Here
we have a quarm again good
morning to the members good
morning people in the audience
good morning those turning and
online thank you for joining us
before we begin I like to
announce that I have a shadow
for today from there the mexican
hand university mark what I
listening were joining us
appreciate you coming out and
and it's giving him a glimpse of
what happens here in the
legislature and so without
further adult organised we're
gonna kind of fumble around this
this
agenda because the scheduling
issues with other people and
other committees so I believe
one of those and so the by
showman has great allowed me to
go first to present house bill
to fifty two.
Good morning into clarifying
confirm our planned agenda for
the day for those of you all
waiting for other bills based on
scheduling and rotating chairs
today will start with hb two
fifty two will then go to HB one
sixty six will then likely leave
our chair to present to build an
education and from there we'd
start from the top eighty two
ninety three one sixty three and
we have checked in with our
legislative sponsors and today's
plan and now you all in the room
and listening online
mister terror you ready on two
fifty two is there most year I
am thank you for the opportunity
thank you committee members good
morning again
appreciate the opportunity to
present house bill two fifty two
that passed out unanimously from
the commerce and economic
development committee earlier
this week if you recall this is
the same structure that was in
the house version of house bill
five forty seven in the twenty
twenty three legislative session
and ultimately passed the both
the conference committee that
came together between the house
in this and in the senate.
Passed the house flooring in the
senate floor and then went on to
the governor to which she
ultimately vetoed so we're back
again has built two fifty two
adjusts the income tax brackets
to increase progressivity and
target rates cuts for working
families these proposed tax
brackets do not impose any tax
rate increases on any income
level to anybody in new mexico
this personal income tax
structure proposed in this
section will decrease taxes for
all taxpayers with the rate
decreases targeted at the lowest
and middle income earners.
For instance single filers with
incomes below sixty six and a
half thousand dollars and
married filers with incomes
below one hundred thousand
dollars will see tax rate
decreases those with incomes
above the same thresholds will
maintain the same tax rate as
currently in status you'd but
will ultimately see a tax
liability decrease due to the
marginal structure of the
personal income tax structure.
Further detail information is
that this bill spreads out tax
payers out through the entire
brackets currently approximately
forty six percent of all tax
payers are in the four point
nine percent tax bracket and
thirty nine percent in the one
point seven percent tax bracket.
Each other bracket contains less
than seven percent of tax payers
under these proposed tax bracket
changes approximately then
thirty nine percent of taxpayers
will be in the one point five
percent tax bracket the same as
the current tax structure.
Many of these.
Many of these tax payers do not
earn any income.
The next court brackets with tax
rates between three point two
and four point nine percent each
contained both between eleven
percent and sixteen point eight
percent of tax payers in new
mexico the highest tax bracket
at five point nine percent
contains approximately three
point nine percent of tax payers
in new mexico the same as the
credit structure today.
Tax burden is also effectively
redistributed amongst a across
incomes under this proposal
increasing the personal income
text progressivity with rates
and tax burden rises with
incomes.
Progressivity means that as
income rises a larger share of
one's income is paid to that tax
as one's ability to pay
increases the current tax
structure is extremely compact
at the lower income levels with
tax payers quickly reaching the
four point nine percent tax rate
as incomes right the four point
nine percent bracket covers tax
payers making between sixteen
thousand dollars.
Up to two hundred and ten
thousand dollars under the
proposed structure the share of
the overall state tax revenue
paid per bracket never exceeds
forty three percent for any
single tax bracket.
The lowest tax bracket peers
everything negative tax
liability after claiming
eligible credits and refunds
under both of the proposed
structure and the current
structure at this point in time
madam chair woman I would stand
for any questions thank you for
the opportunity.
Thank you we'll go to the
audience now starting in person
and then moving to zoom if you'd
like to speak and support of
each b two fifty two please
raise your hand
go here in the back.
The.
Thank you next in person.
Okay.
Thank you anyone else in person
we will look to zero if you'd
like to speak and support of HB
two fifty two please raise your
hands we will start with carla
thank you
thank you matter share members
of the committee of president
ceo that mexico business
coalition we really applied to
the sponsor of this great
legislation and it really good
for the state.
This is a good bow for economic
development and bringing
business to the state because
most of our people pay their
business tax at their personal
rate so we just absolutely love
this we were would love to see
that the broad proceeds taste go
away eventually and that the
marriage does penalty also goes
away but what this legislation
they could do to the sponsor and
the members of the committee I
hope that you will support it
thank you
thank you next we go to paul
countries.
Thank you
committee and representative or
spot in this legislation
this is a good idea when it
comes to mexico
the government take it back
to my front boiled gas industry
and generating base surpluses
and this is an average to allow
that
to participate in that
prosperity so thank you
this is good to start the right
to rationally mexico thank you
thank you anyone else online
liking to speak interested in
speaking and part of HB two
fifty two.
The.
Okay we will go to those in
opposition anyone here in
opposit.
Thing man will go to online is
anyone on zoom interested in
speaking an opposition to hb to
fifty two if so raise your
hands.
Do you have your hand up from
previously you might take that
down.
Thank you
okay mr charity other comments
before we go to committee I
failed to mention my expert when
this is general for far beyond
less the group on everything
taxes thank you thank you
committee.
Representative townson
thank you ma'am chairs.
Fortunately
three and a half.
Although i.
Real reservations that it's in
there.
That we have given back.
To the families of the mexic.
A.
A fair amount of.
And I think there's nothing
that we could do more
demonstrably to change the lives
of the mexicans and return or
let.
So I know there's only like two
hundred million dollars.
I'm i'm happy to to support the
effort.
The.
That is so little.
The.
We have the capacity to.
Madame chair woman
representative towns I would say
that if there is the ambition to
want to increase it it w.
Are in trying to be responsible
and working under the asking of
what we have in terms of a tax
capacity identified anyway that
this is probably the responsible
step to take if this is true tax
reform and policy reform that
we're not we're not to represent
harpers point creating just a
more holes in a swiss cheese of
tax giveaways for it for lack of
a better word this is the tax
party that should and deserve
take the majority of.
Of capacity and then if there is
they again that ambition and the
will of the of this.
To be good next year.
That we are doing this because
this provides the most benefit
did the tax payers of the
standard mexico at a localized
level for everyone to end
well I appreciate that german
chairman
i.
I would just encourage I dropped
the bill yesterday
is even more aggressive
than this annoying well we don't
have the capacity for it but the
message the legislature that.
The.
We have the capacity.
To believe more men.
The.
And we sometimes forget the
legislature that it really is.
There many to begin with and we
are leave it there because so
what they can do with the.
The.
The cost of child care is more
than state.
College
that's crazy.
And the people of the mexico
I don't want that.
Probably are burdened the mouse
so I would just encourage the
legislature.
Drive that money back to the
families so we can incr.
Think that where.
It is their money whether it
comes from one gaster come from
video it's it's people so
banking there.
Next we have representative
harper.
Thinking about chair and and
chairman i.
I just wanted to make one quick
comment and I just w.
Thank you and this committee you
know last year I think we
really.
Did something amazing right we
came together and put together
one.
Loved most of them there were
some parts.
But I just want to remind all of
us in the community that
this bill was in a different
form.
And it was changed in the
package and and I was just so
grateful for that as that meant
I could vote for the package I
could support it and I just want
to thank you chairman for for
doing that
and it it just shows.
How you are trying hard to make
sure that it's not just the will
of a few that get ramp through
the this body but that we come
to the middle and do it's good
for new mexico and I really
believe that is where the magic
happens where that's where the
best legislation is it's not
worth the far right or the far
left go.
And we do good things for the
people and so I just wanted to.
Take a minute madam chair and
chairman.
We see that and we.
And that's one of the reasons.
We show up and help you make a
core because we know that this
is a.
Thank you next representative
channel
thank you madam chair and thank
you chairman bringing this bill
forward I have to say I guess my
take on it is a l.
You know last year we
approached our tax policy
efforts with the idea of reform
madame chair and chairman and
part of that reform was looking
at the personal income tax
brackets in way thought added
progressivity across the board
madame.
And i'm a little disappointed
there were not pushing forward
again on looking the higher
brackets I know that proposal
madame shared and chairman did
not make it into the package but
I don't think we should give up
on that in what i'm afraid of
madam chair is
here we go we give another tax
cut
in the amount of almost two
hundred million fighting i'm
reading this right our capacity
is two hundred million so we're
jamming are this this tax cut
into that two hundred million
and we're making no effort to
find any use this mechanism to
counter balance out when madam
chair and chairman I really feel
like we should we're still
trying to recover mountain chair
from the horrific tax cuts of
the rich richardstone
administration in the distortion
that those policies placed on
our tax code and so many
significant ways this being one
and I would encourage us to look
out a broader you know policy
objective of
gain a little bit more on the
top like we were proposing last
or at least some of us were
proposing last year and
certainly i'm cutting taxes on
the lower end then working folks
middle income folks in I think
it's going to be a missed
opportunity
and we can say madam chair we're
going to come back next year and
look at it for that cause i've
been talking with folks about
this it's a lot harder to do
that when you're just looking at
one segment of the population
and it would be much easier if
we did it as a package i'd also
like to say the other part of
this was
because we got a little bit of
additional revenue on the pit
side which we should be looking
to do so that we can.
Cut taxes madam chair and
represent chairman on the g r t
side
grates of very progressive tax
and if we could find some
additional revenues through
through the pit and perhaps
other means we might have some
capacity to cut on the g r t
level which helps businesses it
helps the consumer and so on so
I think we're squandering some
chances we have to actually try
to change the paradigm a little
bit I know it's not gonna be
huge because grates such a
humungous part of a revenue
stream but we need to start
shipping away at it madam chair
and chairman and we could use
this to do that and would give
us capacity in other ways to cut
in other in other three other
mechanisms and mountain chairmen
this is not the criticism of
course I understand we're
dealing with a lot of competing
factors and we have to address a
lot of competing factors but you
know I i'm concerned that we're
missing opportunities to do some
real ch.
Thank you anyone else committee.
Gently temporarily table house
bill five twenty two
two fifty two apologies to fifty
two
thank you mr chair you have a
temporarily tabled bill and as
audience and others know I
imagine that means we'll be
having a conversation about a
tax package coming out of this
committee with this bill as a
consideration for that package
thank you mister chair.
So as mr chair leaves to present
about another committee we are
actually going to house bill
ninety two.
If I responses are ready.
Yeah.
Do we have a member that fills
comfortable enough to sit with
our expert here while we wait
for representative.
Yes committee we're going to act
at the top of the agenda with hb
ninety.
Good morning thank you
representative or test
we are here to present house
bill ninety two.
Again i'd like to turn it over
to my expert witness to explain
the bill.
Good morning madame chair.
And committee my name is tom
solomon I am the
first illiterator of the new
mexico do you though my working
group working with a center or
cheesy pino and representative
robot cover euro please to
explain this bill here today
this house bill ninety two the
geotherman tax credits bill is
intended to be
paired with another deal
thorough incentive bill which is
also a hospital which is also
moving as polanding one.
The purpose of this bill is to
provide some incentives to
companies to come in due thermal
electricity production companies
to come into new mexico and to
develop new mexico's
abundant potential for producing
electricity from hot rocked to
you through all energy new
mexico is number sixth in the
nation according to enrille.
In terms of geothermal resource
potential and this bill provides
a few tax credits and tax
deductions
to new companies to come in and
develop the developed at
resource
provides a benefit of one point
five cents per kilometer
to companies that would build
one of these electricity
production plants from
geothermal for a period of time
after twenty twenty five.
Basically through the end of
twenty thirty one
and so there's there's a sunset
cars in the bill.
And.
There is a cap on the tax
credits a combination of
personal income tax and
corporate income taxa.
Cap of five million dollars per
year amount and it also provides
a gross receipts tax deduction
to
those companies.
To defray the cast the initial
capital costs of building those
plants in new mexico so that
the very high up front capital
cost of building the first
plants
they will get a bit of a break
in terms of.
Deducting gross receipts tax on
the capital equipment
construction costs equipment
costs again for that same
period.
Yes there isn't there is an
amendment
madam chair there is an
amendment would you like me to
read out the two or two number.
Yes thank you
manager.
The.
Madam share the two or two
numbers to two seven six nine
two point two.
Yes give us just a minute
finished passing out the
amendment.
For the amendment to be
uploaded.
Cover your.
Representative catch your breath
or having a bit of a glitch
uploading the amendment here so
we're trying that from a
different laptop so members just
give us a minute to make sure
public has access to the same
amendment that we're looking at.
The.
Thank you to go so
representative and expert we've
heard the overall presentation
of the bill we've just confirmed
that the amendment has been
passed out and now we're going
to go through the explanation of
the amendment before going to
public.
I'm going forward with the
amendment please.
Thank you manager i'm going to
have our expert witness your
explain the amendments are
pretty simple thank you.
Thank you madame chairman
members of the committee
through the course of getting
the bill analyzed we got some
feedback fro.
That they felt that the
provision in the bill which is
essentially section.
One
it covers the whole harmless
intent to hold the local
communities.
We're in some of these
facilities might be
maybe built harmless regarding
the impact on their local
revenue stream from taxes
and revelt that this was going
to provide a lot of extra
complication for them they
weren't staffed and looking
through it
I think we agreed so because
there's a sunset provision at
the end of twenty thirty one for
this bill and we're looking
basically at new businesses
coming into new mexico but don't
currently exist we're not
actually.
Removing tax revenue that
currently is existing these
communities it would just be
they would increment and so for
the period of time that we're
talking about we agreed with
taxes and so the purpose of the
amendment is to strike the whole
harmless section.
If you look at the amendment it
says on page one
after costs break the rema.
The title section removes the
whole.
The.
And the rest of it on item two
page one strike later twenty
three twenty five and strike
pages to and three that is the
section withhold her.
Committee do we have any
questions or comments on the
amendment.
Representative but I go
into
I just like to know are there
where is the nearest geo there
more.
Madame chair
we're gonna hold that we're on
the amendment currently i'm
sorry
that's okay on the amendment.
Any opposition to that motion
your bill has been adopted
amended
back to the original bill
representative any final
comments before we go to the
public thank you madame chair I
believe we are ready.
Thank you
members and others remember we
did hear this bill once already
so if you've already offered
comments potentially raise your
hand state your name let's move
quickly today please and we'll
start with people in the room
who do we have here in support
of HB ninety two
thank you
guys just state your name for
the record yeah with the circle
of drug on the chapter.
How much anyone else here in the
room that would like.
Will go next to the zoom with
the same considerations we'd
like to just name
raise your hand if you like to
speak and support and share your
name.
This.
Overseas will go to opposition
to this bills and you and here
in opposition and would like to
speak in opposition to each
ninety.
Moving to them.
Okay
anything else before we go to
committee i'm terribly ready for
questions thank you committee.
Chairman
representative but I go should I
restate or I don't yeah okay can
you please tell me where the
nearest geothermal facility is
operating and how it's
vegue out of share
representative very new mexico
has one operational thermal
electric plant it is on pn's
grid it is caught lightning dark
in it so located in her doctor
county.
It is rated at fifteen
megawaters as part of.
It's great it's fairly small
than electronic turn and
representative and.
Solid thank you
I just wouldn't like to know
like how many how is it doing I
mean do we have any status
updates on how it store.
Madame chair thank you for the
question of representative I
just like to say that the reason
why we bringing this forward as
well as a we have another bill
and regards the investments we
need for
this type of energy source and
the investment that we've made
for the state in each british
his already been
showed up with five million
dollars this is something uh
discussion that we've been
having over the last few years
something that were trying to
show up as we are looking for
other resources other sources of
energy for our state thank you
miss merchant thank you
thank you next to representative
harper
thank you mature representative
and this is all in great to see
this morning
so I just have a a couple
questions in and maybe a comment
and I just want to first think
that representatives
want to thank you for driv.
We have learned through sad
experience
is really painful
they're often not sustainable
and then just by way of helping.
To understand new mexico.
Is part of the streamlined
sales.
Commission group compact
whatever you want to call it
we're like part members and part
of that
the provisions of that group are
you know they're designed to
make sure that our sales tax for
gross receipts tax is a minister
fairly and as simply as possible
and consistently across
different states and more than
half the states in the US or our
part of th.
And one of the
main tenants of that is that you
don't split your taxpayers
and what I mean by that is you
don't have a city there taxes
something that's different how
are county taxes different than
how your state.
The.
And some states do that and so
they have like thousands of
different
tax rates depending on where
you're at
new mexico we're pretty good we
have like ninety.
You you know when you pay sales
tax your your pay for the state
county and city official
now we occasionally
are tempted you know when we're
trying to give a tax break and
the locals come up and say no
you're going to hear us too
tempted to hold them harmless
but I always that just not
sustainable and starts breaking
the call but it goes contrary to
this
commission.
Positive you're all aware and
it's really not good tax policy
so thank you.
You know.
The simpler we can make the code
for them to administer that more
grateful they are to
thank you for that.
Manager and represent I guess
my.
Going to my two questions really
uhm
this is how this tax credit is
structured is really different
than
I think anything else we have in
the cold and maybe you know I
can have some correction here if
i'm wrong but my understanding
were proposing here a generation
based tax credit and i'm not
familiar with you know we have
credits against you know grate
that's paid for construction or
or you know these kinds of
things were
maybe i'm can you maybe speak to
that.
Thank you miss thank you madame
chair and present if we do have
we do have a some tax expertise
related to that question as you
always like to drive in really
deep in teachers
but but basically you know it's
it's pretending to pits in the
corp taxes but if we have.
Any additional information on
that.
State of council service
protection system started sport
opposition matter before you I
am trying to think of a similar
credit I don't think we have a
credit market in with text
policy director at texan of is
also looking through the book as
well I can't recall at the top
of my head a tax credit that is
based on generation of energy
there might be something that's
comparable but it's.
Tax policy director
taxation every partner of
this on the quick review I have
one similar credit which is the
renewable energy production tax
credit.
Section seven dash two thousand
point fifteen and that is that
credit is based on production of
ours.
Manager and represent have think
you it's great to have your ex
so so it sounds like we do have
at least one out there that is
based on generation and it's
kind of a similar area.
And can you just maybe speak to
why.
If I was a point ago this
direction instead of you know
the typical more.
Thank you madame chair I really
appreciate that that question I
think as we discuss a previously
regards to your federal
tax changes and codes in their
fault following suit there as
well and I think that this is a
time that we are moving into
into the direction of renewable
energies and how to make those
measures to make sure that we're
having
the outcomes
that we are looking for in other
policies and i'll lean to my
expert to add to them manager
thank you madame chair and
representative
this production tax credit is
mirrors all out a similar text
policy at the federal level and
I think the rationale behind it
is that we would like to promote
the generation of clean
renewable energy from georgia
sources in the state and so the
more of it they generate
the better under this production
tax credit of one and a half
since per kilo what our is
aligned with the amount.
Okay i'm sure representative all
and thank you for that.
So I just maybe want to make a
comment on this so I have the
privilege of serving on the
national
conference of state legislatures
and salt task force which is the
state local taxation task force
and it was interesting at our
last meeting right before the
session started so you know
legislators from all over the
country republicans democrats we
just kind of start a talking
about.
Uh energy generation and how to
tax it
because we're getting to the
point now and even in new mexico
were about forty percent of
energy generated is from
renewable sources.
That's that's amazed.
But.
States are starting to realize
that a big part of their revenue
base was energy generation and
and now we're going to a place
where we're not getting any
revenue from energy generation
and so they're actually talking
about generating excise taxes
for solar and win
and and honestly I think whether
we like it or not that's
probably a direction we're gonna
need to go
when that happens I don't know.
And so I just I just find this
kind of interesting and maybe
counter to that that were
instead of looking at waste the
tax renewable.
We are wanting to give them a
tax credit and I understand you
know at this point you know it
still was expensive to be
renewable
trying to get on their feet to
compete with the stuff has been
around for a long time.
Another asking for these things
but I think it's it's kind of in
the opposite direction of word.
A water states are starting
look at where we need to g.
That I thought
just to share my my last
question
madame share representative is
you know we're pretty with my
read of the bill and maybe I
just don't understand the
industry my readers that were
pretty specific on who can
qualify what kind of technology
can qualify it has to be
natural heat and accessive two
hundred and fifty degree spare
and high.
And such is and I guess my
question is this really
targeting a specific.
Technology and business
cause we try not to do that here
right we want to say all folks
were going to do certain power
should qualify or or is this
really targeting one particular
technology in one particular
business thank you manager I
think that's a good question and
I think what you're what you're
looking at to is that that new
source of information as we're
moving into as you you know that
this energy renewable energy
generation and what we're doing
and making those investments so
I think when we're looking at
this type of renewable energy
that it it is encompassing and
i'd like my expert to add to
that manager
thank you madame chair
representative harper as I said
before this is one of two their
more bills and the other geo
through my bill provides some
granted loans to.
To get similar resources that
are lower temperature than two
fifty above one hundred degrees
for night which basically covers
hotspring direct use of
geothermal like as is used in
mass and farms in and redium
springs which is you know direct
use of geothermore for heating
and the he day very large
greenhouse complex investment
farms with that and so that bill
is intended to cover that
segment of the other thermal
below two fifty
it's not really familiar with
below that are not really
suitable for electricity
production that is not enough
energy contact there but you
know plenty of other ways to use
that.
This bill regional thermal
actually tax credit specifically
for electricity production.
Um.
Existing statutes basically
defines.
So we're basically just a lining
with.
So you need you need enough
energy content in that heat
and two fifties about the rate
cut off willing.
I think those are other
is that a good yeah manager
representative thank you that's
a great answer to that question
that helps be filled.
Thank you representative towns
and
yes thank you manager.
Representative.
In this.
Provisions that in a generation.
That would be
that the
so.
In essence support by the mexico
taxpayers.
Is there anything in your bill
in the original act that would
be
electricity that was generated.
Consumer button of mexicans.
Madame chair
representative so to understand
your question that a bit more
you're asking if author the
energy that's gonna be generated
with you this energy source is
going to be for new mexican tax
payers alone
well miss her
representative as we get into
the science of electrons and
distribution in those sorts of
things.
If you believe in the theory of
saying it is we tell we talk
about with those protection of
energy and and electronics it's
it's pretty universal and all
over but I I see where you're
going with this question and
this is a new
and you renewable energy that
were bringing on so those things
those discussions I believe will
happen in the future I don't
have an answer for you at this
time I don't know if my expert
witness has one at the time but
but
if you like if you have anything
to add.
I think the answer specifically
is there.
You know these are these.
Yeah.
It comes with all of challenges
of course they need to build you
need to finance it you need to
build it you need to generate
you need to connect to the.
It will be natural in the
initial stages that it is local.
Down the road I think with new
mexico's quite abundant
geothermore resource I would
love for us to.
And be able to provide those.
Thank.
Production cost is.
The.
Madame chair representative i'm
not sure I have that number but
I can give you some parameters.
Just your thermal electricity
generation
in the current style which is
typically referred to his
hydrothermal you're basically
tapping.
This is already underground
subsurface water already in the
contact with hot.
The.
There is in the united states
about three point six gigawatts
of hydrothermal electricity
generation are most debits in
northern.
As we said it really are.
South of lordsburg
it's rated at fifteen mb
I don't know exactly what.
But.
Hydrothermal electricity in the
in the united states on average
is rated at about seven.
Yeah.
The.
Uhm it's competitive a bit
higher than a combined second
natural gas point.
For the current generation what
we're talking about.
Is.
I knew higher tech
process where you're basically
drilling much m.
Not having to.
Providing that.
The.
Under in the subservers where
the.
It's new technology the first
plant of that style is under
construction right now.
The bottom line answer your
question the best they can give
you is cried hey.
Representative.
This.
A.
I support you.
Readily available.
Prices
production is that high but.
It is a dispatchable.
Source.
And work with
it works all the time and that
that's a bit that what I am most
concerned about is that
it's a production tax.
And I come from america but my
up here is protective
jobs.
A
share holder.
So I would tell you that
i'm very concerned that we would
have any tax credit.
Yeah that's a bargain.
That they don't.
Yet to utilize the power and
we're already with with a lot of
renewable where where
subsidizing them with
all this other stuff and the
power not not a killer is
dropped off in the mexico.
So I would just encourage I
think there is a great question
and it should be.
Or something.
And
great source
of support
we have to make sure that
I think this is
for somebody else.
Thank you representative the
annual media make a taper
temporary table motion on house
bill ninety two.
The.
We have a motion to table house
bill ninety two any opposition
to that motion
here though has been able to
thank you manager next we have
representative case ready on hd
ninety.
Yeah.
And for those joining us in
personnel results our plan is to
go to HB ninety three then HB
one six degree and then finish.
Yeah.
Good morning chair and committee
i'm here to present to hb ninety
three I wanted to first thank
you this committee was able to
pass
the hb to twenty last year and
it was rolled in to both
chambers tax packages and this
is the same we brought it back
it was line item feedered by the
governor last year and we
believe that it was worth the
event coming back so this is
edge you are tea waiver on home
modifications
we have a whole modification
program for individuals with
disabilities and then also on
the community home
program I want to first limit
introduce my expert witness go
ahead and inter.
Yeah.
So currently medicare recipients
who are in this specific program
so it's not all medicaid
recipients have access to a very
tiny amount of money has been
reduced down currently five
thousand dollars for individuals
with disability six thousand
dollars for those in community
i'm supports.
To be able to do home
modifications so they can safely
stay in their homes these are
grab bars eighty eight toilets
zero entry showers will chair
ramps into the house you know
five thousand dollars especially
those of you were familiar with
construction costs or not you
know
the observation is that they can
get into the house but they
can't get into the bathroom and
we need to get people and both
you understand the savings of
having individuals in the
dignity of having individuals be
able to stay in their home
instead of going to very
expensive
assistant living programs so
this program helps to that
currently there is a grt waiver
on the equipment to do the home
modifications but as you can
guess the labor is actually many
times the larger expense and
that is still being grtet these
laborers are certified in
registered by the state they're
only the their registered or
licensed installers I believe
there's only three of them in
the state currently.
The.
I'm not sure the exact number
yes there is a limited amount so
there are eliminated amount of
approved installers but they
were still paing you rt when you
have a very tiny budget and that
is current and then you're also
paying a several hundred dollars
in your teeth this can become a
hardship for the families
understand that without a hoyer
left if they have to make
decisions between will chair
rams and where lives the family
are lifting individuals in an
out of bad in and out of the
shower facility the toilet this
we also cause further injuries
on family members and then none
cause even further medical
expenses
you might if i'd like to have my
expert witness if she would like
to make a statement thank you.
Committee yes to your point that
often times the little bit of a
grt would actually allow us to
ins.
So it actually benefits the
member receiving.
Allows the member to have more
and larger benefit if you well
by.
And thank you managerial members
is tampered questions thank you
and we will go to those in the
audience first if you're here to
speak in support of hb ninety
three go ahead and begin.
Madame chair members today my
name's art hall.
I'm a registered lobby as her
home specialist modifications.
I think what's important to keep
in mind we're considering this
is the first benefit that's
provided to be seniors and
medically fragile disabled
community.
In two thousand and fourteen was
twelve thousand five hundred
dollars over a five year period.
Over the last ten years that
benefit has been reduced from
twelve thousand five hundred to
six thousand dollars over five
years the durable medical
equipment isn't one of those
sexy health care topics
but it's incredibly important we
talk about access to health care
all the time this is for access
to your home.
Access to your bathroom to your
shout I think it's important
that we keep in mind that the
ability to provide this access.
Allows these folks to stay in
their home and not.
Have to go to an assisted living
facility a nursing home.
And in the area of fault two to
three hundred more dollars could
add grab bars.
False in new mexico are much
higher than the national average
and a fall for the members of
these communities is very
expensive for the state in terms
of emergency room
hospitalization and other care.
This will cost the state about
two to three hundred thousand
dollars a year.
Thank you do we have anyone else
here in person to speak and
support of hp ninety three.
Moving on to zoom please raise
your hand if you like to speak
and support of hb.
The.
Not seeing anyone on zoom is
there anyone here in opposition
to hb ninety three.
Not so far and on zoom anyone
that would like to speak in
opposition.
Representative any other
comments before you move to the
committee no thank you very much
for your time thank you
committee
representative what I go
then i'm sure and representative
cates my um neighbor to the up
yes kind of northwest little bit
so I am really delighted to see
you bring this bill back
I used to sit on the
city of public her gee and
bernio counties affordable
housing committee and we still
have a program like this
that was administered through
the department reabilitation and
madame chair and and numbers I
saw
a really successful program and
I think that if it's offered in
a way that people can take
advantage of this and encouraged
um it really does how people
that are disabled people that
seem especially our seniors as
our population is
I say that likely as we move
forward in time
madam chair I saw
people come in to put grab bars
in we had we actually had our
architects on hand that helped
designed a little ramps up in
two people's homes to get in and
out so
the funding that was available
through that program was very
widely used especially in burned
county
I am glad to see that it's you
know something like this has
been offered state why it so I
just want to commend you
representative caters for
bringing us forward and and
your.
Your expert witness I think that
it's a really great program and
down I definitely support it
thank you manager thank you
representative thank you thank
you manager a representative can
you give me a percentage of.
Of what.
A man's your representative I
will defer to my experience
madam cherry representative I
don't know the percentage but I
believe in two thousand and
twenty three we had one thousand
three hundred lives in the
state.
Again the benefit is offered
every five years so they don't.
Yeah.
Thank you madame chair
anybody that has grey hair and
there's a whole lot of ascent of
it have great here those who.
Yeah.
I'd like to make a motion that
the speed approved.
So we have a motion to table
house bill
well temporary tables and state
we have a motion to table he
ninety three so thank you
representative keeps your bill
has been able to
i'll just add that seems to be
the theme of the day we're
talking about all the bills
online item be too so thank you
for coming but for us again
thank you.
Representative I see
representative johns with you.
The.
Here we are we're next audience
to eight sixty three after this
will finish the day with h one
sixty six representative on your
ready.
Thank you I am terrible members
of the committee.
We wanted the as the area.
Manager.
This.
This measure before you was in
the tax package
last session
and
ruling they know from the road
and also all that manager I did
fit in the member in in the
health committee and that bill
crossed over
yesterday
but I went and has the secretary
make obvious or the committee
just in case that
the health company packet
wasn't.
Available
in all addressed at a moment
later on it.
The basically.
And oversight on the part of the
drafter in including one of the
professions that you are that I
last year's bill.
The.
So many chair house bill one
sixty three
adds six new categories to our
existing real health pier
practitioner tax credit these
are one.
Pharmacist.
And manager in many of our rule
communities the upper drugstore.
Just isn't your regular drug
store.
It's a pure of the community.
And whenever we lose one of
these drugs stores in the rural
communities it's like nokimate.
One of the legs on us on the
four negatives too
are kind of probably
in terms of that meaning there
are adequate health needs.
And up
more reactive last their only
pharmacy twenty twenty two
and the hundred and eighteen
year old land pharmacy and
balance close the stores in
february.
And manager I can adjust the
fact that these
local drug stores in a rural
communities are.
But they're all constitutions
and kind of line personal person
basis.
Where the pharmacist knows the
family the family members the
name of the family bar its
efforts in a manager and I when
I was going up and took them
carrying
there was a drug story
that was more friendly to a
chicago's.
Chicago
and
and it was the only drug store
that provided a real exotic
of fountain
it had the only place to compare
either hand
um
and milk shakes in his real
fancy crystal like places with
the biggest phone in the big or
fat
from and the only place to do
carry that hand to recoke
and they had the
when the local.
And that actually was bright and
I had a sour lime
but also this drug store also
had steady yard magazine reno
housekeeping all the car
magazines
sports illustrating and vet
sports illustrator went under
just about a month ago.
But that also had the
main magazine for us analysing
in teenage years which was
played by magic but it didn't
happen on the rat they had a
little hard board said they were
magazine check with clerk for
purchase no minors
manager also
were adding richer nurses
and chair during call that the
work they were front line health
workers and the only persons in
the ice they were holding the
hand of patients perishing from
commit why because members can
go into the icu.
Enter number three were and
social workers number four
behavior help answer
and her five physical therapist
and you all manage that in
yesterday and last year's bill
on this measure you added
license midwives at your.
Which was a very welcome
address.
The manager these six
professions will
will take advantage of the two
thousand dollars tax credit and
this is in nineteen year that
i'm hearing this.
Four years ago I passed the
house with before zero died in
the center finance unless you're
was the first time it ever made
it.
And sadly again you know I was
minor beat up by the governor
the real health your practition
attacked whether it was
established two thousand and
seven.
There was two tier of five
thousand dollar credit in a
three thousand dollar credit
five thousand dollars
basically applied to the doctor
class
and it was and I remember voting
for this I was really excited
about two thousand seven.
Primarily it was to retain
competition or some areas
secondly I was to use as a
recruiting tool.
For bringing practitioners into
royaries and thirty was to
connect reduce works orders and
the rural areas and lastly it
was it had an economic
development component.
The sun practitioners move into
rock and many what do they do
they fire house and they shop
locally so that's the boost that
the local economy unless your
manager this is really important
is that a hassle of legislation
considerably
last year reps in a general
john's raise an orange issue
as a really drafted and when it
came to qualifying hours
at the richer nurses and all
fine only for the half credit
and that reps johnson's language
in her house will three fifty
one rectify that oversight in
such a language was incorporated
in two our tax
and also representative of
johnson's definition of rural
orange quote in her house bill
three thirty one was also
incorporated into the tax bill
and these two elements are
imposed and house bill wants to.
We also hear the suggestion but
attacks and river now analyst to
upgrade the reporting criteria
requested by the health
department these are really good
overseas in terms of the credit.
There is a great device between
over the rule when it comes to
equity to h.
Work force committee which
determines endorsements
is a thirty five member
committee commission by this
legislature in two thousand and
seven.
To do these annual reports
all this team at thirty five
professionals run the help
industry including
representation from I mean it is
an other
two identified needs and
priorities in
healthcare professions and they
in their last annual report you
permanent that there were
sixteen thousand four hundred
and sixty second nurses and
certified your specialist the
new mexico.
Ninety percent of the sixteen
hundred of sixteen thousand a
restaurant nurses.
Twenty one percent of these
practice and real areas.
Yeah sixty five percent in
mexico is rural for purposes of
our tax
approximately three thousand our
ends are els.
Two there are
approximately eighty four
hundred the hero comes from
therapist practitioners in new
mexico twenty five percent of
these practitioners practice and
rural areas yet new mechanism
sixty five percent rural for
purposes our tax bill sixteen
hundred we have a health care
purpose I arguably.
There are eighteen hundred
pharmacist.
Twenty four percent of these
pharmacists are rule
yet new mexico and sixty five
percent role
for provision of our tax bill
for sixty pharmacists are
eligible for the tax
fifteen hundred physical
therapist in new mexico twenty
five percent of those bts are
rural areas yet because sixty
five percent rural our purpose
is our tax building
our elsewhere for a tax
in total with the six additional
professions also one sixty three
we can estimate a little over
six thousand new practitioners
would be eligible.
Manager and conclusion on my
presentation incorporating the
rural initiative in our
expectation is monumental.
I quit it.
To reaching the top amount every
in the driving night.
It has nothing common practice
among the legislature to
systematically target our tax
packages at rural new mexico.
The.
And manager i'd like to go to my
experts
they'll take her with the
pharmacist so s.
Yeah.
I'm guilty.
I would like.
There were a hundred and forty
four pharmacies in an imax
independent pharmacy.
When they do there has to be
somebody in there pharmacy in
the.
Willing to purchase it.
Yeah.
Help move.
Since you heard this at least
I I won't believe that.
And.
Thank you mrperiod terman chair
members of the committee linda
signal for the new mexico nurses
association.
In new mexico right now
according to novembers work for
lucians list of advertised jobs
there are over six thousand
seven hundred registered nurse
job openings throughout the
state we we do have an
incredible crisis in most health
care categories but a specially
in nursing and that means fewer
nurses in the hospital then we
really need fewer nurses out
mechanics and pretty much
everywhere this rural tax credit
this is the I think it was last
year was the first time that a
representative garcia putting
anywhere so grateful for that.
Because we need to be able to
attract nurses to the rural
areas is a three thousand dollar
credit alone going to do that of
course not but it's going to
help and it's going to
encourage nurses that live
perhaps in an urban area but
there it's drivable to go to a
rural area and practice that's a
possibility because you don't
have to live in a rural area to
be eligible for this you just
have to have your work and your
practice in that area so this is
a a very positive thing for
nurses couple of years ago right
after covered you are generous
we gave a thousand dollar tax
credit to every single nurse
that worked in a hospital during
that last year of covered and I
can't tell you the gratitude
that nurses felt for that
recognition of the incredible
during uh during the pandemic
period so this is
something that were grateful for
representative of garcia to
bring forward and can I can help
us with the attraction of
people.
Thank you manager with but that
was down for questions perfect
and think you committee thank
you for those joining us today
and we are in a bit of a here
floor and so we will go first to
comments and support of this
bill will start in person and
then we'll go to zoom so let me
again ask you to keep your
comments concise thank you for
waiting here all day and damn
please remember that we've
supported this and like we want
to get to those committee
questions to talk about moving
this forward we'll start here in
the back.
Thank you in the back.
Yeah.
Thank you and the side of the
room
and chair committee.
Yeah.
Also business.
Emerging in.
Yeah.
More.
Financially afford to address.
Although.
Think you so much anyone else in
the room.
We will go to zoom fees your
hand if you'd like to speak in
support of HB one sixty three
first we have joan dickerson.
Manager committee
person with the better military
families caucus but we support
the spill our population
is over seventeen percent not
over there to receive health
care from the
**** they must first precure
health care in our communities
this would go along with you
retaining and attracting health
care practitioners to those
rural communities and sir are
redements thank you for your
time
next we're going to davidly.
Sorry manager remember the
committee thank you
solutions president of the new
mexico provider association the
association standard support of
this bill we are all of the
thoughtful comments made by our
colleagues
think you're next dana greg.
Manager and members of the
committee might be a sale agree
in coming executive director of
desert says it's all there
we'd like to think
representative garcia for his
tireless efforts in an artist
and representative of the jobs
for taking up the cars while the
network is coming in independent
private practices at physical
therapy and occupation there
were a teen point in rural areas
rural clinics to retain and
recruit staff that tax credit
for a physical
provider
to deserve much under
communities we stand at a full
support of house bill sixty
three support as well thank you
thank you and finally we have
carry rounder.
Many robin
medical society
positions cannot do their jobs
and we also are all of the
provisions
thank you now we will go to
those in opposition and you in
here interested in speaking and
opposition
to household one sixty three
not seeing anyone in person
going to the zill please raise
your hand you'd like to speak in
opposition to HB one sixty
three.
Not thing anyone we will go back
to committee for questions
enough hand it back to mr chairs
I have a question but we'll
start with representative cerato
thinking madam chair thank you
representative for the bill i'm
two questions one I might be for
the chair I notice that there is
not a sunset in this version was
there a son said in the version
that was in the last year's tax
package.
Madame chairwoman and
representative there was not
okay thank you i'm I did have a
question on the fire's a little
bit confused in one aspect they
say that the anticipate five
thousand three hundred seventy
two healthcare practitioners or
estimated to be newly eligible
for the credit within later they
also say that the assumes no
growth in the number of
professionals eligible for the
credit each year I don't know if
you if you have any insights
into that medicare and
representative why that it seems
like a.
Five thousand
three hundred seventy two
percent difference.
Of manager right I don't quite
understand what the discrepancy
is I know that we've had to kind
of through the nine years.
To kind of.
For like a better word train the
tax and r.
And how to get it how to get
the.
Initially what tax and what was
doing worse only or gammit of
license practi.
So naturally the fiscal impact.
And actually what we owned that
the department on.
Practice.
So that's that's how kind of
group
arriving at what they're writing
now with their analysis but that
particular issue on that rule
clear in terms of why.
A briefly place yes
I think that's part of the
problem is they really don't
know how many because there are
providers who do not live in
rural areas that could work
and that's part of it and there
are thirty thousand licensed
nurses in new mexico but only
about seventeen thousand
actually live here so if they
don't get those number.
If I may read directive or
bitter representative garcia we
do have our or lsc
representative europe maybe you
want to clarify if there's
something you want to clarify a
behalf of the discussion.
Thank you mister chairman of
committee I think to your
question.
Once
you're added
your year but there will be
obviously a large job.
Thank you mister thinking for
that and so that is included in
these estimates here thank you
upgrade and i've no further
questions I do appreciate the
expansion of of part time we
know a lot of people are looking
to get the work force we can't
participate fully because of
children or family so I think
that's wonderful ad thank you
thank you representatives could
representative by strong
thank you representative
thinking mister chair I
appreciate your consistency and
clarity and and moral commitment
to this conversation over many
years representative I also
appreciate that when I first saw
this dropped again I thought
midwife's missing so when I got
the email this week that we are
being referred to the bill I I
said to quick note upstairs to
ask for an amendment bringing
license midwives and then cnase
back into the spill and they
caught me up and and shared that
you'd already handled the mid
with free piece in the household
committee so thank you for that
I do just want to add to this
conversation I have offered some
critique about the efficacy of
the real health tax provider
credit over the years I think
it's an important conversation
that we've been having like how
are really helpwear and how will
the mechanisms ever be to retain
and recruit providers I also
even appreciated my conversation
we're having about the tax and
reb department assuming no
growth after we factor these
folks and because that's that's
the truth right now we we we are
not successfully finding other
people in bringing them here and
I think it points to the real
investments are states making so
that we can grow our own so they
are young people and folks
imagining what their future
could be are looking in health
care and finding educational
paths and possibilities in that
field and but one of the
questions they've raised over
the years is about more so
pointed at the five thousand
dollars credit wondering if that
five thousand dollars again this
is not a refundable credit but
that five thousand dollars
towards income is really
affective in bringing in some of
the higher salary providers so
i've.
Continue to be curious and and
interested in looking at that
lower salary or lower pay and
benchmark knowing that a credit
like this could potentially be
more proportionally to people
that are earning less and so as
such representative grocery and
I didn't get to chance to check
in with you I just got the
amendment this morning i'd like
to offer an amendment to bring
cnase into this legislation as
well certified nurse assistance
as such when we think about what
hathways are to growing these
health care professionals I
always imagine the folks that
maybe don't have a code
education yet maybe our first
generation college student may
be their first death is stepping
into more of the community
college entering point beginning
part of this profession and then
hopefully stepping into the
higher levels so mr chair and
representative of our commit to
you that I think the analysis
that you have so far is strong
and if adding cna is meant that
we couldn't afford this in the
tax package where we would
otherwise I would not not mess
with your potential to get back
in in that way but I have
prepared an amendment that i'll
ask the committee as staff to
pass out so that we can begin
the conversation as well and
look at what it would mean to
include cnases part of this tax
credit.
Would move the amendment to for
probably amendment for
discussion.
What we're waiting and we all
admire representatives shirt.
Looks nice love it
budget.
Better by roman you please with
us the two or two number and
then begin with your discussion
and we are at point two two
seven eight three six point one
I have the company hazard as
well do we get this uploaded up
okay perfect it's being uploaded
this takes
seven steps to straight some and
strike other language but really
get to the point of adding a
certified nurse aid registered
on the new mexico aid registry
as as a category of a provider
type that would be eligible for
this credit
so committee as i've explained
before I have always expressed
concern that while we point some
of these credits to folks that
are making significantly more
and likely in the hundreds of
thousands of dollars of salary
per year and the folks their
potentially could benefit most
are those at the lower wage lane
including those that are into
your level but do immense and
incredible jobs supporting our
health care teams in facilities
and homes across the state so I
bring this for conversation
thank you thank you
represent a garcia is this a
friendly amendment
mr chair.
I'm at the mercy of the
committee.
I don't see.
But we do have a question.
I don't know if it does.
The.
But.
My.
All the professions that we have
currently.
Even though they they're
mentioned as sort of find.
Our license and to our
understanding this
this category of certified nurse
aid are not licensed.
So I don't know if that was.
Madame last year or if it's if
it's still kind of.
Profession is still eligible for
the credit based on that fact
that they're not licensed thank
you really appreciate that
question that was not something
flagged for me
I would ask in potentially
request that I if if you did
consider this friendly that's
information that we could get
clarified with legislative
council and especially i'm
interested in what the analysis
would be if we are able to add
this back in so as my commitment
to you we know that each bill
went he won sixty three does not
become law it is this idea where
to move forward or your idea
specifically that the elements
of HB one sixty three were to
move forward it would be left it
and put into the tax package so
if you were to consider this
friendly we could get more
analysis get a cost answer those
questions and I commit to you
that if that was something that
bumped your other elements out I
would make sure th.
Mister terror and.
Thank you we're still in the
amendment questions comments
from the committee
on this amendment seeing none in
his friendly at this point in
the time.
Potentially be amended based on
the discussion that.
Well mister checking we amended
and I what i'm offering back
mister chair
what i'm offering back is that
we amend the bill and then if it
raises concerns either budgetary
or in the language we would
leave that out in other ways
move the rest of HB one sixty
three into the tax package okay
given our prerogative to build
that tax package from scratch I
and I think that we would have
enough time to do that still but
I at the end of the day do you
do.
With the rosary and remedies
through from last year that that
I I would hate to.
We will consider it amended bill
knowing that you will work in
full faith with the with the
sponsored self okay so now back
to the bill itself and now next
I have a representative
whatever.
Thank you mister chair
thank you representative for
bringing us forward again for
the ninth time into your experts
I do support this and I just
wanted you to know because I
wanted to give you a very quick
example of something that i've
had to deal with they're in the
session my mom has been sick and
she lives up in a spineller for
about three weeks now trying to
get into sea doctors at the nest
bin yola having difficulty at
ninety six years old
she I finally one day when we
were mister chair I think we
were excused about four o'clock
and I ran up there took her to
the day care walk in for a
slight while she's had a pretty
bad called and
they gave her a prescription
when we finally got in and
they were not able to fill it at
the local pharmacy until the day
like twenty four hours later
because they didn't have enough
pharmacists and I say that
because I see a real example of
what's happening to our seniors
and people that do live in rural
areas and I think that you know
I was mister chair talking to
representative of our corn and
he was telling me that it took
him like four or five times to
get a bill through and this is
the night time and it just
really concerns me that people
you know things are not getting
through fast enough and people
are not at are having to suffer
in in a way that this shouldn't
have to
erm so I bring that up because
it's a real example of what is
really happening in our
communities so thank you mister
chair thank you representative
or anybody else questioned their
comments from the committee
just yes may reps thank you
mister so the bill is not
amended
at this point at this point it
is not a ment.
I just the bill is amended help
in amended and and with the
caveat though that once
by store and cadena works with
lcs to figure out whether or not
this me
disrupted the bill because it
then becomes too expensive or
something else happened and and
working with the sponsor
themselves we will take the
moment out at the point where if
in fact we consider this to be a
part of the tax package thank
you mister and thank you my ster
just request that we be updated
on that process and where it
lands in the mountains and all
those pieces as well then.
At this point in time can I get
a motion for a temporary table.
Make motion of same second
single discussion thank you very
much are you coming back again.
That's just it's moved now then
two house bill.
One sixty six
which is the child care
assistance gross receipts bill
we have vice rowin enough or is
yours whenever you're ready
thank you mister chair and to
beyond them today
the tenants of this bill in this
exact former part of hb five
forty seven and ultimately nine
item be towed by the governor I
will have my expert explain the
bill I would just add that we
were really proud to have a
conversation related to this
initiative during our the rest
at meeting we held in last
christmas of this year and at
that point I remember we all i'm
really appreciating that we had
many many families from the
border lands and I saw the new
mexico communities come and
share directly what this
initiative would mean to their
lives and their financial
willness so I will turn to my
expert.
Good morning mr chairman members
of the committee thank you so
much for allowing us to stay
here and speak with you again
today my name is daniel garcia I
own the toy box early learning
centers and muscle says we serve
a b.
I'm also the precedent of full
circle which is an advocacy
group representing our children
families and providers in
southern new mexico the bill
that we branch again before you
today as mentioned by
representative is to get a gross
receipts tax extension for a
families that receive childcare
substitutes and new mexico pre
case services in private
community programs like mine
I want to be clear that I come
before you today not as a
business owner because this
isn't necessarily my tax this
tax is a text that's passed on
to consumers it's passed on to
families so i'm here speaking on
behalf of my families because
they can't get up here to do so
I want to particularly think
this committee because you guys
came down to visit us over the
entrant and you got to hear from
the families that i'm here
representing and speaking for
and they were very thankful that
they finally had the chance to
speak to you themselves so we
are there very thankful to this
committee for doing that and
this particular bill would help
like I said get across receipts
tax exemption for our families
that are receiving childcare
substitutes and free precaution
services through private
providers and community based
programs that means give an
example I have a month cool
right now applied for our child
care
it was determined by her
application that she
did not have the income to even
support a copay with her for
children however if I didn't
scholarship her and pay that tax
for her I would have to hand her
a monthly bill of three hundred
and eighty two dollars for her
taxes alone
that mum has made it very clear
and she was able to speak with
you guys through the entering
that that would mean another job
for her leaving her teenage
needs to care for her for
children in the evenings and at
night so that she can pay her
tax bill so that she could pay
it so that she could work during
the day
it would mean having the
difficult decisions to pay the
light bill or pay the child care
tax bill and these are real life
situations that families are
facing because of this gross
receipts.
Tax programs this is not a new
tax we all know that but
unfortunately programs like mine
who have scholarshipped our
family sport my months been
doing promised or a little over
twenty years we have taken on
that burden and scholarshipped
our families and unfortunately
the cost of doing business is
becoming greater and greater
every day and it's becoming
something that we can no longer
sustain I know I ask this is a
loan programs that have been
open for over thirty years that
have scholarship their families
most recently started a passing
that taxed along to families in
september I have had more calls
and my weightless has expanded
have always had one but it's
like three times but greater
because I currently install
scholarship big families and
those families are now subject
to gross receipts tax and other
programs and it's creating an
extreme hardship so I appreciate
this committee where all of your
support in the past on this bill
and I think.
Good morning chair and members
of the committee my name is
days.
I'm serving children and donate
for over seventeen years I
additionally hold a position of
the president of the chamb.
And I also serve as a vice chair
for the full circle nonprofit
organization are further more am
currently on my six year as a
city counselor for the city of
someone park and lastly and
twenty twenty to I was appointed
to serve as the chair for the
alerting early learning advisory
board representing local
government I would like to add
that as new mexico is leading.
By improving access expanding
eligibility waving corporate and
increasing the rates to meet the
cost for child the dirty
continues to be a barrier for
low income families as this tax.
That these families are
responsible to pay for we do
need to remove this barrier to
make it more equitable for
families accessing the service.
Thank you representative at this
point time that's moving to
audience all those in favor of
house bill one sixty six please
raise your hand
okay let's start with this site
and will stay with the smell.
Thank you very much next on the
next bill yes m.
I am also the policy chair from
the new.
Yeah.
First is that this.
Very hard quality for child care
to the families of new mexico
and as our expert witness stated
that taxes.
Or they can shop around and find
a start a little too basic
license.
And that taxes ninety three
dollars so we're forcing
families to make it decision on
whether or not you all have
funded quality child care but
we're forcing that week to take
a look at that the other two
part full arts.
Yeah.
Keep high quality services
thank you thank you yes maybe.
Yeah.
At we off.
Well.
So I went through.
Yeah.
Favorite.
Or all.
So having a set of that yes I
just want to import this
healthy the private providers
which right now we're having to
compete against all the
education for employees.
Why get proposal to the
customer.
Employees on a reason.
Which helps.
You offer coming today let's go
to the side of the room yes.
Programs the best way to invest
in.
Yeah.
And scaling to.
Level the plan filled with.
The name is canada anyone else
in the salary support of
hospital one sixty six thing not
anyone on line support of house
bill one.
Anyone in opposition
in the room for hospital
one sixty six okay mistake the
seller room first just came
there
nobody raised in their hand
either in opposition of house
bill one sixty six.
Very well let's move them to the
committee with questions and or
comments representatives.
Thank you mister chairman
representatives
the non profit organizations
providing these services
identical services do not pay
gross receipts
and the four profit
organizations.
To
have to charge gross receipts is
that
mr tare representative yes that
accurately captures what's
happening because of their tax
status the grocery seat does not
imposed under nonprofit
providers and the important
clarification is if they are
serving families with these
childcare assistance contracts
the providers regardless of
their filing status or tax
status I repeat the same rates
based on the type of child care
they're providing so everybody
across the state is getting the
same rates in held to the same
standards like these two
incredible women and folks in
the room that have five star
child care centers but they're
expected to meet those standards
with average eight percent less
because they are imposed the
dirty
dare to use imposed on them and
miss trim representative
could you tell me what the bill
would be for a one child.
For a one month in one of these
progr.
It goes based on quality scale
and age of the child but to give
you an example of our program
like myself and infent would be
one.
One sixty two a month for that
one in fence to attend a program
one hundred and sixty two
dollars.
And just the tax okay.
I guess the question
misunderstood the question gross
revenue it would be.
Twelve thirteen hundred dollars
okay you're the reimbursement
rate so again that does depend
on the child mister chair
representative it does depend on
the child and the rate for
instance
our program that right now is
yeah so it's eighteen twenty
four so one thousand eight
hundred and twenty four is the
reimbursement rate for a five
star infant child and then their
tax on that is the one sixty two
and that's what's passed on to
the family and that would
presume missed chairman
representative and expert the
these are public funds paying
for these services is that
accurate yes mister chair
representative that's accurate
and miss chairman
representative and expert.
And what would that number be
with respect to private pay.
Mr chair representative course
every program charges a
different rate for a private pay
i'm one hundred percent subsidy
but I do have private fees if I
do ever have a family that comes
in and my feet for the same
infent and my five star program
for a south pay family is a
little over seven hundred
dollars it's a hundred and sixty
three dollars a week.
Plus tax.
So mister chairman represented
the.
The the net revenue even if you
scholarshipped all of the grt
would still be substantially an
excess of what you would be
charging a private pay.
A child to participate in your
mister chair representative i'm
just to give you a little
clarity on why the discrepancy
so different is because self pay
families cannot afford the cost
that it actually does it it
takes to care for the children
so the state has its done a cost
model based on the actual cost
of care for quality i'm in the
state of new mexico and that's
the rate that was determined by
the child care substitute
contracts unfortunately
that is far out of reach per
most self pay families to afford
every month that's why there is
such a discrepancy and how much
we actually charge to pay
families versus how much it
actually cost.
Mister chairman representative
does those membership
spiritually hire and anything.
That we're doing for.
K twelve.
But I do understand the
terrorists significantly more
attention given or needed
buzzies much younger children
thank thank you
present it's good to
representative dunkin
thank you mister chair
we've heard this build for and
i'm gonna come right back to
what I said then
they're significant help for
those with low income
and a pay part of text I just
figured it up eleven seven
percent is what they'd have to
pay for their child care for the
entire year.
Missure
I don't know how we're going to
skin this cat but i've got to
have some skin in the game.
Whether it's pope whether it's
something
even though that have the least
amount of money whether it's
five dollars a month I don't
know what it is but there's got
to be some skin in the game and
whether it's attacks okay I
don't care
but I can't support it without
skinner the game mister thank
you
thank you represent ducking and
wish to respond to that thank
you mr chair I appreciate the
considerations and that
certainly something that we will
keep in mind I would just add
that for a family to be eligible
for child care assistance they
are working or seeking education
and when we think and talk up in
about where our value standard
what it means to provide social
supports for the families in new
mexico that have the list i'm
really proud that these families
where we might debate otherwise
of our what kind of substitutes
go out for tanner for health
care benefits these families
specifically
have shown up and are finding
employment or seeking education
and in my mind that's a big
investment in themselves and
their children thank you mister
chair
thank you representative let's
go then to representative
heartberth
thank you chairman i'll be super
brief I know we're short on time
I just
wanted to bring something up
that I
appreciate so german and and
vice chair.
So reading this this bill I was
I was confused at first because
this is a gross receipts
deduction for the sale only.
Of challenger services right and
so there's two sides around
receipts
right there's a business when a
business cells something write
the customer comes they buy it
and they pay the grocery.
You know the customers paying
that.
But the other side is when the
business goes in purchases
something.
Rate and.
And and often always see here f.
From their purchases.
Business inputs
and we understand it when they
sell something that's up to the
customer.
But I think this is really
interesting here because we're
cassing the opposite here the
businesses are coming in asking
us th.
And I appreciate that.
In order to mention you know
this does help with the parity
between nonprofit and for profit
but it does not completely make
them equal because my
understanding is again this is
just for the sale.
That is for a profit businesses
are still paying gross receipts
when they go and perch.
On profits.
Gross receipts tax so they're
really getting a double wamy
here and we're gonna fix half of
that double wammy.
And if I could wave a magic one.
Everyone non profits everyone
would pay tax and with use that
extra revenue to cut the rating
half and then we can.
But this particular case I don't
have magic wind so i'm happy to
go half.
Pingross.
You represent her but let's go
to represent a bagels
thank you mister chairman and
thank you vice chair cadena for
bringing this piece of
legislation to us today
you know through somebody who's
run a business for what I do run
a non profit but I I guess the
the new ones is here and I think
it's really interesting in and
mister chairman
you know for most businesses you
know if you if you're if you in
a grocery store and you have to
charge taxes that's you give it
to your consumers right
and why in this type of business
would we make the assumption or
the state would make the
assumption that these providers
should have to eat that cost and
so that purchase it that battles
me mister mister chairman
because I think that
most of these businesses are run
by women of color
throughout the state and I think
that that's something else that
we need to talk about is why
would we expect these types of
businesses to once again pick up
the tab
I also want to point out that
when our families are working
going to score to be able to
qualify for these types of
services
that means that they that
they're trying to keep you in
other family together they're
trying to work to it to better
their families
so many times if there is not
these types of services that can
provide daycare for your kiddle
you have to look at what can
grammar do it and maybe she's up
and age and it's hard for her to
to know or be able to take care
of kids maybe she's not able to
provide some of the early
education services that I know
that are happening in these
daycares I am not to say that we
don't want family input in
involvement but I think that we
need to put kids where they're
going to thrive and do the best
also being in in the service in.
It's the social service arena I
also see that sometimes
kids get left with maybe
boyfriends that are
inappropriate neighbors that
aren't appropriate neglecting
abuse happened so at the end of
the day I think we need to look
at the the price tag when we
talk about price checks when we
pay for quality day care
services we're making an
investment in that and so I can
end you for trying to provide
your your families with
scholarships but I also don't
believe that that's your job to
have to do that so thank you for
that I could go on and on
a have a lot of feelings on this
but I won't I just will say
thank you for bringing this bill
to us and I well I think once
again we do need to look at our
social conscious and
look at what the big price tag
is thank you mister mister
chairman.
Thank you represent vehicles
anyone else on the committee to
comments
saying none any final comments
before we mister chair and the
hastes and hectic pace of this
morning I failed to mention my
incredible cosponsor here that
brings a depth of expertise and
commitment over a lifetime to
these family so think you
represent your vehicles for
corresponding this bill thank
you at this point in time as we
normally do the promotion to
gently temporary table and will
figure it out as we move along
motion made the second and see
no opposition we have temporary
tablet your bill thank you for
