Public that that is listed in
we're not gonna take public
comment we had a three and a
have our hearing of last
Saturday so
we do I did get a couple of
letters and concern from the
the New Mexico Siqueira
Association so we will forward
those to the respective Sanchez
so it these bills to move
forward of they go to the
judiciary so hopefully people
have an opportunity to make
their a public statement there
but since we spent almost four
hours on these four bills last
Saturday we will go a straight
to the committee and
And I'll go that route Mr chair
yes.
I thank you sure I just I just
want to for the committee and
for the public we heard four
bills.
into those bills are not on the
agenda one is Senator Ivy Soto
is bill on and the second one
senator Candelaria is been all
and I just that's that's by the
choice of the Sanchez I wanted
to state that I also want to
state right up front
that senator Candelaria.
Is is okay with the amendment
process to the house bill to
house bill twelve but he wanted
to meet me to make sure that he
still has.
Real concerns about any attempt
to limit the pip account and so
that will be even though he's
not moving for with his bill
that will continue to be a
discussion of that he'll be part
of but I just wanted to to let
you know about the members now
up front of that that was the
decision that was reached by
those two Sanchez just so the
public understands exactly what
we're doing thanks Mr chair
thank thank you a major leader
that's good I know that people
people do here for bills and I
want to thank the the sponsors
for try to work some things out
in the in the they feel
comfortable that amendment H. P.
twelve was the best and then
and then of course you have the
the Senate to eight eight as
well so so with that I'm going
to go turn to Senator Perla
believe you have a committee
substitute.
Yes Mr chairman I'm not sure if
anybody wants to volunteer to
move that committee set up.
I will move what what's the bill
number Mr chairman two eighty
eight.
In terminal do not pass on
central to engagement and to
pass on Senate tax business
transportation committee
substitute presentable to eighty
eight for discussion purposes
only thank you senator update so
go ahead and throw thank you Mr
chairman thank you for Senator
Padilla for doing that so they
were just a few changes
incorporated into Senate bill
two eighty eight that the you
did not see last time we met so
the changes that were put in was
the tribal cooperation language
that the chair was concerned
about the other was the
interstate regulation language
so that if the feds ever do
the schedule will be able to
have Interstate Commerce and the
other two were to ensure that
the commission
did not have the ability to put
plant counts or license limits
and then what was pulled out was
the one mile between stores it
was pointed out that there's
language that allows the
municipalities and counties to
put that language in if they
want to so the communities that
don't want the green mile can
put those restrictions in but
then it allows us Albuquerque
one to have a green mile
somewhere concentrate all the
stores they would have that
flexibility as well and then the
other was that was requested
that was a sticking point was
the local opt out option
allowing counties to opt out we
just spent three hours dealing
with
liquor control and and trying to
reform that and so well the
checker board that we used to
have with with liquor it's not
something that was wanted to be
created with with this
legislation so at the request of
a few the the other members that
sponsored legislation this was
something that I thought was a
good compromise.
And with that Mr chair I'll
stand for questions.
Okay
Go to the committee for a
Senator Padilla.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Senator Pirtle up top can you
please talk a little bit more
about I didn't quite get your
line of a discussion on
Plant count how does this
ammendment affect question thank
you.
So this prevents the commission
from putting in any type of
plant count it was under my
assumption that it was not in
the bill that was pointed out
that we didn't specifically
address that they couldn't do it
so it's it's important to me to
ensure that we let the the free
market determine how much
cannabis can be produced and the
goal is to get cannabis as cheap
as possible to drive out the
illicit market so if we create a
shortage and and have a higher
demand and supply the black
market is what's going to fill
the the the needs of the of of
the cannabis users and so the
goal is to put the illicit
market out of business and so to
do that we need to have a
enough production to keep prices
low.
Mr chairman
then Senator Pirtle so maybe a
little deeper if you go a little
deeper and if dive into how does
the amendment on your plant
count analysis or language.
How does it specifically cut out
the black the the the illicit
market.
I'm.
Well we're gonna keep prices low
by ensuring that we don't create
a false
price market being held up
because there's a low supply so
if you have a short supply
because you but plant count in
the black market is going to
come in and now compete because
the price of cannabis is high so
if you have a a high supply with
the high demand
then the price will stay low and
the list of market will be
driven out of business if you.
Cap supply and the demand is
there once we go to recreational
sale then you will propped the
price up which will still allow
the illicit market to come in a
smaller drugs into New Mexico
and and right.
Mister chairman Senator Pirtle
and and you and I came in the
Senate the same here and I just
want to compliment you on your
speech on the floor last night I
know how.
Do you desire you had for the
people that you spoke about last
night and when recognize you for
that Mr chairman but it and I
know that you being a farmer and
and knowing get a ninety eight
percent more about this than
I'll ever know about it I grew
up on a couple of farms along
the way but not is this deep as
you to your family roots that
way where did you get the data
the information the analysis the
told you where plant count needs
to be or not be or whatever the
to to drive down the illicit
market I'm I'm still trying to
get my hands are and how I'm
gonna vote on any of these bills
and I'm trying to ask as many
questions as humanly possible
I'm talking to everybody that
wants to talk to me and I talked
to one advocate for about an
hour forty five minutes the
other night I think I left the
roundhouse got all the way home
was home for half hour by the
time I finished talking to that
person.
Where did you get this
information this analysis to to
to to arrive at these spots in
these points in your bill your
amendment well Mister chairman
Senator it it's a really basic
economics whenever you limit the
supply in the end of the the man
claims high consumers are going
to look for that product
somewhere is going to set the
price because of supply and
demand so if there's a a low
supply due to capping the amount
that can be produced and the
demand increases and the supply
is going to come from somewhere
and so it's going to come from
the illicit market or you can
look at that legal things such
as milk in Canada so in Canada
Mr chair and senator they have a
quota system on how many cows
can be milked and so what
essentially is happened over
time is just the right to milk a
cow has a value and then plus
the supply of milk for their
country is not where it needs to
be to meet the demand so they
actually pay twice as much for a
gallon of milk in Canada then we
have been joined America because
the supply is low and the demand
is high and they've cap that
system and set up a quota system
and so the in consumer ends up
paying more money for that milk.
Thank you Mr chairman so just
just one more time for my
clarification with your
amendment and if your bill were
to make it all the way up to the
to to it for governor's
signature the governor's
signature
Would there be caps of any kind.
Sorry Mr chairman and senator
could you repeat that question I
apologize with your amendment
and then your bill if if your
amendment were attached and your
bill made it all the way up to
the governor for signature
consideration for signature
would there be a plant limits
caps of any kind.
So the the the verbiage is the
commission shall not limit the
number of plants a cannabis
establishment may possess
cultivate or manufacture.
So there there can't be any
limits or caps or anything put
on because the goal is to allow
the free market to thrive ensure
that we don't prop up and create
basically the liquor system that
we've seen that we worked on
today with the limited number of
licenses are limited amount of
supply so this would ensure that
we keep prices low in New Mexico
if you wish to market out.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator I I guess you know my
big concern if I do wind up
supporting any of these measures
on this topic
is not to squeeze out the New
Mexico former because it seems
to me like there's so much money
in this industry but I'm I'm
envisioning consolidation very
very quickly much faster than
maybe any other because the the
the cash flow is going to be
huge here
how can you assure me that your
measure would not squeeze out
New Mexico smaller farmers that
want to get involved in this in
this in this business and not
favor large consolidation.
So Mr chair Senator that's a
that's a great question and and
other parts of my bill insure
the ease of of or the low cost
of entering the market so we
have the portion that requires
consignments at a retail space
so if a small producer wanted to
get their product on the shelf
they don't have to build a one
million dollar building just to
sell their product they can get
it in on consignment the other
thing is the fee on the plants
as a per plant fee so that way
if you only want to produce ten
plants you're not buying a
license for ninety or you're not
buying a license for for fifty
you just want to buy for how
many you want to produce and
scale up your business as
necessary on a per pip basis.
Thank you Mr chairman and then
Senator Pirtle and so who who is
setting the cost or the price
per plant who is doing that and
since the government with your
measure.
And Mister chairman Senator
that'll be the commission the
cannabis control commission.
Thank you Mr chairman that's all
I have on the amendment.
Thank you Mr.
There were still a member of
central meal.
Mr chairman thank you senator
thank you for this bill I was
just gonna ask the same thing
Senator Padilla asked in regards
to ensuring that New Mexico
farmers could make sure that
they can can join in if this is
if this is passed but did I hear
you correctly senator and
chairman of that counties would
be able to ban cannabis
production delay here that at
the beginning.
Mr chair Senator you did and
what and what you heard was that
we pulled the opt out portion
out of the legislation so we
don't end up with the checker
board situation that was created
through alcohol.
Mister chairman Senator thank
you for that.
No further questions.
Okay thank you I had Senator
Brandt ten go up but then he
disappeared so
Do you have a question Senator
Brandt.
If not we'll go to Senator
Hamblen.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Senator Pirtle actually I'm just
following up with what Senator
Padilla asked because you didn't
actually answer the question of
where you got the data about
plant caps you just talked about
supplying demand but is there I
mean in Oregon they capped their
plant counts and and because
they were having an abundance of
it so I'm not real sure about
stating that you're making thank
you Mr chair.
So Mister chairman Senator you
know the information is is out
there as far as that goes but
you know I I tend to lean
towards the free market I'm I'm
taking my opinion off of economy
in my my experience in business
for the last seventeen or
eighteen years and seeing how
other nations and other products
how they put quotas and and caps
and and things like that and
what it does to the end consumer
and and so since the goal is to
put the illicit market out of
business we do want the price to
be as cheap as possible that's
part of the organ a model that
you know isn't spoken over isn't
brought up is the fact that
because it's so cheap in Oregon
that you don't see a lot of the
black market cannabis being
brought anymore because it's not
profitable the cost of of
getting in there and and the
danger of of smuggling drugs is
is no longer worth it so
although you might see one
problem with it there's also a
benefit and that is that that we
put the list of market out of
business and that that's the
main goal.
Further questions Mr chair you
thank you Senator Brandt.
Mr chairman with that I would
move a do pass on the committee
so.
Was going to be anyone else's
questions.
I don't see any.
And so the at the moment.
Senator Wirth we go to you.
Yes thank you Mr chair so I just
I want to lay out kind of where
we are here because we have
these two bills and I do
appreciate the work Senator
portals done I hate in his San
and you know my plan is to vote
for both of these bills are
moving forward will have the
discussion on the second one
there's a there's a lengthy
amendment that I'm gonna sponsor
and and more superintendent is
here and will help walk through
that on the second bill but I
just I just want to lay out that
you know I'm moving the ball
forward because I think the
discussion continues and I don't
want you know there to be a
sense that all we're picking a
bill one over the other Senator
Pirtle is a member Senate
Judiciary enough for both these
bills are going and so I just
wanted to kind of I guess
explain my vote before I take
it.
But that's not a lot on where we
are on this
and just to make that clear we
we usually the explanation after
the Senator yeah and and Mr
chair I think in seventeen years
I have never once asked to
explain my vote afterwards I
almost never do it although
maybe I did on this committee we
had some fun and maybe that's
what got Center Brandt got me in
trouble the other day.
So anyway I just want to lay
that out thanks.
Appreciate that thank you
Senator Wirth I don't see any
other hand so we do have a
motion by Senator Brandt do I
have a second.
House second.
We have a second by Senator
Kernan of lane can you please
take Rowe.
Senator Brandt yes ma'am.
Senator Griggs.
Senator Hamblen yes.
The.
As.
Senator how to meal yes Senator
Kernan.
Senator Kernan your muted.
Yes thank you senator Sanchez.
Yes.
Senator Clemente yes.
Senator Wirth yes.
Senator Hickey yes.
Senator Padilla yes and Senator
Shendo.
Yes.
So you have ten to the positive
and one excused.
Okay thank you just Senator you
have a do pass Senate Mr
chairman thank you members of
the committee.
I know will move on to the.
Committee substitute or need
assistance of the hospital
twelve as amended of Senator.
are you Representative Martinez
Romero.
Mr chair I believe senator Ortiz
Pino as well are you on this one
yes and RTZ Pinos well okay
already.
Where is taking the lead on this
one.
Thank you Mr chairman Apollo
the need for the my my internet
I think we're up it sounded like
we're about to go up.
Chairman of the committee.
Thank you are you all have heard
house bill twelve you heard it
last week at length Michael
Sanchez here with me as well
Senator metal as well as our
expert Emily Kaltenbach we're
very proud of this piece of
legislation it's something
that's been vetted for several
years now pass the house with
thirty nine votes last week and
we are here today to
to to respectfully ask for a
vote of the bill as you know
legalizes adult use cannabis
industry in New Mexico we
believe that it's an industry
that is certainly part of the
diversification efforts are that
we all want to engage in when it
comes to our economy this bill
is also you know something that
I'm very proud of because this
is you know in the last few days
the session this is really where
the the the best minds from the
house and the Senate can come
together and get out a bill that
we can all be proud of and that
we can hopefully continue to
move on and keep this discussion
going so with that Mr chair out
of my a co sponsor was to add
anything but we're open for
questions comments and debate.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee I just
wanted to add that this past
week we've definitely taken lots
and lots of feedback we've had
open discussions with anyone who
wants to have them as well to
Senator videos point about just
wanting to have that open
dialogue we've taking a lot of
feedback and I think the
conversation today will include
all of that we look forward to
your questions thank you Mr
chair thank you.
I don't have anything to address
Mr chairman of the just be
really listening and following
all of these.
Different chicken parts were
going to come up with something
that can really be a stimulus to
New Mexico's economy but also
take care of some of the social
justice issues that.
You to play a stronger failed
war on drugs.
With this one simple.
I think I push some wrong button
on my computer.
Mr chairman we we can hear you
can okay or else I.
Okay I think I.
Something wrong button can you
hear me now.
Okay all right good good good.
And.
Senator of worse before we go to
the bill itself I believe you
have some amendments I do I do
Mister chair I have an
amendments of point two two oh
six oh three point one.
and this is an amendment
that is coming from our
regulation and licensing
superintendents nice to see you
former representative and member
of the Santa Fe delegation Linda
Trujillo.
And what I would do is move this
ammendment for discussion and
then yield to our superintendent
to walk us through exactly what
this does it is a Ortiz sixteen
page amendment so there's some
different things in here but I
think this is.
The work that's going on in and
the discussions that have
happened Representative Romero
was referencing and so Mister
chair I would move that
amendment for discussion
purposes.
Chairman Mr leader.
The.
That I have is the six oh three
point two you said one track
okay well I have six oh three
point one so I'll go ahead and
move six oh three point two and
well the superintendent explain
six oh three point two I will go
figure out where where my copy
of point to this is what I was
handed on the floor so all get
the point two version but I move
that for discussion okay
appreciate that thank Majority
Leader so
Catchment Sherman okay thank
you.
That that was that was laying.
I committee secretary so all the
credit goes to her so which is a
great secretary yes yes services
so with that with that Mr the
trio thank you Mr chairman thank
you senator Sam I just want to
say thank you to the Sanchez of
this on both the house and the
Senate side and for their vote
as to have really open dialogue
about how we can improve and
make sure that this is
employment it can be implemented
so I'm just gonna start I I'm
I'm not gonna go through line by
line I'm happy to answer any
questions I do have the bill and
the amendments have in a
notebook so I can flip to them
quickly if there's questions.
I will say that the first thing
that we do is we repeal the
house floor amendment but we
then put it back in later in the
bill under section I believe
sixty two and that was just some
cleanup language where we just
cleaned it up to say that the
cannabis products that are sold
in accordance with the Lynn and
Erin compassionate use act so
that's not the amendment is not
removed completely it's just
removed and then put back in in
the right place we also change
the language to ensure that the
cannabis consumption areas could
be extended to all licensees
that have the ability to do that
rather than limiting it
we're clarifying that account
most cannabis producer can only
sell wholesale not directly to
the public we did increase the
micro Business plant count to
two hundred rather than ninety
nine and we believe that this
makes them more competitive we
change the dates to no later
than there was a combination of
beginning
and and no later than and so we
changed all of the dates to no
later than with the exception of
the March first twenty twenty
two start date for the retail
sale of cannabis for adult use
that we felt that that was
unclear in the bill and because
it was unclear there was a
couple different analysis that
we got from folks we decided
that we really needed to have
kind of that line in the sand to
say exactly when retail sales
could start.
The changes to some of the dates
also include our analysis of the
state rules act and how quickly
we can draft rules notice rules
have public comment.
Combine those public comments to
make final decisions on the
rules and then publish the rules
file the rules and have them
published and then began
working.
So it.
Excuse me we do have of we are
putting in here the possibility
that the department could in
fact limit the pip count but it
would require the department to
do an analysis and upon a
recommendation from the cannabis
regulatory advisory committee
that there's a market that the
market equilibrium is deficient
and threatens the economic
viability of the industry or
that there's not adequate supply
of or that there is too much
cannabis only at that point
could the division temporarily
impose a moratorium on either
new licenses licenses or
production limitations.
to allow for greater protection
of current licenses.
All we also clarified that the
licensees in good standing under
the Lynn and Erin compassionate
use act on of October first
twenty twenty one would begin
being issued licenses of the
same class
beginning January first twenty
twenty two
we adjust the like I said we
adjust protections for
participation participants of
the medical cannabis program and
then the ultimate time line of
the retail sale we added in a
fifty dollar per plant feet
which is similar to the fees
currently assessed by the
department of health but they
have a range so if you have
between say one thousand five
hundred and two thousand you pay
a certain fee if you have
between two thousand and one and
three thousand you pay another
fee we believe that the fifty
dollar per feet is a more
equitable assessment of that fee
we also clarified the
collaboration between the
environment department the
department of agriculture the
regular and the regulation and
licensing department and we move
the community grant reinvestment
fund to the regulation and
licensing department to be
implemented by the
superintendent with the support
of the cannabis regular
regulation advisory committee.
And we add in the authority that
those funds could be used for
approved courses using the
higher education financial needs
assessment the rest of it Mr
chairman and members of the
committee is really clean up
language to like you're you're
looking at something right now
we're amending the regulation
licensing department to take
away the responsibility for
division directors to hold
rulemaking hearings only in
Santa Fe and then to have
different filing and notice
requirements outside of the
state rules in addition to the
state rules act we're taking all
of that language up and we
believe that that will help
eliminate any confusion between
the responsibilities Under the
state rules act and the
responsibilities that should not
be included in the regulation
licensing department authorising
act and with that Majority
Leader that is a over all
explanation.
I thank you madam superintendent
I do think Mr chair it would be
appropriate to go to the to the
sponsors the house the two house
sponsors of the bill just to get
their input on on what the
superintendent has come up with
here.
Go ahead the representatives.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
majority floor leader and and
superintendent Rio is is good to
see you in this in this new
capacity.
and we appreciate your work on
this you know as I said the
beginning Mr chair house bill
twelve is something that we're
very proud of I think the the
house of representatives and and
the experts that we brought to
the table have come up with a
really solid framework having
said that we also understand
the.
The wealth of knowledge that
you're chamber brings to this
discussion and we understand
that you know your own experts
and and the work that you do a
Senators is equally valuable to
the work that we do is
representative so in in this
spirit of collaboration and the
spirit of compromise in the
spirit of moving to this very
important piece of legislation
forward we will accept this as a
friendly amendment Mr chair and
I'm not sure of my co sponsor
wants to add anything.
Representative Romero.
Thank you Mr chair you know we
read through this pretty quickly
so I don't want to miss anything
the only one question I do have
for the superintendent on the
amendment is in reference to a
believe number thirty five
and I don't know how this works
on your side of the chamber
one of the questions that we had
been asked for Representative
peated Lee about representation
on our commission was that they
were sort of a non stick to
their position in the market and
so I just want to clarify that
if that's something that
we're looking at for this to
make sure that folks are not
involved in the regulation of
their also participated to the
industry so if we could just
clarify that.
Yes Mr chairman of
Representative I apologize that
I didn't catch that I had it in
a piece of notes on my paper and
forgot to look down to that we
did take out the language about
their not having financial
interest in the advisory board
and added in the cannabis
retailer the producer and the
manufacture and we added that in
because we believe that as a
department we're going to need
to have those voices and one way
or another we're going to be
hearing from those voices
whether it's inside of the
meeting or whether it's outside
of the meeting and as you know
which is always my preference
that this be done an open
meeting rather than be done
behind closed doors in state my
office or someone else's office
and so we figured that bringing
them on to the committee made
sure that those voices were
heard in open in the public's.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
superintendent and I think just
to other additions that we
didn't get to mention that we do
like our the consign men
requirement that is included as
well which is great and also the
addition as well so thank you Mr
chair thank you Representative
for their for the response.
Okay thank you of.
Majority Leader.
Mr chairman I wonder if I can
chime in with the just a couple
of comments it is Mr chairman
and committee is really
fascinating to see as these
bills.
Receive Vigil how many it
elements in each other's.
Concept they're picking up and
and they're getting closer and
closer together
I just wanted to mention two
things that are still pretty
significantly different between
the two bills this bill.
As a cannabis regulatory
advisory committee.
Our still with the RLD.
The other bill has a separate
independent commission and I I
just I have to say I really like
this approach better is I think
it's safer for the public.
Is a little more control the
other one has to do is a plan
County issue and I know that
that.
It's nice to say let the market
decide but that is exactly what
got oriented to the problem
because you open the doors you
can you you have no limit on how
much any individual producers
and reduce the oversupply
immediately take the market and.
I would just suggest it is not
in need of bill now but I know
this out as a possibility to
keep in mind starting with the
result was a chap really hi tech
I don't know something like five
thousand plants are so but then
sunset that and then give the
department the opportunity to to
to to.
After your to it would it would
be sunset in and then the
decision can be made aware of a
realistic level out of the.
I just I just you little caution
as we proceed into this so that
we don't open the door to the
wire and that alone well I'll
just listen to the discussion
thank you Mr chairman.
Okay thank you what we're still
on the amendment the Senator
Wirth anything more
on nope Mr chair I just go to
other committee members and and
will make a motion once the
committee said input on the
amendment.
Okay thank you I have a Senator
Kernan Senator Padilla.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members I you know I really
didn't I didn't ask a lot of
questions on the previous bill
because I think they're very
similar and so I guess once we
get to the bill I have some
questions just in general but on
on the amendment
I'm just just wondering why it
tell me about the consumption
areas and why.
What we're moving to that
expands them why is that
necessary and
tell me a little bit about that
if you would.
Majority Leader worthwhile why
we're doing that thank you
Senator Kernan Mr chair I would
yield to our.
Superintendent thank you thank
you Mr chairman thank you
senator and it's very nice to
see you the reason that that was
changed just because the way the
original bill was reading is
that only the retail sales were
going to be able to do that and
that wasn't the intent the
intent was to allow the but
micro businesses and the micro
Business and the but businesses
so anybody who's licensed with
an establishment that allows
them to sell we wanted to give
them the opportunity to have
that consumption area it was not
in Chennai we don't believe that
it was intended to do that and
we just wanted to clarify that
it wasn't that limit.
So okay just to clarify when
you're talking about the micro
businesses were talking at give
me an example of one because I I
I just am not that familiar with
this whole business but what
what would be an example of a
mac pro business.
Mister chairman Senator they're
going to have left two hundred
or less plants and so their
production is going to be lower
their manufacturing is going to
be lower their retail may be
lower because of their ability
to produce that's really the
difference between a regular
business and a micro business is
the number of plants that they
can have.
And so when you talk about Mr
chairman and superintendent of
consumption areas so at these
businesses that would have an
opportunity to purchase and then
then utilize the cannabis.
I don't understand what that
means the consent.
Mister chairman Senator that
gives the department the
department will have the
authority to draft rules to
explain what a consumption area
would be V. similar to a R. it
could be that you would have a
consumption area is a bar it
could be you know it could be
some other area could be an area
where you're selling it maybe
away from where the sales are
happening you've got similar to
what we have here in Santa Fe a
cigar room there could be that
kind of you know consumption
areas similar to a cigar room
that's.
Example I can give that that
helps me thank you Mr chairman
superintendent so I'm they were
going to micro businesses can go
from ninety nine plants two two
hundred that's that's doubling
that and so is Dale is set just
to let them kind of build their
way up you know they start maybe
at a lower that number and then
as things if they're successful
they have the authority of the
ability to make that to to more
plants is at the purpose of that
Mister chairman Senator that is
correct okay and.
Let's see
The only thing I worry about a
little bit is the fact that you
know we talk a lot about Mr
chair and and superintend we
talk a lot about the plant limit
and that seems to be something
that states have struggled with
and and historically we go back
and look and see how they
handled it that that decision
now is going to rest with our it
will do is that correct Mr
chairman superintendent that you
you would upon the
recommendation of
I'm not sure let's see an
oversight advisory board is that
correct.
You would you would listen to
what they're saying and then you
would have the authority to to
make a change with with regard
to the number of plants correct.
Mr Chairman US senator it would
be after up there have to be in
a market market analysis the
department of health did a very
comprehensive market analysis
and twenty nineteen and we
reviewed that and we believe
that we'll probably use
something similar to that and
then it would be upon
recommendation by the oversight
can't advisory committee but it
wouldn't be the superintendent
that does this it would be the
director for the cannabis
regulation division.
Mr Mr chair and superintendent
that that rests within your
department correct that is
correct Mr chairman Senator that
is correct and so so I think
that might be a concern for me
where we as a legislature maybe
he of relinquished the ability
or the authority at two down the
road make a decision on that so
so that one piece is concerning
to me a little bit and tell me a
little bit about the I don't
understand the fifty dollar per
plant see I'm in so is that
that's pretty standard then
across the industry is that is
that more than what was in the
original bill is it last is that
tell me about that because I
don't remember that
being discussed Mr chairman of
senator it was not in the
original bill this is in
addition it is something that is
currently being done by if not
all most states and it it rather
than having a block so for every
five hundred it was recommended
that we consider for every five
hundred but we felt like that
could make it easy like somebody
could go all the way up to nine
hundred and ninety nine before
they actually had to pay a what
somebody that has one more plant
would have to pay and so I
thought that it was more
equitable and also provided a
greater flexibility for those
micro businesses as you said as
they try to grow so they're not
stuck with that you know a large
fee so yes it is standard and
fifty dollars is kind of it's
not the highest plant channel in
the country and it probably
isn't the lowest it was a little
challenging for us to do that
analysis but it was recommended
by the department of health as
kind of a happy medium.
Okay thank you and so is there
is there still a license fee on
top of that or is it just the
point at for plant to see is it
both or just the fifty dollars
per plant Mister chairman
Senator it's there's a license
fee and then the plant count.
Okay
thank you for answering all
these I'm just learning how to
do all this
So one last question with regard
to the rule making and and you
you kind of went over that it
that didn't follow you very well
to grow making.
Where that occurs can that be in
various communities and then how
does that connect with the rules
at just kind of clarify that for
me just what kind of figure that
out.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator and I myself have
learned more about cannabis and
I thought I could learn in in a
very consolidated time frame so
your questions are are very good
questions we would in fact hope
to do Raul hopefully by this
time we're doing them in person
the analysis that we did
indicates that the earliest that
we could have rules adopted
which we felt didn't really
provide us an adequate
opportunity to analyze the
public input would be September
to Oct I'm sorry September
twenty seventh and by taking the
language out of the regulation
licensing department act that
requires they be in Santa Fe we
could in fact have on rural
hearings or public comment in
different areas of the state and
we would also take in public
comment via email and again
depending upon where we're at
with the pandemic and
potentially the expansion of the
ability to use of media like
this we might be able to take it
on in this manner to which we're
calling kind of the Brady bunch.
Okay thank you Mr chairman thank
you superintendent and looking
at the difference between the
two bills the primary regulator
of course and and now.
This particular bill house bill
twelve would be the division
of R. L. D. and then of course
in the other bill a separate
commission that would work out
site so I guess my final thought
would be in and of course it's
not part of the amendment that
that's a huge responsibility
this is this is a major event
that's going to happen in our
state with regard to the
adoption of this legislation and
I think that I'm gonna be really
honest I'm glad you're in that
position that I don't know that
I could have said that
over time with regard to that
position so I'm I worry a little
bit when maybe you're not there
and so I don't know I hope we're
doing the right thing with that
because
that that is a huge
responsibility and is going to
require someone that is
Really able to direct and manage
something.
Of this nature so that's just
the COVID and something that I
worry about down the road not
now thank you that's all I have
Mister chair thank you Senator
Kernan Senator Padilla that I
have Senator Brandt.
And senator Jerry Ortiz Y. Pino.
Thank you Mr chairman I I do
still have you know what to talk
through on on this ammendment
verses when I mention on on the
last bill
on the plant count and I I heard
I think senator Ortiz Pino talk
a little bit about that himself
in in may be setting a higher
plant count limit you know we
talked about economics in the
last bill presentation and and
here we are again
I'm concerned that if if it's
just you know you're allowed to
have as many as you can and you
might have the most capital
right out of the gate and or
whatever you can consolidate you
be able to consolidate this
business pretty fast what
safeguards are I think one of
the terms used was you know I
heard this term before guard
rails are in place to prevent
that and squeezing out the New
Mexico a potential are you and
and I I'm all gonna be real
clear on this too I mean I I
came into this and I think it's
become pretty well known based
on the way my telephone is been
raining in my email box has been
filling up on where I'm at on
this but I'm gonna support the
majority leader's comments on
moving this on to get something
put together hopefully but but
how do we ensure to the sponsors
are to the point of the sponsor
of the amendment yes how we
ensure that we don't squeeze out
the New Mexico business wanting
to do this.
Can see just massive
consolidation and really large
players owning the entire
market.
Mister chairman Senator I think
that's a really valid and
responsible question and we
actually in the way that we
ended up coming up with this
ammendment it was it was really
a go she added amendment there's
been some concern about having
that kind of land line in the
sand on the other hand you know
we've heard a lot about the
illicit market I think our goal
is more to ensure the exactly
what you said that the the
farmers of New Mexico have an
equitable access to the cannabis
industry and if there isn't a
bit we feel about that ability
for us to at least set that out
if we can prove that the market
Gen will still function with the
limit without a limit we feel
like exactly what you're saying
is what would happen and so when
we kind of just by develop
language to make us have to do a
report make us have to go to the
advisory committee and then put
in rules that was our way of
negotiating between no plant
count and the line in the sand
plant count.
Does anyone else wish to comment
on how we manage this industry
from consolidation and just
having one or two rather large
players and squeezing out all
the New Mexico operations.
Mr chair and senator but yet at
the thing that's a great
question and that's really been
at the heart of what we on the
house side have really worked to
avoid
part of the reason why our bill
has a micro business license and
now with this ammendment their
plan count increases to two two
hundred is precisely to ensure
that communities across the
state have the ability to get
into the industry with limited
capital I mean at the end of the
day you need water.
Access to water land and some
know how and and you should be
able to to to enter the business
you know with regard to
squeezing out local so I mean I
think that the bill also
provides.
And this is prior to the
amendment but the bill also
provides our current medical
licensed producers
what we call legacy licenses so
these folks would be licensed I
had a time and would be able to
establish themselves in this new
market along with the micro
businesses and it is not until a
later time that other folks can
come in for a license our hope
and our expectation is that
through those different
mechanisms we can ensure that
New Mexico business cannot only
enter the industry but can
thrive and not have to compete
with out of state interests that
might come in with a lot of
money right off the bat.
Appreciate that I still have
questions on it but as I
mentioned before I'm going to
help you to move this forward as
the Majority Leader dimensional
want to support his position on
this and in that we continue
this conversation but I I can't
guarantee that I will vote for
it on before just because of
other you know.
Very deep rooted feelings I have
on the matter and and and also
how the business will be managed
thank you.
Thank you Senator Padilla though
have a Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Sir work to bring this
ammendment I I still have
several concerns about the bills
or wait till we get on the bill
or will just move forward let's
to Senate Judiciary deal with
that
so I'm trying to understand so
you increase the
Micro Lysons from ninety nine to
two hundred can you remind me
again with the license the
differences between the regular
license in the microlights sins
and then what the total cost
would be if you wanted to do two
hundred plants.
One of the ways the
superintendent to heal it is
great to see you.
I I I mess you up here.
Mister chairman Senator I miss
you too and it was very nice to
see but I have been following
you throughout the session
in the struggle you can because
you plenty of trouble with all.
That's always my goal.
I'm gonna leave the the fees to
someone else I wasn't prepared
to answer that question.
Mr chair representative or I'm
sorry Mr chair Senator I'm I'm
not sure I'm looking through the
amendment I'm not sure if if
superintendents amendment deals
with fees the fees under our
bill
the micros would have a fund
would pay five percent of the.
Quote unquote traditional
vertically integrated license
which is about a hundred twenty
five thousand dollars so micro
would pay roughly sixty two
hundred dollars to be able to
enter into the biz into the
industry as a micro licensee.
We feel that that's affordable
you know relatively affordable
obviously there's more capital
that's needed if you don't have
land if you need the equipment
that's those are costs that
would be associated with with
those micro well licensees
entering the industry but if it
in terms of the fee it would be
about sixty two hundred dollars
a year.
This on top of that you would
have fifty dollars a plan which
is a per plant license fees at
trying to understand that well
Mr chairman and senator I think
that part of that amendment and
I can't speak to that
specifically but that's part of
the amendment that the there
were I think you proposed today.
Mr chairman Sir worth you know
what what's the cost for plant
that see that the sixty two
hundred plus I think it was
fifty dollars plans what I was
hearing.
Mister chairman Senator that's
correct is fifty dollars so they
can get pretty pricey first what
we're trying to set up an allow
entry level.
Are quite frankly and everyone
knows that I am clearly more in
love with server portals Bill
and not just because these are
one of mine.
But not just because I worked on
the bill with him
but because I honestly think it
does help and make it more
accessible for the person
wanting to jump in because it's
just a ten dollar per plant.
No matter who you are no matter
where you are so you can start
with ten plants and if it
weren't good for you you could
increase it to twenty and then
you could increase it to thirty
and and you can just grow your
business organically that way
and I just think that's a better
approach I think it's something
you you should consider between
now and Judiciary because I
think it's something that just
works better I also do have a a
great concern with really
expecting anyone I mean we've
seen with the
Alcohol
the alcohol licenses liquor
licenses that we just dealt with
on the floor today a hundred
twenty five thousand dollars is
is very expensive to be able to
get into any business and I
think it really and I know it's
not your intention
Representative
But I think it really protects
the of license holders to have
it now and quite frankly they've
had the ability to to make
probably twenty thirty forty
fifty times what they've paid in
the initial licensing fees that
they did and and have had pretty
much it's not a monopoly because
that would be one company but
you know they've they've been
able to control everything and
there's there's one major
producer of our state I think
that's my biggest concern.
With some of the changes we're
making here is that we're really
not making it accessible and not
making it where just the average
person.
Can get in on this business on
the ground floor because we've
given advantage to everyone
who's been doing the medical
side.
and so I I I know it's probably
getting more away from the the
amendment with the exception of
were increasing the pip council
come back to that during the
bill but
super John that the other
concern that I have is and and
Representative you want to dress
that I'm sorry I see your hands
up and I see you're on the sorry
yes Senator no thank you thank
you for that question so I in
taxing with with our expert and
and and looking at the the
amendment so
I'm in on page thirty eight this
is on page
eight of the amendment of the
per plant the Business not apply
to cannabis producer Michael
businesses or integrated
cannabis micro businesses this
so so you wouldn't pay the per
plant fee until you went over
the two hundred well you
couldn't go over the two hundred
under that licensing scheme you
have to apply for I have to
upgrade your license I guess to
upgrade would be the right term
to the unlimited license that is
correct okay.
Mr chair Senator two it's only
up to fifty dollars so like you
said it kid to get in on the
ground floor even going past the
two hundred plan account the way
I read it says that you the love
the most you would pay under
RLD's discretion would be fifty
dollars per plant so it could be
a dollar per plant starting at
the gate or something.
Yes Representative you know and
and it may be different under
Mr Heo but are of the usually
charges the maximum we allow on
just about everything and so I
you know I understand what your
argument is it could be a petty
right but I doubt.
We let's just be reasonable the
government likes to get as much
money as they can get their
hands on and that's just one way
of doing it without calling it a
tax so
so that's that's one of the
areas I have a little bit
concerned I think it will be
difficult for those entering in
I do appreciate the fact that
that only starts after the
higher license course then
you've already paid a hundred
twenty five thousand dollars
plus you're paying fifty dollars
a plant as the cruise a simpler
easier way to make it more
accessible for all
So the other concern that I have
quite frankly and unfortunately
I doubt that we can get
Mr hill I'm so used to call you
Representative I keep wanting to
Mr hill just to commit to
staying RLD forever I don't
think we'll be able to get that
in writing but unfortunately I
doubt that she will be there
forever that will change and
changes happen there and we have
no idea who were going to get
there in the future we and so
when we right law we can't write
it based on who's currently
there and let's just be honest
one of the reasons you're there
is to clean it up.
Right one of the reasons you're
there just because they've had
some problems
and so we have to look at the
history of that department and I
think we could have put a better
person there I should say we the
governor could put a better
person there clean it up and I
have full faith in you doing
that
but I'm not sure that we can
always count on that department
I think this the the approach
Senator Pirtle has put in his
bill having that this done
separately is a better approach
I just think it works better I
think it makes more sense so
I appreciate some of the changes
that are being made I just don't
the low they go far enough
and I obviously have a
preference for one bill over
another but I I appreciate your
work on this and as one of the
Republicans that really want to
see this happen.
I will continue to work to to
get this through thank you.
Thank you Senator Brandt I
believe Jerry could probably
find you at least the first two
hundred clones.
So.
Well Mr president I I probably
couldn't afford the fee.
No no Jr is going to donate
close to you as well okay all
right awesome thank you all
right thank you a I have Senator
Thoman.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you sponsors of the bill
no use.
What long and hard on the
Senator bill so.
I have several questions but
I'll accept a short answers
because my I have a short
attention to tension span so
that might stop listening if you
are too long.
So other states have experienced
a very volatile and
unpredictable
Revenues from marijuana and so
I'm just saying we should be
careful and relying.
To have only and these revenues
so I've heard estimates and
we're from forty million to
three hundred million how much
are we budgeting this year from
a.
Read more water from taxes I
more one.
Mr Chairman Senator Tallman I
don't believe we're budgeting
anything from cannabis revenues
at this point.
When approaching anything okay.
I thank you for that that.
That answer
If we up.
What kind of.
Kills my second question which.
Was I I really I've been told by
the
Majority Leader that we can
designate.
Funding from the state marijuana
taxes to specific programs like
education for spent a mental
health services.
So.
There is one study out of
Colorado that
Clan I don't believe everything
I read but they claim that that
for every dollar raised.
But in Colorado four four
thousand fifty cents was spent.
And Enforcement education and
mental health services a truce
that.
Mr chair and and senator Tom and
you know that there is there a
lot of studies out there I mean
I've I've seen other studies
that show that Colorado's
economy has has improved this
has been a book to them as in
other states where they've
legalized so you know I think
it's a little bit of a give and
take.
And Miss Mister chair but if I
could address the year marking
question because I want to be
real clear about the difference
between having a direct your
mark and having a
responsibility to address some
of the other issues there is no
question that we we have a
responsibility to address some
of these other lanes and I think
one of the things that we're
gonna have to do out of the
General Fund is when this money
comes in address those issues
and have education have
treatment all those mental
health all those different
things I I just think that there
are the reason we've kind of not
done earmarking a very much
appreciate the representatives
kind of taking some of that out
it's it's a philosophical issue
with members of our Senate
finance committee which I also
happen to share is that you can
really lose control of the
overall budget we start here
marking everywhere so it's so
it's just philosophical but it
does not mean in any way that
those other issues you're
bringing up are not certainly
important in need to be
addressed thank you Mr chair
thank you Sir without any
problem with that what you just
stated.
So what I know center part rose
so Bill he has a provision of
we're by the dispensaries have
to be at least a mile apart.
good on some states say that
are.
Hey you had a problem with these
dispensaries being located in
vulnerable communities is there
any such
provision and and your bill sent
of Representative Martinez Mr
chair Senator AUMENT yes sure
that no our bill does allow
local governments to utilize or
zoning ordinances to regulate
where these activities can take
place
but we don't mandate other than
you know you can be within three
hundred feet of a school or a
church for example everything
else is left up to the local
government.
Thank you Mr chairman
if I heard correctly Senator
portal is for needs that station
this bill or he's removed that
provision this bill and the but
local ordinances just as as
chairman Martinez just indicated
so I think I believe that's what
I heard in a substitute you
brought the quote unquote
required to be done on a local
level but it's not the actual
legislation center grants
statements that.
Thank you for that and thank you
Mr chairman thank you for that
answer I know it's been a
problem in other states they
make all kinds of promises to
keep it out of the.
But communities but it happens
happens anyway.
The water I've been in the
northern California but a lot of
marijuana.
I didn't go there because of
that.
But they up yes very humid you
get forty fifty inches of rain a
year.
And.
And they they can say it's a
high quality
So one hundred center that said
that that we're gonna grow up
high quality best your.
Marijuana United States well how
can we if you are a lot of water
how how can that be but it's a
bogus argument I mean is there
any truth to contention that
this gonna affect our water.
The supplier Water.
Mr chair and senator that's a
very good question and you know
this question came up in our
clock is early on and one of my
one of our colleagues answered
it perfectly well and he said
look.
You know landowners will make a
business decision it's just like
if if you have an acre land are
you gonna grow chillies are file
file or cannabis obviously
growing cannabis.
Requires
This you know several regulatory
steps as opposed to just
graduate but none the less
people make a you know whatever
decision is best for them in our
bill Mr chair and and senator we
it is a condition of licensing
that the applicant demonstrate
legal right to a commercial
water supply to ensure that you
don't get a company plopping
down in in rural New Mexico and
is taking up the the local water
they've got to have access to
the gonna have a legal right to
it and and we feel like that's a
pretty solid protection to
ensure that whoever is engaging
in this commercial activity.
Actually has legal right the
legal right to use that water
but it's a fantastic question
and state like New Mexico that
both as an agricultural state
but also state where water
expressions that something that
we really wanted to make sure we
addressed in our bill.
Thank you Mr thank you
Representative for that answer
moving and I quickly now we
we have public service
announcements.
I encouraging people not to not
smoke.
Cigarettes are we don't have.
Service announcements
encouraging people not to use
marijuana.
Mr chair Senator that's another
good question you know our our
bill in in different sections
alludes to ensuring responsible
use right and so you know we do
create a community reinvestment
fund even though we don't fund
it through the bill because we
don't have your marks we do
create a fund that will allow
the appropriators the folks and
and and Senate finance and house
appropriations to appropriate
money hopefully from the
revenues of this of this new
industry to help
build awareness and education
with young people particularly
in those communities most
impacted by the war on drugs
poverty eccentric and you know
some of those messages should be
about responsible use nothing in
this bill allows for people
under the age of twenty one to
use our process or be able to
purchase cannabis it is a well
established scientific fact that
young people should not be
smoking cannabis should not be
drinking alcohol should not be
vaping or smoking cigarettes it
is bad for you is bad for your
physical and emotional
development and so I would
suspect that once this industry
is legalize that yes absolutely
we would C. R. D. O. H. putting
out messages we would CRPD
building it into their
curriculum you know evidence
based reality based drug
awareness you know what one of
the I'm smiling because when I
was in the fifth grade we had a
program called dare and quite
frankly it was well intentioned
but I'm not sure it worked it
was sort of.
Sort of funny.
you know I think that there's a
lot more out there now that is
more based in reality and that
is proven to really build a
culture of responsible use up
you know I have no problem with
anyone of us enjoyed a good
glass of wine on the weekend but
I am concerned if all of us are
drinking two bottles of wine
every day that is not that that
is not okay we've got to build a
culture responsible use and
that's what I would hope we do
with cannabis.
Thank you Mr thank you one last
question
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino
Has made comments publicly that
the this the reason he supports
this is because.
Of the it.
More water can of this is going
to be available regardless of
What we do here but it's a state
feels that.
we should regulate it it's going
to be available anyway other
than what what's really driving
this other than.
What it what Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino states plus a.
Raising revenues in in any other
reasons set behind motivating or
try to do here other than
raising money and and making and
regulating it because it is so
regulating is better than that
and that regulating in.
Mr chair and senator Tom and
you know my my driver for for
doing this and you know this is
now my fourth or fifth session
working on this
this is for me this is not about
the money I mean I think that
it's great to bring in other
industries into the state
economy to bring another source
of revenue but to me it's not
about the money to me it's about
the fact that the war on drugs
has been an utter failure the
war on drugs has cost thousands
of lives both in this country
but also south of the border I
saw the impact of the war on
drugs growing up in into the
what is and I've seen the the
impact of the war on drugs here
in my own neighborhood
it is something that it is
outdated something that has long
lived its purposes whatever the
purpose was up cannabis will be
legalized nationally sooner
rather than later and New Mexico
can be ahead of the game ahead
of the curve you know what I
said on the house floor on this
point was this.
Think about all the.
Create industries we have in the
state whether it's renewables
oil and gas agriculture.
Our our regulations and our tax
system has had to catch up to
those industries yet here in
front of us is a brand new
industry that we get to shape
from scratch.
I think it's a wonderful
opportunity for this legislature
for all one hundred and twelve
of us plus the governor to put
our collective heads together
and come up with what is the
best possible legalization
framework for the state but
again for me it's it's not about
it's not about the money I mean
yeah it's great that this could
create more jobs and and more
revenues for the state but it
really isn't about the money
it's about smart policy it's
about doing what's best for the
state and I think that that
legalization sooner rather than
later is is the way to go.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative Martinez that's
all I have I just want to.
To recognize this.
Representative Martinez for a it
always hard work and passion
regarding this issue thank you.
Hey Mister chairman are we ready
to move this ammendment forward
I don't have any questions we
are I don't see any hands up so
I believe that's the.
Questions concludes the question
on the amendment so we do have a
motion and second yeah just for
almost before we make a motion I
I do just want to just.
Make sure we understand exactly
where we are and I think you
heard different positions on
plant counts Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino I appreciate you throughout
some some additional suggestions
and I just I want to reiterate
you know what I said right up
front Senator Candelaria is bill
had no plan County and he feels
very strongly about that
position and so what we're
seeing are the different
positions here and this
amendment does put in place in
approach and again I really
appreciate our superintendent
and and what she's done to come
up with this because I think
we've moved you know a number of
steps forward here but that
issue remains and it's that's
going to be the the big issue at
the next stop and I just I
wanted to make that point so
with that I would move
this amendments point two two oh
six oh three point two and I
move up to pass on the
amendment.
Okay
Do we have any opposition to to
the amendment.
I'd like to second the amendment
Mr chair okay we have a second I
don't see any opposition.
To the moment so seconded the
amendment Senator Hamblen.
Okay so I was in opposition so
we have an amended bill
Representative.
So now we're back on the bill.
So Senator Kernan.
Thank you very much and and now
I do have some questions and you
know I'm voting to move things
forward but I will tell you I'm
I'm right in there with Senator
Padilla because I I do have I do
have questions and concerns and
and just some clarification
because frankly I I have sort of
been following these are built
from a distance and and now I
need some some answers.
So with regard to on site
consumption we talk about that a
little bit earlier
the consumption lounges and
retail outlets
in accordance with local zoning
laws so in my community.
We don't have zoning so would my
community be able to
evidently sort of have some
ability to to handle these
things in a community with no
sounding would we would we have
the ability to to do some things
since we don't have a sounding
and my community.
And that for whoever would like
to and and guest
However would like to insure
that yeah Mr chair and Senator
Kernan that's a great question
and all all also all well take a
stab at it have Michael sponsor
or or or or expert jumping as
well you know I think that with
this new industry this past and
become the law of the land we
will have some time you know
before before this industry
really roll out and before
commercial activities began.
My assumption would be that a
local committee like yours might
adopt some sort of ordinance
that is specific to this
industry and that would then
regulate where and how the the
the industry can operate in your
community that would be my best
gas you know I know I know in my
hometown of Albuquerque we
already have a zoning ordinance
they probably would need to
revise it to make it inclusive
of cannabis because it doesn't
include cannabis right now
necessarily but I would assume
it would be a similar process
right you County commission or
or your you know city council or
whatever or maybe both would
probably come up with a way of
of of regulating.
The the use of of the industry
okay so thank you Mr chairman
thank you Representative so that
would be allowed in your bills
to give local option with regard
to managing and I'm not quite
sure what falls into.
You know in into the.
Ability for the next few minutes
probably are accounted to do
that so in in California and I
think in Colorado there is local
option and that's not in either
built in my in my grant to that
that a community can't opt out
in in New Mexico Mr chair and
Senator Kernan the the I I'm not
sure but the other bill but in
our bill we do not allow local
governments to opt out in two to
opt out of of any activity that
is legalized we do allow local
communities though to regulate
the time in place of of the
activities and the reason for
that Mr chair and and senator
once upon a time like two
versions of this bill ago like
twenty eighteen twenty nineteen
we did have a local option where
local governments could just
completely opt out of any
building dealing with cannabis
and at the request of law
enforcement.
Which said look if you are if
you create an opt out mechanism
in your bill we're gonna have a
checkered board approach to
legalization and it's going to
be a nightmare for us as law
enforcement to.
To address that right because
you're gonna have people driving
from account through counties
where maybe they're not allowed
to have the cannabis for maybe
careers that are delivering
product from a grower to
manufacture in just creates an
enforcement nightmare that
you're correct about California
California does have an opt out
mechanism and it's created a
nightmare for them where they've
got a checkerboard of different
counties that either allow or
don't allow and what that really
has done is it's resulted in
some illicit market rate if
you're in a county that is quite
a cool dry surrounded by
counties that do allow you get
all kinds of funny business
happening so in this version of
the bill we decided to just take
out local option but still give
local communities the ability to
regulate the the place time of
the use of of the industry so
that
you know you don't end up with
unintended consequences like the
green mile potential.
Okay thank you for that in in in
that is a problem for me because
I do think a community should
have the opportunity to to make
that determination the community
because there will be a number
of us to do not support this
bill and in spite of the polls
that have occurred and and
everybody thinks it's okay I I
do think that.
That there will be in California
I think most of the local
communities have have actually
opted out that I can see the
problem that I want to make sure
in this bill that there is an
opportunity for ordinances when
there is no sounding that we
have an opportunity to to have
some control over this because
when you have no sounding just
that anything can happen and I
sure want to make sure that bill
if you can point that out to me
at some point where we will have
some control over that
reasonable I'm.
Being able to do that recently
with with where and the timing
and all of those things
so you know going back to that I
worry a little bit too about no
license cap in the water in
senator Tom and brought that we
talked about commercial use of
water but it seems like I read
somewhere in one of the analysis
it would be either commercial or
municipality so is there any
depending on the number of
plants as soon if you didn't
have a high plant count you
could actually just use your
your local water supply the
municipality what is there
anything in there that talks
about water having excess water.
I understand the permitting if
you if you have a large
facility in your growing and
number of plants that you
probably would need to get a
permit.
Still goes to the LESC office of
the state engineer you still
have to have a permit and and
all the water that municipal use
I mean is there anything I need
I want to make sure the water is
available and that we are not
doing anything.
Changing laws with regard to the
battle bility of water.
Mr chair and and senator that
that language is on page
eighteen of the bill.
and water was not addressed by
the amendment I don't believe it
was also a page eighteen any
page thirty five
and as I mentioned earlier as a
condition for licensing you've
got a show that you've got
access to an adequate water
supply
you know if if you have a
cannabis operation in a
community
obviously you've got to show
that you've got the the land
you've got it show that you've
got the security apparatus
surrounding that operation you
gotta show that you've got
access to to the water supply if
that is a water supply that is
connected to a municipal source
you know it would have to be it
would have to be adequate to
support you know if you're if
you're a full out licensee if
you if you're one of the big
guys you know that water source
I needs to be
you know responsive to that need
you know but you couldn't you
wouldn't be licensed if you
don't have access to a
commercial water supply you
would not be licensed by the by
the regulators to to operate in
a community state with you know
limited water right I mean
that's the intent of the bill
and that's you know that's how
we we would dress at this is
also another issue that over the
course of the last several years
has been address by us because
initially we didn't have
language on on adequate water
supply and we've seen with the
medical program we've seen you
know there's one example in
northern New Mexico that I'm
familiar with where a medical
cannabis license producer went
and set up shop and they tapped
into to their domestic water
well you know without without
really proving that they had
access to it and it creates a
problem so in our bill trying to
avoid that I mean I believe that
the language on page eighteen
and thirty five does that.
And so and Mr chair and and
Representative so R. L. D. who
would be the licensee that would
that would provide a license
would have the ability to make
that determination that they are
accessing sufficient water for
that particular type of fund
project is that true that it
would be R. L. D. S.
responsibility to make sure that
they have met those
requirements.
Senator okay
so probably my last statement we
hear a lot about shut down the
black market and I think
everyone might agree that the
black market isn't just about
marijuana.
We can solve this problem with
marijuana but it's not going to
close down or shut down the
black market because there's so
many other drug state now
cocaine I mean it thank market a
lot of things and so you know we
may take care of the marijuana
issue that but I don't think
we're fooling ourselves if we
say that that we're going to
shut down the black market
because that is always going to
be here for something and so I
think we have to be really
honest about that
I I am.
Very concerned for our state
with regard to what we're doing
I'm I'm just staff really really
I'm worried about the long term
effects and and that she said
it's not about the money and I
think it is a little bit.
We're going to make some money
that we're going to spend a lot
of money.
With regard to
Kind of cleaning up the mess
we're going to create is a state
that's just five year and and I
know I'm probably going to be in
the minority that that I do
worry and but I do appreciate
the hard work you have done
I wish we were not being so
expansive and and just no caps
no limit on license until we
kind of see where this is going
because I don't think really.
We're going to we're going to
shut down the black market in
any form or fashion but I sure
thank you and appreciate the
opportunity.
To ask you some questions thank
you.
Thank you thank you Senator
Kernan they'll go to a Senator
Padilla.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
representatives and senator
Ortiz you know I have to echo
almost everything that Senator
Kernan said I I think she and I
are pretty much on the same page
on this topic I haven't been shy
about it I've talked about
openly as I mentioned before and
I've met with absolutely
everybody that wants to talk to
me and I I always have a wide
open door to listen and who
knows all learn something you
all feel differently about it I
disclosed why I feel this way
personally but I'm a state
senator that represents a lot of
people when I need to represent
their interests and that's what
I'm hoping to do here that's
what I'm trying to learn as much
about this I don't and and it
never once touched the stuff
myself I just never did I was
completely
frightened by it if you will by
what happened with my own
brother family and I will go to
that story again but I am sure
that openly disclose that
it was a horrible thing and I
can't say that that's what did
it but I'm certainly I I do
believe that it can contribute
to it
I am am concerned about a couple
other things that I didn't even
ask on Saturday with the Senate
we had this discussion how is
cash management going to be
handled Mr chairman and and
Sanchez.
how do you envision that
happening working here in our
state.
Thank you senator and chair
Mister chair I'm gonna I'm gonna
pass it on to my to my co
sponsor here.
Thank you Mr chair thank you R.
as senator so the banking system
as we've seen nationally is in
your of the challenge course
because of the schedule one that
said
Mr chair Senator we're basically
their options within the
The the credit union option
within the state we're looking
into the possibility of the
state being here that it's
frozen right now.
but that said there's
opportunity for cash business to
take place that's why the
security component is part of
the licensure process so we've
looked at and wrestle with the
different options that other
states have have gone through
and we feel confident that
through this sort of licensure
that we have and of course the
credit unions option that there
there's viable
you know opportunity for folks
to bank responsibly and securely
in our state.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
Sanchez so can you just talk
briefly you you mentioned a
couple of of options I think
this will all call them but the
cascade effective banking in New
Mexico you have credit unions
you have statements you have
federally insured banks you have
August so they're all federally
insured I guess I don't
so we could accept this cashew
who could transported who could
you know ensure that it's safe
and that it's not you know the
the the train robberies of the
days of old.
Maybe Mr chair and senator by
the let let me take a stab and
I'll have Michael sponsor also
jump in so of medical already
does is up here in New Mexico
and my understanding is
most if not all perhaps use a
specific New Mexico charter bank
the feds allow for banking there
are a lot more requirements on
those banks us why not that's
why most banks don't do it
because the.
The the level of scrutiny is
much higher it is also more
expensive for these businesses
to bank for example but those
are choices that these folks in
this industry are making every
day but you know the way the
medical cannabis system works
they they operate mostly just
like any other businesses they
deposit cash for the you know
write checks you know they they
do what they do obviously with
some limitations but I it would
it would be very similar as
Michael sponsor the tour here as
well part of the licensing
process is to produce for
verification by the regulators
of a security plan right and so
how for example how do you plan
on depositing cash right if
you've got fifty thousand
dollars in cash every day
they've got a deposit what is
the plan to deal with that all
of that is embedded in the
language of this bill to give
the regulators the authority to
to to to address those issues
right and and not leave the mop
up for grabs if you will because
that that is a concern we did
this is a you know potentially
multi million dollar industry
and we've got to make sure that
folks are safe as engaging his
business.
One of my co sponsoring said
anything to that.
No I think that covers it and
additionally I think just part
of it if if you've ever traveled
to Colorado to look at how it
works to use the cash machine
sitting right outside of these
organizations they figured out
the logistics to meet the
consumer demand as well as on
making sure that they're
responsible with that.
Thank you Mr chairman Sanchez
and and just shifting gears just
a little bit so if you've
already discussed this and this
is also and like life along the
lines of what Senator Kernan
talked about and I've never even
thought about you know trying it
I just that's just who I am I
guess I don't know and and and
I've talked about why one of the
a couple of the reasons why
It NEC said this I apologize
Sanchez but please help me just
to clarify for me so with
alcohol you may have a limit on
what you can consume that the
consumption area or whatever
what is that in for for for
cannabis for recreational
cannabis or is or is that
already caught out is that
something that the
superintendent takes care of
over how does that work.
Mr chair it's since that is in
addition I would defer to the
superintendent on those
consumption areas.
I'm sorry Mister chairman
Senator could you ask that
question again sure thing so I
was talking about how Mr
Chairman superintendent of
Sanchez and superintendent you
know with alcohol you you you
you have a consumption limit you
have but you know what to drink
limit you have a couple things
going on there how does that
work with with recreational
cannabis I don't think I've
heard that yet.
Mister Mister chairman Senator
that is not written into the
bill
what we would have to do is
draft that for Raul and I think
that's probably going to take
some recommendations from the
department of health and
probably in the drug alliance
the drug policy alliance folks
and a number of other
individuals but that is not
currently written into the
amendments we did not
contemplate that.
Senator it even without home
though we really don't have it's
not against the law to during.
And here's.
This is a lot drier after having
dropped several we don't have
that kind of concern it is the
same thing with with with
cannabis if you drive impaired
you're breaking the law.
Hello how many how much you have
to smokers or how many animals
you have to consume in order to
reach that level levels.
That that's not.
On so many things to your body
size your your age all sorts of
things but is still against the
law to drive impaired whether
it's under the influence of
alcohol or under the influence
of cannabis thank you L. callers
you have a nice.
Easy and some people say it's
not fair Mr deciding it because
it's based on.
One what else our content but Mr
Chambliss some states are
already beginning to deal with
that Mr some testing and will
we'll stay on top of that is
that becomes available that
would be built into our our
driving while impaired statutes.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
the Sanchez and superintendent
yeah I it was a huge question
that I had around and that was
my next line of questioning was
around how do we how do we know
if the person driving down the
road is is is you know was so
over the I don't know what
whatever the limit will be
calmer beer whatever that'll be
every year and and and then of
course you know you have the
employee driving the fifteen
tons cement truck down the road
possibly in you know enjoying
the some of that at lunch or
whatever and I'm just trying to
figure out you know how do we
know what's going on and how to
correct this.
Yes that's a great point Mr
chair and and etcetera but the
yeah and you know
I think that first of all I
think I I we probably need to
brief the committee on why there
is such a thing as a consumption
space again this is one of the
things that we change from
previous iterations of the bill
and really the idea comes from a
social justice perspective right
I own my home well the bank owns
my home but as far as I think
you know as as far as I'm
concerned I could do most
anything in my house right
and I can pop up here after
committee and enjoy it with the
movie.
Or I can should this become
legal I can light up a joint and
it's perfectly fair game right
but if you live state if you're
renter in a house where the rule
is no smoking whether it's
tobacco or cannabis
or if you live in state public
housing you know that's
federally subsidized maybe there
are rules around recreational
use of cannabis creating a
consumption space within a
licensed premise I think really
allows most everyone to be able
to engage in in the you know
whether it's ingestion or or or
smoking or whatnot of cannabis
now you know you you as an
individual making an adult
choice to the goal small court
ingest cannabis any consumption
space it does not give you the
legal ability to drive home for
example right if you're
intoxicated and granted there's
a great line with how we measure
intoxication it's not as simple
as with alcohol where you you
know you can you can blow into
the.
Whatever that thing is called a
breathalyzer and and an officer
can say okay you're over the
limit you're going into a cop
car
although law enforcement does
have what they called drug
recognition experts these are
officers trained in how to
assess whether or not somebody's
intoxicated but the creation of
a consumption space under this
bill by no means allows you to
drive intoxicated home or or
somewhere else same thing with
the example of of an employee
this language is very clear that
I employers who have zero
tolerance policies in the books
continue to have zero tolerance
policies in the books if
somebody takes a lunch break
lights up a joint and Dr that
fifteen tons cement truck down
the road they're not only
breaking the law but they're
probably gonna get fired as
well.
I would agree Mr chairman and so
I guess the other question I
have I'm glad you mentioned that
Representative Martinez so as an
employer I'm an employer I think
your employer your employer as
well and so are are we are we
not at all are we able to
develop these policies and not
be doing that but by any
You know it fair employment
practices act in New Mexico to
say that you know we don't want
our our property or we don't
want you smoking I don't I don't
run a cement truck company or a
concrete company but we we can't
have you driving down the road
what what your stones.
Yeah absolutely I mean I I I
know of of plenty of of work
places now that you know why
you're on the job you can be
drinking you know even smoking
tobacco is frowned upon in many
organizations and and businesses
and and you can certainly have
the rules that you have now
whether or not you can regulate
what employees do on their time
off I mean that's you know I I
would say you probably can do
that but look if I party for
Super Bowl Sunday and you know
drink an eighteen pack of bud
light at about eight Jack and I
show up to work the next day
hung over still maybe not fully
enumerated but I'm still not all
there of those could be grounds
for discipline or perhaps firing
if the employer has a zero
tolerance policy it would be the
same thing with cannabis.
I appreciate that I'm glad you
stopped when you were listing Mr
Chairman representative of all
the things that that were
enjoyed at the Superbowl party
that we we don't have issues
their queue I know a long time
you know I'm getting
So Mister chairman I looked
across the zoom just now and I
wanted to see a Senator Pirtle
was still here so just I don't
see him but you know I'm gonna
help you move this out of here
today I believe I just stated
very clearly I don't know if I'm
going to vote you know on Senate
floor on this just yet I've made
my mind my mind up on that but I
do want to help you to continue
this conversation I think you
all worked very very hard
but where are the so you've
already consolidated down now
you know I think for bills down
into too it seems like and there
are other Sanchez seem to be
happy with that so that's good
news
where are we with discussions
with the Senator Pirtle or is
that are you intending to
continue to swim in your own
lines to get this done.
Mr chair and and and etcetera
but the yeah the that's the
that's a great question I mean I
think that the the the Senate
and and up through the work of
of Senator of Majority Leader
workers and and others I think
have really created some space
for these discussions to
continue you know we've had a
week long of of conversations
that lead us to this point here
today and I would expect that
the conversations will continue
moving forward you know that the
clock is ticking on the session
but you know I I believe we
still have plenty of time to
come together to
to a compromise that works for
for for all of us if not most of
us.
Thank you Mr chairman I do
appreciate the time that that
you all spent answer my
questions I really appreciate
that because I I've had quite a
few questions on this I like to
really think about you know
before I cast such a to me this
is a historical vote for that
for the state and this is a big
decision we're making here and
then Mr chairman I just wanted
to also say thank you to
superintendents Rubio she and I
have worked very hard together
on a number of issues she was my
co sponsor of the early
childhood education and care
department I Mr everyday thank
you Mr chair.
Thank you Senator began I will
go to Senator Brandt.
Mr Chairman Representative and
and first I want to thank Sir
pretty a great questions really
appreciates questions that I
think he's convinced me not to
support either one of these
bills now so just very
phenomenal questions did a great
job
no I really I'm serious you
great questions it really gave
me a lot think about so
First of all I want to thank you
for not you're working the
income.
Well I really appreciate the the
change that I think both sides
we are you know the bill that I
worked on with our side in the
bill that you've worked on on on
you're marking the taxes I think
it's the right decision to allow
the legislature to maintain
their authority when it comes to
you know appropriating funds and
I think that's the right
approach
I.
Do hope that we will.
Really focus on making sure that
law enforcement is funded.
Correctly as we see some of this
income come in.
and I really appreciate
Representative of Martinez your
Amendment on that this isn't
about making money necessarily
there's maybe a by product of
that maybe not I really don't
know.
I think that's really you know
the jury will is out on that one
and speaking of the jury I think
that's actually where we might
see us not necessarily income
but from some savings.
in the fact that we are are.
Making it legal and so we're not
going to be trying people we
won't have as much of a black
market it'll still exist unless
we I don't even think we can
make it we're would exist at all
we might take it from yeah we've
got a huge black market
cigarettes in our state thirty
five percent of the cigarette
school sold in New Mexico or
actually sold on the black
market.
So we're gonna see well black
market you know that's that's
going to be but I think with
what we're doing in this bill
and I think the approach that
we're taking you know maybe
we'll see ten percent.
Of cannabis sales be black
market will be way below the
cigarette because we're our our
tax rate is so much lower than
what we are looking at
especially if the the new bill
passes anyway I digress on that
can you explain to me how your
bill of.
One of the big things that's
that's holding me back from
supporting the bill is.
What I really feel it is a huge
advantage to current medical
growers so how does your bill
address that and how are we is
it just seems like your bill is
keeping out new growers and new
entrepreneurs in this area.
The man at the reserve and I are
lake who's gonna go for go
ahead.
No it's fine of thank you for
the question
Senator Mr chair Senator so
that's why you do see the two
different versions of licensure
I think first and foremost this
is to invite folks to the table
and it because it's a very
vertically integrated license
that that talks about everyone
with portions of the business
whether you look at becoming a
career or a grower or what have
you Mr chair Senator so you'll
you'll see that tiered system in
order to ensure that everyone
can be brought to the table who
wants to be part of the industry
that's why I support this bill
so strongly
Mr chair Senator and then
secondly I think what we when we
were talking about water we're
talking about all the
constraints that we're are built
into the bill when it comes to
sustainability and what we're
looking at
cannabis itself takes only a
third of what our largest cash
crops today you'd utilize in
water what we've learned from
the industry and for why this
could be something that people
have it too as well so when you
look at the structure of our
license and you look at some of
this is Dana bility aspects that
we have built in Mr chair
Senator we're looking at how we
can bring people to the table to
to meet the demands that we know
will be there but we want to be
sure that we're we're within
well with then the opportunity
and that's why when we did not
cap plank count to begin with
and now we're putting in this
mechanism with the amendment
that you all just agreed upon
helps us find that sweet spot
for insuring that the that the
market demand is made but
without obviously squeezing out
any business opportunity that
we've seen in the equity that is
in our bill in bringing folks to
the table so hopefully that
helps and again with the timing
of everything Mr chair and
senator that's RLD's business
that's there will house on how
everything rolls out as to who
gets in on the ground for we're
only talking about I think very
some.
Margins of time for everyone to
be able to launch their business
they're listening.
and the relic competitive in the
business in our state so it's
sponsor and of course RLD to
talk about some of the time
anything.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Representative just want to let
you know that that I got part of
that but your internet
connection you may want to turn
off the video because it kept
breaking up so I I know that
yeah down in Kabul they don't
have very good not just getting
in a couple with I always joke
that the house can be anywhere
in the world and still be
considered present so that's
just kind of an inside joke with
me Representative Martinez if
you could address that a little
bit
for me I appreciate that and I
think this is one of those areas
that.
Because we can't guarantee and
make sure that they're least
there's a clone of of
superintendent Linda Trujillo in
that position forever and for
always
I think that may just be one of
those areas we have written in
house on on your bill but if you
could just address that for me
I'm really concerned about those
who aren't in the industry right
now.
Let's just be honest anyone in
the industry today has a massive
advantage over anyone trying to
get in it coming in right I know
we can't level that playing
field but what it seems like
you're doing in your bill is
actually giving them an even
greater advantage and that's my
concern so help me with that.
Yeah I know thank you for that
and and for the record I am not
in Kabul I am in the north of
the.
Do you wish I will for the
record.
New Mexico.
Well New Mexico.
What you want to go up you know
I I think I think the the that's
so that's probably one of the
best
Like philosophical questions of
of of of this entire discussion
right
and I can tell you since I've
been involved in it for the last
few years it's it's always been
sort of like do you you know
what what is the balance between
as we build this industry.
From day one that just allowing
anyone and everyone to come in
and help us build industry.
Versus helping
insure that for those that have
invested over the last fifteen
years into building the medical
cannabis industry that those
local your favorite Senator
biltong less enrollment
enrollment unmuted.
Senator going.
Your.
All right
could you send that almanac and
with your is in his email
address Senator go Robert
Senator told her Romero.
Tomic can you please commute
your.
I think we needed that.
There are.
I missed it what was it I missed
it hi.
We can't we can't repeat it
Representative.
Those differences Senators.
You know just a little bit of a
laugh break of a growing
secondary.
Go ahead and continue Senator
Britain thank you Mr chair thank
you miss center rent so it's
been one of the great
philosophical questions right
and so you know I I think that
in our bill we we achieved what
I consider to be a a sweet spot
so current medical producers.
get what we call a legacy lice's
it they still got up by by by by
all the rules and and what's in
this bill in order to get the
vertically integrated license
and they've got to pay the fee
and you know now with.
Center were it's amendment
there's a a cost per plant
associated as well.
At the same time that those
legacy licenses can begin you
have are my creating businesses
licenses all these are and so
this is a way
for for us to not only
You know find some.
you know find those those
current medical license holders
the ability to.
Get a bit of a head start but
also those million new micro
businesses and then shortly
after that and and again you
know this isn't RLD's will house
but shortly after that within a
few months the other industry
players can come in and apply
for their license at that point
and it's it's literally a matter
of months you know we're not
talking about you know two years
or five years or whatever it's
literally a matter of months
between the time a legacy
license can can can get their
vertically integrated license
and the time that you know you
folks can come in and get their
vertically integrated license
with the exception of microbes
microbes begin at the same time
as legacy licensees and that's
was was important partly for the
reasons you you expressed but I
believe that in our bill we we
have that sweet spot right
respecting the investments made
by these folks that it's stab
wish the medical cannabis
industry and giving them a
little bit of a of a of a leg
up.
But also not enough to allow
them to you know blow out the
competition we don't believe we
believe that what how we did it
helps achieve both of those
goals and and I think that it
really goes to the heart of
ensuring that our new industry
has enough.
city in every single way to to
have a successful industry so I
hope that answers your question
but I I your point is well taken
and and it did not
you know we did not escape
because it's it's an issue that
we need to figure out and I
believe we did.
I'm sure it is because I think
and senator McConnell still.
The actual commission itself has
producers on it.
Here to me that that's like
asking the industry this made of
leisurely now the medical
producers maybe there'd be a few
new ones but they're they're
gonna be they're going to be the
main players are first two years
no matter which model we adopt
but at least in you are a bill
having RLD console Senator by
reiterated include some
producers.
But doesn't give them control
over the actual direction of the
program the HSA crucial
difference and I and I do favor
one that says they should be
advisory we need to consult with
them let's not turn it over to
them to run.
Mister chairman Senator thank
you for that actually I have
some agreement with you in that
in that area as far as that but
I think they only have one of
the three members of the point
of the not really running it but
they are but I actually agree on
I don't know understand whether
not just advisory members on
that board so that that's
actually if you want to bring
that amendment when Sir pearl
still additional foreign support
you with that and then we can
talk about how we're gonna put
together our business model I'm
just getting so but I I think
that super janitor here also on
the answer that so I would like
to yield her.
Mister chairman Senator yes that
was part of the reason that we
in our amendment to change the
language from beginning to end
no later than and so no later
than September first the
producers can start produced can
start growing and no later than
January first of Michael
businesses can start the only
one that we kept the the
language with the start off was
the start of sales and then the
other licenses beginning July
first and so that gives the
producers and it gives the micro
businesses a good six months and
it also gives us at the
department incentive to try to
get the rules of the
applications and the
technology system set up so that
we can begin begin issuing those
licenses before that September
first and before that January
first.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
sure to and and we don't have to
start you know we're not
reinventing the wheel here we
already have a program in place
that we just have to make some
adjustments to take it from
medical only to you know making
it commercial.
I really like the term
recreational but you know to
just legalize the use of.
and so it is not like we're
starting over also several other
states have already done it
they're so good models out there
join me again we're not
restarting so I don't think it's
gonna be a huge problem for your
department if this bill passes I
I just still think yeah I use
the analogy before it's it's
like we're in a marathon yeah
and and you know the the current
producers are all you have
already run twenty miles before
we let the new producers even
stark and therefore all of the
Isley there's not a whole lot we
can do about the fact that they
have already been in this in
less we said they couldn't you
know be involved in it for a
year but then we're going to
really have a situation where we
can't bring it to market at all
for here and so that's the
because it takes a little while
to get these plants growing I've
I've actually never grown one so
I'm not speaking from experience
but I believe it takes three to
six months to get a plant from
planting to harvesting I don't.
Sir Hammons shaking her head and
she stuck a little bit more
involved in the growing industry
of crops maybe not this one so
I'm not trying to.
you know anyone who has a
medical license could grow
plants and completely legally in
the state so late now they can
help us with that
but yeah this is also one of
those weird situations where
we're trying to get information
about still of legal so you know
it's just one of those weird
things so that's just an area of
concern for me I think that Sir
portals approach of ten dollars
a plant is a very simple very
accessible
approach but those in the
industry already you're still
going to have an advantage no
matter what we do I'm just
trying to figure out how we make
it no more balanced and I hope
that we can continue this
conversation through Judiciary
and even to the floor no to
figure out how do we make this
so that anyone can get involved
in this business I I talked
about Oklahoma what they are
doing and there's is with quote
unquote medical and I put quote
unquote in there because anyone
can get a medical license they
don't even need a doctor to sign
up so is it really medical not
really anyone can grow it so
and so they have seen a huge
number of people get into.
The act early and then you know
obviously the stronger ones will
read out the the weaker ones and
that's the way the market works
right I mean that's the way it
works with every business in the
market that's the way it's going
to work with us
the other thing I was wondering
about is is why do we want to
create a special place for
people to smoke cannabis I I
don't think I understand that
we've talked about how the
majority
of people are no longer.
Smoking but there are using
edibles I do think there's some
vaping that's very much involved
there but why are we wanting to
create the special smoke rural
setting.
I've been fighting to keep
cigar.
You know rooms open for years
even though I don't.
Ever participate one every been
to one why are we going to
create this whole new new thing.
Mr chair and and senator you
know I I it comes from
Thank you come from the
perspective of ensuring that
people have a safe place to to
to use up because everybody's
going to have the ability to use
at the residence
and you know assuming that
there's you know people who who
can not use at their place of
residence creating the
opportunity for these come
consumption spaces would allow
folks to use in those regulated
legal place.
keep in mind that
you know licensees don't have to
have a consumption space it is
merely an option for them if if
they want to provide for that
can they can they can they can
do that
Furthermore I think you know
this is more on the economics of
this stuff
Part of what I think will happen
particularly in tourist towns is
that you get people coming in
from out of state whether it's
to our ski resorts or or
wherever it might be and you
know perhaps hotels may not
allow for consumption and so if
those folks come in and and they
want to go consume cannabis
eight it's probably a good idea
to allow
licensees to provide for that
space otherwise I think you can
create a situation where it's
legal to use but there's really
nowhere to use so that's that's
why we put consumption spaces in
here and again this was one of
those things that we added to
the bill I think as recently as
last year because I don't think
we had it two years ago but but
last year we added that
provision in here and and
clearly it's it's it's it's
stuck you know I think it's a
good idea Mr chair Senator and
time and just for second Senator
Brandt do you mind I would be
glad to yield to you etcetera
and one thank you so much and I
think it's really what you know
what Representative might
Martinez was talking about is it
you know when we were talking
about it on the floor today
about the opportunity for
tourism and you know I look at
it as a way of allowing a space
for people to go ahead and
consume cannabis but also
support local businesses there
are opportunities for actual
experiences of that so that you
know you could have like dinner
entertainment and finish off the
evening with cannabis I mean
there are number of I think we
we have the potential to have
these and that's why I see the
value in having these
opportunities for people to have
these these rooms and in all
honesty I'd much rather have
people just kind of chilling and
relaxing in a room then having
to go from a restaurants to a
store and then back to wherever
they're staying.
Thank you yes Mister chairman
Senator on the that actually
that makes a lot of sense I'm
just wondering you know actually
had someone text me you know can
we make the roundhouse
consumption area.
So that you know when we're
we're up here in stock until
late hours of the night maybe we
can go wrong.
I'm sorry Mr no will have his
own Mr Jack cannabis consumption
zone right outside of the garage
door so that we can all just
come chill together.
One last question and then I'm
done what yes so we talked about
yes for law enforcement to use
Representative you brought up
the the the one yes that's
approved but is there any other
tests like the breathalyzer or
like the blood alcohol test I
think she Senator Ortiz Y. Pino
had actually mentioned some of
the other states I don't know of
any that have actually been
approved and up held in the
courts do we know of any yet are
they still in the research
Senator chairman and and
Not that I know of and I know
that we had a company for around
house I believe last year.
The minutes showed us a sensor
breathalyzer I'm not sure what
came of it but not that I'm
aware of and I'll defer to to
our co sponsor senator Ortiz P.
no matter if he has any new
information but not that I know
of.
Mr Chairman nor do I just I
think The Washington state have
been the one that I read was
pushing a most aggressively on
that please Sir state police
force it was you know was
testing it and seeing if they
can find dilemma is the
I'm like alcohol.
It it remains in your system
long after his spirits this
presents in detected in your
system longer routes influence
over here behavior is and and so
that's the base into a little
bit and I know they're working
on it in New Jersey.
I am great station technology.
And I think Mr chairman I think
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino that that
that's one of the areas where we
have a lot of concern and that's
why as we go forward once this
is legalized and once we start
seeing some income coming from
the US we need to make sure that
our officers are trained in do
you hi detection and those
because they have to be
certified and that to actually
for the hold up in court because
right now there isn't a simple
yes it's really about whether or
not your is here while you're
driving there's not a
breathalyzer or blood alcohol or
anything like that can be done I
know from my military days you
know that that it will stay in
your system for up to thirty
days maybe even longer depending
on you know how small the amount
you're looking for and they
really can't tell whether you
spoke to yesterday or whether
you spoke to twenty days ago
they have no idea so I think
that's one of the the areas that
we still have to do a lot of
research I hope we can get the
science on that Mr Chairman
Senator Representative are
appreciate the time Mr chairman
I yield the floor.
Thank you senator bread just for
folks I have senator Wirth and
then I know we're back on the
floor at six thirty so
were after we take action on
this bill we're gonna roll
everything over to Thursday I
want to give our committee
members of these have a about
thirty minutes to grab something
to eat before we get back on the
floor so with that the Majority
Leader Wirth thank you Mr I'm
ready to make a motion if you're
ready to take it.
I don't I I had Senator Hickey
had up Senator Griggs.
I don't.
Just.
Senator Hickey was in a car I
saw his handout but he
disappeared but will go away
maybe he'll get back on but
Senator Griggs I'm just doing my
best to keep senator Wirth for
making this motion now as that
is it all but you guys on the on
page fifty three I I think and I
I was unfortunate enough to miss
the amendment so I ask you
something it's in the amendment
I apologize
on page fifty three we talk
about advertising.
And we we talk about.
Actually we we say that we can't
on page fifty four that we can't
use or somebody who uses
predatory marketing and
advertising.
Practices.
What those are
and maybe there to find
somewhere but I don't think
they're defined in the bill.
So I'm I think that
of Mr chair and representative
It would probably be good you
know that if if indeed that is
not defined in the then it gets
diversifying so they they know
for we know what that is or may
be is to provide some work.
I used to find in other parts of
the of the law.
But I'm just on the just a
simple question is.
The first part of that on page
on page fifty.
Fifty three where we talk about
advertising we say we're going
to prohibit advertising on
radio.
And not but then we're gonna not
prohibited to subscribers of
subscription based there one we
just not do advertising what is
that a is that a majority saying
for for this to to allow
advertising somewhere and then
have to then have to regulate
Halych done or you know I know
that you know smoking got pulled
from a variety of things
cigarette smoking then then.
You know you still you'll see it
somewhere.
Representative is it reasonable
to to allow advertising or would
it be reasonable to just not
allow advertising.
What is what did you all start
about that thank you thank you
Mr chair Senator Griggs that's
that's so that's really good
question and and we went back
and forth as we were is we're
drafting this bill you know I I
my personal opinion you know
when when I go to a nice tools
came or any Mexican lady came
and take my kids you know be
here for example is advertised
everywhere
granted there are rules with
regard to
the type of advertisements right
so you you won't really see like
cartoon characters selling you
be here the way we used to see
cartoon characters selling us
cigarettes right but I think the
language the weights drafted it
really puts it on the regulators
to to to figure out what kind of
rules can be in place to ensure
that advertisement is not
completely cut out I mean to
honestly that would be like the
easiest thing is no
advertisements right up with
that could potentially be
problematic for the industry
specially as we build up the
industry especially when you
talk about the smaller
businesses that that might need
that that traffic.
So you know the that section
twenty really is geared toward
toward allowing the regulators
to come up with a mechanism with
a framework we try not to be
super prescriptive you know we
may have failed I'm sure if we
look through through each of
these lines is probably so that
is a little bit over
prescriptive but the idea is to
give the regulators ability to
to decide what that would look
like understanding that there
are public health considerations
with regard to advertisements
that target minors
but also understanding the
mechanics of of this industry
and understanding the fact that
particularly smaller businesses
particularly businesses and and
and and rural communities might
actually need to have
advertisement in order for those
businesses to be viable.
You know and and thank you Mr
chairman and thank you
Representative for that I you
know I don't I don't know
honestly whether of there's
there's medical marijuana do we
advertise it.
Much to do we are are not Mr
chair and and and senator I
believe the the new limited
advertising
like if you pick up like you
know Albuquerque's have the
after Gallup by which was sort
of like an alternative weekly I
don't think it's around anymore
but in that particular
publication there were there
were advertisements in it for
medical cannabis but keep in
mind that that particular
publication was never meant it's
not meant for for you know for
young people right there's
there's nothing about it that
would attract young people to
read it but you also don't see
advertisements
you know if.
A necessarily at.
Of these that I've seen and
public events whether it's blown
fiesta or you know and I said to
the game so I think there is
limited advertisement that
happens
but it does happen.
You know I would just recommend
it as we as we look at it we
look at that you know predatory
marketing whether.
The superintendent or food
actually deal with that but you
know we put it in the bill we
say this is what it is but are
you can't do this we don't say
what this year other than H. H.
predatory marketing which means
something to somebody hi guys
yes on the you guys are on page
fifty seven.
We talk about a locked space
we're we're going to you know we
have to keep our our cannabis.
Worldview four percent.
Mr chairman and senator said
page fifty seven.
Page fifty seven down online
twenty four.
you know that's yeah I mean the
the that is that is tough to
enforce you know but we've got
to have we got to have some sort
of language in here that
dictates how you should treat
your your cannabis you know it's
are are we gonna have law
enforcement knocking on people's
doors and making sure that it's
being enforced probably not
you know I'm I'm assuming that
if the police come your house
for something else that you did
and as are looking through the
house of they see that you
didn't.
Keep it locked or whatever that
they might be able to being you
either through a civil fine or
whatnot but yeah I mean I think
it's it's tough to enforce no
doubt.
Mr Chairman representative I I
would think so too and it's just
you know something I would
suggestion as you're moving
forward you see if there's maybe
a better way to do that I
wouldn't say it's got to be in a
lock space
right right above that and I I
it's something I've been curious
about for a long time is you
talk about yeah we're we're in
the.
How much you can have we're
talking about two ounces of
flowers in sixteen grams of
extract what if what if I have
chocolate blueberry.
so how does how does that fit in
that how do you say that.
You know it's it's obviously not
a flower and age range sixteen
grams of it was a blueberry.
I just I don't know how that's
going to work in.
Rio and Senator Cervantes
brought his bill that changed
everything to civil penalties
which you know in six page sixty
five you've got certain things
that I don't know if they match
up with a Senator bondage stuff
as well I think you know we need
to to be sure that right but
I've I've just never have known.
If I've got the.
You know I got twenty four
ounces of chocolate blueberries.
Do I have too much.
I'm or.
I mean I sure can't even fall
I'm sure that's going to be real
problematic if I tried but I
might sure was senator Wirth but
you know I don't I don't know
and yeah I've got a story about
my my brother I could tell you
but I I'm I'm not going to at
the.
The deal is about that if if
they stop here and you've got
that.
Where's your level of happen
more than you're legally allowed
to.
Yeah that's a that's a great
question Senator and all I've
got we've got our expert here
who helped us drafters bill and
it's Emily calling about the
drug policy alliance I mean I I
think I think we kind of had to
come up with
with a number what with with an
amount of what was legal to have
right I mean.
absolutely and and you know
whether it's it's you know.
Sixteen grams or or whether it's
you know two ounces or whether
it's four ounces or eight ounces
and I'm I'm assuming that that's
probably based on other states
and as we were drafting the bill
all those many years ago that
that's where we landed
you know there's probably some
sort of personal use you know
that that might be enough for
your personal use perhaps.
For the day.
But we we kind of had to just
kind of put a number on paper
our expert can can take a stab
as well
Make sure that I'm not speak at
a different rate is a good
question Mr chair and and
Representative we we don't we
don't need to try to go into it
if you didn't know it right off
the bat it's something we need
to figure out and I I believe
that that you you need to
because we're just what you're
going to have these you're going
to have somebody subject to a
rash because they've got a
certain amount of something in
their in their car and you know
whether they will where they're
supposed to have twenty four
ounces or twenty two ounces
whatever it might be we're going
to L. especially as as Senator
Brandt mention earlier if the
whole.
Shootin match is moving toward
edibles away from.
Flowers and and roll joints and
and that sort of stuff we need
to get ahead of that or what
we're going to wind up doing is
putting law enforcement and
people in situations that are in
conflict and that's not a not a
good place for for everybody to
be so so Mister chair and and
Representative and I don't know
where this incentive per bill
but I would really recommend it
we we kind of come to some idea.
What is the right way to to
handle that because if it is
gonna be it's gonna be the
majority approach we we've got
to have our arms around it
before before it gets there and
show.
Mr chair representative.
Madam superintendent I mean
there's got we're going to have
to be some staff as I think
you're gonna be some stuff done
in the bill before the bill
winds up being lost anywhere and
there's I'm I'm actually I think
Senator Hickey put up his hands
so I can quit talkin and maybe
we can still delays senator
Wirth motion for a bit but no
I'm not I'm not trying to do
that I'm those are important
things I believe and I think
you're you're you're moving
forward you need to be able to
address those because those
things were problematic when
senators for bondage did his
change to.
what we we were decriminalizing
the use of marijuana and I I
believe that I believe we need
to work on that show we've got a
better feel for show a so thank
you Mr chair and and thank you
Representative.
Thank you Griggs a Senator
Hickey.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Representative the expert
consult I do want to thank you
for wrestling with this very
very complex topic but one that
will be a benefit to the state
I just want to give a little
perspective
Senator Brandt question I'm not
why would you have liked our
loud and my answer is Starbucks
Starbucks coffee really know
better than anybody else but
they capture the sense of the
experience of doing they're
sharing it with other people
and that I will also offer a
historical observation and I
will finish the first time
average and the Santa Fe with
the nineteen seventy in the
spring I was actually spending
time up in the monastery in the
COVID valley and and we can down
and referring back to the
question of places I remember
walking up and down canyon road
it was wrote at the time and it
was mostly had jobs it was not
art galleries and you could
smell the marijuana in the air
so I suppose fifty years later
think there are coming back
around but again I think for the
tourist industry and other thank
and to be very important to have
Starbucks marijuana lounges
whatever you want to call a
back in may that highs being.
That our folks are going to need
to do it have you got a Colorado
that the smaller newspapers that
carry as I have never seen the
Colorado television stations
have and that that might that
but thank you everyone for all
the hard work and Senator Wirth
please make your motion thank
you Mr chairman yes
Representative.
Senator I don't see more hands
so back to the Senate Majority
Leader.
Thank you Mr chair I move a do
pass on house taxation and
revenue committee substitute for
House health and Human Services
Committee substitute for house
Bill twelve as amended.
To have a second.
Yes Mister chair I second that
all right Senator Hamblen second
lane can you please take grow.
Senator Brandt.
No.
Senator Griggs no.
Senator Hamblen yes Hickey.
Yes.
Senator how to meal yes Senator
Kernan.
Senator Sanchez no.
Senator common.
Your muted.
Your muted Senator Tallman.
I I'm I'm I'm on board yes okay
week we're Senator work yes.
Senator Padilla yes explain my
vote.
Senator Shendo yes.
So it seven to four.
Your nose and seven the yeses
and Senator Padilla wants to
explain is about to just real
quick Mr chairman will reiterate
I really appreciate the work of
the sponsors and the
superintendent and and
everywhere that's put effort
into this I I still not decided
how I'm going to go to the floor
but I wanted to follow the
leaders expectation to get the
two times two sides to continue
to talk to each other and then I
will make a decision when we get
to the floor thank you.
Thank you so thank you
Representative Martinez and
Romero thank you.
Thank you Mr chair we appreciate
the committee's work on this and
and we appreciate the majority
floor leader's work as well and
we continue we look forward to
continuing the conversation
thank you all.
Appreciate that I think you're
it was a good discussion and so
thank you concludes our Senator.
I I just want to thank the
committee for what Mr Chairman
has been very very interesting I
think a very thorough discussion
we need issues all got a raise
and I really appreciate the the
level of the of the discussion.
Thank you so with that this
concludes our committee for
tonight thank you all and hope
you guys to get some to eat
before we hit the floor here in
fifteen minutes.
Thank you.
