Your.
Senator Shendo.
Here.
I'll go back and call the ones
that have didn't answer Senator
Brandt.
Senator Griggs.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator Clemente.
Senator Wirth.
So we have five people I think
we have to have six to have a
quorum.
Yes so.
The state I find anybody else.
Senator Wirth is on now.
So you have a quorum.
Okay.
All right we'll go ahead and get
get started.
We have a Senate bill eleven.
As a member director standard
act.
Center program.
Thank you so much Mr chairman
good afternoon everyone.
Of this bill has come to me by
way of the secretary James Kenny
of the environment department
it's a it's a Administration
bill it said someplace clean
fuel standards that idea is
enjoying a resurgence in a lot
of states in the west of
Washington Nevada Colorado
Nebraska Minnesota Illinois in
New York are considering joining
California and Oregon and
adopting this model I'm gonna
let US secretary Kenny going to
detail that make a few comments
and then we can talk about the
amendments so setting up a clean
fuel standard we think it's a
real positive approach for the
economy public health the
environment we're estimating
about forty seven million
annually in economic investments
in fact when we announce this
bill our state agencies are
already hearing from new
businesses will want to come to
New Mexico on expands on these
are the kind of businesses that
will diversify our economy we're
estimating four point seven
million tons and reduction of
carbon emissions we're talking
about the transportation
sector that's the second largest
emitter of greenhouse gases in
New Mexico behind our oil and
gas industry so we're trying to
track all the transportation
sector to meet our emission
goals as well improved air
quality.
The way it's going to work is
the environmental movement
forward is going to be required
to set these fuel standards we
are requiring a reduction in
what's called carbon intensity
of fuels up by ten percent to
twenty thirty we have an
amendment to change the next
standard the twenty eight
percent building for twenty
forty so we're not talking about
fuel retailers like gas stations
we're talking about businesses
that refined blended mate or
import transportation fuel and
the idea of generating credit
says where we introduce and that
this market mechanism to reduce
gas emissions credits can be
generated all across our state
agriculture oil natural gas
power generation if you can
reduce carbon emissions you can
generate credits so Mr Chairman
if I can ask the secretary Kenny
course secretary Alicia keys to
make some comments before we
move to the amendments.
Okay that's fine settlement
program or or or I can do the
amendments well what I will go
ahead and move the amendment for
the purposes only although the
memo for discussion purposes and
then they can.
Thank you
so three of these amendments are
substantive
on page four that's where we
included are more aggressive
timeline as we have a minimum of
ten percent by twenty thirty
below twenty eighteen levels and
we want to move the next target
to twenty eight percent by
twenty forty and again it's
below the twenty eighteen levels
and then further reductions will
be determined by E. ID that
stuff first substantive change
also on page four lines twenty
to twenty four we include
language to ensure greater
integrity of the credit market
by adding greenhouse gas
emission reductions eligible
eligible for that generation
credits must be quantifiable
verifiable permanent and
enforceable.
And finally our our last
substitute change of the the
other changes are definitions
etcetera on page six line six we
had it to provisions to ensure
rural and otherwise under served
communities are equally included
in the budget so paragraph
twelve a page six after line six
prioritize mechanisms for credit
generation that benefit
disproportionately impacted
environmental justice in rural
communities and reduce
cumulative impacts and then
paragraph thirteen require
electric utilities that generate
credits from electricity used as
transportation fuel to use at
least fifty percent of revenues
generated for the credits at
setter it sort of lays out
clarifying adding a language so
secretary Kenny has been meeting
with industry environmental
groups community groups of these
amendments are from those
organizations and if I can call
on him to make further comments.
Go ahead.
Okay good afternoon
chairman and and members of the
committee my name is James Kenny
on the secretary of the
environment department and I'm
I'm joined here today with other
members of the cabinet and you
and you may wonder why the
environment secretary's here
it's it's not only just because
of the climate benefits of this
bill but also because it's all
of our jobs to diversify and
support our economy
and that's really what the clean
fuel standards bill clean fuel
standards act is all about it's
a giant leap forward in our
approach to diversifying our
economy creating jobs and
improving our climate outlook
so with that
As you may know I am the co
chair of the climate change task
force along with secretary
cultural products and we have a
goal of reducing our greenhouse
gas emissions by forty five
percent by twenty forty and
Senate bill eleven we'll tackle
the greenhouse gas contributions
of our transportation sector so
what you'll hear from secretary
keys in a moment on more
benefits about accounting and
jobs but again this bill does a
lot for public health and the
environment specifically
children and elderly New
Mexicans are more susceptible to
respiratory illness caused by
air pollution and this bill will
diminish those air pollutants as
well as the bill also supports
environmental justice
communities those those
communities that sharing the
inequity of greater pollution
and health and.
Some of those amendments were
just added to the bill as as
Senator Stewart just indicated
and then when fully implemented
I think you heard we're we're
because of the increase in the
outer limit meeting one of the
other amendments we added we're
talking about now six point
eight million metric tons of
carbon dioxide reductions so
that affected we eliminating
tail pipe emissions from six
hundred ninety thousand vehicles
on full implementation of the
bill.
So in closing my remarks just
before you right now
you know the I think what we
realized what we all know I
think is true is that the the
the notion of picking the
environment and the economy is a
false choice we can we can have
both and we can work harder to
get there and that's what this
bill is all about Senator
Stewart indicated since we've
announced the bill we have a
number of companies who are
looking to either move to New
Mexico or expand with in New
Mexico
we want to keep our existing
businesses as much as support
our our new businesses in the
New Mexico attractive to those
looking to move here so I'm
excited by the prospect of what
this bill holds for our economy
environment and with that Mr
chair I'm going to turn it back
either to you or to my
colleagues secretaries use
however you it.
That we can of a turn to the
secretary K. for her comments.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee so I'm pleased to
be here today to support SB
eleven as a secretary candies
are and said it's very rare that
you see the EDD department with
the environment department but
we are super excited about this
bill that will create jobs and
maintain New Mexico as a clean
and healthy place to live and
work and this bill is also going
to create a tool for private
investment in innovative
technologies and I think that's
really the most important part
the bill will help New Mexico be
at the forefront of and
innovation and it will stimulate
people to start thinking
differently it was for research
and development at our
universities our labs also in
our private sector specifically
for the private sector the
creation of an equity market of
credits will creative tool for
private companies to invest in
infrastructure in New Mexico and
as the pro tem already alluded
to we have had many companies
already reach out and talk to us
about these potential
investments our economists study
California and found that the
state's clean fuel market grew
by fifty percent between two
thousand and eleven and two
thousand and sixteen we believe
that there is huge potential and
hydrogen fuel market and
industry expected to reach forty
two billion dollars by twenty
twenty six their major companies
like Honda Audi BMW Volvo
they're all leaning towards this
technology and we want to be
able to attract one of those
companies to New Mexico in fact
in New Mexico company called bay
attack of which we've all met
with we've all part of his
reason is currently already
working on this technology today
with a smaller more efficient on
site hydrogen production and
they announce just recently at
the beginning of the year that
they raised a hundred fifty
seven million dollars in
investment in New Mexico company
raising that.
It's amazing so we really think
and feel that this bill paves
the way for potential biomethane
also to be used as bio gas and
is already planned it's at a
refinery in at Holly frontier.
Also sets up the opportunity for
the dairy industry to capitalize
on and then your to renewable
natural gas projects and I
emailed you all this week that
we've already been speaking with
a company that is looking to
move into New Mexico to use our
calendar work for gas projects
which is pretty fantastic we
have the work force and we have
the technical assistance and
partnerships with a laugh and
while the clean fuel standard by
title may raise concern for
those areas areas historically
reliance on coal mining in the
uses of core out of coal and oil
and gas and other known carbon
intense industry it should
actually really provide help
because while the clean fuel
standard sets the standards that
also allows for those
traditional carbon industry to
generate and use credits
allowing them to maintain levels
of operation while still
contributing to the overall
economy and job creation in
those regions it's so we really
feel like a clean fuel standard
provide a long term market
signal that will stimulate
investment in manufacturing and
production and the distribution
of cleaner fuels in New Mexico
thank you for the time.
Thank you madam secretary.
Center program.
Yes so Mr chairman you could err
okay I'm sorry Senator Kernan
the EDD just before we went on I
do have some questions on the
amendment however you want to
handle that thank you yeah I was
going to go back to the
amendment now so go ahead the
Senate pro temp.
so Mister chairman
I've given you kind of an
overview of the amendments I can
walk you through them a little
bit more so once I did not
mention are centrally changes
some changes in the definitions
so on page two we are changing
the definition of credit and
adding deficits.
On page two we're adding life
fuel lifecycle emissions as a
definition.
then we have four instances of
we're putting and use after
combustion on page two and we're
adding emissions after life
cycle.
on page three we're striking
states and inserting
jurisdictions.
Page four line eight that's
where removing our twenty
percent standard by twenty forty
to twenty eight percent
standard.
A twenty eight percent reduction
in emissions from twenty
eighteen
we are after page four line nine
after twenty forty we're saying
that the board and that's the I.
P. board will determine for the
reductions
the next year you're again
adding emissions after live site
phone.
I'm adding ask for page four
line twenty two after chemical
were inserting carbon
sequestration and after Gary
inserting direct air capture
we're trying to make sure we
capture all the ability of
the industry to get these credit
sent to help reduce the carbon
intensity of their fuels page
four line twenty three after
manufacturing again these are
all in the definitions were
inserting methane capture and
use after guests were inserting
transportation.
So page thirteen number thirteen
page four line twenty four after
sectors were inserting
greenhouse gas emissions
reductions eligible for the
generation of credits pursuant
to this paragraph shall be
quantifiable verifiable
permanent and enforceable I've
talked to you about that is one
of our three substantive changes
and then the last one was also
the one all right talk to you
about ensuring that rural and
under served communities are
equally included and the budget
so that's an overview of the
amendments as I said before US
secretary Kenny has been meeting
with everyone and so these
amendments have come from
western research association in
EMNRD Marathon Oil suite
yes well
And suggestions from other folks
so the secretary has been
meeting with people and he
offers these as a way to make
the bill better.
Thank you madam program Senator
Kernan.
Thank you very much and I
appreciate that and Senator
Kinney and I've had a long
conversation and I appreciate so
much.
The opportunity to visit with
him this is one of those bills
that you know a lot about people
like it a lot of people down
that I do have questions that I
want to make sure I understand
everything so I'm just looking
at the amendments first and the
first thing looking on I believe
it's on page two the fuel cycle
emissions and one of the things
that I think you added was from
extraction of the start
generation up tell me just
explain briefly out of what long
explanations.
I was at at it that one piece at
I think that's a and inclusion
there.
And Mr chairman if I could asked
us secretary can need to answer
that.
Victor can.
Yes
the gentleman Gendo and Senator
Kernan good to see you we added
that at at the request of one of
the stakeholders I'm assuming
it's going to be from the Ag
industry I'm still trying to get
my notes here pulled up but I
believe that was that edition
and Mister chairman Senator
Kernan we also have Amy brown
and I apologize that I didn't
introduce our earlier was an
expert on low carbon fuel
programs from Adelante and
consulting here in the in Santa
Fe.
Is also with us so she can help
answer some questions as well.
Go ahead.
Okay.
Just waiting to hear from her.
Apologies Mr chairman and
Senator Kernan I think we can
move on of that satisfies you
all double check that while
we're going through this to make
sure that I think there get the
lending I think like so in in
one of the amendments increases
from twenty to twenty eight
percent of that but this is a
kick into the twenty twenty four
so we're increasing that
percentage but we really are not
starting this process to the two
twenty four so give me a little
bit of information on the
increase and then the shortened
time period to reach the goal at
twenty forty it's a little bit
concerned.
Mr chairman and senator Kerr and
it's it's a good observation one
of the things that we have to
remember about this particular
piece of legislation is a market
based mechanism so I'm like your
traditional sort of command
controls that you know kind of
now shall meet this standard by
a certain time frame this one
actually and sense the market
the greater certainty that we
can give industry and and the
transportation sector and the
sooner by which we put in that
carbon intensity the fuels the
greater the investment would be
in New Mexico so it's a benefit
it's a win win scenario as you
reduce the carbon intensity you
inside the market so it's a it's
really a cat it's it's good for
the environment but it's really
a catalyst of certainty for in
economic investment by reducing
that number are changing that
number to twenty percent reduce.
Thank you very much we'll talk a
little bit more about that in
the bill that and then on page
four looking at the edition of
the green greenhouse gas
emission reductions eligible for
the generation of credits
explain to me how that the board
it how did they do the gonna
have to that point I verify make
sure what what message do they
use are you better than me and
so I need to make sure I
understand how the board is
going to do that.
On chairman gender and
Senator Kernan.
The these are concepts that are
very common under environmental
federal environmental
regulations ensuring that the
reductions are quantifiable
verifiable permanent and
enforceable the idea here is
that the board will the
environmental improvement board
your rules in which the
environment department would
develop would bring us to the
board and those would be the
guardrails the market guardrails
to ensure that the credits are
real and that there's no
fraudulent activity where
somebody might say I have a
credit but we can't quantify it
verify it and and tell that it's
real so that's market
infrastructure to the credit
system which is really key for a
market based program.
Okay and then one last question
on the amendments and and you
know you change some definitions
and added a few and so I'm
wondering when you use the term
environment yes this is is that
internet you're going to to find
some way and hello how are you
going to make sure at the part
on page going back to page two
with regard to rural communities
and and how they're going to be
impacted help me understand yes
Sir definition that you are
going to use for environmental
justice and then how does how do
we help those rural communities
give me an example.
Mr chairman and senator and a
good question so in my
experience working with
environmental justice
communities and what we do now
the environment department which
would be a good example but it's
up to the environmental
improvement boards to to adopt
this just to be clear on is what
we use what is called a
nationally recognized model if
you will is probably the wrong
word the EPA puts out it's
called AEGEE screens and what we
do is we look here we use the J.
screen it looks and
objectively takes information
from communities to quantify
which communities are
environmental justice and which
ones are not so my my vision but
without being precision all
because we do have to take this
to the board would be to use
something that is already known
to the state in New Mexico as
well as other states that would
be one way to do it for
environmental justice in terms
of rural communities Mr chairman
and senator Kernan we the the
goal here is to make sure that
that all communities benefit by
the economic development as well
as the environmental benefits so
this could look something like
ensuring that Evey charge
stations don't just hit the I.
twenty five Carter but they
actually go from Deming to Hobbs
if you will and and they they're
all around the state because we
need to make sure that the rural
communities are not only
benefiting from the low carbon
fuels but also the credit market
which helps to incent the
development in the state of New
Mexico.
Okay thank you and and you
mentioned that electric vehicle
vehicle charging stations that
but I'm assuming that as these
blended fuels come in that that
regular traditional gas stations
would also be an issue and and
we would have to figure out a
way in rural communities to
retrofit those and make sure
that they are able to receive
that different kind of gasoline
with that the way that we can
help the rural areas as well.
Mr chairman and senator current
you know a lot of these low
carbon fuels when you think
about it are effectively you
have gasoline and diesel and
what we're really talking about
we we talk about low carbon
fuels are the biodiesel's that
that tends to be in a big area
those biodiesel's are typically
that there may be some
infrastructure investment to get
those to market but generally
speaking the consumer would not
be impacted on there and it
would be on the importers side
of the house or the producers
side of the house there should
be more okay it's so Mister
chair and secretary so the
regular gasoline stations that
would be now just that
dispensing that new fuel they
they can just put it in the
tanks that they currently have
the pumps of that currently use
I would think have to retrofit.
And I'm getting off a little bit
into the bill so if you want to
come back we'll we'll we'll talk
about that later and I guess
basically that's all I have a
little bit thank you very much.
Okay thank you of.
There are no other questions on
the amendment we do have a
motion and if there's no
opposition is there any
opposition to the amendment.
See non.
We have been amended bill so
madam pro tempore go to the bill
now.
All right Mr chairman and I
think I've already explained
unless you want me to go into
more detail I think we're ready
for public comment okay thank
you madam pro tem at this time
we'll go to public comment we
will first start with the
opposition people that are
opposed to the Senate bill
eleven as amended.
Those opposed we have TJ through
he'll.
This is a judiciary I I'm
actually registered to be a
support.
Sorry about that thank you very
much.
We have Ruben Baca.
Ruben Baca.
Okay is that right.
Okay moving on we haven't done
Torren.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
and members of the committee my
name is don for it and I with
the American fuel and
petrochemical manufacturers
thank you for the opportunity to
comment on SB eleven the clean
fuel standard as you know
California has run so programs
similar to this for a decade
their experiences shown program
has an undeniable impact on the
cost of fuel in the state
California's legislative
analyst's office because they're
low carbon fuel standard
implicit tax on fuels they say
consumers are hit with higher
retail prices which today equal
to nineteen to twenty four cents
per gallon these costs will
continue to rise as carbon
emission targets are lowered I
urge the committee to take the
time further study this proposal
twenty seconds you markets and
the true cost to consumers thank
you.
Thank you very much next up we
have Jim Winchester.
Mr chair members of the
committee bill sponsors
secretary Kenny and secretary
keys
independent troll Association of
New Mexico respectfully stand
opposed to SB eleven percent or
reasons our members to see this
acts not as a direct tax but as
an implied tax that will
eventually reach consumers who
do use automobiles are hitting
them hard at the pump in there
also will be costs associated
with fuel conversion and that
will affect the entire supply
chain and those costs will be
passed on to other oil and gas
sectors as well as other
industries that we do
wholeheartedly agree that
reduced emissions a share goal
by all parties in the oil and
gas industry has led the way by
significantly decreasing
emissions while increasing.
Part of that was twenty seconds
you me on me again.
So in conclusion we do stand
opposed this bill we do like the
idea of tax credits and we do
think environment secretary
James Kenney for reaching out
but again we do respectfully
stand opposed.
Thank you very much next up we
have John block.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is John block I'm in need of New
Mexican and I oppose Senate bill
eleven this bill would add
burdensome and costly
bureaucratic standards that
single out businesses producing
and importing transportation
fuels that we rely on the
standards as enacted in states
like California and Oregon maybe
the average price of gasoline
skyrocket for the average
consumer anywhere from twelve to
thirty cents per gallon these
cuts won't affect affluent
families as much as they would
hurt poor and middle class New
Mexicans were thirty cents extra
for a gallon of gas makes a big
difference especially during now
during the pandemic families
already struggling to make ends
meet this cruel and
irresponsible tax on the poor
will harm our economy and kill
critical industries and jobs in
our state I urge the committee
to reject Senate bill eleven
thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee.
Thank you very much.
Now moving on to those who wish
to speak in favor we have TJ
Trujillo.
Madam.
Mr Chairman can hear me.
Yes I can't thank you Mr
chairman Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is TJ
Trujillo and I finally figured
out what settlement of support.
I'm a registered lobbyist for
the biotechnology innovation
organization or bio for short
and we stand in full support of
the bill by technology in in
innovation organization is the
world's largest bio trade
association includes members in
the areas of agricultural
industrial health care and
environmental biotech products.
I believe the maintains that New
Mexico clean fuel standard will
spur investments in the clean
fuel technologies in the state
generating new businesses
creating jobs and growing the
state's economy with that said
again Mr chairman the we stand
and support.
Thank you very much next up we
have Mike d'antonio.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee Mike
Antonio with Xcel energy we
serve electricity to the eastern
part of the state of support
this bill we feel like it will
help increase the penetration of
electric vehicles in throughout
New Mexico and out there for a
have a positive effect on the
environment and some little girl
for a metric utilities thank you
so much.
Thank you next up we have Ryan
Kenny.
Chair numbers of the committee
my name is Ryan canning with
clean energy we are the nation's
largest provider of renewable
natural gas transportation fuel.
We are doing great business in
California because of the LCS
yes yes yes yes credits are
allowing us to sell only
renewable natural gas all over a
hundred sixty five stations in
the state we do not self also
because those LCS credits allow
us to bridge the cost gap
between diesel and renewable
natural gas we have a
substantial eight stations in
New Mexico provide service to
refuse a transit any trucks
you're looking to expand our
business for print in and New
Mexico because of this bill so
we are just on support for thank
you.
Thank you very much.
Next up we have Scott Hedrick.
A good afternoon mention of
centers just got hundred I'm up
with a company called renewable
energy group we're north
America's largest manufacturer
of biomass based diesel so we
manufacture both biodiesel and
renewable diesel there's two
things I want to touch on in my
probably forty seconds left one
is we have a partially built
facility in Clovis it's been
partially built sitting there
for about a decade
over that same period of time
we've invested probably two
hundred and twenty million
dollars into our other plants
across the country there's one
real good reason for that those
states that those plants read
like Illinois Iowa Minnesota
Washington state of all move
forward with the very good
support of public policy the
second capitalist gas we've got
to make choices on where to
invest and reinvest were states
on this the signal to businesses
get to do you want to touch on
one thing real quick our
colleagues at the American fuel
petrochemical manufacturer said
nineteen cents in California
it's one point nineteen cents
over ten years roughly two cents
a year that's less than that the
north any gate thank you very
much next up we have Tom to re
in.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
and members of the committee my
name is Tom to reunite of care
on behalf of the Cerro
incorporated in support of S.
eleven.
We are developing facilities
that will make cost competitive
zero self for low carbon
footprint gasoline and hydrogen
from natural gas and renewable
natural gas a portion of which
we anticipate sourcing from New
Mexico we look forward to
selling our products in New
Mexico and a participating in
the program that will be
developed at this bill is
adopted we commend secretary
Kenny and those who worked with
him for including full lifecycle
analysis with third party
validation in a second.
Traffic measured and and I thank
you for the opportunity to speak
today.
Thank you very much next up we
have Scott Scanlon.
A good afternoon thank you thank
you Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Scott
Scanlon registered lobbyists for
the Misia valley transportation
company the C. a valley
transportation is one of the
largest locally owned truckload
carriers in the United States we
specialize in time sensitive
service between major
manufacturing areas in the
United States Canada and Mexico
borders all of that is done
right in Dona ana county New
Mexico we stand in strong
support of this bill and we urge
the committee to pass it along
thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you very much next up we
have page night.
Hi Mr chair and members of the
committee my name is Paige
knight and I am here
representing New Mexico voices
for children to stand in support
of Senate bill eleven I want to
thank the sponsor for this
legislation which we believe
offers the right incentives to
reduce carbon emissions in the
transportation sector which is
necessary and effective steps to
protect our environment and and
improve community health and the
air we breathe we also believe
the credit system will help
drive innovation create jobs and
help diversify our economy and
lastly we really appreciate the
amendment to include stronger
environmental justice provisions
so I urge your support for
Senate bill eleven thank you.
Thank you very much next up we
have bill mid cap.
The committee for allowing me
the opportunity to speak in
favor of SB eleven today my name
is Jack I'm here today
representing Rocky Mountains
farmers you.
If you would like to go on
record to support SB allowing
our members support all types of
energy production we're back to
date we have a big impact on
just and all several states.
One is not a big modern Mexico
and will will not likely play a
large part in your overall
reduction are based fuels we
would hope this legislation
would provide producers with
options for their losses in the
ability to take advantage of our
requests are markets or some
other additional officer twenty
second our farmers and ranchers
will have numerous opportunities
to take advantage of carbon
markets and models to offset the
carbon admit we must lower our
missions clean air clean fuel
standards are a must for our
state and our nation our culture
can play a big role in that
thank you.
Thank you very much next up we
have Sam lower.
Thanks for the opportunity to
provide comment today on in the
Santa Clara Policy minister with
the coalition for renewable
natural gas and that is because
a lot of our colleagues in New
Mexico the people's coalition in
support of SB.
The implementation of the clean
fuel standard this bill would
provide for a limited period
externalities corresponding
infrastructure to decarbonise
next the transportation sector.
You'll Center policies
successfully implemented in
California Oregon and British
Columbia.
Your states having issues
legislation this year.
Thank you we'll send this
statement that New Mexico among
other jurisdictions leading on
climate policy particularly in
the transportation sector.
An immediate opportunity to
affect real transportation
department stationed at the
state department of education
future Mexico
the committee to Rachel's
standard currently struggles for
consulting for the greenhouse
gas reductions environmental
improvements in the state thanks
for your time.
Thank you very much.
Next we have Rico Gonzalez.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee members regarding this
is also the pasal electric and
we have senator Kerry Hamblin
type in doozy Azam for this bill
we are very excited about this
opportunity to electrify the the
transportation sector and to be
part of that changeover that
gets our our new technology
Division excited they're all
about twenty five to thirty
years old they're the funniest
group and at eight el Paso
electric and I'm just excited
for them that they get to work
with this if it passes I think I
can.
Thank you very much.
Next up we have Camilla I will
then.
Thank you chair members of the
committee and the sponsor I am
standing in qualified support
for the Sierra Club and our DC
And sweep clean fuels programs
can be a net positive for the
climate but they're labor
intensive rulemakings and
programs if done right they can
be a good component of building
a clean economy and we're glad
to see some increases on the
goals and investment in Evey
however an ambitious program
should be double double the
percentages by twenty thirty at
least twenty percent we have a
long way to go to meet our
decarbonisation goals from the
calamity hello electric vehicles
are coming so there's plenty of
opportunity to decarbonise the
bill should require clears the
bility and carbon accounting
protocols that will capture New
Mexico biofuel feedstocks and
will submit the rest of our
comments in writing thank you.
Thank you very much next up we
have Jana said you worry.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
and members of the committee and
sign your name on it with the
public service company of New
Mexico we appreciate the Sanchez
secretary Kenny's willingness to
work with us to clarify the
definition of transportation
fuel PNM is committed not only
to comply with the energy
transition act but diligently
working to exceed the ETA zero
carbon emission goals of twenty
forty five PNM shares Senator
stewards and the
administration's commitment to
reduce carbon emission by
working towards a more
environmentally and economically
sustainable transportation
infrastructure in New Mexico and
therefore we're happy to stand
in support of Senator Stewart
center Senate bill eleven thank
you very much.
Thank you very much next up we
have can Hughes.
Morning or good afternoon is
Jenny Hughes representing the
coalition sustainable
communities of New Mexico.
I think of the major roadways
where people live and work next
to them this is a public health
issue that more clean of the
feels so you're better the
health of our new all of our New
Mexico senator support.
Thank you very much next up we
have Kerry Cole.
Mr.
They my name is but your.
Moms.
Forty seven
percent of all nations to
level protests more hearing bill
is with the support.
Officials rural.
Why is that more people.
Also for secretary.
Actually part of all it's
important to be able to run
way about two years is
appropriate.
These are two more quality is
more reasonable second.
We are born we regulations built
in the city.
We are happy to stand in support
of this legislation.
Thank you very much next up we
have sherry marrow.
Sherri Mero are you with us.
All right moving on we have
Barbara Senna.
This is sherry sorry all right
sure go ahead.
Yes thank you thank you madam
though by current chairman
Padilla and members of the
committee my name is sherry
Meryl and I'm the director state
government affairs for natural
gas vehicles for America and the
co chair of the New Mexico NGV
coalition I speak today in
support of Senate bill eleven
The New Mexico clean fuel
standard act action is now
required that will use all
available clean transportation
technology to address today's
emissions problems and a major
first step to accelerate this
transition is implementing a
clean fuel standard to CFS in
New Mexico CFS enables
incentives for the cleanest fuel
twenty second based on their
carbon intensity and Senate bill
eleven would implement that some
fuels are actually carbon
negative renewable natural gas
is one of these and can be
carbon negative greater beyond
solar wind generated electricity
New Mexico is already doing this
and we request the city's
Committee thank you very much.
Next up we have progress in a.
Good afternoon Mr chairman and
committee members my name is
Barbara sempat I'm representing
three fifty Santa Fe chapter of
the international organization
three fifty dot work.
We advocate for solutions that
promote transitioning away from
fossil fuel based economy we
stand in support of SB eleven.
I'd like to compare how the
state is dealing with emissions
from electricity generation
versus how SB eleven proposes to
deal with emissions from the
transportation sector.
Emissions from electricity
generation are produced right
after generating station.
The chase at a standard for
utilities to meet its set
targets for what percent of
their total retail sales
renewable energy should be in
twenty twenty five twenty thirty
at twenty fifth.
A mechanism for keeping track of
that is renewable energy
certificates.
In contrast to emissions from
the transportation thank you
very much next up we have called
in Masser.
Call in Masser.
We have lower Tabar.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Larry Tabor
and the sustainability and
resilience officer at the energy
minerals and natural resources
department EMNRD strongly
supports this governor's bill
secretary Cottrell Propst is one
of the co chairs of our climate
change task force and our
support reflects the fact that
this bill would make significant
progress on our climate strategy
both in reducing emissions and
by creating investment that will
grow and diversify our clean
energy economy thank you.
Thank you very much.
Food to our list of members of
the public who registered prior
are there any members of the
public who wish to speak
against this bill at this time
you may raise your hand using
the reaction but an or just
raise your hands general.
Thomas solemn and help.
All right.
Are there any members of the
public who wish to speak in
favor of Senate bill eleven.
Thomas Solomon.
Thank you Mr chairman the
centers of sponsor yes my name
is Tom Solomon I am the co
coordinator of the New Mexico
chapter of three fifty dot org
the group devoted to fighting
for safe climate in on behalf of
our eight thousand members we do
support the clean fuel standard
act I transportation is now the
top source of global warming
emissions and this bill takes a
important step forward and
fighting to reduce those
emissions so on that basis we do
support this act thank you.
Thank you very much.
This concludes public comment at
this time.
Thank you
Now we will go to a.
Committee for.
For questions.
Senator Kernan.
Senator Wirth.
Senator Kernan can you you
you're so.
Thank you very much.
Okay thank you very much and
appreciate all the comments and
and a little bit from from just
listening to people and that was
very helpful going through that
I'm so sorry I just have a
couple questions.
Going through the through the
bill and thinking about how this
is going to be implemented.
We have a provider which means a
person that produces in New
Mexico or imports
transportation fuel and I know
in my community we we get our
fuel from Big Spring Texas so Mr
chair and senator am I going to
expect that
the refinery in Big Spring will
need to transition and provide a
blended fuel in order for that
provider to to supply fuel to my
community and I don't know
Senator Stewart wants to answer
that or or maybe secretary
Kenny.
Mr chairman I would like to have
secretary Kenny answer that.
Thank you.
Mr chairman and Senator Kernan
there's options where that
refinery could.
May be producing low carbon
fuels for as moving into that
market there's options to blend
higher carbon with low carbon
fuels in taxes are in New Mexico
and Mister chairman Senator
Kernan I I'll ask Amy brown to
speak more specifically and she
has our our expert in the ground
and she has more insights.
Sir thank thank thank you
Secretary Kenny.
Mr Chairman Senator Kernan as
secretary Kenny indicated there
are lots of options including
this creates incentive for for
the supply chain itself to be
cleaned up for the carbon
emissions to be reduced in the
supply chain of in through
improvements at the refineries
through cleaner transportation
from the refinery to of the
terminal in New Mexico the
terminal in New Mexico could be
the one that does the blending
if that's the option that they
choose in order to reduce the
carbon intensity of the fuel
that they sell here and then the
the final option is that they
can choose to purchase credits
if if they are in a pending a
deficit at the end of the year
that they need to offset.
Thank you in that answers my
question because.
It's blended I mean did the fuel
comes from Big Spring and is
trapped in so there's no there's
no facility in New Mexico in my
area and I'm kind of wondering
where across New Mexico those
facilities already exist and I
don't maybe it's you but
certainly not enough to provide
fuel for at you know all the
people in New Mexico so Big
Spring in order to continue to
provide fuel to my community
it's going to have to retro fit.
So that they can billion
specifically for New Mexico and
that cost I have no idea what
that cost will be or they're
gonna have to purchase the
credits in order to continue to
supply fuel to my community so
thank shape inside you know it's
not worth it we're not gonna
we're we're not going to do that
so then I'm wondering where will
my community percent fuel and
a at a rate that.
Isn't.
I guess at a rate that is
somewhere that cost is going to
be it's gonna be passed on to
the consumer so perhaps.
Senator Stewart and and
secretary canning help me
understand how quickly those.
Facilities could be and I know
you you have a lot of people say
that they're willing to come
into New Mexico but you have
been working to do this but
twenty twenty four so it did
spring doesn't want to
participate and it's going to
take awhile to get these
facilities wind at the bottom
line is probably providers for
short period of time or maybe a
longer period of time are going
to have to buy credits give kids
my community would you agree
with that.
Mr chairman and
Senator Kernan if if I may.
The the I think.
You are seeing the path forward
in some respects but let me just
also point the time component in
your Mr chairman and senator the
it would take us about two years
to develop the rules that's what
we're saying of the bill were
enacted and in that time we are
working with stakeholders just
to start to bring certainty as
to what the carbon intensity
standards would look like in the
fuels themselves and then once
we set those standards and
there'd be opportunities for
those of fuels we went and then
they would continue to be
ratchet down the carbon
intensity of this you'll be
ratcheted down over time what
that means is the cart the
credit market would accelerate
over time as well so there is
the opportunity always for
credits to be used to bring and
higher carbon fuels than what
the standard is at the same time
there's opportunities to blind
that fuels in the ground
indicated
in New Mexico to reduce the
carbon intensity of that fuel
and there's opportunities as
you're pointing out for
refineries many of those
refineries are rounding Mexico
have already invested and one in
New Mexico has already invested
in bio fuels so the opportunity
to to create low carbon diesel
is there the opportunity to
produce higher carbon diesel
with the use of credits is there
there is so there's a glide path
into the implementation of this
man
R. Mr chairman and senator thank
you very much and I'm not going
to dwell on it too much but but
it it seems like.
Timing is is very important but
also investment and so you know
we've had I certainly read
through all the letters and and
now there appears to be a lot of
support for this but and I guess
what they're going to wait to
find out is what the Avid does
what they're going to develop
with regard to rules and so I'm
going to move on because I'm
still concerned about the
availability of that whether
providers will get that fuel and
to parts of the state we're
we're it's not I know that I
know we have a refinery Holly
frontier but but I'm not sure.
I'm not sure what kind of fuel
they I'm what they produce I
don't know if maybe do so but I
don't know that it's for cars on
the road and I may be wrong on
that but I'll check on it that I
I don't think that's contact
with the kind of fuel that they
they produce their.
So I have another question in
this is about jurisdictions and
you talk about about reaching
out to other states and other
places where programs have been
put in place and that just
basically is California and and
in Oregon Washington spent
trying to do this but they have
not got it yet and so when you
reach out to adopt what other
places have done basically we're
talking about those communities
that are correct those states
and jurisdictions with that be
correct.
Mr.
Oh
sorry
Mr chairman and Senator Kernan
we would look to those cute
those states that have clean
fuels programs are low carbon
fuels programs and and try to
ensure that we had reciprocity
with them it on on the credit
markets ID if that's what you're
asking.
Well I think Mr chair Senator
and secretary just basically in
adopting the rules that the
board's gonna take into
consideration to have a couple
programs other states and.
Basically I guess are they the
only two states that have
adopted programs or the it is
that we would look to basically
those two at that have already
been implemented this and
obviously have some history and
some experience with regard to
that so that's where we would
look.
Mister chairman Senator Kernan
we would certainly look there
you know one of the things that
I've been talking to
stakeholders about and and and
various members of the
legislature is that no we would
be the only south southwestern
state with the clean fuels
program we would be what the
only oil and gas producing state
where most of our revenues are
coming from that industry right
now so it gives us the
opportunity to look to those
programs take the best that
serves the economic incentives
they really has bolstered their
job creation and their economy
and apply that you're in New
Mexico cognizant of that our
industry base is uniquely
different side I would not want
you to leave this conversation
thinking we're gonna drag and
drop that's not what we've done
in any of our rulemakings we
would make it New Mexico true.
That's that would be good to
know and.
When we talk about
jurisdictions to I I just am
curious because I think
Albuquerque at is their own
jurisdiction with regard to air
quality in my correct and so are
you included would that be
included in this or would they
have to adopt their own
standards and implement this
from within the City of
Albuquerque.
Mr chair and senator.
Mr chairman and Senator Kernan
they would have the opportunity
are at their own independent air
pollution control agency they
would have the option to
participate in this program and
implement their program they
they themselves can take rules
before the board the
environmental improvement or
just like the environment
department.
Okay so so that will be up to
them and and I guess at this
point unless they do that.
Probably would not be terribly
impacted unless it used to go
and I understand that's what
they're considering so doubt
that that that wouldn't do it
thank they don't have to do it
I'm in just circling back around
California you know that's been
the model and and and I guess I
want to know
how much have they reduced what
has the impact been because you
look at California have a state
with the huge population lot of
course on the red and then you
look at New Mexico which is a
large State Land bars that we
have.
Very very few people and so when
you compare California New
Mexico how would you estimate
the benefit I'm in New Mexico
compared to I mean I think
California has based on some of
the information that I have that
they haven't really achieved
just matches they had hoped to
but with so few people in New
Mexico and then you take
Albuquerque have mix we're we're
looking at what kind of effect
are.
What what's gonna be the impact
overall state by twenty thirty.
So
Mr chairman and and Senator
Kernan I apologize and may have
misspoke mind my folks are
texting me that they'd we would
include Albuquerque here and I
apologize for that if they would
not have to adopt rules that we
would we would be adopting the
rules they would be able to
participate in programs I I
apologize I misspoke and that.
and so Mr chairman and Senator
Kernan you're asking about what
the benefits would be by say
twenty thirty
I will see if we have that we
have the benefits from an
environmental standpoint laid
out at the full implementation
standpoint let me see if I have
that at the interim standpoint
of twenty thirty.
I can try to get back to you on
that unless amendment I'm sorry
your around.
That's fine thank you miss it
I'm sorry no that's all right Mr
chair Senator Kernan I believe
we estimated that it would be
the equivalent of taking forty
six thousand cars off the road.
Okay so I'm sorry no you go
ahead I'm I'm just trying to
learn so sure I was going to say
I just immense in California and
it's it's a little complicated
because they enacted a suite of
environmental a Clemente
oriented bills but I've seen
anywhere from estimates of
thirty eight millions of carbon
pollution to forty three million
reduced as a result of their
clean fuel standard okay well
I'm I'm going to I'm going to in
my comments just with with some
I'm.
Just to say that this is a hard
one for me because I know the
oil and gas industry has an
opportunity here for those that
are being very progressive and
what they're doing and I am very
proud of that hope people
recognize the fact that they're
going to be able to generate
credits and they're going to be
able to take those credits and
sell them because they are doing
some things that are very
helpful to this process and then
on the other hand you know I
know that that it'll be
difficult for some of the
providers in particular unless
we get the infrastructure in
here pretty quickly and that's
going to be an investment that
that cost is gonna be passed on
to the consumer I worry that
I've always tried to support oil
and gas and so that in this
instance I'm torn because I
believe the consumer is the one
who's really gonna pay the
price.
For this and so one comment I
heard during public testimony
kind of set of light for me the
goal is really I think over time
get away from even blended fuels
then we're going to talk about
Edie's we want electric vehicles
and so we're going to have
people coming in and investing
in this blending process and
getting people out to fill them
percent with blended fuels that
are going to cost more and I I
just can't see how they won't
and so when that prices then
they're gonna say when the next
time I'm gonna buy it electric
vehicle and so I think that's
the goals are wonder why anyone
would want to come in and make
an initial huge investment to do
the blended fuels when probably
about twenty thirty twenty
thirty five they're not gonna
have any customers anyway
because they're all gonna be
elector so these are my concerns
I just in previous for oil and
gas and for for what they're
going to be able to generate
credits I'm worried about the
providers you're gonna have to
buy the credits and then turn
around in the cost of that is
going to increased cost to the
consumer so I'm really important
and I would listen to further
debate and I really appreciate
again secretary canning you've
been so helpful and and I
appreciate all the time spent
trying to explain this to me so
Mister chairman Senator Stewart
that's all thank you.
Thank you Senator Kernan I have
on the list senator Wirth and
then Senator Hickey.
Thank you Mr chairman just a
procedural question for
I understand there's a couple of
additional amendments that
secretary Kenny has approved
and one of them is a one word
amendment the others a one
sentence amendment but I don't
have amendments you know they
were submitted to the committee
or other members I don't know
what and this this bill as I
understand Senator Stewart it
this bill goes to Senate finance
so they could also be put on
there but I just wanted to check
with you as to whether you you'd
be willing to consider or want
to discuss those now or would
like me to hold off and and they
can get put on a Senate finance
one check with you Mr chair.
Some Mr Chairman I'm I'm fine
with whatever however you want
to do it I have seen those
amendments and they're very
minor but they were they were
not submitted to you early
enough so this does have another
committee if if you do passed.
Yes I didn't.
I don't think I saw that
amendment so let's just go ahead
with this bill and then we can
amended at the next
year and I just wanted to.
Not gonna head down the Senator
Ivey Soto path here and start re
writing bills on the fly so.
At this.
So Mister chair I mean I I
certainly.
I appreciate that they're minor
that it could make a difference
I mean I don't I'm not that we
need to approve the amendments
are but it sure would be nice to
have just a quick.
Tell me what they're about
because I mean some of us may
really need to know what's going
on with before it places
committee thank you okay that's
why there enough of so Center
program go ahead explain the
amendment what Mr chairman if I
could ask Senator Wirth gives
plan I think she's got a copy of
them I'm happy to do it so the
first one is on going back to
the original Bill Page three
line ten.
After the words used at the were
only so it's all one word
amendments in the definition of
transportation fuel which if we
did the amendment just
clarifies the transportation
fuel means electricity.
Or a liquid or gaseous fuel that
is blended sold supplied offered
for sale or used only for the
propulsion of a motor vehicle or
that is intended for use in a
motor vehicle in New Mexico and
that meets applicable standards
specifications and testing
requirements for motor vehicle
fuel fuel quality so it just was
a clarification it's all one
word to make sure that this
language wasn't misunderstood at
some point.
and again as I mentioned I
certainly could yield to.
Senator Stewart secretary
economic stand this is a
friendly amendment that we could
do here we can put it on and
finance up to the committee
again I think the chair
indicated he wants about of
finance but that's the issue
number one Senator Kernan.
And then the second amendment's.
And maybe I can even do some
fancy here.
Strong screen share hopes the
screen share is disabled
so let me see if I can I'll just
read it to you it's on page four
line twenty four
at the end of this section and
this is talking about the rules
and what the rules
Do these are the rules of course
that are promulgated by
environment includes four and
this would just add a sentence
at the end of this subsection
five that would read as follows
in determining whether
greenhouse gas emission
reductions are eligible for the
generation of credits the
department shall consider
whether those reductions are
additional quantifiable
verifiable permanent and
enforceable.
And actually Mr chairman.
that a a slight variation of
that amendment has already been
adopted so if you look at the
original amendments a number
thirteen.
I reads on page four.
Line twenty four.
After sectors insert greenhouse
gas emission reductions eligible
for the generation of credits
pursuant to this paragraph shall
be quantifiable verifiable
permanent and enforceable so I
think that amendment was already
taken care of it's not exactly
but I think it's pretty much
what we need so really probably
Mr chairman we're only looking
at putting only in.
Yeah I would agree so I would
based on based on that I would
you know the second sentence it
sounds like it's already been
included so so we've already
done that so really we're back
then just to the were only on
page three line ten after used
and for the work for.
Okay thank you Mr chair thank
thank you madam pro tempore to
and then also Senator Kernan I
know that I had indicated not
seen the amendment that we'll
move it on but if it's this
money or do we want to just go
ahead and
The the the second amendment to
this bill and that we to Senate
clean copy to judiciary or
Senate finance what's the.
Okay with it thanks so move Mr
chairman okay so we have a
motion of to move the second
amendment.
A inserting the word of used so
is there any opposition to that
amendment I mean to the.
Mr chairman it's inserting the
word we're only up your the word
used page three line ten correct
the.
Only talking about motor vehicle
correct.
Yeah I wanted to clarify that Mr
chairman thank you Roger okay
yes home reading my notes
backwards.
Happens yes at the of these
rural hours you know you're
getting crossed eyed so with
that I don't see no opposition
or here or no waving a hand in
opposition so there's no
opposition you have a twice a
month and that the.
A bill so right so thank you Mr
chair I just have one one.
Comments
And I think it was you know the
I think the emission goals ten
percent by twenty thirty as I
understand it and it's
interesting that that's nine
years away are
National envoy for climate John
Kerry just.
Kind of cited the twelve years
that was leading scientists said
that we had to evade the worst
possible climate change
consequences and that was three
years ago so we've got a nine
year window here to.
Obviously deal and that's what
you're doing and I appreciate
that a time I would like you
though just to address secretary
Kenny if you could you know
there was some mention in the
the testimony in support of
question I think you know what I
and I realize Hernandez I'm
gonna I'm gonna condition this
question up front because I
realize you know you're trying
to get a consensus bill hearing
you're not all the way towards
consensus but there's been a lot
of consensus reached but I guess
my question is is ten percent by
twenty thirty and off and and
you know as we as we sit here
and this is the challenge and we
really are in.
Fundamental change I just would
like to get your your take on
the.
Executive order and in kind of
the that nine year window which
I think I I really made me pause
and it and it makes me pause
here because that line your
window is the twenty thirty
window the sector that envoy
curious referencing so I just
like to get your kind of your
input in your kind of analysis
of that for us.
Mr chairman and
we were thank you for that that
that question not at not at not
a quick answer to a it's a very
detailed question I guess a very
in depth question when we look
at what we're doing here in New
Mexico to address climate
change.
That you know ETA our oil and
gas rules dealing with methane
and ozone precursors
the transportation sector
building codes grid
modernization all the things
that we're doing we're still
working towards closing the gap
on reducing our state emissions
our contribution to the overall
what what we can do here so your
your point of whether we should
be seeking a loft here percent
reduction in the first part of
this bill is one that we've
looked at to see to say.
Based on the available resources
are departments are getting in
order to put forward our rural
meetings what can we
realistically do with our fiscal
constraints to achieve climate
goals that the governor has sent
out this is where we've landed
knowing what we can do so while
I idealistic we would love to
see us do more as it as a state
I I also recognize we have
fiscal constraints in the way we
that we get there and I think.
Creating market based mechanisms
where people will go at least
now remember that language says
at least ten percent leaves the
door open for the market to
exceed the expectations and
based on all the interest you've
heard today in this bill I do
and and many people who didn't
speak the fact that New Moga is
not opposed to what we're doing
the fact the mining industry not
opposed to what we're doing
we're leaving the door open for
our traditional extractive
industries to participate more
meaningfully and hopefully that
will get get us further but
lots more to say Mr chairman and
etcetera but I'm gonna and it
there because I have a lot of
use here yeah no I and I
appreciate that and I just is
something you said of really
rings out to me because we of
course as the appropriating
body.
We are we need to do a deal with
the fiscal constraints that your
agency is facing and I was happy
to put some of the little amount
of money that we got in the
junior bill towards your agency
what you know all this is this
is this is also on us I mean we
these are huge policy.
Issues and climate change
obviously is it's here it's now.
And it concerns me that that
what's holding back kind of the
agencies are fiscal constraints
because that's on us and so we
have an opportunity right now in
our budgets.
Hi it's over on the Senate side
is challenging because it's a
you know the process but I I
just want to use this
opportunity to just.
A thank you for what you're
doing here but B. also to
encourage all of my colleagues
when we look at the budget that
you have and the reductions that
you faced over the last ten year
window.
You know we can't complain if
we're not giving you the money
to do the job you need to do and
so I just really hope that we
can address some of that moving
forward and and I realize this
is a an important staff and I
certainly appreciate Preciado
the effort to.
To develop collaboration and
have industry on board because I
think there's a recognition that
we really have to act and so
it's all of us and again I'll
just leave it at that but thank
you Senator Stewart for for
caring this bill and thank you
to our governor for for leading
ands again for all of us in the
legislature.
I think we've got some big
choices to make here real quick
in the Senate's because that's
where the budget is to address
some of these fiscal constraints
so that we can really give you
the tools that are needed to
take the next step so that's
what I have thank you Mr chair
thank you of Majority Leader as
I've got Senator tall man hello
Senator Hickey I'm sorry.
Thank you Mr chair.
This.
and senator
I'm sorry madam pro tem thank
you for bringing this bill this
is directionally correct
and we gotta get there and you
know whenever I start doing what
I'm about to do I go my kids and
their kids are going to face a
stop and I get to pass through
it and about.
Ten twenty thirty years but this
as this as real impact and so it
is very serious but
you know with with a lot of
directional and things that we
really want to do and and now we
need to do sometimes we get into
wishing and that and just some
procedural pieces on this I'd
like to get an answer to
I'm I'm lucky in that I Senator
Feldman
who mentors graduate students
and public policy I has had one
of them working with me to do
research and I sent her in to
discuss that and I I need to
understand this and she is
really done incredible job of
bringing out some things and I
highly recommend to everyone the
California air resources board
assessments and and I can send
it to the.
Chairman's of assistance so
people can get it but it does
really look at California which
is the one state that done this
and that and they've been doing
it since twenty eleven and their
goal was to a have a ten percent
decrease at this point but
they're only about six and a
half percent decrease now also
when you get a chance to look at
this it's pretty amazing what
they've done in alternative
fuels but again there is the
Senator Kernan brought up the
the question of well are we
going to do a lot of
alternatives in the future are
we really gonna move
particularly with our renewable
storage electric but
so anyway I what I'm getting
from the the working California
is that that it's hard and I
know you think that that the
leader brings up a good point
now we're gonna do this let's do
it
and and really have the impact
but I'm worried that in the bill
I don't see where there is
flexibility and get it I mean if
we can't do it how are we going
to or who is going to make the
judgments that it's.
Ten percent or eight percent is
okay how does that mechanism
more.
Or is it just by god twenty
thirty we've had a ten percent
reduction.
So Mister chairman you know I
could take a stab at it but I
would prefer to hear secretary
Kinney's views on it.
Go ahead secretary Mr chairman
and senator thank you thank you
for the question I I am not
going to ensure that great lead
and by Senator Stewart but I do
want to ask Amy brown and she
might be able to weigh in on
that I think she has the most
experience Mr the implementation
side of it right now.
Certainly thank you Secretary
Kenny Mister chairman Senator
Hickey you mentioned the
California goal and you're
absolutely correct originally it
was ten percent by twenty twenty
and they actually amended to
make it I think it's now seven
point five percent
and they did that for several
reasons one there was a period
of time where the program was
enjoined well they worked out
some.
A legal challenges but they they
realize that they did need to
step back from that goal a
little bit so I would say that
if if we found ourselves in a
situation where we felt like we
weren't going to make the target
that certainly there could be
amendments to to change the goal
going forward however I also
think we have the benefit of
California which is a huge
market and which by the way we
live between it and a lot of the
fuels being taken to it so we
would be an easy place to stop
an
and fill up at our stations and
let them increase the market
that they're serving and make
more money while they're on
their way to California so you
know following in the foot steps
of a very large market that's
already really dramatically
change the fuel market place I
think is is a good thing for us
and I think that you know we
have projected that the goals
being set by this legislation
are feasible.
Thank you
Ms brown thank you very much
also in here actually and I'm
looking at that and California
is doing pretty well
in terms of the the credits and
deficits and so there is a
pattern out there I know some
people have said to me that how
come only two states I have done
this and I guess Washington is
approaching
why aren't others coming up and
I get I get down to the
education in the implementation
and I also understand that in
California measuring the air is
in the a little bit tricky and
difficult and subjective
as to how much arms coming out
I'm not sure but again and and
so this isn't a question is just
an observation of how do we do
that and and do it well and and
make sure it's fair and as we do
sometimes get into the state
it's Albuquerque here it's a
seven part of the state you know
bear moves around all over the
place and so if there is a hot
spot that needs to do more
credits or more activity we can
identify correctly the last
observation I have is that
In California that the which has
the second highest average cost
of gas.
There are some critics of this
Abbey noted that the cost of
doing this
again aggressive way and up on
the floor because they and again
exactly what is driving up their
prices how much do this.
It is debatable but it is going
to I think we do need to
recognize it is going to raise
the cost of gas is you by the
credit you got a pass and you
got to pass that along somewhere
and I'm just wondering if
there's anything else we can do
to whether it's income levels
I'm you know I'm used to working
with federal poverty levels in
in health insurance and so forth
but is there any way that
there is a a tax credit I'm not
sure maybe is is is too
bureaucratic but I'm just again
concern that too much of the
cost is going to be borne by
those who can't afford to do it
because it will be a costs.
It anyone who would like to
answer.
That would be helpful.
Mister chairman Senator Hickey
one of the a couple things on
that and and
I'll just Secretary keys to jump
in here in a minute because we
did a big analysis on on gas
prices and what that would mean
that the pop but first the rules
by which we would the mechanism
by which the environmental
improvement board the duties of
that board are to look at the
public injures social economic
cost cultural value they they
have they have separate
standards that are outside of
this particular act by which
they have to adopt rules and
that that guides their adoption
of rules so we the environment
department would work in the
role making a hundred.
Did to ensure that the rules
that we propose the E. ID would
be would satisfy those
requirements and we typically
look at the cost of consumer the
cost the industry cost the small
businesses we do an economic
analysis if you well in that
context we we would look at that
and
we also put in this in the
amendments that the second round
of amendments the first round
women's for this bill we also
put in there the benefits to
rural and underserved
communities environmental
justice communities I'm not
reading the exact language but
the idea there would be that we
could
in sent the credit market in
those areas to to to bring
better jobs better you know when
when the tide rises unemployment
arises for everybody kind of
concept so we're looking at that
as well and we really strive to
really make sure that that this
market based mechanism thought
about a quality issues again
that's an legislation so we
would have to undertake that
Environment Department for the
role making provisions and then
if secretary keys Committee
jumped in on our economic
analysis that would be and yet
their problem.
Mr chair
Senator Hickey and also
secretary Kenny so we did have
our economist a look into this
and as most people are aware of
the price at the pump is super
complex it's affected by
multiple variables it includes
the cost of oil refining
distribution marketing taxes
profits so national and regional
economic policies further sheet
the cost of a gallon of gas so
regarding the clean fuel
standard and if we are actually
putting a burden on
The lower economic secretary of
New Mexico in two thousand and
nineteen or can work to isolate
the clean fuel standard cost.
Variable since their program to
the fact in two thousand and
sixteen so the state included
that it could have resulted in a
two to three cents per gallon
and increase for gas and diesel
however unlike gas and diesel
pump prices in all states
regional and national economic
issues and more influential are
more and influential on gas
prices and not necessarily the
clean fuel standard and then we
looked into it for California
and more recently in analysis of
the break down of California gas
prices showed that the clean
fuel standard attributed less
than a one percent increase in
the price per gallon of gasoline
or diesel so again broader
regional and national economic
policies are more are more
impactful on prices we have not
seen any other data that has
been introduced to us by any of
the organizations that have set
up set up in opposition that
contradicts this so I would say
that real world data continues
to show that hi at pump prices
are unaffected by the clean
fuels program or at least one
percent are negligible.
Okay thank you very much
Secretary keys for that that
observation
I hope that we will
we got I'm hoping that your
economists that and through the
future regulation continue to
look at this I mean you know
lies and then statistics but
number is what you gonna do with
them
and on the other hand you know
taking a genuine again we have
to go here I get that and but
have as little collateral damage
as we can in the process and as
the leader said doing so
aggressively but actually so I I
am going to support the bill but
at and not.
Probably the the most moving
part of that is that I have
heard I think for the first time
ever this year in the chamber of
commerce both advocating
together and I think that in of
itself wins the day thank you
very much Senator Stewart and Mr
chairman.
Thank you Senator Hickey Senator
Thoman that I have Senator
Griggs.
Thank you Mr chair.
Top of page three of the FY are
two states that there's six
full.
D. ease
Three technical staff to
economists and one attorney I
can understand why any three
technical staff.
One attorney what we're what
will the what's the need for the
two economists over they be
doing.
Mr chairman and Center Tom and
that the economist would be
working on the market based
mechanisms the credit deficit
understanding the market system
that that would be their role is
ensuring that the market
integrity of the overall.
clean fuels program.
Okay thank you.
Secretary for that answer also
You're a agency is a.
Understaffed and you're not able
to carry out.
All the enforcement duties that
you would like is that correct.
Mr chairman and senator that is
correct.
So.
This three point two million
dollars to.
Implemented force this news
standards so is this program
more important than the other
and programs in your department
are napping and
that being a funded.
Mr chairman and senator Tom and
no this program is not more
important or less important I
will note that the three point
two million dollars
appropriation is to stand up the
program we do think that the
implementation of the program
will be paid for by the fees
transaction fees the the sale
and purchase of credits and
things like that so we do think
it'll become an enterprise
program but in order to invest
in getting the roll out within
twenty four months and initially
managing the market that's what
the appropriations for.
Thank you Secretary for us so.
You have fully.
If every intention.
This will eventually be a self
funded.
Mr chairman and senator Tom and
that is our intent here is to
ensure that it is an enterprise
program our air program where
this is how this would be house
is an enterprise program the
general fund does not provide
any money into that program it
is entirely based on permit fees
as well as on federal grants the
legislature's not invested in
that program for a number of
years.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Secretary one final question
other than California New York
or any other states implemented
this program.
Mr chairman and senator Tom and.
Currently we have New York who
is working on their program a
number of states across the
Midwest are looking at it.
The the there's a Canadian
program that is it I and we're
hearing that the federal
government is also contemplating
at a similar program.
Thank you secretary Mr secretary
thank you Mr chair that's all I
have thank you.
Thank you senator toman of
Senator Griggs followed by
Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr chair in that and
thank you madam pro tem for
bringing the bill I mean I
appreciate this piece of
legislation I think it is
looking forward and maybe it's
is the right direction I'm I'm
concerned honestly about the the
cost to the consumer of which
we've heard several people bring
up we heard from the American
fuel petrochemical manufacturers
and.
It's a little bit different what
they say then what
than what I've heard from
from secretary keys and and
from.
Secretary Kenny they they talk
about the right now anywhere
from nineteen twenty four cents
of every gallon of gasoline sold
in California can be directly
attributed to the low carbon
fuel standard California boat.
I think and what I've heard nine
you know it may be all stations
a little bit Mr chair and madam
pro tennis price for gallon in
California still around four
dollars a gallon.
Where should we should stand for
the cheaper out here.
We have.
Numerous people in New Mexico
that you know to get them to
move toward electric vehicles
and different things
you will take time try thank you
know we we certainly need a
little time for all of this to
to come together for them.
Because the it's going to cost.
It's it's going to cost
We've discussed in New York what
I'm I need to catch this before
forget about it
Senator Hickey mentioned
collateral damage and collateral
damage you know in a lot I guess
if it's not you.
If you need to collateral damage
means something.
And I think there's some people
out there that they will be
collateral damage and it will
mean something to them.
I'm I'd like to just just just
real quick and this
Madam Mr chair in a Madam pro
tem the
Do we know actually we know how
many cars are on the on the road
in the United States.
Mr chairman I certainly don't so
I don't know if the any brown or
secretary Kenny does you know
let me before I turn it over to
them let me remind you that one
of the folks that us talk to us
this morning I'm pretty sure was
thought header it from our
renewable energy group who has
at a building in Clovis that
they would like to actually put
money in they said that you have
that nineteen cents increase
Asselin was over ten years and
he said that means that was two
cents a year so I think I think
the the sky is falling about the
cost of the gasoline is not
really accurate but I don't have
the data so I don't know if any
brown or secretary Cheney can
answer the number of cars.
Of.
That Mr chairman pro tem
secretary Senator Griggs I I
Google that I'm not going to
pretend that I knew this off the
top of my head but according to
finance online dot com there
were two hundred eighty four
point five million registered
cars in twenty nineteen.
Thank you thank you for that
information Mr chair and and Mr
brown our budget that's the same
number I've got I've got about
two hundred eighty six million
cars and light light traction
the the information we received
show that this will be like
taking forty four thousand cars
off the road.
in the in the I mean annually
so you know you take forty four
thousand cars and you divide it
by two hundred eighty six
million the numbers pretty small
numbers pretty small even when
you go out ten years to reduce
and that assuming you're
reducing forty four thousand
every year which you could
reduce more last but it is still
a a small number in a small
number because New Mexico's not
not necessarily a very big state
I do want to go back to to
Senator storage comment about
the
the nineteen cents and be and
you know over over time and I
think that you know that would
be a good thing to find out the
cares.
This American fuel and
petrochemical manufacturers
that's what they say and so
they're one of the groups
that is in opposition to the
bill and they also talk about in
the letter that they sent out to
all of which that they recognize
ride you things it would be
probably good to see you have
our if there's any way
whatsoever to get them on.
The pro side of the bill instead
on the on the nation bill
Because when we talk about we
talk about nineteen cents twenty
fourth whatever whatever that
number is and one guy Shazier's
relates to century year over ten
the next guy shares or eight
point twenty four percent are
what that particularly means and
I don't want to secretary of
state one guy's not telling the
truth but it could be as we all.
Things get skewed to the the.
To your argument and that and Mr
chairman pro tem mentioned
trying to talk about your
argument just talking about the
argument between
American fuel petrochemical and
the and the gentleman the cloak
so I I think that denture
That could go a long way toward
making people understand or feel
more comfortable thank you for
people of New Mexico are going
to wind up carrying a much
bigger burden than we'd like to
see him.
Kerrey
I wanted to ask to and our.
Mr chair and and
Madam pro tem does the does the
state of California who seems to
be the one that we're you know
we're talking about because
you're the only ones it may be
a.
thank you so graciously.
This California have to have a
balanced budget every year as
New Mexico that.
Mr Chairman I think I think
that's the case I'm not positive
I I will tell you that I've just
been texted that we're the third
lowest state in the country for
a gas tax.
That might change.
Richard and madam program I I
think I think there were some
bill passed just maybe yesterday
tries to do one more area I
don't I don't know sponsoring so
I did not.
Show you and I don't know cal
California the economy
California's way way different
than one in New Mexico I think
we all we all recognize that
I'm you know I I wonder should
care and I want to be more.
will be more positive about the
bill because I think there's a
lot of things that are that are
forward thinking and headed in
the right right direction I
think it's a positive that the
Moga has a state neutral.
But the independent petroleum
producers are neutral they're
they're opposed to the bill
and I I think those are guy just
days they need more maybe they
need more.
Talking to maybe maybe it could
be a bill that could truly come
out in the way way non partition
One one one last question before
before I go on edge about Fred
age and age on.
page page two of the bill Reid I
believe or not it's not true but
it was talking about a variety
of of
Rougeau did one of them is
talking about the the the film
industry may and I think our I
think maybe secretary keys could
could explain how have they
would be.
You know any industry that would
be able to to utilize credit.
Madam secretary Mr chairman
thank you Senator Griggs so the
conversations that we have had
with businesses so far that are
interested in the clue clean
fuel standard act really see it
as a fiscal tool they were
considering potentially
expanding their infrastructure
here but now that we are
considering the clean fuel
standard if it passes a few of
them have already said that they
will so I know that sometimes
we're getting bogged down in is
that one senses that two cents
on the M. on fuel but I think
we're kind of missing a bigger
issue here where in these rural
areas.
This can be a huge blow in terms
of jobs and not just
new minimum wage jobs I mean
these are jobs that are going to
pay well and have budget and
with really proper companies
that are bringing outside money
that's just a few million
hundreds of millions of dollars
into our state and so you know
when people say to me we need to
diversify the economy.
You know I'm running around
doing deals here and there with
agriculture companies in
aerospace companies and film
companies but this is a policy
that is going to change New
Mexico and create just thousands
of jobs and so that's why and so
behind it because.
It's it's it's not like it's
just.
Expanding our are bringing a
company here it's just bringing
a whole industry here and it's
so this by watching the major
companies the major automotive
companies Boeing they're all
going this way there is there's
not one company that's not right
now and so I just feel like for
once let's be in front of this
New Mexico let's let's let's put
our people in a good position to
have these jobs let's train them
before it's too late let's have
those relationships with our
universities to get these people
trained so that they can work in
these companies so yes and it is
a fiscal tool to back to your
question it's a fiscal tool that
allows these companies to make
hundreds of millions of dollars
of investments.
And that's not a burden on the
state.
Thank you for that I am sure you
madam secretary and then Mr
chair Senator Stewart.
You know we've changes a.
Changes sometimes a hard thing
and sometimes jumping out in
front of those opportunities you
know sometimes we get it right
sometimes we don't get it right
and
I I appreciate truly I
appreciate the passion and the
desire to Tim and the belief
currently that they're going to
they're going to make it better
I hope that's true I hope it
comes out that way the.
The initial concern to me right
now is those that are gonna be
impacted in that in a negative
manner
one of the things we we also
have item and
Senator dish Bill invest yet but
it's a bill raising the.
The income tax bracket should
increasing the top income tax
bracket that's good seem
sometimes to be a little bit in
conflict with wanting to bring
in a whole bunch of high paying
jobs and they're going to have
more income taxes they have to
pay so I I thank you there's a
direct correlation rider what
the.
Secretary keys which was talking
about show again Mr chair Madam
pro tem thank you for bringing
the bill and that I look forward
to hearing more nine I look
forward probably just seen it
all before because I imagine
that's where it'll show up sure
thank you thank you Mr.
Thank you senator very Senator
Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman and I
think yes just to to to tack on
to what Sir Greg's was saying on
the high paying jobs will have
to make sure those are under a
hundred eighty thousand a year
is apparently that's the
definition of rich nowadays
as far as the the bills go to
raise the income tax that's
that's now the definition of
being rich I do have a couple of
questions and you bring up
California.
and
Mr Chairman Senator do you
realize how expensive gases in
California.
Yes Mister chairman Senator
Brandt yes.
This is about double what ours
is I I have been there fairly
recently
in in some places it's over four
dollars a gallon.
I could text my nephew right now
to find out what it is today if
you if if that helps
now they do have a little higher
gasoline tax but it's not two
dollars a gallon higher.
and so I don't know.
How much of an impact this is
had I'm I'm I'm doubting
nineteen cents for ten years all
the cost of fuel out there
because there I think I think
the gasoline taxes about forty
cents a gallon.
That's definitely not to.
Dollars a gallon so we are
actually have the fourth lowest.
Price of fuel gasoline in the
country.
so is there any concern because
we know that gas prices affects
the lowest income people the
most so how do we help the when
our gas prices shoot up four
hours ago.
Mister chairman Senator Brandt I
I guess you missed all the
conversation because we have
been talking about this
so you know secretary Keyes
answered that secretary of any
answer to
I don't see that happening here
I just don't see it happening
here so we're not going to just
take what California is doing
and but in the New Mexico we're
not going to do that we are
taking two years and we're going
to be smart about it with what
we can do in New Mexico to lower
the carbon intensity of the
fuels that we use in New Mexico
we I was just gobsmacked by how
many people got on the the zoom
today in support of this
companies that want to come here
companies that have moved here
companies that have this of fuel
blending come up operations and
several other states and they're
waiting for New Mexico so you
heard about from Scott Hendrick
about renewable energy group
about the building in close us
that they want to start using so
to me this is a way to.
To move to the front of the line
and lowering our emissions.
Which my children and your
children and grandchildren want
us to do and to create a jobs
and appointments where you know
we have this year club in the
chamber of commerce on the same
page so this is not about the
cost of gas I know everybody's
trying to make it into the cost
of gas but you know that cost
and how it's determined in each
state is dependent upon so many
factors in what gas costs in
Europe it's six or seven dollars
a gallon in here they have a
tiny little cars there cut down
on their missions and there D.
incentivizing people buying gas
we are trying to make our fuels
better for the environment
better for children's health a
lower our emissions and we will
work to not have those prices
affect lower income we've heard
secretary Kenny heard secretary
Keats of been talking about it
now for two or so you know I
that's all I can say about it
really we can have this
conversation
but I just don't think this bill
is going to drive correct guests
prices up to affect lower income
people you've heard parts in the
bill to make sure that happens
you've heard the two secretaries
on we've got two years to get
this right and thank goodness
that we're going to take that
time to get it right.
Thank you Mr chairman I'll set
madam chairman C. every time on
the directing something to you.
I and then we go on the floor
and I see Mr I don't know
because Senator it's fine to the
Senate.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Stewart I appreciate it and I I
I really do respect your passion
for the US there were something
mentioned about the film
industry being able to generate
credits I don't know remember to
mention that but how it how does
the film industry generate
credits through this that they
can then sell and monetize.
Mr chairman if I could ask
secretary keys to mention that
again.
I'm actually chairman members of
the committee I'm gonna act I'm
actually gonna secretary Kenny
because that's more his
expertise I can talk to you
about the film incentives.
The generation of credits on
that so secretary penny.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
senator Gramm for that question
I think secretary keys's
referring to me because I have
movie star good looks today for
this but this I'm sure.
Senator Brandt so to answer your
questions are all the all the
industry you see listed in the
bill that and some techniques
like carbon sequestration our
opportunities we wanted every
industry in New Mexico to see
themselves in the bill and for
the film industry in particular
it's a growing industry in which
they have eight of vehicles by
which they are using diesel
power generators you know diesel
fuels gasoline they themselves
are all over the state
contributing to those emissions
and this gives them an
opportunity to reduce their
emissions by moving into into
generating credits by lowering
their their fleet management but
print in stating.
So so Mister chairman Senator
those are calculated then are
they based as the calculating
those in the reduction I'm
guessing it's based on what they
use today and then as they
reduce it they get a credit for
the reduction house how does
that work I'm not sure to get in
the weeds a little bit if you
explain this before and I I do
apologize I am working on
capital outlay on one screen and
working on this on the other
screen and then I keep getting
phone calls so I I do apologize.
Mr chairman and Senator Brandt
the the way in which credits
would be generated and again
we'll go through a full robust
stakeholder process of
rulemaking to really explain
this and codify it before before
we get into the V. and then
codify it but the way in which
it would work is is at some
point in time there would be a
baseline that they would set and
then they would get the
opportunity to reduce those
emissions as it's been said many
with your capital capital
improvements or some kind of way
and reducing that to lower
carbon fuel the one of the
things that's really important
here is that creating
uncertainties so that when we so
that if if we pass this bill and
enact this legislation that will
be the first signal to industry
that this is coming the second
will be the rule making so we'll
get the investments going like
the investments will start we've
already heard from many of those
people but that's how film could
participate through that fleet
management generating.
Thank you for that and I was I'm
on page four we're talking about
you have listed the the groups
and it says for a person to
generate credit so so if I
downsized my house or move into
a a more energy efficient house
can I produce some of these
credits and selling.
Mr chairman and senator Brandt
that the person is sort of the
definition by which the
environmental improvement act
recognizes businesses and and
introduce in a legal context as
an engineer not a lawyer I'm not
going away into that too much
deeper but the intent here is
that
We would we would work on that
in rulemaking that is not in the
the the intent of the of the
legislation but it's certainly
something we would welcome I
guess during the stakeholder
process discussing the rules.
Mr chairman of this K. I was
gonna say up it is I should
waited to sell my house and
downsize because I I'm actually
you know really reducing my
carbon footprint not for that
purpose but because I'm cheap
like to save money
if I can save energy I can save
money and yes you can you can
repeat that as much as you want
that I need but I want to save
money that's that is fine with
me everyone knows that about me
I think at least everyone that
knows me well so.
I am trying to to figure out I
really am trying to figure out
whether to support this bill or
not it is it's a tough one for
me but at the same time a lot
like Senator Kernan you know
it's it's rare that I don't
support of filled with the oil
and gas industry in support of
and so it's it's one of those
well okay
But I do have some concerns I I
do think if if it's correct that
it's nineteen cents over ten
years increase of yeah we we've
seen over the last month about a
forty to fifty cent increase in
our gas prices
through no control the
government that's just with the
way the market is so and those
prices do affect your lower
income people I know we're
trying to push people.
Sir Stuart to do the but let's
be honest we've had this
discussion on the floor many
times when it comes to so we're
we're comes EDD it is the
wealthier person that's able to
for those vehicles most of the
lower income people buy used
awful bills
and sometimes built it barely
make it back and forth to work
they're not investing in
electric vehicles
and I don't see that changing
you know I appreciate Center
Tolman and bringing up several
times how the average price is
only a few thousand more than
the average price of the vehicle
but I will tell you the lower
income people are not buying a
thirty five thirty seven
thousand dollar automobile
they're buying like what I did
the eighteen to twenty thousand
dollar vehicle.
that's that's just the way it
works that's that's just the
facts
so it is.
You know the we're gonna have to
do something if we want everyone
to transition into electric I
have no problem when they get it
where I can travel from here to
Florida are here to California
to see my family and not have to
stop every three hours for an
hour to get my battery recharge
then I'm interested at that
point or when I get a truck that
will so why travel trailer
because I enjoy going camping
that I'm interested Intel then
I'm probably not so
I don't know how this is going
to work but it and going to be
it's really gonna be interesting
to watch it Mr chairman thank
you I appreciate the opportunity
and I am sorry that I have been
multi tasking through this
committee so thank you.
Thank you of.
I I'm hope that the.
Some of my projects on your
capital outlay in this Senator
so.
We we should talk.
All right so
Senator of the.
Thank you Mr chairman I don't
know if you have questions but
with all of that with you just.
We have a due pass motion by
Senator Padilla.
Second part one second by
Tolman.
Of.
The name of called row please.
Just to clarify this is a roll
call on the bill that has been
twice amended.
yes we're all and once with the
written amendment is that
correct correct correct Mr okay.
At the same time yes.
Two for Senator Brandt.
Yes.
Senator Griggs.
Do that to.
No not.
Senator Hamblen yes.
Thank you.
Yes and explanation place.
Senator Hotmail yes.
Senator Kernan.
No.
Senator Sanchez.
No.
Senator Tallman yes Senator
Wirth.
Yes also Senator Brandt the way
okay.
Sure Brandt.
Now that you've been shown the
way
I'm gonna go the opposite
direction during the vehicle
around and say.
Okay.
Senator Padilla.
We just.
Will I have to I have to call
your name Senator well.
Yes.
Okay one two three seven four.
Seven in the affirmative for in
the negative with no one excuse.
So Senator probe medical ten you
have a due pass on Senate bill
eleven twice amended.
Thank you thank you for spending
the time this afternoon talking
about this I think Senator
Hickey want to explain something
that yes our Senator Hickey.
Thank you Mr chair and Madam pro
tem um.
Again this is a a this is
direction we have to go in this
comment is
one of the reasons I was a
little bit tenuous coming up and
I just want to make this comment
to the departments
economic modeling is really
critical and I know you've done
some.
but I would really like in the
future to see.
Economic economic modelling
around different scenarios and
and then I know you can go crazy
with the scenarios but the
probabilities of scenarios and
the economic modeling and I know
that they interact with one
another but I just think it's
going to be a great habit for us
particularly as we go into
something that we gonna have to
do yes but what are the real
impacts in the in the little
better sense
yes needs you points on.
The cost of gas but that would
be helpful in the future I I
know that the FIR says with the
cost of the the carry it out and
and I created the leader
probably should be infested
Market secondly future economic
modelling maybe it's just the
business part of it comes out I
mean we don't read and business
without my you know it used to
be a five year plan out of three
year plan.
As things go so fast I would
appreciate that in the future
thank you I know that's not so
much been explanation but it is
a desire going thank you.
And great presentation.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
committee members okay good so
now we're moving on to the
Senate bill eighty four as
amended community solar act of
senators to bollocks OPEC's.
Thank you Mr chair and members
of the committee it's a pleasure
to be with you today.
we're looking forward to the
conversation.
After I and senator Lopez
present assured Committee we do
have two expert witnesses with
us Rick Gilliam who is the
program director and in charge
of distributed generation
regulatory policy for both solar
and also PLR Thomas a partner in
the law firm of corals and Brady
and is an expert in solar
distribution across the western
states and with tribes.
So I'd like to for small excuse
me going out.
That you have a committee
substitute that we hope you will
adopt and of but it do not pass
on Senate bill eighty four and a
do pass on this committee
substitute.
So the senators the Sanchez
Outline of the motion on to the
south okay the fund.
Okay.
Go ahead okay thank you very
much I'd like you explained that
the committee substitute
incorporates the amendments that
were put on and Senate
conservation from Senator souls.
And senator Siobhan K. indicated
several areas of COVID.
And also reviewed the bill for
us from his perspective to make
it tighter.
And then we also
received comments from the PRC
and the PRC has been addressed
in this bill as well so I'll go
on to talk about the committee
so and you all should have
received it well in advance
because it was already a couple
days ago.
The I'd like to tell you about
how this bill.
Came to be we last session
during the short session we have
the Senate memorial sixty three
which set up a task force a
working group informal working
group to look at community solar
to bring together members from
all over the state advocates of
experts engineers the investor
owned utilities and the electric
coops.
We started with a we have a
contribution.
From I'm nonprofit organization
that was then used to contract
with the facilitator to assist
with all of these meetings that
we held over six months.
Over the state we started with
ninety individuals participating
but we held steady at between
fifty and sixty individuals at
every meeting every other week
over six months to discuss many
Points about community solar.
We used to do.
National renewable energy
laboratory from Colorado to
actually train everyone on what
community solar were was is and
then how to decide for
individual topics we I tried to
find areas of common ground we
identified the areas of
disagreement and we try to
minimize areas of concern.
These representatives we're
we're from state local tribal
government utilities.
NGOs the solar industry and
citizens who are just interested
in this topic the group was
serving at the beginning of this
six months and at the end of the
six months you chairman their
opinions on the annual program
size the facility size utility
participation etcetera.
We held additional meetings with
the a lot rural electric
cooperatives tried.
Community solar task force the
tribal the tribal governments
collectively had a community
solar task force and my any
Rudin who was involved in
convening that is also on as not
a witness but as a proponent.
And we also met with the
investor owned utilities.
The New Mexico electric coop did
give us a resolution from the
board of directors that if we
put into the bill and opt.
In versus an opt out they were
neutral on the bill.
And so I believe that we have
some co op members tool comment
later on the proponents.
And then of course the tribal
community solar task force has
their own resolution and we did
not only consult with the chair
of the PRC but we had the chair
of the PRC need to with the
entire group to talk about what
was needed from their
perspective how open it needed
to be for them to regulate this
project versus how open it and
it it needed to be so for
example the PRC does not have
authority to set up a program
for low income people.
So we needed to state that in
our proposal we wanted to
address the ability for low
income residents to be able to
participate in such a community
solar project.
We briefed our two or three
interim committees and the final
working group report once shared
with all existing legislators
and new legislators coming on
the bill one the result of all
of those consultations.
So what is community solar it is
a large local solar arrays in
their shared my individual
community members who receive
credits on their electricity
bills for their portion of the
power produced.
It makes community solar makes
solar power available to people
who can't access it for reasons
such as renting finances
apartment ownership home type
it's etcetera it does not take
away rooftop solar it is for a
different audience.
Your we have a special emphasis
in this bill on tribal
communities and low income
neighborhoods.
We created options for all
consumers business residential
government nonprofits to lower
energy bills and choose
renewable energy.
The economic benefits is we want
to stress that there is a great
deal of job creation in the
solar industry there's a lease
payments to landowners and as
well as to other sectors and
many economic benefits to the
state in counties.
It just so happened that you NM
bureau the bureau of business
and economic research did a
prepared study on the economic
benefits of community solar.
We would reap over five hundred
million dollars.
And create close to four
thousand high quality jobs over
the next five years.
Over two point nine million in
tax revenues funded through
private investments and it would
not require any increased taxes.
Every county in New Mexico over
a twenty year period could
benefit by almost fifteen
million dollars in output and a
hundred seventeen new jobs over
twenty years.
The local sectors hardest hit by
the virus.
With benefits such as
construction restaurants and
professional services.
Now before I turn it over to
our.
Main co sponsor senator Linda
Lopez I do want to let everybody
know that we had many Sanchez on
this bill Senator Shendo signed
on Senator common and Senator
Gonzales as well as house
members Senator Lopez.
Thank you very.
Mr chairman members of the
committee.
what details of the previous
years in in the bill has been
the Garcia including a consumer
protections for subscribers
ensuring that utilities are
fairly compensated for
interconnect.
Right of costs and determining
the subscriber bill creates.
The PRC Mr chairman members of
the committee the PRC is to
conduct a comprehensive
community solar program review
after three years and recommend
adjustments if necessary to
annual cap facility size REC
local solar industry affects
bill credit rate etcetera.
The PRC identified revenue need
so we added Mr chairman members
of the committee a fee
collection authorization to
defray costs.
One hundred MW state cap
statewide cap which would
generate the equivalent of
approximately one percent of
utility retail energy
consumption which is divided
proportionally by investor owned
utilities.
there is a five MW per project
cap allowing colocation with
other energy resources such as
battery storage but not with
other community solar
facilities.
Thirty percent of the statewide
cap reserved for low income
households.
RBCs which is a credit for
renewable energy go to you the
utilities to help meet there are
P. requirements and which
supports the energy transition
act.
And again as senator of
Stefanics did mention coops may
opt in either completely if
they're ready for only for a
single project at the sole
discretion of their governing
boards.
Lows in Indian nations are
exempt from some requirements in
line with their sovereign
rights.
Mr chairman members of the
committee I also would like to
recognize that our our house co
sponsor Representative Caballero
is also on this as soon meeting
with us to.
And I'll turn it right back to
Senator Stefanics.
Senator.
Looser you Senator budget.
I'm sorry Mr chair I I was
muted.
As I short version of the
committee set up is that it was
cleanup of the Center souls
amendment and some language
clarifications for Senator von
case so that it would be a
tighter ward legal bills and it
clarified the PRC role in
preventing the colocation of
community solar and it provided
a mechanized mechanism to
relieve some of the
administrative financial burden
on the PRC and it pushed out the
dates for the PRC did come back
up with the guidelines so that
they would not feel too cramped
and what they're doing.
Changes to the definition in
section two there's a
clarification of community solar
facility to add that subscribers
are billed for their
proportional share.
It amended the low income
customer definition to change
reference from county to area
median income to align with US
housing and urban development
usage.
It added definition of name
nameplate capacity it amended
the total aggregate retail rate
and removed soft such as
language and replace with more
definite direction.
Changes to section three and
seven it change the co location
language to clarify the PRC role
in preventing co location of
community solar facilities.
It it changes to section six it
clarified limitation on credit
securing forward on a bill.
Change to clarify that the rex
to the utilities changed from
conservation doesn't apply to
tribal community solar projects.
Changes to section seven it
clarifies the cap is in
alternating current.
I could go on but I'd be happy
to introduce our experts and
then they will be available with
us to answer any specific
questions.
The Mr chair can I have the
experts speak.
Yes Senator go ahead thank you
so much we're going to start
with Mister Rick Gilliam and
then go to peak agency P. like
Thomas so Rick.
Thank you senator first the
facts are can everybody hear me
okay.
Yes we can.
Thank you are chairman Shendo
and members of the committee
Despite the collaborative effort
that Senators defects are just
referenced in her opening
there were some parties namely
the public utilities investor
owned utilities that continue to
oppose the program so because of
that I don't to dispel the
misleading arguments that
utilities are making our this
should be fairly brief.
Oct first utilities claim that
community solar shifts costs to
other customers this is simply
untrue we've known for years
that distributed solar projects
bring benefits to the system and
many studies have shown their
value to the system exceeds
their costs the latest and most
technologically advanced utility
planning models show that local
solar projects do not shift
costs and scaling them can save
the grid and ratepayers money
that's because these projects
reduce the need for a right pair
back investments in costly power
plants
transmission infrastructure and
with more flexible power local
power on the system.
In a nutshell the benefits
outweigh the costs.
Developers of subscribers
develop suit developers or
subscribers.
Pay for any incremental costs
and for the use of the system.
You community solar generation
reduces load and reduces losses
wear and tear on the G. and T.
system the generation and
transmission system the need for
upgrades and additions and the
cost responsibility of New
Mexico customers in some cases.
Next we hear that community
solar puts projects anywhere and
utility has to purchase that
energy whether it needs that are
not.
First community solar projects
can't be built anywhere they
must be located near certain
distribution facilities and
interconnected to the same
utility system passed the
subscribers locally sited and
must abide by local zoning and
permitting laws this puts power
back into our local communities
to decide how these projects get
brought to life.
Second utilities don't actually
by the subscribe power produced
by a community solar facility
subscribers by the power and
utilities are fairly compensated
for their infrastructure used to
transfer the community solar
power to customers subscribers
then receive a fair credit for
that power equipment to the
utilities generation and
transmission costs.
Assets not used by the community
solar facilities and which are
used thanks to the community
solar energy generated.
Utilities also claim they will
be building more renewables with
the energy transition act so
what do we need community solar.
New Mexico has ambitious goals
with the ETA but to meet these
goals and build a grid that is
low cost reliable and ready for
the twenty first century we need
to scale both utility and
smaller distributed solar sinal
simultaneously distributed solar
won't replace utility scale
generation but will complement
it.
Finally utilities tell us that
community solar is an outdated
concept and we don't need it now
that utilities plant to build
more renewable energy.
Community solar though is market
driven competition and
innovation and community solar
has transformed the way
investments are made integrated
and how customers can choose an
access local affordable and
clean electricity these programs
and the tens of millions of
dollars of private capital the
fuse into the grid bring new
power generation online at no
risk to ratepayers pay for
costly grid upgrades find bill
savings to all customers
especially those who need it
most create good paying local
jobs and help speed the
transition to a cleaner grid
this is why community solar is
the fastest growing form of
solar in the country.
I'm now handed over to pull our
Thomas for additional opening
comments.
Thank you senator thank you very
much honorable chairman
honorable committee members my
name is bill are Thomas I'm a
proud graduate of the new
University of New Mexico school
of law I'm also a former deputy
director and acting director for
the department G. office of
Indian energy policy and
programs some of very sound in
long understanding of some of
the challenges that the pueblos
and tribes of New Mexico have in
developing distributed energy
projects and working with many
of them in my former role and
current role I'm I'd like to
make just for quick comments
about this bill all start first
with talking about from all
right payer perspective Senator
Stefanics talked about much of
the economic benefit but there
are very real benefits to the
rate payers who have the
opportunity to voluntarily
subscribe to community solar
projects first and foremost
because of the use of bill
credit offsets through a virtual
net metering process.
Right payers are are more than
likely going to see reduced
energy costs and depending on
what their current energy bills
are those reduced energy costs
those savings could be
substantial.
So these reduce energy costs are
gonna be important is going to
put money into ratepayers
pockets they're gonna be able to
keep more of their money solar
projects also have the benefit
of having stable energy costs
and so subscriber fees will be
tied really to the cost to
produce the solar power and
they're predictable why because
they're not subject to variable
fuel cost I think we've seen
pretty recently in Texas what
happens when you don't have
access to fuel to produce power
like natural gas so solar power
is going to be consistent
there's obviously no cost to the
sun that's going to result in
stable and and predictable fuel
costs for the rate payers who
are participating I'm and then
as well as also mentioned
earlier.
Rooftop solar is only available
to people who own their own
homes and can afford it I and
and even with the in the
investment tax credit or a
residential tax credit which
will be will be expiring I think
the Congress extended for a year
maybe two so this expands the
opportunity for other rate
payers to be able to access the
same benefits of community solar
and distributed energy such as
again reduce costs are stable
energy costs renters I would be
able to buy into a project
people who live in multi family
housing whether it's apartments
or condominiums certainly small
businesses who may not have the
rooftop space available to do
rooftop solar and then low
income ratepayers who would be
able to I and many community
solar projects slide into the
project and no up front cost let
me drill down into some of the
specifics with respect to some
of these ratepayers first with
respect to low income
populations the bill requires a
set aside or a subscriber
requirement of thirty percent of
the projects be available for
low income community members
also that ensures that there is
energy equity in the community
solar program and it ensures
that low income ratepayers who
again would not likely be able
to afford their own rooftop
solar or would not have
necessarily the financial means
to otherwise invest would be
able to take advantage of this
program.
As described earlier the the
definition of low income is
eighty percent of the area
median income as defined by the
US Department of hide and for
low income populations what we
tend to see when and other
states that have low income
requirements and are trying to
ensure that there is low income
subscribers.
Either a series of incentive
programs of other offsets that
might be available if a
nonprofit subscriber
organization for example wants
to focus on low income they may
qualify for substantial grant
programs from the federal
government or from others that
helps slide down the cost of
that for low income subscribers
so you'll see incentive programs
or other types of opportunities
to assist low income subscribers
with participating and there may
even be an opportunity for other
anchor tenants for example to
share in the cost for all to to
offset for lowincome
subscribers.
With respect to tribes one of
the truck primary challenges the
tribes have in the pueblos have
with developing projects on
tribal lands in this is not
unique to New Mexico is that a
tribes are like a lot of other
people kind of captive to their
utility so because the state
regulates the I'll use am the co
ops from all right making
standpoint certainly from a net
metering standpoint tribes and
pueblos in effect are going to
have to respond to state law if
they want to do things because
that's what they're utilities
are doing so the community solar
bill insurers that tribes first
of all that there sovereign
status and their self
determination authorities
control the types of community
solar projects that the that the
pueblos and tribes might want to
do insurers that there is a
recognition that the tribes and
pueblos have jurisdiction over
the people who might be doing
projects will be able for
example to hire a third party to
come in and develop that project
so it's important that there is
a recognition of of tribal in
publicizing T. and that everyone
has is playing by the same rules
with that and with regard to
that the tribes and pueblos also
will need flexibility in the
design and the deployment of
projects that they they're going
to want to make sure that
whatever they do is consistent
with what their community needs
maybe their community values
certainly where they would wanna
located on pueblo or tribal
lands and they may be able to
want to take advantage of other
financing mechanisms that the
tribes and pueblos might have
access to and and so this bill
accounts for some of that
flexibility that that the tribes
and pueblos will need and then
lastly it's important that
there's consistent and equitable
treatment for tribes and and
pueblos.
Vis a vis non tribal community
solar projects everybody should
have to play by the same rules
in other words and so the bill
incorporates tribes and pueblos
in their projects in this to
ensure that everybody's playing
by the same rules the last point
I'd like to make is about some
high level grid and
environmental benefits of
multiple multiple surveys and
studies around the country
including department of energy
studies including for example a
major study of Lawrence Berkeley
national lab which is that the
national lab this of the
seventeen DOE national labs it's
the one that focuses the most on
studying and analyzing
distributed energy and its
impact on the grid both from a
financial standpoint and from
another budget standpoint and
they've identified several of
the type of kind of grid
benefits as well as
environmental benefits that
distributed energy which
community solar is would bring
to the the district especially
the distribution grid but the
grid writ large so one key
benefit is avoiding additional
generation it costs money to do
obviously the debt generate
power if you can avoid
generating power out in the
middle of no where that you have
to then bring into the urban
environment or to the load
you're but you're able to avoid
generation and transmission
costs because you're generating
power where the power is being
used there's also a huge benefit
with reducing line losses as you
move power from one side of the
state to the other you lose
power the you don't get the same
number of electrons at the end
of the line so you're actually
going to have a more efficient
grid and your the the power you
produce is more likely to be
used it also of course will
support distribution grid
resiliency and reliability
because again the.
Those electrons are staying in
that system close by where
they're being used and it's not
you're not having to move it
across the system and and to the
extent that you may have I mean
I'm not suggesting New Mexico
will have this but everybody is
now looking at of the the bulk
power system and how reliable it
is in the context of extreme
weather and certainly in the
context of climate change so
there's there's that knowledge
to benefit and value of
producing power close to where
its use and reducing the risk of
like California having to shut
down power lines cause wildfires
or as we saw on taxes and then
that's not to mention the
environmental benefits and other
economic benefits that certainly
solar brings to the table but
that actually also a smaller
footprint project located in
your distribution grid as
opposed to a ten thousand acre
project out granted it might
look like it's on the middle of
nowhere but as we see in the
California desert where there's
efforts to build out massive
solar projects utility scale
projects you have endangered
species issues you have other
Conflict resource of con
conflicts with resources issues
so those kinds of environmental
benefits or or reduce conflicts
I get reduce the smaller the
project the smaller the
footprint of the project and
that's a community solar in
addition brings to the table so
what that I will turn it back
over to Senator Stefanics thank
you.
Thank you Senator.
Thank you Mr chair and I'm not
sure if Representative Roybal
Caballero wanted to say six give
her greetings.
I'm.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator thank you for that
acknowledgment and and I do just
want to say that having been the
the house sponsor of community
solar for many years and having
joined you as co sponsor of the
working group on over the summer
and actively work together on
this I just want to stand in be
here and stand in very strong
support and be available should
there be any questions and to
think the chair and members of
this committee and all of the
public who have come together
today in support of community
solar I want to thank you all
publicly for doing so and I look
forward to this committee
passing SB eighty four so that
we can move on thank you so much
Mr chair and senator.
Mr chair we're ready for your
next point okay
so will now go to public comment
I know we've got quite a few so
we're gonna allow well folks to
have a their statements in the
one minute so.
Where we're ready.
We'll start with the opposition.
Beginning with opposition for
Senate bill eighty four we have
TJ to heal.
T. J. Trujillo.
Moving on we have Mike
d'antonio.
Thank you
Mr chair members of the
committee Mike Antonio with Xcel
energy we provide electricity to
the eastern part of the state we
did participate in the Senate
memorial sixty three stakeholder
discussion however we felt like
our recommendations were not
taking into consideration for
this bill there are very few
changes may.
So that that was the issue that
we have we really are not we're
not against the community solar
effect we recommended a
essential only program because
if you truly want to reach
residential low income customers
you can design for a residential
program this program here
targets large customers
additional customers and it is
similar situation in Minnesota
that's a similar type of program
ninety percent of the Energy
from those programs goes to
commercial and industrial
customers only ten percent is
actually goes to residential
customers what happens is that
the bill credits that.
One minute thank you so much.
Next up we have Ashley Wagner.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I'm
Ashley Wagner director public
policy in New Mexico chamber of
commerce and we respectfully
oppose this bill in twenty
nineteen our organization was
part of the groundswell of
energy transition exporters and
advocates that work hard to get
that bill passed today we need
to again strongly voiced our
support for this clean energy
shifts and especially support
for our local solar industry who
you as a legislature have worked
tirelessly to strengthen and
build up over the last ten to
fifteen years this community
solar bill as currently drafted
inherently favors large out of
state solar corporations and
will harm our local solar
businesses and.
The true cost of community solar
for the average family or
business hasn't been established
adding no cost burdens to our
most vulnerable communities is
unfair especially now when
you're considering a number of
measures to help are most in
need due to comment and having
non subscribers subsidizes
subscribers is regressive.
Thank you very much next up we
have Matthew had a meal.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee Senator senator
Senator Lopez and Representative
Arribo I don't know if you have
to deal with the public service
company of New Mexico we have
seen the previous amendments
from conservation however we
have not seen this version of
point four with that says remote
is there are many people in this
room connection of stated
commitments to renewable energy
and for justification in the
Senate memorial working group of
intention that that would
testify against this bill
introduction is fully supportive
of community solar principal and
the objections of our to this
bill should be rooted in this
that Senate bill fifty four as
previously amended is outdated
not the concept of community
solar as Mr Delia previous
twenty second.
we have four key issues like as
much in terms of the program
used to be presidential
customers second country Mr
Graham's plan will still need to
avoid shipping costs and so the
size needs to be smaller and the
subscription and and okay Google
thank you very much.
Thank you next up we have Roger
Gonzalez.
Mr chairman of the committee
thank you for hearing me today
my name is Roger Gonzalez I'm
the president of help New Mexico
the state's largest community
action agency I want to applaud
the Sanchez as we support
Canadian solar and concept what
we're not having the
conversation about today is the
impact to lowincome non
subscribers and every time we've
asked the question it's always
well that'll come later we'll
find part of money for them
we'll do a grant and this is
basically a B. unfunded mandate
on low income families who can't
afford to participate in solar
and we stand and cut current
opposition of the bill right now
thank you Mr.
Thank you very much next up for
we have Rico Gonzalez.
Good afternoon regal Gonzales
without Paso electric there's a
few points that I wanted to make
to this bill in in opposition
and I don't know where the
committee sub is that so I but
on the previous bill page six
section five it allows for a
hundred twenty percent of a of a
customer's annual bill we
believe that's too big it
doesn't allow for them to pay in
their fair share costs of fixed
costs that are inside the Energy
charge.
Eight seven C. section section
six eight four goes along with
that by having those those
credits rolled over that means
they are insured of not not
paying any energy costs
and to Roger's point we are
concerned with with the low
income folks and also we do
support community solar we have
in Texas and we've prescribed in
New York try to get a system in
New Mexico.
Thank you.
Thank you very much next.
old.
Shannon fitzgerald.
All right moving on we have Greg
Sonnenfeld.
Hello I'm Greg Sonnenfeld
engineer ward winning Asalem
this and and energy modeler in
the San Juan Pierre C. K. I've
done economic analysis of the
proposed yes a bill and it looks
like the bill may have been co
opted by the solar injured
industries of the majority of
work group members were industry
staffers so I ate this bill Macy
community and solar but doesn't
look to be good for the repairs
or for climate change it looks
good for out of state business
the worst parts of the bill is
the norm Mr Breck's of defective
taxed rate payers the solar
energy which utilities would
have provided for us right
appears for about a hundred
million or hundred eight million
it looks like it'll end up
costing right here seven hundred
million I think it's exact same
amount of solar energy with a
six hundred million dollar
defective Tax there's no extra
climate change benefit is not
market driven it's it's just the
tax to pay for more expensive
solar so are you I just don't
see any benefit to residents
they don't get anything it's
just out of state businesses
banks.
Thank you very much next up we
have Terry Cole.
Mr chairman and members of the
in the city of greater
Albuquerque.
On the issue Wirth will set this
up on.
The government that we yes we
see.
stepped forward strong supporter
thank you.
That.
One part of energy sources in
New Mexico is able to act
we cannot however works eighty
four.
Legislation on.
Businesses what are the early
because I do not.
On the second part is what we
are we also have concerns about
the lack of oversight or
regulation the state so now for
Parisians related to
operations on liability for
these reasons we are maybe one
legislation today thank you for
letting us on.
Thank you very much and there
any other members of the public
who wish to speak in opposition
of Senate bill eighty four at
this time you may raise your
hand.
All right moving on to those in
favor of Senate bill eighty
four.
First off we have Karen villa.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee members my name is
terra via and I am the policy
coordinator with all public
council of governors and make my
statement on behalf of chairman
will return junior to date
all of the council of governors
is comprised of the twenty
publications each with
government authority and
sovereignty over their lands
the twenty one nations each have
their own vision for community
solar development and
relationships what they're
lecturing service utility in
December of two thousand twenty
eight BCG has resolution number
twenty twenty dash zero six that
supports community solar
legislation in the two thousand
twenty one legislative session
ABCD stance in support of Senate
bill eighty four with the
inclusion of community commute
Act committee to do with
insurers that tribal nations can
secure the renewable energy
credits in accordance with the
BCG resolution twenty twenty
dash zero six that will
ultimately promote the social
and wellbeing of publications
and it's tribal members thank
you very much.
Thank you next up we have the
least right just.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Louis
race and the CEO of K. question
elector coop in Taos New Mexico
I'm also working with the
comment about electric and him
is mom's electric all three of
us support the the bill we do
think and we thank the sponsors
for acknowledging self
governance model of the coops in
the caucus members to choose a
type of renewable energy they
want also it helps to keep our
contracts that we have in place
with our powers fires intact
as far as local labor K. Carson
has built has a goal of a
hundred percent daytime solar by
the end of this year this bill
will help it every single
project fourteen of them have
been done with local labor from
either the PTA's or Albuquerque
area as to what those comments
the three co ops fully support
this legislation thank you.
Thank you very much next up we
have Adam Harper.
Yes hello thank you everyone for
your time today my name is Adam
Harper I am the founder and CEO
of a wee seller a home grown
community solar developer that
has engineered procured and
constructed more than twenty
megawatts of solar energy in the
state I want to highlight.
A few reasons why we should
support SP eighty four in in New
Mexico over the last year we've
lost sixty five thousand jobs
solar farms in SB eighty four
mean solar farms all over the
state of New Mexico that's
providing great paying jobs and
economic growth in rural New
Mexico like clean where I'm from
not just the metropolitan area
where I currently live today our
hard working population and
skilled labors in declining
industries could transition to
community solar relatively
quickly I urge the committee to
vote yes on SB eighty four with
a local preference amendment
thank you.
Thank you very much next up we
have Beth Beloff.
Mr chair committee members I'm
Beth Beloff executive director
of the coalition of sustainable
communities The New Mexico
representing the elected leaders
of Santa Fe city and county
Albuquerque and Los crucis our
member governments seek to
increase the quantity of and
access to renewable energy for
themselves and their
constituents we strongly support
community solar because it
provides access to all who want
to subscribe to solar energy
regardless of income property
quality or ownership with
capsular is not an option for
renters or most low income
housing second unity solar is it
reduces the cost of electricity
for all has a thirty percent
carve out just for low income
households and this bill has
multiple safeguards to prevent
cross subsidization by not
participating utility customers
thank you.
Thank you very much next stop we
off we have Joseph Hernandez.
Yeah.
Good afternoon.
Mr chairman and committee
members my name is Joseph
Hernandez and I am that Dinesh
Energy organizer for neighbor
education project I live in
Shiprock New Mexico I would
respectfully ask that members
here passed just be eighty four
because community solar will
help reduce high electric bills
provide a source of economic
development and job creation for
our tribes a create great
resiliency for remote
communities and give tribal
ongoing opportunities to serve
as a renewable energy the
I think the image I I usually
have on my background is of
Navajo tax energy systems
programmer ground point
you know even students will be
able to benefit from community
solar legislation with the
promise of workforce development
and job opportunities.
Thank thank you very much next
up with JD Bullington.
Thank you.
All members of the committee
this is JD.
What what voluntary community
solar legislation are available
in twenty other states and
Washington DC and are working
very well community solar is
also it's also been a part of
the Pueblo of Laguna's renewable
energy strategy documented this
renewable energy feasibility
study update in plan which was
adopted by the Laguna pueblo
tribal council in two thousand
sixteen that plan defines goals
for community development
economic development energy
reliability energy sovereignty
community resilience and
relationships to people in the
natural world the pueblo six
villages of lego second.
And so now Missy to pull what a
pariah casa Blanka and Seema
could utilize systems ranging
from point two five to two point
seven megawatts the pueblo of
Laguna was an active participant
in stakeholder working group as
well as the tribal community
solar task force we strongly
urge support of this bill.
Thank you very much next we have
owner Porter.
Oh now Porter.
Good afternoon.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Tony Porter
and I'm the founder and emeritus
in clean energy leader for
prosperity works I appear before
you today as a representative of
low income people in New Mexico.
As a as prosperity works we
seize SB eighty four through the
lens of energy justice.
Thousands of households in New
Mexico have energy burdens that
range from high to extreme
however due to non preferential
rate making rules utilities
can't currently offer cheaper
rates to the point ratepayers
and opportunities to access
energy efficiency retrofits that
are required by the efficient
use of energy act have eluded
most those most in need any
second with these as system
failures the wolf is that the
door for thousands of the
poorest of New Mexicans with SB
eighty four we have the
opportunity to get solar access
right by and large low income
households are unable to access
the financial benefits of owning
rooftop solar we urge your
support and the support at the
thank you very much next up we
have Andrew stone.
Will chair sponsor and committee
members I am Andrew stone of
pace Fund New Mexico the energy
transition is a once in human
history of vent and all New
Mexicans need full access to
participating in the benefits of
that transition the sun shines
on us all equally some say
utility scale solar is cheaper
but Warren Buffett would say
price is what you pay value is
what you get for the greatest
local economic multiplier effect
distributed solar gives a better
value local capital local jobs
local benefits if a foreign
owned company builds all the
solar the price may second but
the value flees the state and
the country I stand in support
of the community solar act and I
recommend a local choice
provision thank you very much.
Thank you very much next up we
have the needs your Romero E.
Parker.
Good afternoon chairman members
of the committee my name is our
mission America for I'm here as
a member you have to you cannot
have a kind of crisis action to
express our strong support for a
speedy for.
Members from throughout northern
New Mexico and all of our
community stand to gain the
passage of this bill when we
first organized a statewide
construct two years ago
community solar was one of the
first policy tools we ask for in
order to address the climate
crisis we've been waiting a long
time for this as you all know we
have just nine years to reach
the carbon emission reductions
the side to say we must achieve
by twenty thirty we are
passionate about community solar
because it's not only going to
allow us our families were
renters low income households
and small business owners to
access on a source of renewable
source of energy it's also going
to be a source of revenue local
economic development and jobs
most importantly it will be a
sustainable source thank you for
voting yes on SB four and
bringing solar the people.
Thank you very much next up we
have Robert role metal.
Robert role metal.
Moving on we have a Stephanie
Barrera.
Stephanie Pereira are you with
us yes I am.
Chairman and members of the
committee my name's Stephanie
water and I am here as a
representative over the care you
thank you many development
organization on the south side
of Santa Fe that focuses on
environment social justice
issues we are strong supporters
of **** for because it would
benefit native American tribes
and hurt historically
marginalized community members a
recent study found that three
thousand seven hundred sixty job
opportunities could be created
through the passage of community
solar and New Mexico one of the
greatest strength of this bill
is that it would make it
possible for people from all
income levels to take action to
help the planet as a renter
myself commute.
Community solar would not only
benefit me but also my family
and community we need to make
renewable energy more accessible
not only because it's a way to
help the environment but also
because it's cheaper all
communities you serve to have
access to lower electric costs
of solar for our families
ourselves and our communities
please pass community solar so
we can all be part of the
solution thank you for your time
and please well yes.
Thank you very much next up we
have Patrick Doyle said.
Hi tech also.
We have Melinda Smith.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee for the
opportunity to testify I'm Linda
Smith provided volunteer with
the Rio Grande a chapter of the
Sierra Club with thirty five
thousand members statewide we
strongly support this bill in
addition to the other comments
about serving low income
ratepayers the bill will also
ensure that frontline
communities directly benefit
from the new clean energy
economy through the creation of
high quality jobs and economic
development opportunities it's
time for New Mexico to join
nineteen other states and the
district of Columbia that have
already passed laws in the
enabling community solar
programs thank you.
Thank you very much next up we
have William Bohen.
William Baldwin.
All right moving on we have
Daniel Baker.
Daniel Baker.
Moving on we have James Cook.
James Cook.
Next up we have Joseph Patton.
Happen.
We have Francine cron job.
Francine from Shaw.
Moving on we have Tracy and
start.
Casey and start.
Moving on we have ever to and
then.
And part and then.
Mr chair I'm wondering if that's
a list for another bill.
I would suggest maybe just make
a statement those that are
available reserves and okay.
That sharks.
Speaking for the Senate bill
eighty four please raise your
hand at this moment in time I
will call you from there.
Them days are gone.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
and members of the committee my
name is Jim dates are down I'm
the executive director of the
renewable energy industry
association of New Mexico we're
known as ria we are a trade
association composed primarily
of local solar companies and we
are true believers in the
concept of community solar.
And it's very important to
achieving one hundred percent
renewable energy we also believe
in the potential to provide
social equity to our state
however we are concerned about
the proliferation of out of
state solar companies and it's
fact it's rumored that they're
already scouting sites for solar
farms before this bills even
passed.
So we do believe in the second
we do believe in community solar
but we think it's very important
that there's a language for
local preference report in this
bill and we strongly ask for
amendment to that effect this
will help keep our local solar
companies employed people
working on our dollars in New
Mexico thank you very much.
Thank you very much.
Nine.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Paige
knight and I am here
representing New Mexico voices
for children to support Senate
bill eighty four community solar
provides a way for all New
Mexicans to have access to clean
energy and the related health
and economic benefits that come
from the clean energy at clean
air well paying jobs and energy
savings I also want to thank the
sponsors for their commitment
and time in developing this
legislation and in collaboration
with stakeholders and community
leaders so we strongly urge your
support for Senate bill eighty
four thank you.
Thank you very much.
Selasky.
Under bill chair chairman and
the Senate committee members and
just last year involved with
retake our democracy with twenty
five hundred statewide members
we support HD eighty four like
many other renewable energy
environmental related bills is
transformational in nature
meaning that it requires
transformational thinking
specifically the understanding
that our past dependency on
fossil fuels will not sustain us
in the future the truth is New
Mexico's blessed with the best
renewable energy resources
including solar and we had that
are currently yielding only a
tiny fraction of their potential
benefits to our people our
economy and our environment
their job is far beyond that the
Permian basin while looking back
to financial proceeds from this
resource if you're a blessing
they are however rapidly
becoming a curse is a
disincentive to establish twenty
first century world we are now
being called upon by the effects
of climate change in the thank
you very much are there any
other members of the public who
wish to speak in support of
Senate bill eighty four at this
time.
South valley.
Cellphone wasn't doing local
organizer good afternoon
chairman and members of the
committee the south valley would
benefit from this thinking about
it the best model for the south
valley subscriber organization
would be a nonprofit called up.
On page five section a three.
Was having at least ten
subscribers might slow the
formation of community
organizing office so working
organizations my opinion section
be a nonprofit entity should be
included in the list in section
B. it is not listed at that time
is only listing of tribal
entities.
The commission should adopt
rules that promote creative.
Formation of community solar
organization as the commission
that is put in charge of those
leopard I imagine it'll be the
PRC commission and all I feel
that they should be instructed
to have of the promote creative
innovative formation of
community solar organizations
thank you.
Thank you very much are there
any of the other members of the
public who wish to speak in
support of Senate bill eighty
four.
Whether any members who wish to
speak against Senate bill eighty
four at this time please raise
your hand.
That concludes public comment at
this time thank you very much.
Great thank you at this time we
will go to the committee and I
have Senator Padilla Senator
Hamblen.
Thank you Mr chairman not sure I
put my hand up first but I'm
happy to let Senator Hamblen go
first whatever you like Mr
chair.
You had your hand up first Mr
chair I thank you very much Mr
chair
So thank you what a lot of work
has been conducted
I'm trying to get my hands
around a couple of things
And you know we always say this
Mister chairman how you feel
about the Sanchez deal but I
have probably the most number of
contacts on this bill this
session so far and it's it's
just one of these that is really
drawn a lot of attention by what
we just heard as well.
So I guess I need to be made I
need to feel a little more
comfortable on how this is not a
tax on.
A a a regressive tax on the poor
it would have to pay into this
yet probably still not be able
to do this I heard from several
folks that they be able to but
how does that work can you walk
this are what we at least to a
through Z. and how this is not
going to harm the individual
that wants to participate but
this doesn't quite have the
dollars to do it themselves but
yet still pay into it for others
to utilize.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator Padilla for the question
I'm gonna turn to regularly M.
and the large Thomas Rick I do
want to start out.
Sure
Mr chair and senator the
I think it's a it's been clear
in the studies that have been
done that there is no cost
shifting I I know you've
probably heard that a lot from
certain sources but there are a
lot of cost savings related to
deploying solar locally as well
as of course the economic
benefits that that come from
there.
In terms of the the ability of
the low income customers to take
advantage of community solar.
The community solar is
structured so that from day one
those customers would receive a
benefit that is they would
receive a discount on your
electric bill because they'd be
replacing a portion of the cost
from the utility with the cost
of the subscription the cost of
the subscription is less than
the the credit from the utility
so are in theory at least all
low income customers ought to be
able to benefit from this from
day one.
if that doesn't quite get your
question please let me now.
Well no actually it doesn't I
would like a little bit more
information on so so so does
everybody in the area were eight
community solar farm or I even
heard the term garden these
don't seem like gardens to me
they seem much larger which is
going to be maybe the second
line of questions right now
in that area pay into making
this this occurring this happen
with the Baker participate in
and around.
No thank you I'm.
The chair and to the Senator
place.
yes Mister chair and Senator
Padilla know that they do not.
Mr chair what why would that be
part of the dialogue on this
thing.
Mr chair and senator do I'm not
sure I understand your question
why would that be part of the
dialogue you will have closed
this from Google individuals
that everyone in the service
area for one of these these
farms would would participate in
this or or or or I guess another
question is is not my major swim
lane here so I don't think I
don't have the full and complete
you know except of this work but
I will say in Albuquerque in my
district in the south valley
about the Bernalillo county and
and be participating in the
solar farmers solar Gardner
whatever in in the other on the
other the success of the border
you know down in Columbus New
Mexico there were one there my
participating in that are my
participating in the solar farm
it's covering the area with
which were where I actually
live.
Yes Representative do you want
to go ahead Mr chair and senator
Mr Williams yes Mr chairman and
Senator Padilla if that solar
farm was in your utility service
territory you could participate
in that farm but it would be up
to you whether to push
participate in that our store
garden or sword facility or
another one that may be closer
to you for community reasons for
why that might be in a different
location for economic reasons.
You know what well okay so the
state is divided our with the
three investor owned utilities
and their geographic coverage
and the electric coops.
So it is within your territory.
That you would be selected.
Okay so I live in that territory
I want to participate with this
I I don't want to participate in
I don't participate at all am I
still paying to make that
important.
Happen in my area is there is
there any I don't see any
opportunity that or any
requirement for me to pay into
making that farm happen.
Mr chair Senator Padilla
I'll turn it over to our
experts.
Mr chair Senator Padilla no
there is no requirement for are
you as R. as a non participant
to pay into that development of
that so our guard.
Thank you that clarifies one of
my big questions that I had
thank you and so Mister chairman
in and on the the size of these
things you know I had initially
as a town hall
Are you really huge town halls
in my district raising three of
them and sometimes I'll go off
to another town hall for maybe
at five state representatives
that come into my Senate
district is just one of them one
of the co sponsors here
Representative a copy of at a
town hall
This topic was being discussed
and in the cities our gardens
are the hot how are charities
okay.
Mr chair Senator this is doctor
prescribed in the bill itself
but I'm gonna let Mr Mr Gilliam
described how much five
megawatts would take up land
lies and what it could produce.
Yes thank you Mr chairman and
senator do at.
As the senator said five
megawatts is the cap for
individual projects that doesn't
mean they have to be five
megawatts set but the largest
system would be five megawatts
which would take up roughly
twenty five acres maybe thirty
acres of land depending on the
nature of the structure of the
system and that that type of
system if it follows the are the
model of a significant
commercial customer or a
hospital or school being taking
up forty percent which is the
cap for each system of the
output and remainder could be
residential customers that
basically means that six hundred
roughly six hundred residential
customers would be served plus
the one larger commercial
customer.
Okay so you know I'm thinking of
a densely populated area like
Senator Lopez and I have on the
southwest Minnesota where with
this sit in and an ace in a
subdivision somewhere it would
be but it looks appear from the
Harris over a parking area where
would it sit for per
subdivision.
Mr chair Senator I'm gonna give
you an example I cover the Rio
communities in Valencia County.
And as you drive into the real
communities from Isabel in our
little slowness there is a
fenced area that is also older.
That takes care of their entire
community residential and
commercial.
So you're taking empty lots and
empty space
that can be zoned for such a
project but Mr Gilliam correct
me if I'm wrong or any
additional information that you
have.
Mr chair and senator Padilla no
that's exactly right the solar
facilities that that I've seen
personally are often on open
space nearby residential
communities because they are
small enough to fit into those
those areas of land that for one
reason or another may not be
developed cause for open space
purposes
but the added Senator statics
that is exactly right.
So Mr chairman again Sanchez and
so if if what Senator Stefanics
just described it is happening
it real communities I'm very
content with that community I I
know that the county court of a
might still live out their
some of my good friends former
state representative.
First campaigns ever worked on
when I was like fourteen years
old I think that's community
where she was still at the scene
or a little bit but that the why
do we need this piece of
legislation that if these things
are already up and running and
and up in and out there.
So I chair and senator when I
have the opportunity to sit on
the Santa Fe county commission
our county commission came up
with some resolutions to do such
a project and they were ignored
by the investor owned utility
when we try to come to the table
to a plan out such a project we
were told that we weren't we
could they were not required to
do it and that they had other
projects going on in the Santa
Fe area the other projects that
they had were not specific to
the purposes that we're talking
about today to have an small
anchor tenant that might be
business or industrial have
residential and to accommodate
low income so that there is a
difference than when a utility
moves they had to do something
it might not include all of the
purposes of a governmental
agency or a nonprofit we're
trying.
It actually does make sense
thank you for clarifying that to
mean that that I realized I
heard earlier in the
presentation about the anchor
tenant or what have you
The in my buying a portion of
the farm as a consumer or in my
just buying from the farm.
So Mr chair Senator would one of
my experts six.
Describe or explain some
subscription.
Sure Mr chair and center to be
at a subscription is basically a
share in the projects so if it's
a five megawatt project
typically a house will get maybe
a five or ten hello what are.
Piece of that and then whatever
energy that Here produces is
what the subscription will
provide to that subscriber.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
Sanchez of so I I I was curious
about that because do I own that
out right share or when I say I
sell my home and I move what
happens to my share do I have to
sell it myself do I have to
dispose of it or or or or do
something with it or how does
that how does that go with these
farms typically.
Mr chair Senator Rick.
Mr chair and and Senator Padilla
The shares are transferable and
my experience has been in other
states that there's usually a
waiting list for those shares so
if one person these the
territory or decides not to
continue with their subscription
are there are people waiting in
line to take over that
subscription.
Mr chairman and I I guess so I'm
assuming I.
Have this share like like the
stock market whatever the so
this is going to increase in
value this is going to be
something I can.
Continue to whether I live there
not handed over to my kids so
that they continued on it I
don't know I was at work and I
by the way and I I have to
disclose here I am not a solar
user I've I've I've come let
close to doing it at different
times I just haven't quite
pulled the trigger yet and
building my forever home ideally
this year or some into next year
and that you to come to my
weight in that house I'm never
moving again I say that you know
but up but I don't know how this
works because I've never made
this this type of an investment
so what happens to those shares
as I this is my life changes.
Thank you Mr chair center for
that question and Riker people
are.
Mr chair Senator Padilla I think
I would ask up you are to take
that question please.
I'm thank you Mr chairman
Senator so this subscriptions
are we there's a couple of
different models that are
available but in this particular
model you don't really have an
ownership stake in the eighties
in the project so it's not an
asset that you own and that you
can sell or transfer like a
stock certificate would be you
have a right to the power and
that's what you're buying is a
right to the power as the part
of your subscription fee the
subscription itself is
transferable to if you move
which doesn't sound like you're
going to move a Senator but if
you did move you get transferred
to the new homeowner that's
that's going to be buying your
home from you or you can take it
with you and transferred to a
new residents as long as it's
within the same service
territory if you stay within the
same utility service territory
so you can't you can you and if
your if your son or daughter
lives in the service territory
and you want to transfer your
subscription to them where they
live are you would be able I
think to do that as well depends
on each subscription
organization will have its own
set of terms and conditions also
important to note that the P. R.
C. will have consumer protection
oversight with that as well so
those are some very is options
that you see in subscriber
programs.
I appreciate that Mr chairman
and sponsors and in the lot
thank you and the and Rick I you
know you said the three magical
letters P. Garcia I have such a
joy working with that body it is
a I could tell you stories
within your years back but I
will do that today
so so on when I have a problem I
got an issue something's not
going right with my shares or
something how YA what what is
the privative to resolve that or
who who handles that I go talk
to this is a company I'm talking
to who's who's gonna resolve
things for me when I have a
problem.
As.
Mr chair Senator it would be the
subscriber organization and Rick
would you address that.
So certainly I Mr chair and
Senator Padilla the subscriber
organization as you are said I
will have certain terms and
conditions
but as the senator pointed out
there are the PRC will establish
consumer protection standards as
well so those contracts the
subscription contracts will have
to have certain protections of
the consumer so that if there is
a problem or concern that that
the subscriber has an Avenue to
address that concern are the
through the subscriber
organization or not satisfied
beyond the subscriber
organization.
Senator the subscriber
organization is on page four
section am on that page it can
include a municipality and
county of for profit our and
nonprofit with which answers one
of the.
Questions earlier entity or
organization an Indian nation
tribe or pueblo a local tribal
governance structure or other
tribal entity authorized so it's
quite broad in terms of the
groups that could become the
subscriber organization.
Yeah I have to say that I'm I
know that we're in the process
right now of of doing some
additional reforms to the PRC
and and we're not quite sure
what the body's gonna look like
when it's all said and done but
I still have to go back one more
time to the fact that it sounds
like this already happens you
know and and what are those
folks doing who who who is
overseeing that regulatory
environment for these these
solar farms it sounds like that
have popped up you have the one
that Senator Stefanics talked
about a little while ago Mr
chairman what who's resolving
issues when when that happened
today.
So Mr
chair and senator I'm gonna give
you two examples I have solar on
my property I live in the
country and so I and then Nibert
share solar field and it's
enough energy need to.
We're both houses but we are
connected directly to PNM.
So I am not I as an individual.
In this case is a subscriber but
it I can't set it up for others
to join the one that I was
talking about here in Santa Fe
is a disability that's totally
owned by PNM and they're
creating energy to add to their.
Transmission lines and grid
utilize for a wide area.
And so nobody individually has
anything to say about the solar
field that PNM set up.
Okay.
Yes listen a little bit more I
guess I'm I'm still concerned
about at the moment I think Mr
Chairman want to come back again
this is this pretty big win for
all of us
well they're all very important
this legislation money is the
most important but but we'll see
how that goes but.
But we're the public regulation
commission is concerned I I'm
I'm incredibly nervous about
voting for this bill if it's
going to be overseen by the PRC
I'm I'm concerned about the bill
with with you know who really is
able to participate in this and
who isn't and and I'm also
concerned about the fact that it
sounds like we already do this
today and so I you know I I've
I've brought bills before by the
way that I've been told the very
same thing will gosh why do you
need this we already do this
today and so I'm trying to
figure that out as well so at
the moment I just going to put
the sponsor someone to listen a
little bit more Mr chairman and
and I'm I'm I'm right on the
fence everyone that's called
have told them that I've been
very honest about that I'm very
open about that but but my my
biggest concern is a public
regulation commission in New
Mexico that has a very difficult
time you know really regulating
much of all that we have some
new commissioners I'm very
excited about that I'm really
excited to work with them and
see how that goes but I just
think we're going to place
another huge regulatory burden
on top of them when they're
having difficulty getting the
job they have done today house
is going to go for the consumer
so I I really want to hear more
about that instrument with your
permission I might just to go in
thank you.
Senator but the I. Senator
Hamblen then as senator Wirth
hard meal and taking.
Thank you Mr chair and and and
my apologies it looks like I've
been punched in the eye but I
have not my eyes really really
red and and I think some stuck
in there so my apologies for
that for looking like I've
already gotten into a street
brawl I have not but I'm kind of
willing to do it for community
solar in all honesty because you
know in my capacity with the Las
Cruces green chamber of commerce
talk a lot about solar energy I
my wife and I had the good
fortune of having solar on our
roof and we've done a lot of
research about that in about
panels and and and the outputs
and just Senator Padilla if you
ever want to talk about solar
it's so be very happy to do that
we feel was one of the best
decisions that we've ever made
but you also have to have the
capital to be able to do that
and I feel the capitol so that
community solar we'll be able to
address those issues that our
communities don't have that
capital and and that especially
our communities that don't have
the resources to do this will
still be able to benefit on this
I'd like to point out that
what's is missile range in the
military in general are really
much more a leaders of the pack
when it comes down to embracing
what solar energy does matter of
fact I think Mr Gonzalez from
past electric we were both out
when white sands missile range
had a ribbon cutting on their
solar field and it's because the
military recognizes the impact
of solar to their operations and
to protecting our country.
in Los crucis are more at one
point when I first started with
the green chamber talked about
how he would have wanted to make
Los crucis a solar city.
And I told him that the way that
we can do that starts up in
Santa Fe and that's where I feel
that this helps that we have
communities all over the state
that can benefit from this I do
feel the one thing that I do
have Mr chair and just Senator
Stefanics is is really looking
at local preference and the
reason why I say that is because
you know we talk about by local
all the time we want to keep
money in our community and when
we support these out of state so
are companies that are becoming
more and more predatory by the
way they are being very
aggressive especially to older
folks being very aggressive
about putting solar systems on
their house and yet the owners
of the homes do not have the
rights to that solar system and
so any of the I read any of the
the perks that they may get from
that solar system they actually
don't own so I do feel that if
we can have a local preference
that you can get me going to the
mat and and getting in slugfest
with the about people with
people about community solar
just because you know we have
this opportunity here to not
only find communities that would
benefit a great deal from having
solar electricity but when we
start talking about renewable
energy industry and will be away
from oil and gas we are creating
that industry.
We are helping to support those
jobs and I feel that we really
have to look at the bigger
picture of how all of this
different bits of bits of
legislation can really help us
propel that well we help
transition people who work in
oil and gas out of those jobs
but so that they can still have
occupations where they can
support their families and not
have to worry about paycheck to
paycheck or the industry that
they spent a lot of time and so
I feel we have some great
opportunities with this and so
mine is more of a COVID actually
I never had a question I just
wanted to talk about how
important this is with three
hundred fifty days of somebody
here we would be foolish foolish
to overlook this and not start
putting this into those
communities that can that can
benefit a great deal from it so
thank you Mr chair thank you
senators to Phoenix's Senator
Lopez.
Thank you thank you Senator
Hamblen senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr chair and hi.
Echo the statements of my
colleague Senator Hamblen
about community solar
I ate when I first chair of the
Senate conservation committee in
two thousand and thirteen
Senator being a minute just
retired and he came and
testified to the state Senate
conservation committee and it
was a really cool thing because
he had been out of Stanford and
work on bipartisan energy
solutions and they came up with
a cookbook and the just the late
the recently late George Schultz
was part of this cookbook and
one of the things that he was
pushing hardest was community
solar and I carried the bill we
discussed the bill at length you
went through a process here and
I just want to thank Senator is
defending Senator Lopez
Representative Roybal Caballero
for getting us here I do want to
address
Senator Padilla is comment about
the PRC because I think his
comments are certainly
legitimate with respect to the
old P. Garcia but I just want to
remind everyone and remind
Senator Padilla we're we're
going up under the new P. R. C.
which is going to be three
professionals who are appointed
by the governor with the
experience to finally be able to
move this regulatory agency into
a place that's more professional
that has expertise and I think
that will address the PRC box
Senator Padilla you're racing
for good reason and you and I
have talked a lot about this and
we just went through an election
in the voters have spoken on
that so I just wanted to make
that point
I do have one question it has to
do with the grid reliability we
just saw what happened in Texas
which is an absolute disaster
and when you have no regulation
whatsoever what can happen when
you have a climate emergency
which we saw in taxes and the
whole system broke down it's my
understanding that community
solar benefits the whole system
and the stability and so I'd
like you can Senator panics are
Lopez or any of the experts can
you just talk a little bit about
that am I correct that having
community solar systems tied in
it actually can address some of
the.
The reliability issues.
Thank you Mr chair and senator
Wirth that question just this
morning and Senate conservation
we have the three investor owned
utilities and the electric coops
from and the southwest power
pool present to the conservation
committee about rolling
blackouts cut offs and power
outages.
It was clearly stated.
That the solar was not any cause
or any concern for the rolling
cut off.
That that energy that the that
was coming from solar was being
stored and available for
transmission but was not the
cause of any of the gas that was
needed to create more energy
during this polar voted vortex
we did not have enough to
actually continue the Energy
throughout the entire
transmission area that we're
talking about and Senator
Hamblen was in that meeting
we might have had other
onlookers I thought we had
another member from conservation
on this committee and
We were in fact we don't even
ask that question they offered
that I'll use offered that
information first off that the
solar did not create the problem
and that the solar is reliable.
Yeah Mister chair I appreciate
that.
Senator Stanikzai just think
that's an important piece in
this mix and I just want to
thing I just want to reiterate
Senator Padilla I thought your
your questions were appropriate
to try and figure out if someone
has to sign up to one of these
if it's in their area and I
think the answer is no it's a
choice
that they can make and and what
I've always said not carry a lot
of these bills and and I've
always said it's one of those
things that families should sit
down around the kitchen table
and figure out if this makes
sense does that make sense can
you can you do your own solar
panels can you lease solar
panels or can you subscribe to
community solar they're
different options and everyone
needs to look at whether or not
it works and if it's an option
that makes sense they should do
it if it doesn't make sense they
shouldn't do it I do appreciate
that this bill has really made
an effort to also carve out a
protection for for lower income
folks so they can participate
to because I really think that
there's many folks that don't
have the money to invest in
their own panels that want to
participate and if they sit down
at the kitchen table and this
works for them then give them a
shot to do it that's kind of you
know my two cents on that so
again I'm I'm gonna support the
bill it's taken a ton of work
it's gone through you know a six
month process and I just think
it's time to give citizens a
choice and and I just conclude
by giving a shout out to Lou
Reed Louise right just suffocate
Carson because they were one of
the leaders of community solar
and they they provided those
options and they determined that
it made sense you know for for
folks within their their co op
and and again I just think this
is something that really can
work so I thank you Mr chairman
support the bill.
Thank you Majority Leader I have
the.
To.
Thank you.
Okay.
Thanks Senator Hermio as the.
Yes I'm I missed of my sheet
okay says Senator of our meal
and then we've got fifty and
then the for the for the second
half thank you Mr chairman and
thank you senators to phonics
and Senator Lopez and so we have
some small solar that happens in
Rio Arriba county wide and all
called it and then a little bit
larger one in the league of New
Mexico and the one of them right
those is with northern New
Mexico college but I'm starting
to think about residents and I'm
hoping you can answer this
question when it's lower income
residents will they have
priority over solar verses let's
just say for example that solar
farm wasn't with northern New
Mexico college we would know
that the college would generate
more and need more electricity
than the small homes in the
community ability though would
low income families have
priority on electricity verses
I'm gonna say let's just say
there's a college or a larger
store in that area how does that
work.
Mr chair and senator Hermio
thank you for the question the
bill does identify a percentage
for low income subscribers but
I'm gonna turn to Rick and
people are for that.
Mr chairman and senator Hermio
yes is that is the senator
pointed out there's a thirty
percent car about for low income
customers
however that's not defined yet
as to whether or not that will
be project by project or for our
the entire state there's a lot
of different ways that that
could be implemented and that is
one of the items that is up to
the PRC to figure out and
implement in a way that works
for all customers but that
achieves that thirty percent
goals so if the solar project
that is nearby to those low
income customers is not
available there's likely to be
other solar projects for other I
mean it within the territory
that would be available to those
low income customers so they are
prioritized in the overall sense
but we just don't know yet
whether I'll be project by
project.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senators and this one's a two
fold question but I was thinking
about what happens
To be unsubscribed energy and
and will it then be sold.
Thank you Mr chair and senator
Rick.
Mr chair Senator Hermio de
utility will acquire the
Unsubscribed energy at what's
known as it's avoided cost rate
it would cost rate is a rate
that's on file with the
commission and is literally just
what it says that it it's the
cost that would be avoided by
the addition of of electricity
from another source so there's
no impact on customers by
acquiring that energy at the
avoided cost thank you Mr
chairman thank you centers thank
you Mr Gilliam and so thank you
for answering those questions.
Thank you.
Thank you of.
I'm gonna ask of my vice chair
to take over for a bit so I have
Senator Hickey and then the.
Of course yourself for a second
time so we right back thank you
Mr chair we'll go now to Senator
if you Mr vice chair I believe
Senator Brandt myself from the
list for firsttime okay well
let's go with the.
Yes I do have you honor.
So I'll be back then we'll we'll
we'll go over to senator I will
go Senator Brandt at this point
hello hello it's centered.
Senator Hickey and then Brandt
and current and you for the
second time all right got it
thank you all right so Senator
Hickey please Karen.
Thank you Mr vice chair and the
Senator Stefani and Lopez for
bringing this bill forward
I am a yeah there is on my
screen Adam Harper I think he's
in front of the solar panels at
the academy and I have a lot of
camping pictures that in the.
And and so I I really I and in
those who have been in the LCS
sessions with me in the morning
I just keep coming back to
renewable energy and so I'm I'm
a huge fan by this but I I also
have to say that I just eight
three girl scout cookies because
I needed comfort food because of
the dyspepsia I'm having trying
to figure this out
if there yeah care Senator
Hamblen they're out they're out
on the.
If you want some yeah.
I'm sorry the
I've been probably more than any
bill I've just been hammered and
this is an area you know I
understand health insurance with
someone else nobody else does I
get it it's really complicated
this is really complicated
markets complicated for me and
I'm hoping that your.
Expert witnesses can help walk
me through this a little bit
it's the question that was just
ask the that and avoidable costs
I'm not sure what that.
Needs let me let me pose another
question the kind of relates
it's kind of like
are are there ways as I'd seen
in in the healthcare industry
no a lot of little not for
profit insurance companies got
gobbled up in god knows on the
exchange co ops that.
Wiped out by large companies and
I'm just I'm worried about the
same thing.
In that large companies can come
in and dominate it so.
My sense is there are credits
here and can can those be bought
out by large companies to come
in no I know it says the
extrasensory to go to commercial
annex present
but are there some important
credits such as if PNM has a
contract.
With one of the oil companies
are gas companies for a long
period of time projected use of
of gas and oil and now they're
not going to use it do they get
to me claim that.
I mean so they have to pay those
contracts and they get paid out
then do they pass that because
they're no longer using that
much oil and gas but do they
have to pay that.
The or that contract the and
does that go into their regular
costs.
And that's why I'm worried where
the if I'm understanding
correctly and maybe I'm not
that's why I'm worried that
those less well off who are not
on the budget of the are away
for not grants up a garden so
what have you that they're gonna
have to take those costs in
their rates.
Thank you.
Mr chair Senator Hickey I'm
sorry about the feedback I think
we answer that question earlier
but I'm gonna have Rick clearly
say yes or no.
Thank you Mr chair and Senator
Hickey
I'm not sure I can say there are
yes or no because I want to make
sure I'm answering your question
and so when we just preface it
by saying the excess credits
could occur in in the community
solar situation if the project
is generating more electricity
than a subscriber could use from
their share.
And okay so good that in that
case that excess electricity
carries over to the following
month and over the course of a
year is it all about it should
all balance out.
Your Mr chair Senator you're on
mute.
I apologize up.
Mr vice chair and incentives
departments but if it doesn't
doesn't get stored in the
battery somewhere do we have
that
And so anyway it is this is a.
Again it's the.
Again and tell me that that.
PNM no longer buying that gasket
staff contracts for what happens
to them in those contracts.
In that money.
Mr chair I think I need a little
more clarification you with your
question.
Well it's
Like some other situations in
terms of the ETA the the
decommissioning costs
were there were there was an
amendment to not allow that to
go on to the right pairs but the
it was opposed by a lot of
conservation societies because
that's the way it was set up but
if there if there are costs to
you and for this
because they have contracts who
bears that costs.
We did they did they Barrett and
if it gets it goes on their
balance sheet and negative or do
they pass it on to their regular
repair.
Mr chair Senator I'll turn to
regularly and for that.
Mr chair and senator Hickey my
understanding is that it depends
on the type of contract gas
contract the utility has
many contracts are with the call
taker pay which I think is what
you're alluding to and it's it's
just what it says it is that
they don't take the gas that
they have contracted for they
still have to pay for.
Yeah so anyway that I'm I'm I
worry I have some concern about
that
and then in terms of the
the subscriber organizations or
the or as these get built in
commercial I'm understand people
can come in from out of state.
Our company's and buy these
things are.
Do they get to such a point four
wheel the PRC regulate is maybe
I think I've understood that
they can't create
maps and maps is not the right
word but.
Many monopolies and therefore
then trying to crank up the
rates for everyone if they're
buying up these gardens
particularly as people move at.
So Mister chairman Senator
Hickey the PRC does have
authority over this entire
project they will in the bill it
says that they will set up the
rules to establish the program
and then they it goes on to say
that they will establish
proportionally to investor owned
utilities and also to establish
the statewide capacity program
cap by twenty four and then
there is a three year in
valuation thank you might think
of this Mr chair Senator as a
highlight.
That in three years there will
be an evaluation.
okay thanks thank you Senator
Stefanics and Mr chair of that
that is very helpful
I'll
I I've got some of the questions
here but I over use my time the
if you know that the co ops are
great because I think they're.
They are self contained they've
got customers in over they are
they've been doing business and
I doubt they're going to get
bought out
the but I do worry about the out
of state potential for
monopolistic dominance of this
market and maybe that's just a
worry that I have I understand
the PRC will be there but I
would hope that the PRC would
have some sort of rule on how
much you could own as an as a
particular and the and I'm not
sure how that backs up against
the the three major utility
companies but again I am worried
about
somewhat of a monopoly I know
the PRC controls so that you can
tell I'm having some angst about
it and I apologize and as I
thank you for bringing this fall
over.
Chair Senator I could clarify my
question on page four under M.
scrubber organizations are only
those authorized to transact
business in New Mexico.
So we're not talking about out
of state groups we're talking
about counties municipalities
for profit and non profits and
Indian nations tribes problems
in New Mexico.
So so I've made a wrong
assumption then that out of
state companies that because
someone made the comment in
there are
In opposing saying that already
there were out of staters
hunting down properties to what
stuck together so if it's if
it's not out of state
and that that's good at least to
start up with as we go through
this experience thank you very
much thank college eyes for a
subjecting everyone to my angst
and trying to figure.
Thank you Senator Hickey and Ms
chairman you normally have a
much better hand out back and
forth we'll go over to Senator
Brandt and then Senator Kernan
and all and back or would you Mr
chairman thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman I
appreciated
I I've got.
What if you questions and
concerns.
Senator yes.
You're talking about how this
for residential customers is
there any limit.
As to
What percentage of the community
solar has to be residential.
Okay.
All what.
Mr chair and senator grant I'm
gonna let Rick Gilliam talk
about that but there's one
anchor tenant and then
residential so Rick could you
divide that up for the center.
Your Mr chair and senator
Technically there is no limit
for residential a a project
could serve entirely residential
customers are the advantage of
allowing up to forty percent to
be
serving one customer though is
that those larger customers are
can generally is my experience
in other states can generally
take a smaller discount from
their article bill through the
the bill credit mechanism and
that results in more head room
if you well for residential
customers to get a bit of a
bigger discount and caring that
one step further allows for low
income customers to get an even
bigger discount.
Mr Chairman.
Mr Gillian I'm not sure exactly
how that works so to do the to
the commercial customer on the
regular.
I'm gonna use PNM because that's
who I've had ever since I've
lived in New Mexico this is an
example legislation easier so
the regular of the Walmart
subscribes to PNM do they get a
discount rate.
Through PNM or are they paying
more that actually keeps the
right lower for residential
customers and PNM you know.
Mr chair and senator thanks for
that question and Rick you want
to respond.
Mr chair and senator I think
your question is whether or not
PNM is giving them a discount
currently and if so they're not
getting a discount per se their
their overall rate is lower
generally than residential
customers rates are because they
are a large customer and they
are a we call higher load factor
customer the use more
electricity are then
Representative the individual
residential customers to but
even having said that the
community solar project can
still provide a discount from
that
that PNM right in that case that
simple
And in addition that provide
further discounts to other
participants on residential and
low income customers.
So I appreciate that so does
that in any way subsidized
residential rate payers when the
commercials using so much of
paying so much PNM or do they
discount the right I guess the
right is the wrong term but does
that mean anyway help the
residential side and if it does
then pulling them out without
her to residential rate payers
that don't join.
The community solar.
Thank you Mr chair Senator rec.
Mr chairman and senator
That's a difficult question to
answer that there will
definitely be a discount from
the utility right for community
solar the the unknown factor is
how that discount is shared
among the various subscribers
and various classes of
subscribers in the.
In the subscription program for
each project R. so it it it's a
difficult question to give you a
direct answer to.
In a way it's up to the
subscriber organization to divvy
those those savings up among
noted that customers that it's
serving.
Mr chairman of Mr Gilliam I I
guess I'm a little bit concerned
more about the rate payers that
stay with PNM and don't go to
the community solar if the big
customer the anchor tenant goes
to community solar and goes out
of PNM.
Then doesn't that increase
everyone else's right that stays
with PML.
Mr chair Senator Rick.
Mr chair and and senator
no it doesn't the as we talked
about early on today the our
savings related to community
solar on the entire system
exceed the benefits I'm an ex
see their costs excuse me.
And it does savings are related
to the avoided costs of
generation transmission and in a
time now where and PNM if for
instance is building out.
Resources or planning to build
out resources to make up the the
elimination of San Juan from its
resource mix it's a perfect time
to include community solar as
part of that mix so by doing
that it you're not duplicating
any costs and there are no cost
and passed on to other
customers.
As a result of that the other
thing to keep in mind for
the other two you may have major
I'll use in the state is that
they are in more than one state
and that less energy that is
used by customers in New Mexico
the more of the overall cost of
those utilities are assigned to
Texas and not to New Mexico
customers.
So I I appreciate that thank you
Mr chairman and and the.
Search the phonics and if you
don't mind if I just asked Rick
directly question so we don't
take up that extra time.
Okay this makes it easier for
you
Rick you brought up the
infrastructure that's one of my
concerns with us who pays for
the infrastructure.
Mr chairman and senator the
infrastructure for the utility
which is assumed what you're
asking about
that's paid for by all customers
but in in the way that rates are
set customers pay for what they
use from the utility the use the
distribution system they pay for
the distribution system if they
use generation transmission and
distribution they pay for all
three some customers are served
at the transmission level and
don't pay for distribution so
that the basic premise of rate
making is to is that the cost
causer pays so to the extent
that and a solar customer eight
community solar customer is only
using distribution that's what
they pay for now for the energy
that they still are purchase
from the utility they will still
pay off for all three components
because they're using all three
components.
I think I understand that but Mr
chairman Rick doesn't the didn't
the utility company get em again
just because that's what I have
used have they already paid to
put in that
infrastructure assuming that
they're gonna have X. number of
customers and then we pull those
customers away.
And doesn't then that costs get
spread out to the remaining
customers at a higher rate.
Mr chair and Senator I
understand the theory that
you're describing their but as a
practical matter that that's not
what happens
those costs are
Hi not passed on to other
customers there are benefits
that were described earlier that
over that exceed those costs so
to the extent that there were
costs at the community solar
customers were paying before
those costs are now being paid
by
well the.
There.
Hello said they're overwhelmed
they're overcome by the budget
and keep in mind as well that
we're talking about one percent
as the cap statewide on
and community solar projects.
So Mister chairman Senator so
you have in the bill a cap that
no more than one percent of what
all all power generated can be
generated by community solar is
that what you mean by that and
and
I haven't been able to I read
the original build haven't had
time to read the commuter you're
so it's of what I've been
looking through here.
Mr chair and senator it doesn't
actually say one percent it's
capped at a hundred megawatts
which is approximately one
percent of the I or use
Thank you so so what we're
talking about your Mr chairman
is twenty projects.
Approximately services to five
megawatts or less right.
Yes.
Senator.
That's helpful
So you've got the PRC that is
going to be setting the bill
credit right so my understanding
is that when.
If the community solar project
and this happens with rooftop as
well when you produce more power
than you're using.
Then the utility company.
Has to buy that power back from
you.
Okay you with a credit and is it
is a correct the PRC is one
that's going to set the right
for that.
Mr chair and senator
the.
At at any unsubscribed energy is
acquired by the utility and
utility pays for.
The subscription Energy is paid
for by the subscribers.
The the the buy back the the one
that the Pierce the the the
utility company has to pay for
that is that right is set by
piercing.
Mr chair and senator yes that
right the avoided cost rate is
set by the PRC.
Why do they set that right.
Sorry Mr chairman for up to go
through Jr.
Mr chair and senator I think I
would like to ask the LAR to
answer that question if that's
okay with you that's fine.
Sure.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Senator Brandt so in typical
utility regulatory principles of
the P. R. C. sets the avoided
cost rate under the public
utility regulatory policy act
which is a federal law which
allows for the buy back of power
especially renewable power and
that rate is set and federal law
by the state commission so in
this case the PRC so the excess
production of power the end
subscribed amount of power for
example would be paid at the
avoided cost rate the bill
credit there's a component in
the in the bill itself that in
the the the legislation that
talks about a bill credit that
too will be set by the PRC using
standard rate making principles
so the question of how much of
the credit you were referencing
your net metering program
without PNM that net metering
rules set by the PRC and so they
design and they'd of the find
that program and so a bill
credit in the community solar
program would be something
similar not exactly the same but
similar where the amount of
credit that subscriber would get
against their utility bill based
on how much power the community
solar project.
And generates that produces a
bill credit that goes against
and that of that value of that
credit is set by the PRC and
sent utility by utility because
each utility has a different
underlying cost structure costs
the need delicious but there's
different amounts of money for
their power has different cost
to move the power around
transmission distribution so
that bill credit will be set by
the PRC at each utilities rates.
Mr Chairman
Is it okay if I call you for
sure okay pull our so that ray
is is really the same for any
Hello green energy clean energy
whatever your it's being called
today renewable energy any of
those that's that rate is the
same by the PRC is that correct.
Well it may not necessarily be
that it's certainly depends on
the type of green energy so
solar energy has one value wind
energy has a different value of
geothermal energy has a third
how you so so it's maybe two
brought the state renewable
energy but for purposes of our
discussion with solar the PRC
can certainly determine what the
value of solar is at the utility
level because that's how these
principles are usually set not
just in New Mexico but across
the across the country that at
the utility level solar power
for a PNM might have a different
value than solar power for Kit
Carson.
And that's the part of the
utility economics of those
utilities in the PRC is the one
who has the expertise to
understand that because they do
the right making all the time
thank you Mr chairman Paul are
we may disagree on whether the
PRC has the expertise to tie
their own shoes so we'll just
we'll just leave that one at
that but I do understand what
you're saying there that they
set that for everyone on on all
of that all the different types
of energy
so I guess one of my concerns is
that you're right now and I
guess we've we've kind of
settled law that they have to
buy this power they really don't
have a choice
and usually a company would have
a choice on who supplies the.
and so
even if it costs more.
From your community solar.
The.
Utility company has to pay that
extra is is that right.
Sir Senator is that to me
whoever wants to answer you seem
to be the expert in this area.
Thank you chairman miss Senator
Brandt so it is here that the
utility does not by the power
from the community solar project
the subscribers by the power if
there is unsubscribed power so
let's say you have a two
megawatt project.
And it spits out a thousand
megawatt hours of power don't
that's not the math but I'm a
lawyer so it's easier for me to
use tens um so it spits out a
thousand megawatt hours and the
subscribers only subscribe to
nine hundred and not and fifty
megawatt hours and you so you
have fifty megawatt hours
unsubscribed then the utility
has to buy that power but only
at their avoided cost rate so
that's what Rick was referring
to earlier so if PNM that
avoided cost rate is set by the
PRC as part of the rate making
process so let's say PNM is
avoided cost rate is three cents
a kilowatt hour that's what they
would pay for that solar prop
power because that's what they
would pay if they had to go into
the spot market and buy power
where they might be payment so
they're not so they're not
paying more they're paying their
avoided cost so there's no
incremental cost to PNM to by
the excess or the unsubscribe
power from a power standpoint.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for and and I'm I'm not sure
that that's totally a hundred
percent there's no increased
cost PNM because what happens if
they don't need any other power
and they've already got
contracts for all the power they
need and then there being
required by law to buy power
they do not need what happens to
that power and that's just
another expensed PNM is that not
correct.
I'm well chairman and senator
Brandt I think you know if if
this were and this goes to the
the the.
Studies that Rick was talking
about earlier and I referred to
earlier the the Berkeley study
for example that at the amount
of power we're talking about
here hundred megawatts one
percent
it's not displacing much of
anything if if if you have a
fully subscribing you were only
displacing one percent I'm not
saying there's no cost but there
is minimal cost if any so and
that's going to be part of the
bill credit process and part of
the determination of how much
credit to give to the
subscribers so so this will all
be accounted for its intended to
be accounted for in the bill.
I I appreciate that so
Mr Chairman
The the one percent isn't that
one percent per year.
One hundred megawatts that we're
not gonna put more than the
hundred megawatts each year or
is that total.
Mr chairman and senator you know
you're right it's annual it's an
annual figure so that could get
up to.
Who knows what percent.
No control Mr Chairman
Sanchez rectal are honest
everybody no control from the
utility company as to whether
they want that power or not and
I guess my concern is if you
know the utility company has to
make sure that what happened in
Texas doesn't happen in New
Mexico right and and I
understand they had nothing to
do with solar so I'm just talk
about in general power okay.
So they've got to be able to
have the band with for to to
borrow a term from Serbia to be
able to provide all the power
to the needs of New Mexico even
when we have a pull rivet like
we had
a couple weeks ago that the
nearly froze us all to death
rural popsicles up your line is
four degrees is ridiculous
I was really wanting to be on a
beach somewhere.
So you know but they've got to
make sure that powers available
so they do all those contracts
but so they've got these
contracts out there and all the
sudden every year a hundred
megawatts or added whether they
need it or not.
And we're taking away that sort
or those contracts adjustable
enough.
That they can.
Lower the contract from
somewhere else and buy it from
you or lose those groups
subscribers do you understand
what I'm saying.
Mr chair and senator the one
thing I want to remind you about
and it might not totally
satisfied you is that it's a at
three year evaluation so think
of it as a three year.
process.
Mr chairman Center appreciate
you bringing that up are we
going to come back in three
years and evaluated or does the
PRC evaluate.
Mr chair Senator instead of
three year evaluation by the PRC
and report to the in our our
committees of the legislature
well Mister chairman Senator the
NM interim committees make any
law.
No they can recommends that.
Thank you for the next session
thank you Mr chairman Sir
appreciate that and I'll tell
you have cared a lot of those
intermittent or spills doesn't
really do anything it doesn't
really helpful bills so I I
think yeah maybe we should put a
sunset clause on this in three
years to make it a truly pilot
program that the legislature
would look at and then decide
whether we want to continue it
and continue to let it grow or
whether we want to leave it at
that three percent
so I have a lot of other
questions and I know we're we
are late on time
there was a mention of jobs.
For five years I can't remember
how many jobs Mr chairman Rick I
think you talked about the jobs
could you have any jobs was
that.
Economic study that that bureau
the bureau of.
Researchers at the UNM did.
And then I.
A great.
Okay here it is UNM's bureau of
business and economic research
over my five hundred million
dollars and economic benefits to
various sectors of the economy
and creating close to four
thousand high quality jobs over
the next five years.
I am thank yes I was trying to
get remember what that number
was
how many of those are permanent
jobs.
Mr chair
Senator.
I don't have the full study with
me.
But it does that every county.
Could gain a hundred and
seventeen new jobs over twenty
years so even if all four
thousand are not permanent there
is quite a number that would be
permanent
thank you and I know one of the
issues with solar is there some
maintenance jobs but once the
installation is done and that's
where that's where the large
number of jobs come is an
installation of solar and so
usually there's not a large
residual full time job and
you're one of these days we'll
have it all covered and and the
we'll all be looking at shiny
solar panels everywhere we look
and we won't need any more and
then we'll have to just maintain
them so I appreciate that
I wish I knew how many full time
jobs it was gonna take to
maintain that
this Mister chairman Senator
you're talking about the tribe's
and I'm wondering.
and this may not be covered in
in the summer too so this is a
research question on do they
need to this or that can they
not do this on their own because
they think they are sovereign
nation although there's
guidelines on the federal
government to sometimes don't
let them do whatever they want
so how does that work.
Mr chair Senator Brandt I'm
turning to P. like Thomas for
that.
I'm thank you but chairman and
senator Brandt so as I stated
earlier as you know sovereign
entities the tribes of course
have jurisdiction over their
lands and what occurs on their
lands but the state has
jurisdiction over the utilities
that are servicing those lands
and since this bill in effect is
a utility program that requires
PNM I'll use and if the co ops
opt in the co ops to comply with
the rules in the legislation for
community solar programs I tried
certainly in pueblo certainly
could do these programs degrees
Pueblo has a one megawatt.
Quote unquote community solar
program that works with but it
had to negotiate separately with
Kit Carson.
I'm it took a while to do that
negotiation kit Carson as as pin
pointed out has been the leader
in incorporating a community
solar and renewable solar in its
system I think it's fair to say
that that's not true of the
other co ops and so as you heard
from Laguna pueblo earlier and
on my personal experience with
other working with the other
pueblos the effort to do
renewable energy projects on
public lands or on the tribe's
lands that degree Apache is a of
the or the Mescalero
is a challenge when you have a
utility that's not cooperative.
Doesn't want to do it so despite
the sovereign status of the
utilities still have under state
law of course and under state
regulation the ability to
frustrate some of those projects
so this legislation would make
it clear that tribal projects
would be treated like other
projects in the tribe's would
get the benefit of the state
regulatory scheme that this
legislation imposes on the
utilities that that would be
covered by.
Thank you that's that's helpful
I was trying to figure that out
because I was like well I
thought they but that makes
sense because they're going to
tie into the infrastructure
that's statewide so there's got
to be something there I mean
they could do it if they can get
up yeah well you basically with
utility companies to make that
work on their own but that's
been a struggle okay that makes
sense the
Do do any of you know where the
panels are being made there they
made here and in New Mexico of
the solar panels for the
community solar or they made
somewhere else.
I'm Mr chair I Senator I think
Rick has to answer that
question.
Mr chair and senator I don't
know that I have a good answer
for that question I know there
are fifteen manufacturers in New
Mexico of solar equipment I
don't know how many if any of
those manufactured panels
themselves I know there used to
be one down by the airport.
but the panelists are made.
All over the world they're made
in Arizona the made in Mexico or
they're made in Asia and Europe
so specifically which panels
come to New Mexico and it's
difficult to say but there are
some maybe if not in New Mexico
very close by.
Thank you Mr Mr chairman and
Rick percent that I know that
there was a.
The solar company that was
supposed to come in to Rio
Rancho and to my district and
that kind of fell apart and
really backfired on this is a
state so that was a fun
experience for me I only have
one or two more questions and I
will make that quick I just want
to ask Senator really important
questions who pays for the
implementation of the program
such as the metering billing and
cost to connect as a community
solar to the grid.
Mr chair Senator right go ahead.
Mr chair and senator the
interconnection costs if any to
trade what whatever's necessary
are paid for by the developer
where this description
organization
any incremental costs are paid
for by that organization to the
extent that there are
administrative costs way as you
say billing overseeing the.
The exchange of information with
the subscriber organization
those administrative costs are
picked up by the subscribers.
Mr chairman right so when it
comes to like the metering.
how does that work is that PNM
that keeps up with that because
I know they took my meter
orders the community solar do
that we have is the meter work
I guess you're just connecting
into.
PNM system.
and then people are subscribing
to the amount of energy but
they're not necessarily getting
the energy that's actually
collected by that solar panel
right it just kind of goes into
the ground so I don't think
there's any way to actually.
Make sure that wire goes to that
house.
Mister chairman Senator I know
you're correct we can't paint
electrons green and and track
them into that house
but there's no additional
metering that's required either
that the metering that's in
existence
Which is paid for by the
subscriber by the way it
continues to operate the same
way as it did before and there's
an exchange of information
between the subscriber
organization and the utility as
to the amount of the
subscriptions the amount of the
energy and the the credits that
are provided to the subscribers
thank you Mr chairman Senator
thank you this this discussion
has been great I I could
probably last another hundred
questions but I will not
I I I think that we have had
enough of the meeting for the
day
if this doesn't pass this time I
would I would really look
forward to actually having a
longer discussion during the
interim
This would have a great one to
have a science technology
committee but yeah we've been
kind of doing this really weird
Committee thing this year so a
lot of discussions and should
have been had just worked and I
haven't had the discussion
around community solar to really
understand that and we will look
forward to having more if it
doesn't make to that thank you.
Thank you.
Senator Kernan.
Well thank you Mr chairman thank
you senator at many more
questions have been asked but I
do want to circle back around to
the co ops and with regard to
the I think it was mentioned
that many that that tribal
tribes have have co ops that
service them
Mr chair Senator that is correct
Mr chair Senator we when we
adopted our our build their
resolution that was sent off in.
Okay so Mister chairman Senator
if the co ops are not opting in
and many of the tribal
communities utilize the co ops
they still can go outside the co
op now in participate in a I'm.
Interest so garden and leave the
co op is that possible.
Mr chair Senator only if there's
something in their territory
that they can hook into so there
are some co ops that are working
with tribes especially kit
Carson area
but as was mentioned before
somebody in PNM could not hook
up to somebody to a place down
in el Paso for el Paso electric
it has to be within their
territory.
So Mr chair and senator I'm
trying to figure that out
because I'm thinking of my co op
in Lee County we have a co op in
that we have to excel and so.
If they were tried in that area
they would either be sited
within league coast Lee County
real cooperative or in excel.
And if they work in excel thank
you Sir and then the head that
if they were in the co op
jurisdiction.
They don't they don't get to
participate correct.
Mr chair and senator I'm gonna
turn that to Rick because I
believe that every co op is
going to work on renewable
energy that Rick do you want to
talk about that.
Well Mister chairman Senator
that's okay it I just I'm just
trying to figure out what the
benefit is in the bill to the to
the tribes at this point I just
don't see that and certainly I
assume that in a couple years
probably will pull the co op
sand and that's going to be at
that's going to be a significant
hit to to our rural co ops I
know in northern New Mexico with
with the co opted split actually
from the north east co op it is
very expensive to pull out of
that so and co ops are not
regulated by the PRC is that
correct.
Mr
Chair Senator I'm gonna talk to
I'm going to process to pull our
Thomas because she is our tribal
expert and she can also talk
about that.
Thank you thank you thank you
Mr chairman senators so let me
go back to your last question
about the co-op's being able to
opt in and so if they try wanted
to do a project as the the the
legislation allows co op stopped
in either service territory Y.
or project by project so it is
entirely possible that a tribe
in working with its co op could
negotiate to do a community
solar project in the co op would
then opt in to the program and
this bill would create the rules
around how that project would be
done with the call up would have
to do and what the PRC would do
for bill crediting for example
so the co op can opt in on a
project by project basis and
maybe working with the tried you
would see a tribal project
within the co op system without
the whole co op building in the
program so it's not yet clear
that in certainly not pre
ordained that tribes of would
not be able to work out with
their collapse to be able to do
projects I'm in the.
A circumstance where tried has
several utilities and I think
I'm not sure in New Mexico I
don't think there's any tribes
that have
maybe PNM in one part of the
reservation and the call up
another part of the reservation
but even if there is been
certainly if the tribe has and I
owe you that services their
territory then the and the tribe
would be able to do a project in
the I owe you portion of that
territory so and not in the co
op portion of that territory so
that would make you aware you
have a split utility to utility
servicing tribe but the service
territory boundaries would still
hold even on even on the tribe
or pueblo lands thank you very
much and and evidently the coops
are regulated by the PRC so I
could have an answer to that
question I'm really most my
questions have been answered act
I guess I'm just concerned about
we talk about how and out of
state companies would not be
here comes in that but if
utility a local city or next
week unisa Palicki our county
chose to contract with a company
to do this I could be from out
of state.
I guess I'm just wondering who
has the expertise to do this
type of thing and whether at the
nonprofit or the city most
likely wouldn't go ahead and
contract with an experience
company that most likely would
be from out of state.
Just a thought Senator it Mr
chair if that is kind of what's
being considered here.
Mr statement Mr chair Senator I
will tell you from my experience
that the county was a county
project or local government we
have to follow the procurement
code.
And the procurement code does
identify
certain parameters but it gives
extra points for local
preference.
When we consider any proposal
for construction of our buying
something we can give extra
points for local preference.
So thank you Mr chairman thank
you senator and going back to
the the issue of regi regulation
and and thank you let in section
nine would talk about
subscribers to community solar
facility should not be
considered public utility
subject to regulation so they're
not going to be regulated
Under the public utility act is
that is that correct.
Are you on the committee
substitute.
It I have no idea I don't know
what it looks like this bill has
been amended what I'm looking at
look at page eleven we'll just
section nine whatever that might
be in your your bill.
School mission regulation so
this instructor organizations or
districts crackers to community
solar facility should not be
considered public utility
subject to regulation by the
commission.
Mr chair Senator.
I
guess I'm just kind of wondering
if they're not regulated I'm
they have no jurisdiction over
the community solar it just I
guess it's a little bit
concerning who watches out for
them that.
Make sure that you're treated
fairly.
The PRC is still.
Regulating the rates of the
utilities.
Representative can you explain
it better than I what I'm doing.
Yes yes senator sorry chairman
and that Senator.
the the range for the
subscription organization are
not regulated by the PRC PRC
does have the authority through
this bill to set up
consumer protections as we
talked about earlier and the the
right that are will be a credit
for subscribers which is based
on utilities costs that is also
subject to the jurisdiction as
it is currently out of the PRC.
Well thank you and good really
that's about all I have I just
remember listening and hearing
that someone said well we have
three hundred twenty five case
of sunlight in there's no
question we did that we also
have three hundred twenty five
days of of nighttime but the sun
is not shining in it so I think
that's why you need to back up
with the local utilities to fill
that void the sun is not shining
and just to think about what
happened in Texas and that
impacted our area but
fortunately with Xcel energy
which I'm very proud of the next
PS.
They were able to manage our
area so much better than are
caught which is San regulated in
Texas and that basically it that
you know certainly the the solar
panels nor the wind farms were
much help and frankly the gas
lines from so they turned to
Mexico and we all have to
acknowledge the fact that it
takes all types of energy all
across the board and I think you
might be surprised in my County
which is known for oil and gas
we really believe that all forms
of the Energy we have many wind
farms going at we have solar we
have nuclear.
We really do that we do it all
and I think that's that's
something to remember
but we want to be careful that
that the utilities that have
been there it have been reliable
I'm we don't want to put a
burden on them because at the
end of the day they are serving
many many people in our in our
state from excel to PNM all
across the board and I think
they're doing a pretty good job
of including renewables in their
portfolio and I appreciate that
that's the right thing to do and
you turn around and forced them
to purchase energy that that
don't wait when they've already
had to have contracts with other
sources of energy to make sure
that it is reliant that's unfair
and so we're doing so we're
we're doing solar on the
rooftops and I'm worried about
that industry of if this goes
in.
And I have one last question
with regard to that to that so
regards so as these things are
put in place what is the bonding
requirement for thousand who
covers the cost for bonding for
the decommissioning of these
gardens.
Mr chair and senator.
Thank you for the question I'm
gonna turn to Rick and who are.
I can start out our chairman and
Senator
I don't have a direct answer to
your question I do know that
most solar panel companies
though are recycling our old and
used
Though so what that's generally
not been an issue but I'd like
to ask hello are to to add to
add to that.
Thank you I'm and thank you the
chairman and senator so.
Typically in this in a community
solar project the subscriber
organization is the owner of the
project and so is the owner
they're responsible for the
operations and maintenance of
the project if you have a
developer who's constructing the
project they'll have a bond a
construction bond performance
bond to make sure that the the
performance gets completed and
if you're leasing land you're
going to typically have a
reclamation bond that once the
project has passed its useful
life and you do commission the
project but that would primarily
be the responsibility of the
subscriber organization it would
be part of the ongoing operating
costs of the project which you
of course we'll see in the fees
that people pay to to
unsubscribe to the project so
bonding requirements for
purposes of construction
performance and reclamation are
almost always the responsibility
of the subscriber organization
and as part of the ongoing
operational costs of the project
no different than any.
Thank you very much for that and
and Mr chair and senator and I
think that's one of the failures
of the renewable energy energy
yeah up going forward is because
in New Mexico there is no
requirement for bonding for wind
farms or solar farms they're on
private land.
At the State Land Office
requires upon the away requires
a bond if you place as on their
land but nothing on private land
requiring the land owner at to
to have a bond certainly should
required on that there's nothing
in this bill that requires and I
will tell you thirty years from
now solar farms wind farms we're
gonna be looking down the road
we're gonna wonder why we didn't
require that just like we do on
oil and gas we make mistakes and
oil and gas and now we have
wells and wells we're gonna have
or for wind wind turbines and
we're gonna have four percent
orphan at solar panels there
should be a requirement in this
legislation to require
decommissioning and somebody
should be held accountable for
purchasing those bonds and so I
would copy with the State Land
Office requires I am the only
and with regard to bonding and I
think we're going to see a
problem I'm like we have an oral
guests over the years and now
we're going to see this thirty
years down the road cause us
private landowners their
children are going to be living
in New Mexico and we're going to
be left with a mess so all of
that can be recycled just to
give you an example to remove a
wind turbine the lowest cost
that I have researched is two
hundred fifty thousand dollars
per wind turbine I don't know
what it cost it to remove that
went at the solar farm these are
things these are details it
should be worked out and should
be required in this legislation
but in any event thank you on my
questions have been answered
thank you thank you Senator
Tallman Senator Griggs.
Thank you.
Senator is the fact remains no
forward
hours late sept short answers.
The FIR is top of page two it
says that the PRC will not.
The regulating the rates of
identified a study in the bottom
of page three it.
Continue on the final page to
continue on the page three a
list ten.
Different items that the PRC is
responsible for so is it safe to
say.
The PRC.
Oversees everything except
establishing the range.
Mr chair Senator work you want
to take that.
Yes chair and senator I don't
know if you want me to step
through each one of the ten now
okay you don't have to I didn't
think so
but these are generally
characteristics have community
solar.
Overall generally and so this
will be these.
As I'm glancing through these
are mostly elements that would
be resolved in the rulemaking
process and would be done one
time and and then we'd be done
and as you know we've extended
the deadline for the school
making process so there should
be plenty of time with which to
do it.
Okay thank you going up and and
Mr chair so earlier it was
brought up.
There is concern about out of
state.
Organizations dominating
The construction management of
content.
Community solar facilities.
Someone pointed to page four
section hello.
Which stated that the.
City county for a for profit or
nonprofit.
Trad hello.
For other tribal entity
authorized to transact.
Business and the New Mexico.
Well it could be a out of state
company that was authorized as.
Transaction this in New Mexico.
Mr chair senator Tom and and
people are knows about a local
choice but as a county
commissioner we were recovered
required by the state.
To follow the state procurement
code.
The state procurement code does
have certain requirements.
How about cost and meeting this
the specifications of the
project but it does allow you to
give extra points in the project
proposal in the procurement
process for local businesses.
So right now cities and
counties.
Are required to follow state
procurement which would look at
lowest cost.
We are allowed to give extra
points.
So you are you have experience
with the local choice section.
yes thank you are chairman and
senator so to Senator Stefanics
of a point the state procurement
rules would apply to state
entities of course tribal
procurement rules would apply to
tribal projects if tribes were
using federal funding or and
frankly if any of the subscriber
organizations were using federal
funding to buy these to build
these projects grants lowcost
loans there are federal rules
around local employment and
around for example the Davis
bacon act would apply for
prevailing wage so so
procurement rules might be a
little bit different and
certainly if you had a private
entity that was located on
private land that was building a
project they wouldn't
necessarily using their own
money there there probably would
not be a way to force them to
have local preference but since
the goal is to encourage
nonprofits local nonprofits and
and local governments and tries
to be the subscriber
organizations there are lots of
both federal and state law that
would promote local preference I
think there of course would be a
challenge if you were talk about
a private company and forcing
them to hire local that that
there might be some legal issues
with that but I think the
primary goal of course is to
promote job creation in the
community.
And promote expanse of a
subscriber organizations.
thank you for that answer.
And the.
Mr chair Senator is it so is it.
The state the.
The critics.
in ten that the state.
Organizations would come in and
dominate.
This industry is a scare tactic.
Mr chair Senator Tom and I
believe that
Everybody's comments are valid
and we don't take it to be a
serious problem.
So I can be sure that.
This issue will be taken over by
big out of state corporations.
Mr chair Senator comment I don't
believe so but I cannot assure
you of that all right.
So yes the critics say that'll
hurt low income people do.
Your opponents say that's not
true what what is the truth.
Mr chair Senator would one of my
experts like to talk about the
low income population that's
going to be covered.
Senator Stefanics Mr Chairman
and Senator I'll be happy to
address that so the experience
around the country is that low
income ratepayers who are able
to subscribe to community solar
projects experience savings in
their energy bills so if they if
we find a way to incentivize we
have a thirty percent car about
it incentivized through other
subsidies that are possible for
example as I mentioned before
federal grant funding that
assist low income then then the
the low income ratepayers who
subscribe are on average going
to save money and that's
important right now the energy
equity a higher proportion of
low income of of folks spend
more of their money on energy so
that for those savings will be
real for them I and then has
Rick is pointed out of the way
the the program is designed
there will be no cost shifting
is there's no intention for cost
shifting so one of the issues
raised earlier was that low
income customers what that don't
participate.
I will have to pay higher rates
and that's because there's
impact of a claim of cost
shifting I and so this is
intended to avoid cost shifting
so low income communities that
participate ratepayers will save
money and low income ratepayers
who don't participate will not
see higher bills because of it.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you.
Thousands for your.
Answer and one the one last
question Mr chair up the beach I
it says a this moment does not
appear to prevent public utility
company the owner.
Under this circumstance the
public utility or to fill it
with the both the seller and the
buyer there any danger that the
majority public utility could
to.
It could the.
By upper could to get into the.
Into these the solar business.
The solar business and kind of
dominate.
Because they have the ability
to.
To.
Through IBM owner and operator
of community solar facilities.
Mr chair Senator that's a great
question when I and I'm not sure
if you heard earlier when I was
on the county commission and
Santa Fe we requested that PNM
actually the cooperate with
Santa Fe County and developing
community solar and they weren't
interested.
Currently PNM did participate in
our workgroup.
And when we had a separate
single meeting with them to talk
about their.
Interesting capability of being
involved in community solar.
They indicated that they had
their plans for the next thirty
years.
And I said that is great why
don't you take some of that
space in the next thirty years
to do some community solar
projects.
We have no objection it PNM
wants to be the developer of
some community solar because
we're talking about small
projects we're not talking about
large projects return about five
megawatts to benefit some
residential customers that
include low income.
Thank you for the
response I'm sorry I missed
your.
You're a previous statement
about that must have been
Working at my a a.
Capital outlay.
Thank thank you thank you
Senator thank you all the people
who participated in today's
discussion that's all I have
thank you.
Senator Griggs.
Before a Senator before you go
on of people that are on of this
is going to be our last bill so
we're just gonna roll everything
over after the this bill to a
Saturday so.
Thank you all so Senator Griggs.
Thank you Mr chairman and you
know data centers the phonics
Center Lopez and now you can see
maybe why some of us just
sponsor liquor bill.
Of.
I don't know you know I I should
I listen to it over ideas staff
and then they get I get a
comment here to comment there
and I get kind of turn around on
on some of the staff trying to
trying to be sure I can I can
keep it straight there's a
comment saying like earlier
about the fact that.
You know after state companies
would come in you know and and
build these things which of
course.
In looking at the bill they're
not restricted to they they
certainly could come in
and then shared institutional
phonics you talk about the the
local preference in building if
a
If a municipality or county I
supposed they would then be they
would be the subscriber
organization and they were just
be hiring the construction out
to somebody and then maybe a
local company would win the bid
to build of the shore the
community solar farm for action
of the.
A better description and in and
Senator functions that would
what you mean
Am I correct in that yes.
Senator.
Okay so.
And then the municipality would
be the the owner of the okay
It looks to me like and I.
You guys tell me whether I'm I'm
wrong.
If a
Developer comes in who who are
whether they're private company
whether major private company
that be right if they're not a
of the nationality if they come
in.
They get subscribers.
They they're under should scribe
because they they can't get
enough to to get to the
whatever.
Whatever the rating would be.
Then they
The utility has to in a year's
time by back or pay for the the
power.
It should have been generated it
was not totally subscribe to.
Show it it looks to me like an
on.
I'll give you an example.
In in years past in the in the
Permian basin.
We're we drilled oil with and we
drilled hundreds of oil wells
and wells passed through what
today is is the is the hottest
place in the world it's the the
shale play in the Permian basin.
And we drilled three that shale
and and but well.
Wouldn't really produce it
because it is to.
It's too tight it's too hard so
with the advent of horizontal
drilling they were able to go
down those.
No shale Jones and Frank and
open down in a variety of places
and able to produce that and
they had next to no risk.
Because they knew where the
shale formation wise because
they drove all those other wells
through it.
It looks to me like.
These guys who were the to
shoulder developers it's not a
municipality.
It is I mean it's kind of like a
guaranteed deal they don't get
enough subscribers but it
doesn't matter because they have
to the utility asked by the
subscribe Power.
and my and my mission that or in
my and more right is it almost
is almost pretty much a
guaranteed deal to them that
they will be able to if they
don't get the subscribers.
The utility has to pick up and
by the by the rash so they're
they're risk.
Is very very limited just like.
The oil wells but now is able to
go in the in the horizontal
shale formation the rest became
greatly mitigated because we
knew where what.
Initiations these guys come in.
And can
And and and their risk of of
anything is pretty well
mitigated as as well am I am are
right or am I am I off base.
Mr chair Senator I'm going to
try and that to regulate them.
Thank.
And senator
Your right to talk about risk
because it's the risk of the
developer to provide enough
subscribers to be able to get
the financing to build their
project so it's it's not a
speculative DO where someone
would go out and drill hole or
in this case build a project
without having assurance of a
large number of subscribers
To rely on utility as the
backstop I just doesn't work
economically because the avoided
cost rate is in the range of two
cents so a developer cannot make
a project pencil out.
If they're selling kilowatt
hours for two cents.
Okay so show Mr chair and and
and Rick the risk is pretty
pretty minimal in this project
if unless they just can't sell
to subscribe.
Mr chair and senator I know I
think that's I think the exact
opposite of what I was trying to
say at least in the any you know
me and under understanding that
but so yeah please please tell
me again sure so in order to
build the project the developer
needs to have subscriptions and
has to have a substantial number
of subscriptions I don't know
the exact percentage but it's.
Going to need to be close to
fully subscribed in order for to
make the project work so they
get to subscriptions before that
bill the project because they
need to have financing.
The financing company investment
house will say where's your
revenue coming from if it's just
the utility providing a revenue
that's insufficient to pay for
the debt costs for the project
they need to have subscriptions
from individual customers you
know maybe an anchor tenant and
residential customers
so in order to make the project
work.
They cannot do it simply by so I
unsubscribed energy to the
utility.
Okay sure that I mean I think it
that clears that up for me they.
Well I'm and I say in in order
to get financing.
Some of these guys are gonna
have to be or probably will be.
Larger companies and getting
financing may may not
particularly be an issue to that
they may be self finance.
And
sure I guess I guess Rick I mean
it depends on if if you're
trying to borrow money or not to
run the run the project if you
if you don't have to be
borrowing money.
You could subscribe.
Twenty percent of it.
And then count on well I'm gonna
get more if I don't get more the
utility has to buy the power.
I'm still in I'm still in a
little bit of an issue as far as
a capital cost but
but that might be a pretty
pretty slick slick video for
somebody.
Because of the you know the
limited the live action when
they can self finance I guess
would be the key if you can't if
we can't sell financial then the
then that problem you're
probably absolutely right
You guys I've I've listened to
shore so we're staff for a for a
long time.
And you know I haven't gotten to
that point to where I'm just
completely sold on the fact that
it's going to work.
and I'm I don't think there's
anything is changed my mind I
think that there's definitely
been some staff that has been
brought up that makes it a
little bit a little bit
different.
But and I think the work on it's
been.
Here you guys worked hard I I'm
not going to go to say you have
and I think you have.
But I I really don't believe
that is going to do what to.
Well I don't think it's going to
going to work out the way you
you do but anyway Mr chair in
that and the senators I'm
probably ask all the questions I
can ask and I just appreciate
sponsor for state and with it
so thank you Mr chairman thank
you senator.
Thank you Senator Griggs of.
I have a couple of questions of
I think one of them the
questions that I had the Senator
and I want to thank the work
that has gone on.
I know this is part of a of a
Memorial Day indicated on the
working group that was involved
in course you know the working
the pandemic the tribe as well.
The question I had that the I
think Senator Kernan had talked
on is the the for this.
I know that I know we talk about
picture reads kind of as a as a
model but K. Carson had to leave
tri state.
In order to to do what they
needed to do.
And so I know the weeds radius
earlier talked about it and I
think I like you know
It and I know that tribes have
had trouble working with coops.
So the idea of the coops.
Up in in.
it I guess the question I is
like if let's say a Pueblo
outside of Kit Carson.
Wants to pursue this but the
local court refuses to do this.
What recourse this the tribe
half.
Thank you Mr chair and I'm I
hope you are still on because
this is her area of expertise.
Yes ma'am I am sorry I had to
turn off my video thank you Mr
chair so the the bill allows the
co ops to opt in I and as I said
earlier if the tribe or pueblo I
can work out an arrangement with
their co op for a specific
project the co op I would be
able to opt in for just that
project and not have to opt in
for the whole service territory
if it does come about that I
tried once to do a project and
can't work out something with
the co op in the coop does not
agree to opt in of the tribe of
course is a member of the co op
so there hopefully as some of
further ability or discussion
with that relationship that that
that we would see that
but yes that is a risk and there
is nothing in the bill that
would require the co op to
approve and go forward with the
project and kind of to a point
made earlier the three year out
a review of course would give
both the PRC and the interim
committees the ability to see
what is happening with co ops
opting in and to even hear from
the tribes in the pueblos about
whether they are experiencing
any
obstacles or issues with call
options for tribal projects.
Thank you for that in the.
So.
So the comments that were made
that the tribes can do this
already.
Of is in this with this is that
not true then if.
If if the co ops or I'm talking
about co ops because most of my
the tribes are represented are
in rural areas.
So they really can't do anything
because if the calls are
refusing to opt in then they're
kind of stuck is that is that a
true testament.
Hi you Mr chairman yes I think
that's a fair assessment that
today without the community
solar bill the tribe's cannot do
a project without the co ops
approval and cooperation because
they have to interconnect to the
co op system.
And so the tribe has to go
through an interconnection
process with the co op and if
the co op
slow what's that process we're
refuses interconnection of the
tribes would basically be in the
same position so again you know
reason kid Carson R. I'm the
exception to the rule since they
were able to work together on
that project and so I think that
with this this bill would
assuming that a co op ops in and
works with the tribe on a
project the major benefit of
this bill is that it sets the
ground rules for how that solar
community project will be
regulated from the tribal side
which the tribe has the
jurisdiction to do certainly the
the rules around bill crediting
which will be important for the
economics and the the tribal
members savings of that project
and the customer service
customer protections and the
other things that the PRC would
oversee so it creates rules that
the tribal project will also be
able to to having to follow
because right now there are no
rules right now you make a deal
if you can make a deal and there
are no rules so so it did it
reduces that risk and create
certainty and what the rules are
going to be go forward for
tribal projects.
Thank you for that response of
the the other thing that the
other question I had or have is
I know I support this bill but
as we get deeper into were in
the weeds of some things that
that might be of concern to a
tribe because.
We right now or in the verge of
you know the locating or right
away with J. med.
In light of these distribution
lines.
No sixty five sixty nine KV and
up run through tribal
reservations.
So why would a call up opt in if
they are signing twenty year
leases payments to tribes when
these community solar projects.
Require less transmission.
On those lines so if that
happens.
To the right now I know we're
discussion about what happens to
rate payers that are not
subscribers what happens to
those ratepayers within the
court system.
Does the value of the right away
then diminish.
I mean it did because we're
going to do it right now I mean
we're we're in that kind of
situation right now and I don't
know the you know I know our
tribe supports it but I just
talked to our technical adviser
Baker Tilly as I call in this to
thirty minutes ago.
And he did say that this could
affect.
And so I probably need to go
back to what tribal council
meeting tomorrow said we're
having one to have our attorneys
and folks look at this because
this could have real monetary
impact.
On our tried with our lease
payments yes it'll be beneficial
for local solar project.
But there's a lot to me we
always say that that was on the
details and so I'd like to hear
your response miss Prasar on of
the
of of Senator and and this bill
or.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
when I made the comment earlier
that the bill crediting will be
set at the utility level by the
PRC because that's how the PRC
sets rates is that the utility
level then that's exactly what's
going to happen with a coop if
the tried if the Pueblo comes up
with the project with the co op
the P. R. C. will set the bill
credit rate in in the bill in
this legislation the bill credit
rate would allow the subscribers
to get credit for the generation
that they don't use and for the
transmission line that they
don't use.
But.
It also will allow the PRC
because the co op and the
subscriber for innovation would
come to the PRC looking to set
that bill credit right so not
knowing the very particulars and
so not being able to say whether
there will or won't be a
financial impact on the value of
the lease of the value right
away a sixty nine KV line is
within the distribution system
whether it's providing power to
the Pueblo or providing power
through the Pueblo to somebody
else all of that will have to be
looked at and so every projects
going to be different and that's
the point of having the bill
credit rates looked at by the
PRC and that'll be part of the
economics of the subscriber of
the of the community solar
project as well it may very well
be that there are trade offs to
make and as we pointed out
earlier there's some real
benefits that will be captured
in the grid by the co op or by
the community by the Pueblo and
so some analysis might have to
be done on a project by project
basis I determined to determine
what that is I do think it is
premature and I'm not sure if
you're if you're a financial
adviser Baker Tilly is the is a
friend of mine I know the guys
over at Baker Tilly so so I'm
not going to I'm not going to
pre judge of their work but I do
think that this is really a
project by project analysis and
it's very hard to to say and
that's the the bill is built
that way the legislation is
built for this bill credit
utility by utility analysis.
It with respect to the project
and I think that's probably
until that happens it's really
hard to say what if any
potential impact this might have
on state your negotiation of
right away.
I can't imagine what the impact
is but that doesn't mean there
isn't one I just would suggest
that it might be a little
premature to think that there
could be an impact right now.
I appreciate your response to I
I just curious because I don't
know why in the it if if because
right now to him as well elector
co up probably deals with.
Seven or eight tribes right
away.
And some of them I don't know in
what state is of those lease
agreements they are we're right
now of the ready to negotiate a
twenty year lease and I know
other pueblos of RT and the
Navajo and others have already
done there's so I guess.
You know not knowing the details
what will motivate them to get
involved in this because if they
have already signed right away
agreements it'll they need those
electrons going to the
transmission lines in order to
get the return on investment I
mean it is.
It is so I'm I'm gonna vote for
this bill because I've been
supportive of it but you know
I'm the tribal minister for the
tribe now and I'm in now I'm
looking at in terms of my tribe
in a different way in on both
sides you know and and and my
friend you know what we do have
a long conversation with the guy
Baker Tilly because it was like
pretty quick same kind of
response that you made is that
they are going to be something
but we just don't know what
that's going to be.
So I appreciate the the response
and that thank you senator a I
know there's a lot of work that
has gone in to this I mean this
as Senator Griggs said like the
liquor bill you know you you
pull on here it's like a
polycentric you know where you
know strategically we were
talking about the complexity of
the co ops and how many
communities and try to go
through you.
Pope one here it's going to pull
another and I just don't know
what that impact is going to be
so
I think that that's it important
for me of I know fellow long
discussion and the.
Of Senator again a thank you for
for all the work I I I I do get
a chance to participate any of
the program because to me the
summer of planning events and so
forth but the I appreciate all
the work that has gone on so I
believe that's all the questions
we have from the
From the committee.
so what is the pleasure of the
committee this year I moved to
pass we have a motion for two
passed by is our Majority
Leader.
Call one second.
We have a second by Senator
Kalman lane would you a please a
take role.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Griggs no.
Senator Hamblen.
Senator Hickey.
Now explain.
Senator how to meal.
Yes.
Senator Kernan.
Senator Sanchez.
Madam.
Yes.
Senator Wirth yes.
let's see Senator Brandt.
No.
Senator.
Her phone.
Mr Chairman she should be on her
phone she was going to dial in
on her drive back to Los crucis
all.
Senator Padilla.
Yes okay.
Of Senator Shendo.
Yes.
It is five to four do you want
to wait for Hamblen are you okay
I to the affirmative and for in
the negative.
Notice excuse for of need to
have a due pass okay this to
phonics.
Chairman and members of the
committee and all my co sponsors
and all the hard workers in that
work group thank you very much
and senator of picking wanted to
explain this vote yes.
Thank you thank you
Very very conflicted on this
this is you know we hear all the
time the right direction there
really is so much work has gone
into but I think it's about
ninety five percent there and I
think that Senator Brandt
suggestion that working on this
over the summer to that number
of the poll I I I can see the
leader shaking his head but in
business you know we we are just
because you're almost there
doesn't mean you're there it
means go back and get it right
and that's the that's the
perspective I'm coming from it's
almost right but and I know
there's been a lot of work
but
I think it could do with some
more homework and I think
Senator Shendo brought up some
issues and so forth so I I
appreciate everything that's
been done I know it's tough to
ask for a little more but in if
I were a business I'd say go
back and come back
and figure this out so anyway
but I think it's almost there
thank you very much Senator
Stefanics for all the work the
yes and Senator Lopez on in
getting it here and this someone
said to me
you know look before you leap
this kind of what I'm saying
that then there's he who
hesitates is lost and the just
time we got to get moving so
thank you for all the work.
Thank you thank you members of
the committee that concludes our
a.
Laura Committee for tonight and
and we will see you all of
Saturday morning at nine o'clock
so thank you and and have a good
night.
I voted no.
Eight rigs but noted on.
On the.
The.
That is gathered.
All.
Not just over.
Right payers the one and and so
will the.
