Yeah, it's that, it's that
close. Um, all right, we have an
ambitious as usual agenda, and
I'd like to thank the committee
for being willing for doing
that.
Um, we're gonna start off with
Senator Hickey's, uh, SB 20, um,
for those of you who might be in
the room who haven't presented
in this committee before, you do
have a 20 minute time limit that
also includes your expert. And
then what we will do is go to
the community. We will do the,
the movement on the committee
sub in just a minute because you
do have the committee sub,
correct?
Um
And we will count the roll and
in just a second, but I wanted
to go ahead and make sure that
you know that you will be able
to present. You have 20 minutes,
you will be timed. Then we'll go
to the audience and then we will
go to um to the committee. So if
you will, Rebecca, please take
the role.
Senator Figueroa, here,
Senator Jaramillo,
Senator O'Malley.
Senator Paul.
Senator Ramos, Senator Sanchez.
Sareche, excused.
Senator work, excuse, Senator
Bergman's.
Senator Hamlin, we have 84 corn.
All right, we do have a quorum.
So I'm gonna have you turn off
your mic.
were all notoriously bad. This
is like the legislative version
of your muted.
Or you need to unmute your mic.
Um, so let's go on set, we do, I
do need a motion, uh, for
movement of the committee sub
for discussion.
So
So you want to go ahead and
actually say I moved the
committee stuff for discussion.
Do you want to give us the
Yes, uh, 0.230746.2.
All right, do we have a second?
Right
Thank you. Any opposed?
It's
Yeah, OK.
All right, so Senator Hickey,
uh, we are discussing your
committee sub on Senate Bill 20,
if you will, go ahead and view
the time is yours. Thank you,
uh, Madam Chairwoman, and thank
you committee for allowing us to
go back and fix the bill. Um,
I've laid out the rationale for
the bill to last me, so I'm not
gonna go through that
essentially we're presenting
this bill because nicotine is
the gateway drug to addiction.
And um the
Other key component is that we
know from multiple states who
have raised taxes on nicotine
vaping and so forth that the
uptake by youth has gone down
substantially. And so
essentially, that's what we're
doing here. The main components
that have changed in the bill is
that the, the original bill had
an increase on cigarettes. We've
removed that. The original bill
had an increase on cigars and
little cigars that has been
removed.
The tax on tobacco products,
which is e-cigs, vaping,
nicotine pouches, uh, went from
60% of wholesale to 40% and we
also did change the definition
of nicotine on page 4, J line
13, nicotine means a form of the
chemical nicotine, including any
salt or complex regardless of
whether uh the
chemicals naturally are
synthetically derived and
includes nicotine nicotinic.
alkaloids and nicotine analogs,
and we put that in there because
we are seeing evolution of
nicotine by the synthesizers of
that, uh, last time there was a
potential cost to the general
fund, uh, I have Brandon Gray
here who can testify that there
will be no, now that we've made
these changes, there will be no
cost to the general fund, and it
will raise probably still in an
estimate area range of 5 to 10
million to add to the
Fund for nicotine uptake
prevention for, uh, between ages
5 and 25, and that's essentially
the bill, madam chair.
All right, thank you so much.
Uh, just based on the
committee's substitute for
Senate Bill 20, uh, how many in
the audience by raising your
hands will show that you are in
support of this bill.
We have 2.
3
OK, keep your hands up if you
will.
Alright, 3 in support of this
bill.
We have 2 online that are in
support, uh, by show of hands
how many in the audience are
opposed to this bill.
12345.
All right, so we, I got you. So,
what we are going to do is if I
will, uh, uh, you each get a
minute apiece if we can have
these supporters first come up.
stand in line behind the Senate
sponsor.
Then we'll give you the portable
mic.
And you have one minute.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, Linda Seal
representing the American Cancer
Society Cancer Action Network,
and we fully support this
increase in the other tobacco
products because we know that is
where youth are going. They're
not starting with cigarettes
anymore. They're going to vaping
and chewing and the little
pouches. We know that the
tobacco industry spends about
$33 million advertising just in
New Mexico and quite honestly.
though
They don't specifically target
youth, we know that an
advertisement that's out there
in the public is um especially
um targeting, um, youth, and
that's who's utilizing these
products. So we stand in strong
support of this.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, uh, Masipa, the
American Heart Association. Just
a quick stats, uh, in New
Mexico, uh, 25% of the high
school kids are weeping, 14% of
the middle school kids are
weeping in New Mexico, and the
tobacco industry is creating new
products, and this bill includes
all those new products,
including the synthetic
products. You know, the argument
from the tobacco industry is
like, you know, synthetic
doesn't
is not derived from tobacco, so
it can be taxed, but, you know,
nicotine is nicotine, it causes,
you know, serious heart
problems, strokes, and so we, we
strongly urge you to, you know,
approve this bill. Thank you.
Matthew, if you will, unmute
yourself.
Yes
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I'm sorry, I, I'm in
opposition.
But you're in opposition? OK.
Uh, Leland Gold, are you in
opposition or are you in
support?
Leland is in opposition. All
right. So if I can, uh, we'll
have the folks in here who are
in opposition, please line up
behind the Senate sponsor.
And again, you have one minute
and then we'll go to Matthew and
Leland online.
Bast Hall on behalf of Native
Trading Associates for a small
family owned business in
Albuquerque with 62 employees
who's been.
Serving New Mexico over 25
years.
Regrettably, we oppose this
legislation, it's just not time,
it's unnecessary. Mexico is
awash in cash. We have all time
revenues at their highest ever
in our state's history.
And the programs you have in
place are working.
They're doing their job,
evidenced by the most recent CDC
study.
Showing nicotine pouch use among
youth low and e-cigarette at the
lowest level in a decade.
We're experiencing the highest
inflation we've ever had.
At the same time, tobacco taxes
are the most regressive of all
taxes.
Hurting the most financially
challenged people in our
State
We'd ask you to oppose this, and
I just would ask you if you
I've ever used nicotine gum or.
These these pouches.
They help me stop smoking 8
years ago. I'm thankful.
To have them, they're far
healthier. I would ask you to
please oppose this.
You're gonna drive people to the
black market. Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Dan
Kaufman. I'm vice president for
Gem State Distributors in
Albuquerque, New Mexico, whereas
a medium sized, uh, family owned
wholesaler.
Um, and on behalf of my company
and the 420 customers I
delivered to each week. We are
against this bill.
The bill proposes a 40% tax
increase on vapor products and
nicotine pouches. This will
devastate, have devastating
consequences for retailers,
wholesalers, and convenience
store owners in New Mexico.
Higher taxes does not always
mean higher revenue for the
state.
A high tax like this will drive
border sales to the other
states, border states always
benefit when one state imposes a
higher tax.
And of course, excessive taxes
create an environment for black
market, so.
For these reasons, I
respectfully ask that you vote
no on Senate Bill 20.
He's the beta uh try strategies
New Mexico for Philip Morris
International. We stand in
opposition to this bill simply
because Philip Morris
International has committed
itself to a less harmful uh
tobacco lifestyle for all of our
customers. One of the bigger
things that is happening is that
we are seeing a decline and we
are taking our position of not
marketing directly to youth for
our pro our pouching products
and other uh heat products that
are becoming online. These
Products not only help
individuals who, like myself,
who are a long time smoker, find
a way to, uh, a less harmful
ingestion uh procedure, but also
as for all the reasons that were
said before, um, this is a
regressive tax and it affects uh
those in New Mexico are trying
to live up a better, cleaner
life. Thank you.
Right, thank you very much. We
have uh Matthew and Monty on I'm
sorry, Matthew and Leland
online.
Um, Matthew, if you will, uh, go
ahead and please unmute
yourself.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, we were unaware of
changes to this bill until the
beginning of um this committee
meeting, uh, we have a lot of
questions as of now, we are
still currently in opposition.
We're a small family owned
business in Albuquerque since
1976, um.
Premium cigars and premium pipe
tobacco have their own
definition in the federal tax
code and now in the New Mexico
tax code, we believe, uh, we
should be in a separate category
from cigarettes, um, vaping,
nicotine pouches, we're 100%
natural and the most recent
studies published on the FDA
website show that 1 to 2 premium
cigars a day are negligible to
one's health.
Thank you.
OK.
Thank you so much. Uh, Leland,
if you will, you've got one
minute. What will happen is that
you will see a 30 seconds pop up
in your chat, uh, that gives you
the 32nd warning. Uh, you're
welcome to unmute yourself and
go ahead and speak. You have one
minute.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Leland Gould, and I
represent the New Mexico
petroleum Market Association.
Our members are hundreds of
small business owners in every
city in New Mexico. The majority
of our customers are lower
income New Mexicans. Our small
business owners believe this
legislation unfairly targets and
penalizes those New Mexicans
that can least afford this tax
increase. For this reason, our
small business owners opposed
Senate Bill 20. Thank you.
All right, thank you, Leland. Is
there anybody else online?
Um
OK, Ben, you have one minute,
uh, 30 seconds, you will see in
your chat box that you've got a
32nd countdown. Go ahead, Ben.
Madam Chair, committee members,
my name is Ben Lollinger. I'm
the executive director of the
New Mexico Cannabis Chamber of
Commerce. We don't stand in
opposition to this bill, but we
are concerned about a
redefinition of e-liquid, page 3
towards the bottom. Um, e-liquid
is currently defined to not
include cannabis products, and
that language is struck from the
current version. Cannabis
already has a taxing scheme
including no sales tax.
No GRT for patients enrolled in
the medical cannabis program. So
we would ask that the sponsor
consider not striking that
language that would exclude
cannabis as an e-liquid. Thank
you.
All right. Thank you so much.
Um, anybody else, uh, in
opposition or in support.
Otherwise, we'll return it back
to the sponsor to go ahead and
respond to those public
testimony.
Senator Hickey,
5 minutes
and uh committee members, I
would like to focus on a few
things. Uh, this is not a
revenue bill for revenue for New
Mexico. It's revenue of 5 $10
million to go directly into
prevention and education
programs for youth. Um,
The uh cigars are taxed at 50
cents. That's the maximum that
uh is in the bill and the little
cigars equal cigarettes. So, uh,
the issue in terms of the
striking of not including any
substance containing cannabis or
oil derived from cannabis. This
is a tobacco product bill and
tobacco product, uh, the tax,
uh, of the 40% is defined on
page 5, a product other than
cigarettes made.
Some containing tobacco or
nicotine, whether natural
synthetic that is intended for
human consumption. So that's
what the bill is about. Uh, it
does not involve the cannabis
component, so don't need to
really change that and it will
not be an additional tax, uh, on
marijuana, uh, with that, uh, I
conclude and uh happy to answer
any questions from the
committee. All right, thank you
so much and so committee just
with this committee substitute,
um, previously this bill was
held, but because of the
modifications that the
sponsor made
This is a bill we will be voting
on.
At this point. So if I can, I
would like to open it up to the
committee for anybody who has
questions.
Center had a meal. Madam Chair,
if I the senator could help me
with this, I've been told by a
number of people that when
you're trying to quit,
cigarettes or or tobacco use.
That not everyone can afford the
nicotine. I, I believe, is it a
gum? Is it a patch? But the
people who are trying to wing
off of cigarettes, then rely on
the pouch. Is there a difference
in the amount of tobacco in that
pouch versus a cigarette to make
that argument to hold true.
Madam Chair and senator, thank
you for that question. Uh, the
nicotine amount can change
depending upon the vendor of the
product, up, up and down the,
um, and, and the same can be in
the pouch. So it's really a, a
buyer's choice in terms of that
situation. There is a program
for Medicaid in terms of people
who can't afford um that is
funded under the current tobacco
tax revenues that come in
through.
The settlement that will provide
them with pouches and other
materials free so that they
don't have to purchase those.
Um, and, uh, yes, I mean the,
the, uh the, the track record
for adults.
Stopping smoking with, with the
patches, pouches, etc. uh, if I
recall correctly, is pretty low.
I mean, that's a reason again,
we're aiming at uh before the
frontal lobe solidifies,
particularly in men, um, under
age 25 were usually about 30
when we do that. Um, and so it's
pretty tough to break that
habit, the older that you are.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Senator, and I thank you. I
heard you say my second question
and and final question, this
isn't an additional tax on
cannabis, did I hear you say
this, this is not an attack on
cannabis if you read the bill
carefully, it does not tax on
tobacco products which are
defined to be nicotine-based
products. Thank you, Senator,
and thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator Jaramillo.
Senator Ramos, a Madam Chair.
Um, thank you, Senator, for
bringing this to us today. Um
you said
Uh, cigars and little cigars
weren't taxed, but on page 6,
line 16 through.
20 there is uh
Tax on the
Right
Um, Madam Chair and Senator,
there, there, there has always
been, this is back to the tax
that was already existed on
cigars and little cigarettes. It
just defines it more clearly.
OK and uh so, so they're,
they're, um, I mean, they're
all, there has been this tax, I
can't remember exactly. I can
get one of the witnesses if you
want to know that, but it
basically goes, there's no
change, the taxes they're paying
is what they're, what they uh
will continue to pay in the
future with no increase.
And why are the uh tribes not
exempted in your bill?
Um
They're all, they're
automatically exempted, um, and
they could, and I don't have
enough lawyerly skills to
describe how it is that they're
already segregated out in terms
of the products that they sell,
uh, on their land, um, they tend
to, my understanding is that
they tend to follow, um, lower,
but follow changes and again
cigarettes, uh, is probably the
main product and that's not
being taxed in any additional.
And Madam Chair, uh, senator,
what, what's to stop a company
from going to uh uh tribe or, or
uh
Uh, reservation and rent a spot
or buy a spot from them to
settle within their sovereign
nation and sell these products
at a lower price.
Man.
Uh, Madam Chair and senator, I
think the tribe should probably
stop them because they are
already selling them.
And they don't want the
competition on their same land
when they're already able to get
put the wrong.
Levy, whatever it is, on the
products.
Uh, Madam Chair, does this bill
tax on individual components of
an electronic device.
It is not an enclosed system and
care center.
Um
I'm gonna look to, I mean, in
terms of your worrying, um,
I think it is.
The
That the components.
Would be come under tobacco
product.
Uh, definition, and
A
Excuse me.
3
Thank you. Um
I'm sorry, I got my pages out of
order here.
A device that can be used to
deliver aerosol vaporized as
includes any component part or
accessory of such a device that
is used during the operation of
the device, um, but it's not
include the battery.
OK, so, Madam Chair, senator the
components, madam chair,
Madam Chair, Senator, um, so
If a, if a electronic device
doesn't have nicotine in it, are
we taxing it the same way that
we're taxing tobacco products.
The device itself, um.
No, and then I again have to go
back to the.
tobacco product means a product
other than cigarettes made from
containing tobacco or nicotine
to their natural synthetic that
is intended for human
consumption. There's a likely
consume. So just to be clear,
Madam Chair, um, so if there's
an electronic device, a charger,
and also the the e-ci that goes
into the device. They're,
Um
So, uh, Madam Chair, I'm we're
getting into a little kind of.
Small pieces here. Um, could I
have the question repeated.
Yes, you might, but if you want
your expert to speak, we can do
that as well.
OK, if you will, please, uh,
identify yourself and then go
ahead and answer the question.
Still recovering from a cold,
sorry. Um.
My name is Brendan Gray. I'm an
economist at the Legislative
Finance Committee. Um, I'm not
here to support or oppose the
bill just as expert uh to
provide expert testimony where I
can also say, um this is I'm I'm
not a tax lawyer, but, you know,
this is a revenue that I cover.
Um, and the only piece of
information I wanted to add for
the committee and, and for you,
Senator.
Was that my understanding of um
Subsection E on lines.
We
Uh, 17 through 21, um, that
construction.
The way that the e-cigarettes
are currently being taxed.
Should continue to be the way
that they're taxed under this
committee. That's my
interpretation.
OK
And, and Madam Chair, um,
senator, you know, when I was
on, when I was a chair of
tobacco in 2019, 2020, we, we
did everything we could to uh
tax uh.
Uh, the actual cigarettes a
little more than all the
electronic devices so that
people would utilize the
electronic device and the
pouches and what have you to try
and stop smoking and get those
smokes in their lungs and uh.
I, I just, I'm just surprised we
don't have a big sponsored bill
that was worked on throughout
the, throughout the interim, but
uh that's my comment. Thank you
very much, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator Ramos.
Questions from the rest of the
committee.
See no further questions. What
is the will of the committee?
Over
Du or well, I do not pass on the
original bill and I do pass in
the committee substitute for
Senate Bill 20.
Hey, we have a motion. Do we
have a second? Second from
Senator O'Malley. Rebecca, if
you will, please take the role.
Senator Figueroa.
Senator had a meal.
Senator O'Malley.
Senator Paul.
Senator Ramos. No.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator chair.
Senator.
Senator Bergmans. Yes.
Senator Hamblin.
Yes.
We have 4 yeses and 3 nos.
Right, on a 4 to 3, you now go
to Senate Finance. Thank you
very much.
Sure thing, thank you.
So we have Senator Sendo.
She's all right, you want to
turn off your mic.
Yeah, Senator Jaramillo, if
you're ready to go, then we'll
go ahead and get you in and then
bring in Senator Shindo.
on finance.
Yeah, there's a, there's a lot
going on in finance right now,
so.
Oh yeah, except Josh.
So after Senator Jaramillo of
Senator Schendo comes into the
room, then we'll go to Senator
Schendo next.
Thank you Madam Chair. In front
of you is Senate Bill 159, and
what this bill would do is allow
for a special independent
theater dispensing license to an
owner or operator of an
independent theater.
This license would be valid for
one year at a cost of $100 and
would need to be renewed
annually.
With this special license, Madam
Chair.
The theater would be limited on
what they could serve. So they
could serve no more than 26
ounces of wine or 212 ounce
servings of beer per customer.
Now joining me is Alan Sunnis,
the owner and operator of Sala,
an independent theater in Los
Alamos, which hosts events most
of the time in Los Alamos. We
don't have uh.
Community center or a, a civic
center where we could come
together to meet typically Salah
becomes the place where it's not
only viewing movies, but let's
just take for example, the
viewing of the movie
Oppenheimer.
Discussions were had with
different experts in the fields
or scientific fields that led to
the movie that were
unclassified, and even notes and
talking to directors who did
independent films on Oppenheimer
and the legacy of Los Alamos,
at, at these events, food could
be served, and in this case, if
we have this license, we could
also have the serving of uh beer
or wine, also joining me is
Janice Kris, the economic
development program manager of
Los Alamos Main Street.
And with that, Madam Chair,
we're ready to hear from anyone
who might support or oppose the
spill and to field questions
from the committee. Thank you.
All right, thank you, Senator
Jaramillo.
Do you want to have your experts
say a few words? Sure.
Hello, my name is Alan Saenz. I
am the owner of Sala Event
Center in Los Alamos.
Uh, it is Salah is a community
project we bought an old movie
theater, a 4plex, and we have
renovated so now Sala, it is
open to the community and we can
show er Hollywood movies in Los
Alamos, but we host many other
events like independent films,
and we also do festivals,
corporate meetings, birthday
parties, uh, so many events at
Sala right now and.
of being an empty building in
downtown Los Alamos now it
thrives for the community, one
of the challenges that we have
encountered to host a multiple
events. It is the how hard it is
to work with local brew pops
that can offer alcohol because
they are limited on staff or
resources or sometimes it
doesn't make sense for them to
attend to small events that they
will not generate anything. So
having
The option to provide beer and
wine for multiple events in our
community, it will be important
as a, as a community center but
also for a local business to be
able to be sustainable and have
uh another source and provide
better services to these events.
Thank you.
Thank you so much.
I'm Jacqueline Connolly. I'm the
executive director for Los
Alamos Main Street and Creative
District, but I'm here on behalf
of the New Mexico Coalition for
Main Street Communities as a
president. We encourage you to
support this bill, not only for
the revenue stream that will
provide a small business owner
like Alan, um, or the
nonprofits, many of our main
streets actually, uh, help
manage and operate the local
municipalities, uh local
historic theater, um, but they
would also provide uh.
More opportunities for to have
modern amenities so that people
will continue to engage with
their, uh, historic theater.
Again, these are spaces across
the state where this might be um
a venue that they've had for 50,
60 years and has a lot of local
meaning, um, for many
communities in New Mexico, the
local theater is their largest
public indoor space, and they
are often uh historic and have
been a key component of
community pride and have the
unique ability uh to be a
multi-generational uh interest.
And when
These spaces are active and can
thrive. We can see the direct
economic impact for the
surrounding businesses. Uh,
you're creating a nightlife,
you're creating a space to go to
where people are less likely to,
in our case, drive off the hill,
but, um, also for other
communities to, to make sure
that they can keep the the money
local. Um, I think this is also
got a strong tie with tourism,
we know that the modern amenity
that uh people have that
expectation of is beneficial
when you have folks from out of
town or out of state visiting,
um, and you can really
you know, continue to encourage
them to enjoy, um, and we would
also encourage that folks to
understand that in a lot of the
spaces and uh the community, the
scenario that Alan described,
which is the picnic license, um,
it's not feasible, there may not
be anybody that carries the type
of liquor license necessary to
come and set up and serve beer
or wine, and if they do, they
have minimal staff and maybe
need to operate their own space
and aren't able to send them,
and we see this even in Los
Alamos where there are 3
providers.
But it's become more and more
expensive to do so. So on behalf
of small businesses and main
streets, we encourage you to
support this.
Great, thank you so much. So now
we go to uh public testimony
just by a show of hands. Uh, is
there anybody in the audience
that is in support of this bill.
We have one person, all right?
Anybody in the audience in
opposition of this bill.
Right, see none. Is there
anybody online?
One person in support or
opposition.
All righty. So, sir, if you can
go ahead and come on up and then
we'll go to our person online.
Thank you.
I
Are you holding that microphone?
OK.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, John Hendry, we
operate the um uh nonprofit
movie theater in Truth or
Consequences. Uh, a darnturn
movie theater, um open is a sign
of a vibrant darn turn, a closed
movie theater, uh, that's the
same and neglect and decay. You
can't sell a movie theater to
anything else but a movie
theater, it's a big empty
building. It's got a slope
floor. It costs a fortune,
believe me, I know, the heat and
cool, it's only gonna be a movie
theater.
Or it's going to be another
empty building and in rural New
Mexico. Um, this is important.
This is one of these little
bills that we don't think is
important. It's important to so
many different communities, 30
independent movie theaters in
New Mexico need this help.
A couple of points that I would
ask and ask the sponsor to
consider. There's a weird
reference in here to food, it
says once RLD and I both have
picked up on that and their
analysis, don't know why it's in
there that would love to see
that amended or we don't serve
food, we serve popcorn, hot dogs
and sodas.
Um, and the second thing is, the
restriction on the alcohol. Why,
we're all adults here. There's
no reason why we can do good in
New Mexico liquors. It's
becoming quite a business here
in New Mexico. Every, everybody
else who has a license now can
serve beer, wine, and liquor. I
would ask that you didn't
restrict us to that, but I can
live with the bill as it is. The
food thing, just a little
strange. Thank you.
Alright, thank you so much. We
have Keith Romero online?
Keith, if you will please unmute
yourself. You have one minute,
you will see 30 seconds pop up
in your chat, if you will, uh,
if you go beyond that, then, uh,
if you go beyond the one minute
we will cut your mic, but Keith,
go ahead and uh you've got one
minute.
If you will please unmute
yourself, Keith.
While we are waiting also, we'll
have it uh on record that we
have 3 written emails in support
of this bill as well.
Are we having an issue with
Keith told me to.
OK, uh, Keith, we're gonna
register that you are in support
of this bill. Uh, so since
you're having difficulties with
your mic and we're having
difficulties hearing you, so,
um, at this point, uh, Senator
Jaramillo, you have an
opportunity to respond to any of
the public testimony if you'd
like, or we can go straight to
the committee. Thank you, Madam
Chair. In hearing the comments
about food and serving more than
wine and beer, if passed out of
this committee I'd like to sit
and speak with the individual,
and with the main streets to
take their take on what that
would be.
And amending the bill for the
next committee. Thank you.
Great. Thank you, Senator
Jaramillo. Uh, anybody from the
committee?
Senator Paul.
Thanks, Madam Chair. Thanks,
Senator for bringing this
forward. I think this is, you
know, in these smaller rural
communities where we do see
these old theaters, it's.
Something unique that you can go
and do and experience and my
question was just kind of a
follow up to one of the
gentlemen that uh had spoke in
support of it was the food
aspect of it, where did that
come from? Is there
Any answer to that, Madam Chair
Senator, when we were thinking
about this bill and we thought
about just Los Alamos at the
time of the bill. It's typical
that when we host an event at
Sala, that beer and wine company
food, so we'd be happy to make a
modification when it's speaking
to others. We were thinking
about our lived experience with
our theater.
Thank you, Senator, and thank
you chair. So there was no
requirement that food has to be
served. I know that there's
other liquor licenses that, you
know, require, hey, 1% of, you
know, your total sales have to
be in food to be able to serve
hard, you know, distilled
spirits or not distilled, but
just liquor. Madam Chair,
Senator, we believe that even as
the gentleman stated with the
snacks of popcorn would fit into
that category, so spelling it
out, we can see about working on
eliminating that, and um, and,
and we see that, but
Now that we were just thinking
about our lived experience in
the bill. We're hearing more
from theaters just like the one
of the individual will look at
working that language if. Thank
you, Senator, Madam Chair, I do
have just one more follow-up
question. Is there, is there,
uh, limitations on how many
drinks can be served, so there's
2 glasses of wine or 212 ounce
glasses of beer is that with the
special license, madam chair,
the theater could deserve no
more than 26 ounce servings of
wine or 212 ounce servings of
beer per customer.
Thank you, Senator. Thank you
Madam Chair. Great, thank you,
Senator Paul, Senator O'Malley
and then Senator Ramos.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So, um,
I'm
You're looking at the food
aspect of it, I guess what I'm
wondering is.
Or, you know, this is do
independent theaters get a break
that restaurants don't have as
far as being able to serve
alcohol without foods.
Hi, yeah, so we don't have the
option to provide alcohol in, in
our events. We usually have to
contract with a different vendor
to come to our space to provide
a beer and wine.
And I, I would just add to that.
Oh, I apologize. Madam Chair and
uh committee, um, one of the
issues is the one of the recent
changes that became available
for small food and
beverage-based businesses to be
able to obtain an affordable
liquor license was that they had
to have 60%, I believe, or more
of their sales be for food, and
that's not a possibility for
most of these events or theater
spaces, they don't hit that kind
of marker when they do have a
food offerings. The share so it
is different. We're talking
about something totally
different.
Just out of curiosity, what is
the charge for that restaurants
have to pay for beer and wine
license.
Madam Chair senator, we can't,
we don't have that number with
us.
Uh, let's see, there was
something else. Oh, the food
thing, I think there was a
clarity. Thank you, Madam Chair,
I don't have any questions. OK,
thank you, Senator Ramos. Madam
Chair, uh, Senator, I, I have
more of a comment. I just want
to thank the senator for making
sure that this is a local
option.
You know, I think that is so
important in a lot of our bills.
So I thank you for taking that
into consideration. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator Ramos.
Senator,
I just move a pass. All right,
if I may, before we do that, do
pass, I would like to make a
comment because I think about in
Las Cruces, actually in the town
of Mesa, which town of Mesa, the
like 95% of their revenues are
based on tourism and uh people
spending money, and we have the
historic Fountain Theater, which
goes back to, I think the early
1900s, late 1800s, Sandra, I
don't know if you know the date
or not.
Uh, and for many years they used
to sell wine. Um, and then all
of a sudden it was like, oh, no,
you're not supposed to do that,
and uh they stopped and so then
they started working with the
restaurant next door, but that
doesn't make it very easy for
them and uh as adults, we're,
we're talking about that we're
all adults here and, uh, you
know, there is something
enjoyable about watching an
independent film. The one thing
that they do though, and this is
where in the conversation of
food is they will sell slices of
carrot cake and cheesecake and
chocolate cake and so.
I don't know if that is
something that is in the same
category as, by the way, their
popcorn is made with real
butter, um, and amazing, uh, but
I, I don't know, and so I think
that's a uh an interesting
discussion is to have is like,
what actually constitutes the
food, um, that, that we think
of, it's not just popcorn or
candy, but in some cases,
especially these small
independent theaters, they may
go a little gourmet.
Or they may be total, total dive
and perfect and all the right
ways, but I think there, there
should be some flexibility, um,
in that, and I hope that in your
conversation, Senator, that
those, those come up, um, for
that, but I think of the
Fountain Theater and I'm very
grateful for you to bring this
bill forward. And so, um, on
that Senator Bergman, if you
will, go ahead and do the motion
again. Madam, you pass.
Senator Sanchez seconds, Senator
Bergman's first. So if you will
please take the role.
Senator Figueroa is
Senator had a meal.
Senator O'Malley.
Senator Paul.
Senator Ramos.
Senator Sanchez.
And to share uses Senator Worth
is excused, Senator Bergmans.
Senator Hamblin.
We have 7 yeses and 0 noes. So
on a 7 to 0, you have a due
pass. Congratulations, Senator,
we invite you and the committee
to come to Los Alamos and
experience. Thank you.
Thank you very much. So just for
those of you in the audience,
um, we have several of our
committee members who are right
now in other committees.
And it's so we now know that
like the rush of the session is
starting when we have this kind
of the musical chairs, and so
we're gonna jump ahead, Senator
Sanchez is going to go ahead and
present uh 194 and then 241,
which has an amendment, but
we'll work on 194 1st.
Uh, and then we will, um,
Senator Bergmans is watching the
committee where the rest of
these folks are, uh, to see when
they're gonna be able to get
out.
So if you will, uh, Senator
Sanchez, you're going on Senate
Bill 194. Notice of termination
of franchises. Oh, thank you,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I have two experts
online. I have uh Eric
Warehouse.
And I think Mr. Jed Dixon.
If they're there. Um, Senate
Bill 194, Madam Chair, is a
franchise bill and it's.
Just putting some regulations on
the when you.
Invest in a franchise and you're
paying for a franchise. And this
is, this one's for more
equipment, farm equipment and ag
equipment and construction
equipment. These people buy in,
they put their life savings,
they build these companies, and
they have no.
Guarantees yet so we can maybe
pass this bill for a termination
clause, they come in and say,
hey, we don't want a John Deere
dealership no more in
Albuquerque.
Well, you've been there 50
years. You've bought all their
filters, you've put it on the
shelves, you have all this
invested and there's nothing
that protects the person that's
had this. So other all uh few
other states have already
adopted this Oklahoma, I think,
being the last recent one.
And so we're just trying to move
this here into New Mexico, Madam
Chair and I believe I have Eric
as an expert witness.
Uh, if he would like to say a
few things. Do you mind saying
his his full name? Do you know
Warehouse.
Wareham.
Sorry
OK. So, Eric, uh, as the expert
witness to Senate Bill 194. Do
you want to say a few words,
please?
Yes, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Eric
Wareham. Uh, I am vice president
of government affairs for the
North American Equipment Dealers
Association.
We represent about 4500 farm,
industrial, and outdoor power
equipment dealers in North
America.
Uh, this bill builds on 2023
when it was introduced, uh, we
think Senator Sanchez for
introducing it again. It had
overwhelming support then in
committee.
Uh, in past, the bill itself is
really
Brings New Mexico up to speed.
Uh, New Mexico, I would, I would
describe as when it comes to the
uh dealer statutes as we call
them, is probably the most bare
bones in the entire country.
Uh, contrast that with
neighboring states, Oklahoma and
Texas, have some of the newest,
uh, bills in the country, uh,
and this bill and the language
here, whether it res uh relates
to the good cause definition or
uh notice and procedure for
termination, uh, transfers.
is directly taken from Oklahoma
and Texas language that's
already been in place for over a
decade now.
Um, so, New Mexico hasn't been
updated in nearly 40 years. Our
industry has changed a lot in
that time frame. And we're
asking the committee to, um,
Go ahead and support this
legislation and I'm available to
answer any questions about the
particular language.
Great. Thank you, Eric. Um, so
at this point, uh, in the
audience,
if I had one more thing I can't
take all the credit. Senator
Gonzalez is my co-sponsor on
this, and we all know, like you
just said earlier, Madam Chair,
he is stuck in another
committee, so I'm not taking all
the credit.
Thank you, Senator Sanchez.
Um, but it looks like you're
gonna be doing a lot today. So I
appreciate your, your enthusiasm
for it and your humility as
well.
So by a show of hands in the
audience, who is here in favor
of Senate Bill 194.
I see none anybody in opposition
of 194.
So none anybody online?
OK.
So at this point, then we'll
just go to the committee since
we have no public testimony for
this.
Madam Chair, I move a due
Senator Ramos with a pass. Do we
have a second?
Second from Senator O'Malley.
Rebecca, if you will please.
Could not be easier peasier for
you.
Senator Figueroa is excused
Senator Hail.
Senator O'Malley.
And at your Pa.
Senator Ramos, Senator Sanchez.
Yes
He's like the student in class.
Senator share is excused,
Senator Wirth is excused.
Senator Bergman, yes, Senator
Hamlin. Yes. We have 7 yeses and
0 nos. All right, 7 to 0, you
have uh a do pass on that bill.
Will you be able to magically do
241
as amended thank you and yes, I
will do.
I gotta get my book. Sure thing.
Go ahead and come on up. I know
that you've got uh Secretary
Serna. We do need to
Uh, move the amendment for
discussion purposes, but I'll
let you explain it first.
And, and the bill.
OK. So if you want to explain
the bill first and then the
amendment, and then we'll move
on the amendment and then go
from there.
I'll get the hang of this
eventually. We're only 30 days
in.
So we are on Senate Bill 241.
We'll hear a presentation of the
bill and then the amendment and
then we will move the amendment
and then go to public testimony
on that. Thank you, Madam Chair,
just a real quick on the Senate
Bill 241. This is gonna be speed
enforcement only in construction
zones, these are gonna be uh um.
Speed enforcement cameras just
in the construction zones, not
anywhere else, we're not asking
for anywhere out through the
state just in our construction
zones, we know our hard
construction workers.
People tend to not slow down or
I've been put in that situation
before and I'm holding the sign
and I wanna throw it at a car
that's.
Does not slow down and
construction zones, so this, I
think would be a great
Um, bill that we're bringing all
that Secretary Serna give a few
words if he wants to, and then
we'll move. Uh, thank you, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
especially for, uh,
accommodating moving us up. Um,
so, well, Senate Bill 241 is a
partnership with the New Mexico
Department of Transportation.
I'm sorry, between the
Department of Transportation
Department of Public Safety to
use automated speed detection in
construction zones to enhance
safety through the issuance of
civil fines.
Currently, state law allows for
local and county governments to
require state transport to
request state transportation
commission approval for speed
cams on state roads within
municipal jurisdictions. So,
interestingly enough, the state
transportation commission can
authorize a municipal government
or a county government to place
automated speed enforcement cams
on our roads in their
jurisdiction, but the Department
of Transportation cannot do that
itself on state roads.
Blame the lawmakers, I don't
know why that makes sense, and
so, um, essentially, uh, what
we're looking to do is receive
that authority that
municipalities and county
governments have now only for
construction work zones. Between
2020 and 2023, there were a
total of 3,015 work zone crashes
in New Mexico. In response, of
course, local law enforcement
and state police must increase
their presence around these work
zones to minimize those crashes
between 20.
20 and 2024, nearly 14,000
speeding citations were issued
on work zones by just New Mexico
State Police alone and so New
Mexico, as I mentioned earlier,
is already one of 42 states that
authorizes the use of automated
speed enforcement cameras in
some form. This legislation will
expand our state's existing
authority to enhance the safety
of our workers and traveling
public and construction zones.
Just uh one sentence really on
the amendment after the bill was
introduced, we realized that the
bill needs to create a fund in
which the fines collected would
go and managed by the um traffic
Safety Bureau that's referenced
in the bill. Uh, thank you,
Madam Chair, uh entertaining.
Thank you, Secretary.
Senator Sanchez, anything else
before we go to, um, to the
amendment.
No.
All right. Would you like to
discuss the amendment now.
I'm looking for it, Madam Chair.
OK.
Do you have a copy me?
I do want to thank everybody for
patience because we are, we are
juggling since most of the
committee is is in finance right
now in a very important bill.
So, um,
All depending, we're trying to
get Senator Campos here next.
Senator Trujillo is presenting a
bill right now along with
Senator Wirth and Senator Doig,
uh, and Senator Schendo sits on
that committee, as does Senator
Padilla.
So we are in a very unique
little situation today.
So, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, the amendment is
gonna.
It's gonna be inserted in the
bill here, it's gonna create the
fund.
Um, where the, where the
Fines will be um
deposited.
Yes, for the, for all the fines
where they'll be deposited.
That's about it, madam chair
just creating the fund where
they'll be deposited.
All right, so on that point,
Would we like to move the
amendment for for
Discussion and
Public testimony.
Senator Bergmans moved the
amendment. Senator Hadamilo
seconds.
Is there any opposition?
To the amendment.
So Rebecca, if you will please
mark that all those in in uh in
attendance are in favor of the
amendment, right, at this point,
uh, anything else before we go
to public testimony?
OK, hold on a second. All right,
by show of hands, who in the
audience is in support of this
Senate Bill 241 is amended. Keep
your hands up, 1234567.
All right, uh, we have the 7,
I'm in the audience in
opposition of this bill.
See none? OK. Anybody online?
Alright, let's get all 7 of you
up. Come on down. I'm gonna feel
like Drew Carey right now. Have
you come on down? I'm going to
give you 2 minutes apiece.
You want a question?
But
So if you will, uh, you will
stand behind the, uh, in this
case.
Uh, go ahead and you've got 2
minutes.
I'm sure members of the
committee. My name is Jason
Bowie. I'm the secretary for the
Department of Public Safety. We
stand in um
support
secretary sort of nervous here
supported this bill, um, really
for us, it, it really frees up
our manpower currently, and I
can give this example to
everybody here that commutes to
Santa Fe. It frees up our
manpower, remember the
construction of La Bajada, we
would run operations with the
Mexico State Police 3 days a
week.
And during that time frame, um,
everybody, I think we probably
recall the number of crashes
that we had here on La Bajada
alone, uh, despite the
enforcement, uh, as he said,
almost 14,000 citations written
in construction zones across the
state of New Mexico. La Bajara
alone, we had about 1300 or more
citation or traffic stops there
leading to about 1500 citations
on La Bajara. And every time we
have our law enforcement there 3
days a week, of course, pulling
someone over, uh, all those
additional people are, are, are
speeding past and, and there's
no enforcement action, uh.
On those and so it really is
about saving lives, is about
supporting the workers there,
but also making sure that
everybody uh going to work uh is
safe on the way to work and
freeing up our police police
resources to take care of a
priority calls across the state
of New Mexico for calls for
service. So with that, I'll pass
the next speaker. Thank you so
much.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Rick, executive
director for the Department of
Transportation, uh, Madam Chair,
members, obviously we're
supported this legislation, um,
anything that can promote safety
not only for for the contractors
but for our employees as well.
So Madam Chair, uh, for many of
the things that the secretary
has already mentioned, we are.
Madam Chair members of the
committee, I'm Travis Skinner.
I'm a major with Mexico State
Police.
Yes, ma'am.
And uh we too support this as
everybody said, this is.
Definitely beneficial for what
we believe is reducing injuries
and fatalities and in our.
Uh, workers and professionals in
these work zones safe.
Obviously we have marked.
Every one of these, the state.
a lot of roads on the road
constructions or called to
investigate these incidents, but
we know that speed is a factor
and we support.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
committee members. My name is uh
Jason Quintana.
I used to work with NMDOT now I
work with DFA but as a
supervisor myself, I was injured
in a work zone, and I had other
colleagues that were injured,
hospitalized.
And actually lost their life, so
I
Definitely support this. Great.
Thank you so much. Uh, any other
public comment.
Before we go to committee.
All right, if we can, we'll go
to committee. Senator Jaramillo,
you're first.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Senator for putting this
forward for Senator Gonzalez.
Um, I support the bill. We have
our own highway department at
Los Alamos National Laboratory,
and I'm always amazed how many
people disrespect speed limits
when there's people working out
there. These are people's lives
that they're putting in danger.
We've had employees who have
been doing roadwork on lab
property that have items thrown
at them. But I just have one
question, Senator and um cabinet
secretary in the FIR there's
just a, a statement that
popped out to me as this bill
does not resolve issues such as
whether all construction zones
now have these fines or only
those with automated speed
detection systems. Can you speak
on that for me?
Sure, great question. Uh, Madam
Chair, Senator, and so
The bill will pertain only to
those construction zones that
NMDOT identifies as being part
of the program. And so once the
bill is passed,
Um, it will be construction
zones that are managed by DOT.
And it will only be the
construction zones that through
the project selection process,
we identify as being high risk
for crash. And so, for example,
there may be work zones where
the speed limit is reduced from
35 to 25, and we may not deem
that that is a high risk, uh,
uh, work zone. However, in an
interstate where we reduced the
speed limit from 75 to 55, and
we know that travelers will be
trying to reduce their speeds
accordingly, we would identify
that as a high priority and so
it would only be
subject to the work zones under
DOT control, and only those work
zones that we deem part of the
project selection process is
being high risk.
Thank you for that. No further
questions, Madam Chair.
Right? Senator Ramos, Madam
Chair, Senator, so are you gonna
be having some new signage going
up with, you know, I've seen
some of the signage with
blinking lights,
allowing people to or just
letting people know that.
You are going to be pretty much
under surveillance when you're
passing through this area. Sure.
Uh, Madam Chair, uh, Senator,
great question, uh, so one of
the goals of the program is
really to support other public
facing measures that we're
already trying to utilize to
reduce crashes, fatalities on
roadways. One of them, for
example, a simple one is our
zipper merge campaign, right,
which a lot of New Mexicans
still don't understand or don't
text and drive campaign, other
distracted driver campaigns and
even our our own ongoing
assessment of traffic control
plans and work zone signage.
And the use of our intelligent
transportation systems to notify
drivers. And so absolutely ahead
of rollout in this bill passes
is we'll establish a public
campaign to notify New Mexicans
that uh essentially the
automated speed enforcement will
be used in certain construction
zones and then much like the
posting of Double Fine zones
ahead of construction zones will
allow the traveling public
notice that they're moving into
automate speed enforcement,
camera zones, uh, when they
approach.
Madam Chair, senator, so on
this, uh public campaign, are
you gonna pay for this new
campaign, Madam Chair.
Sure, um, Madam Chair, Senator,
uh, uniquely DOT can leverage
the state road fund and other
traffic safety funds as allowed
by our federal partners to
promote traffic safety and so
much like when we rolled out the
um Breaking Bad Habits campaign,
right? We were
We were able to utilize existing
traffic safety funding to
promote the campaign in the
spirit that we would have
workers out there picking up
trash and so that the traveling
public should be mindful that
they're out there picking up
trash while promoting the
campaign. And so, uh, what I was
also just informed is that we
also believe that we can work
with Federal Highway
Administration to receive
approval that federal funding
could be allowed in the
promotion of the, the, um, the
use of automated speed
enforcement cameras because it
promotes
No further questions, ma'am,
chair.
Thank you, Senator Ramos, Vice
Chair Bergman. Thank you.
Senator, and thank you for
bringing this. I definitely
support this bill, um, but I
feel like since our other
attorneys.
Senator Wirth is not here. I'm
putting on.
But lawyerly had and I'm not a
lawyer, but based on the FIR
also and our committee analysis.
Do so this this bill is all new
material.
If I'm looking at it.
And the FIR and our committee
analysis says that
The fees would more likely be
better placed in the motor
vehicle code.
And I'm just wondering in your
drafting why it was drafted this
way.
Um, Madam Chair, Madam, vice
chair, we'll take off our
lawyerly hat and hand it to the
lawyer, um, and so he can, he
can address that. We did have
some changes during the drafting
process to be specific about the
fees and take a deference of
existing statue to sit here.
And if you will, please
identify.
Yes, madam Chair, members, my
name is Steve Hamilton. I'm the
general counsel for the
Department of Transportation.
What is the reason why this is
not in the motor vehicle code
because it's not a criminal
statute.
Uh, when a police officer gives
you citation, it's a criminal
citation, and it's handled
through that process. This is uh
essentially a civil fine.
It's much like finding somebody
for creating a nuisance.
Um, so, one of the things that
that happens is is this doesn't
prevent police officers from
being in the work zone and
issuing citations if they issue
a citation, and the, the people
will not also have to pay a
civil fine. There are two
separate processes.
that are going on, so that's why
it's not in the motor vehicle
code.
Um, we felt that it had to have
its own fund, the traffic Safety
Bureau manages about 5 or 6
different funds.
For various purposes it has and
the this and all of them were
have been authorized by the
legislature except one which was
done by an executive order.
And they all are very specific
about what they can be used for,
and the definitions of what they
can be used for do not include
this sort of thing, so we felt
there needed to be a new fund.
And to assuage
Um, issues of, uh, with the,
will the proper of the money be
used properly.
We're requiring that the uh the
secretary of the Department of
Finance and Administration.
Authorized disbursements and
that the disbursements also have
to be authorized by the
Secretary of Transportation.
That's to make sure that the
money's spent.
Uh, for the purposes that are
stated in the bill.
Does that, does that answer the
question? Yes, but you can stay
there, baby. Thank you.
Thank you for that explanation,
um.
I know in previous recent
legislative sessions, there's
been a movement to eliminate the
use of these.
2, there's been a, there's been
a movement and a bill passed in
2023 to eliminate the use of
fees and penalty assessments to
A4 programs.
And I'm just wondering if you
looked at that.
Law that was enacted in 2023
when drafting this.
Um,
man, man of chair Senator, No,
I'm not aware of that.
OK, that might be something you
want to look at before you get
to the judiciary.
I also don't have any type of on
the fly amendment.
Um, and then the, my only other
question is on page 5.
Line 12.
Or it says that the department
can pursue all legal remedies,
including awards of reasonable
attorney fees. Is that something
that's used throughout statute?
That that has to do with the the
um.
The the administrative hearing,
yes.
Yeah, there can be an award of
attorney's fees and the
administrative hearing.
So that is the, if the party.
Fighting, fighting their fine
wins, they can be awarded
attorneys' fees and if the uh
department uh wins and
attorneys' fees can be.
And is that something you
decided?
To use based on other parts of
statute you saw or
that just an enforcement
mechanism you wanted to include?
I just felt, I felt that it
would, it would be um.
Useful in terms of the of
whether or not someone is going
to be uh appealing.
Fine
Uh, we want people to appeal the
fine when it's a serious appeal,
but we don't have too many.
Uh, too many of these procedures
going on.
They're small amounts, you know,
we're looking at 5000.
$200 and we don't need to have.
A hearing examiner tied up in
terms of frivolous matters.
to award attorneys.
Go ahead, yes.
Vice chair
For that reason, we also
included the 4 conditions under
which one of the penalties can
be appealed to ensure that,
again, minimizing the the mere
exercise of appealing for the
sake of of not having to pay the
civil citation and so those
reasons in the bill
fundamentally are if the car was
sold and the transfer hasn't
been complete, if the individual
was not the driver of the
vehicle, the car was stolen, or
like, um.
General counsel stated, they've
already received a citation for
that same impression.
I have one more question. Thank
you for those answers, um, and I
don't know if you already said
it and I just missed it maybe,
but.
You do plan on using the fines.
From this program to, and then
put them into the fund and use
that as the main source of
payment for administering this
fund.
Um, Madam Chair, Madam, that's
absolutely what the funds would
be used for. There's, there's
initial concern, and we've, in,
in our roles and relationship,
DOT would be responsible for
shoring up the program if it
doesn't receive enough revenue
for, uh, to manage it, and so
what we may be able to do
through the administrative rule
process if the program doesn't
sustain itself is change which
projects or the number of
projects, but uh the goal here
of course is to minimize the
need for the program in general,
not to increase citations issued
and
revenue generated.
OK, thank you.
Thank you, Vice Chair. Any other
questions from the committee?
Madam Char, you move to do. We
have a Du pass from Senator
Sanchez. We have a second from
Senator Jaramillo. If you will,
please take the role.
Senator Figueroa is excused.
Senator had a meal.
Senator O'Malley.
Senator Paul,
Senator Ramos.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator share is excused.
Senator Wirth is excused.
Senator Bergmans.
Yes, Senator Hamblin.
We have 7 yeses and 0 noes. 70,
you have a pass, Senator
Sanchez.
Madam Chair and committee.
All right. So, um, what we are
doing is Senator Padilla rushed
over here and he's gonna come
right back and we've got a 3 fur
from Senator Padilla. So we're
gonna go first with the SB 164
secretary, is that something
that you're part of that
conversation, all right?
So as soon as, uh, there he is.
It's like you can teleport
Senator Padilla.
that.
Oh, yeah, that's true, you were
just a little one hallway down.
Why don't we go ahead and start
in order we have Senate Bill 164
with an amendment.
So if you want to talk about the
bill and then we'll uh we'll
discuss the amendment and then
we'll move the amendment. Thank
you,
madam
all of us in finance really
appreciate your flexibility
today. We're, we're all over
there on some very hairy bills,
but essentially 164 I do have as
my expert witness, Drew
Loveless, who is the acting
director of the Office of
Broadband Access and expansion,
as you know, ma'am sure I uh
sponsored sponsored the
legislation that created that
office, and we continue to
shepherd it uh as we go forward
with what we're able to get
done. But essentially the bill
Um, proposes amendments to the
wireless consumer advanced
infrastructure Investment Act,
uh, the primary objectives,
objective of the bill is to
expand the definition of
authority to encompass political
subdivisions and state agencies
giving more flexibility, our
ability to be innovative and
quick and move much quicker, uh,
thereby broadening the entities
that can manage and regulate
wireless infrastructure
deployment within the
jurisdictions that they serve,
uh, there are two key provisions
to the legislation. I'm gonna be
very quick because I know you,
you want to keep us all moving,
which has expanded, uh,
definition of the word.
Authority, uh, the build
redefines authority to include
not only municipalities and
counties, but as I mentioned
before, political subdivisions
such as state and political
subdivisions and state agencies.
Uh, this change allows a wider
range of government entities to
act on on these items quicker.
The second provision is
clarification of the term right
of way. Um, it essentially
provides a clear definition of
right of way, ensuring
consistent understanding and
application across those various
jurisdictions that it would
apply to. The reason
we want to have this done is
enhanced local control, which is
very important I know to all of
us, streamlined infrastructure
uh deployment, improved wireless
services and uh which really
dramatically affect the
northwest part of the of of the
US too, but, but New Mexico,
especially a lot of our native
lands are are Dana and Navajo
lands as well, um, improved
wireless services because in
some cases, Madam Chair, these
are the only, this is the only
way you can get um a broadband
to your, to your location and
then adaptation of.
technological advances. We do
have an amendment. I know that
it looks, um,
Pretty lengthy, but it's
actually pretty serious, pretty
short and to the point I'm gonna
ask, um, uh, Mr. Lovelace to
define and describe the
amendment or how would you like
to proceed on the amendment?
OK. So if you will, please
present the amendment first and
then we'll move on that and then
go from there. OK, I'm going to
ask Mr. Loveless just to walk us
through what the, the amendment
does for us, but at a high
level, essentially the state
land office requested clarifying
amendment, clarifying amendment
to prevent any conflict with the
enabling Act and ensure all
authorities in the in the
statute follow state land office
procedures and processes and
procedures, and then this
addresses several incidents is
where incidents where counties
and municipalities have missed
required steps with the state
land office, so it really cleans
everything up.
Keeps them right in line, I
don't know if Mr. Lovice wants
to ask, add anything else there.
Uh, Madam Chair, uh, state Land
Office reached out to the Office
of Broadband when we presented
this bill, identifying a couple
of existing issues where a
county or municipality might
have already gone through state
land office to get a tower, uh,
in place, uh, but as a second
provider came in, uh, you know,
the second, uh, wireless
provider came onto the tower,
uh, the county and municipality
forgot to go back to the state
land office and get those
permissions again, uh, with a
new entity going on there. And
so they just wanted to make sure
that this is a recognition,
there's
recognition that uh the
commission still has their
authority and that it has to be
done every single time that
there's a new provider that goes
onto that tower.
And that's all that is in the
amendment.
That's it. Pretty much.
All right, can we have a motion
to, um, move the amendment. So.
From Senator Ramos and then 2
from Senator Figueroa.
Anybody in opposition of the
amendment.
Rebecca, if you will please show
that all those in attendance are
in support of the amendment. All
right, at this point, uh,
anything else before we go to
public testimony? I think just
very quickly, the, the now that
it's amended properly and we're
in good shape there. The bill,
you know, provides public safety
with better 5G coverage in our
rural areas, uh, better 5G and
congested metro areas as well as
what you're gonna see from this
and then the added potential for
both wireless and fiber-backed
internet to state government
buildings, which further
enhances our service.
delivery for public education,
health care, economic
development, all of it.
OK. Thank you very much. All
right, by a show of hands in the
audience, who is in support of
Senate Bill 164 as amended.
We have 2
Right, anybody in opposition?
See none. Do we have anybody
online? Nobody online. So the
two folks who want to go ahead
and come and speak.
We'll give you 2 minutes apiece.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, my name is Michael
Sage, and I serve as assistant
commissioner for commercial
resources for the Mexico State
Land Office. New Mexico State
Land Office stands in support of
this bill, and we would like to
thank the sponsor for the
friendly amendment, the
amendment ensures that there is
clarity when there are proposed
co-locations on existing
business leases and our rights
of ways that local governments
and our state entities engaged
with the New Mexico State Land
Office, prior to adding.
Thank you. Thank you.
So again, this, I'm Steve
Hamilton, I'm general counsel
for the Department of
Transportation, Madam Chair.
members, we're in support of
this bill because as written, it
clarifies the words um a right
of way, which includes such
things as easements and uh
petrol yards and those sorts of
things where the bill didn't
originally include that.
The Department of Transportation
is not included in this bill.
We're excluded because, as the,
I'm sure the committee knows
chapter 67 requires the
Department of Transportation to
make um make uh amenable, uh,
make.
Allow utilities to use our right
of way, uh, when appropriate,
and we have an entire permit
system that deals with that. So,
um, um, broadband and all other
utilities and use our right of
way and I'm, I'm glad that the
um
The bill has amended right away,
so it's, it's used consistently
in all statutes in New Mexico.
Thank you. Thank you so much.
All right, at this point, um, I
go to the committee.
Any questions or comments from
the committee, Senator O'Malley.
Thank you,
madam chair for the first of
all, I've never heard you speak
so fast.
The second thing is.
Second thing is, um, OK, so I
saw some of the significant
issues in the FIR. Your
understanding is the amendment
took care of these issues having
to do with state line office.
Does this preclude counties
from, uh, you know, in terms of
their utility easements.
From
Um, from, you know, uh, charging
for easements and things like
that, Senator O'Malley, no, it
does not. It it we simply add a
few more eligible subdivisions
that are able to do it.
OK, just wanted to make sure
that, OK.
They mentioned, right, Ramos,
Madam Chair, um, senator, thank
you so much for always being the
leader in broadband. We
appreciate you in New Mexico and
I know this gets really
complicated at times, but I
thank you so much for taking
care of the whole state of New
Mexico when it comes to
broadband. That's only comment I
have. Thank you, ma'am. Thank
you, Senator Ramos. Any other
questions or comments from the
committee. Motion for a pass.
Yeah
We have a motion for a due pass
from Senator Jaramillo, 2nd from
Senator Figueroa.
You will please take the role.
Senator Figueroa, Senator had a
meal. Yes. Senator O'Malley.
Senator Paul
Senator Ramos.
Senator Sanchez is excused. Oh,
there you are.
Send it to share.
yeah
Senator Wirth is excused Senator
Bergman's.
Yes.
Senator Hamblin. Yes.
We have 9 yeses and 09 to 0, you
have to pass. Mhm.
Yes, I would. You're just gonna
warm that up.
So you are now on to Senate Bill
169.
Thank you Madam Chair.
Senator Sher really wants to see
Representative Dixon's face.
OK.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and uh.
Madam Vice chair and ranking
member and
Minority floor leader.
Um, thank you all very much. I'm
just gonna jump right in, Madam
Chair, we are in a position to
really move New Mexico forward
from an economic development
standpoint, I do have our act,
I'm sorry our um uh cabinet
secretary designate Rob Black
sitting to my left, who we all
know and and love and cherish
and uh I, I, I do want to say
that this legislation is being
co-sponsored by Representative
Dixon, Senator Brandt,
Representative Hernandez, and
actually others that don't,
don't show up on the the deal
here, but so this is absolutely.
a bipartisan effort to make New
Mexico the most attractive place
on the face of the planet.
When you get off the airplane
and and we want to be able to
immediately, you know, usher you
over to locations that are ready
to rock and roll and ready to,
to accept, you know, uh, the
businesses that we want to have
come here. So essentially what
this does is it enacts again the
strategic economic development
site Readiness Act, the primary
objective of this legislation is
to enhance the state's economic
development, um, strategy by
identifying, assessing and
preparing strategic sites for
immediate business development.
And what this does for us are
the key provisions here is
again, site.
characterization studies. Um,
and I will tell you, Madam
Chair, I, I, I think you know
about my business, I, I build
call centers, we, uh, staff
them, we've built uh 35 of them
in the past 25 years, and I'm
not going to go to a community
that doesn't have something like
this, you know, ready for me to
look at. And it's something that
New Mexico is woefully missing
on top of all the other
wonderful things we do from an
economic development standpoint.
This is going to be that one key
ingredient. So site
characterization studies will
help us to understand when an
organization is looking at New
Mexico or in New Mexico.
business is looking to expand. I
don't want that to be lost, that
a New Mexico business wishing to
expand. We know exactly what to
sort of point and show them
right away. Second is, it's a
strategic economic development
site advisory committee will be
put together that will be
comprised of experts in, in, in
the field, um, we'll have a site
readiness fund that will be put
together of about $24 million
which is sounds significant,
but, but it's actually a very,
very good thoughtful amount to
start with, and then a
designation and preparation of
strategic sites.
Once we know what those are and
what they need to do, again, um,
the pros and why we should be
doing this is accelerated
economic growth.
A competitive advantage like our
the states in our region and
across the country efficient
resource allocation, uh,
comprehensive planning, and so
we have sort of a database, you
can just kind of tap into and
know exactly where I wanna go,
um, and infrastructure
improvements, uh, Madam Chair,
and so I'm gonna ask the
secretary to say a couple of
brief words, and then we will,
uh, ask you to take a look at a
committee substitute that we
have before you right now.
The two amendment. Yeah, but we,
we decided to drop it into a
substitute because we wanted it
to be clean. a couple of things
that we needed to have done.
Apologize, I don't know if you
want to do that first. OK. All
right, that sounds great.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I'll keep this brief.
Uh, so that we can make sure we
have time for questions, but
this is a top priority for us in
the economic development
department. Uh, we have, uh,
thanks to the legislature
developed a variety of very
A successful incentives here in
the state of New Mexico. But one
of the things we don't have our
sites to sell. So when we bring
companies who call us and they
say we want, we need these sort
of sites around New Mexico. We
don't have a good database or
understanding of what those
sites are, if they have access
to water or if they have access
to electricity, with this site,
with this program will allow us
to do is partner with local
jurisdictions, they would apply,
so let's say the city of Roswell
has some 30 acres.
Contiguous acres that they would
like to see characterized. EDD
would provide free site
characterization, uh, technical
assistance to them to evaluate
that site.
Once they've evaluated that site
and we and we determined through
the the board process that it is
a strategic economic development
site.
Roswell could then apply for
additional funds to do a housing
study, to do environmental
review to do um to perhaps
deploy broadband, things that
would help that site become much
more developable and marketable,
and then we will maintain a
database to help market in
partnership with the Mexico
partnership. Market those sites
on behalf of Roswell to
companies who want to locate in
Mexico. So we're going to make
that available. The counties,
cities, tribal governments, all
over New Mexico. And it's a way
for us to really provide
technical.
assistants, and then some level
of financial support to help do
those studies and that
pre-development work. Thank you
for the time.
Thank you so much. So, um, if I
can have emotion to, for the
committee sub for discussion.
I moved the committees up for
discussion.
Thank you, Senator Sher also
supports that.
anybody in opposition of the
committee said being moved for
discussion.
None. So if you can please
record that all those in
attendance. It's not a vote yet.
Thank you. I appreciate that.
Oh you have a vice chair. So
we're, we're we're happy to give
you just a very brief
description of why we needed to
do this a lot of it was simply
some cleanup and definitions,
things of that nature, but we'll
give you the, the secretary will
give you a high level on why,
and by the way, I just wanna let
you know we did deliver the sub
to your office on February 8th,
I think I personally brought it
over. I ran into you there,
yeah, thank you.
Adam Chair members, um, the
First Amendment would be in
Section 3C, uh, in conversations
with the governor's director of
housing, uh, as well as variety
of housing advocates, we wanted
to list, uh, housing assessment
as part of the characterization
work, uh, so that if there is a
development happening that we
are able to do that housing, uh,
housing assessment. So that was
added. And then secondly, the
municipal League had reached out
to us, uh, with a variety of
concerns. And if you saw their,
their
our, um, I think there was a
little misunderstanding again as
to how this would work. We
aren't changing any planning and
zoning, we aren't putting any
requirements on local
communities, they get to come to
us and apply for resources. So
it's, it's really, it's, it's a
voluntary process. What they did
have identify some important
pieces that I think improved the
bill. And one of those is a
requiring that the advisory
committee that looks at whether
or not a particular site would
become an economic.
Strategic economic development
site, or eligible for funding,
uh, it would require the
advisory committee to consult
not only with state agencies,
but with county and local
governments in those communities
so that they have an opportunity
to to give us feedback and
direction, and hopefully it's
they're the part of the ones
that are applying for the funds,
but we, we make sure that we do
that. And the second one, there
was a concern, uh, that was
highlighted in the FIR around
the use of the word immediate in
section 6B. It was a concern
that the use of that term
somehow would over or get around
local planning and zoning laws,
certainly not our intent, and we
don't believe that's what it
did, but we wanted to make sure
that we were being responsive to
their requests. So we
eliminated, deleted the word
immediate. And so those are
really the changes that were
made and, and Madam Chair, I
think I'll just very quickly
point, uh, so the first one was
on page 3, line 12, which adds
the housing availability
component, which obviously is,
as you know, a key ingredient to
economic development. Second is
the secretary designate said was
really started at the bottom
Page 3, all the way into page 4,
and I want to highlight on page
4 lines 14 through 17, which
retained the five public members
appointed by the New Mexico
Legislative Council. So
therefore, as a legislative
body, we, we maintain part of
the, the um ability to, to
influence this thing as well.
And then um and then page 6, the
bottom of page 6 starting on 22
was the third change. So that's
essentially why we wanted to
come to you with a very clean
substitute rather than a whole
bunch of messy.
All righty, thank you very much.
So now we're going to public
comments, so just by a show of
hands, how many in the audience
are in favor of the committee
substitute for Senate Bill 169,
get 12345, don't be shy, 6789,
1011. All right, so we have 11.
So let's get 6, I'll let you
rock paper scissors, you can arm
wrestle, you can do whatever in
the middle, but stand behind
Senator Padilla, and how many do
we have we have the the list
that you gave me.
Sorry?
Is there anybody in opposition?
No, so just for giggles, we're
gonna hear about how many people
love this bill.
And.
You wanna make a do pass?
Do you care if he makes a due
pass or do you want to have your
voices heard? You're like, no,
get it moving.
Uh.
Thank you very much, Senator
Sheer. Uh, unless there are any
comments from the committee,
Senator O'Malley, you had a
question first. So hold your
horses there, Senator chair, and
we'll move on that. Thank you
everybody for standing up. I'm
sure you just need a little bit
of that blood flow.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. So
in this, uh, pamphlet you gave
us the, the examples are, um, a
lot of them are redevelopment,
uh, sites that like for example,
there's a brownfield site, um,
and these are up to for
industrial sites for business
investments. So it looks like
you've taken the
Um,
This uh development readiness
actor strategic economicbe as
it's including a lot of
different things. So is there a
definition?
About economic development
within the, I mean, now it's
gonna include some housing,
which I think probably makes
sense, but
Is it broader than now it's,
it's not just industrial sites,
it's broader.
Mr. Secretary.
Madam Chair Representative, or
sorry, Senator, my apologies.
Um, the, the bill will do a
couple of things. It will do the
site characterization work.
Um, so that, um, won't actually
do it, it, it just characterizes
site, what is the best
opportunity for it? What are the
assets, what are its
liabilities? What do we think it
has the best potential for
economic development for that
particular community. And then
we'll provide that report back
to the community. And then there
would be a process for that
community then to apply again
for some additional support and
funding.
Uh, that would allow them to do
this, the pre-development work,
so studies, etc. It wouldn't get
into um much beyond that as far
as this program goes, it would
be up to the community to, uh,
or your, your good graces uh
regarding capital outlay to
support additional work if you
felt like that would be a place
to for the most strategic
advantage for your community.
Um, but that's really the scope
of what the bill does.
So for example, the city of
Albuquerque could ask for an
assessment of, let's say,
because this has been out there,
the redevelopment of the state
fair site.
Madam Chair, uh,
Yes, the answer is, but go
ahead, they'll give a much more
eloquent answer. Madam, uh,
Senator, um, that's so much for
my eloquence, sir. um.
So, um, they could ask for uh
This to be a site or the site to
be characterized. Um, if it's
contiguous, um, it's got one
property owner, um, we would be
setting rules as to what that
looks like. Um, if the bill were
to pass, uh, so that we're not
characterizing very small pieces
of land. Um, but it's really
those that have the most
opportunity for larger
development and in the largest
economic impact. So they could
apply for that site
characterization work.
OK. So, madam chair, so there
are some
Uh, requirements, right, for the
size of the site, is that what
you're, there's a minimum.
Well, Madam Chair, and, and, uh,
Senator, the, there would be
rules that would be promulgated
to to find sort of what those
lists might be and you know how
they would be, so I think the
example that you gave would be a
perfect thing that this
committee would need to, this
advisory board would need to
debate and discuss and figure
out, well, how are we going to
allow
be accepted where we would spend
some of this $24 million to,
yeah, all that work will be the
first step, the second step will
be to put out, you know,
requests for, you know.
Uh, sites to be looked at, and
then ideally over time, the
advisory board will meet
regularly, change whatever those
requirements are and all that.
OK.
Um
Man, I, I just wanted to know
what, what was meant by that,
uh, what with, you know, and
it's in, it's sort of like
So example the city of
Albuquerque, we do have a number
of what you would call
redevelopment sites, right?
Sometimes there have been
brownfield sites.
Um, and, you know, I didn't know
if that included that, which I
think is important. Uh, I'm
really glad to see that, um,
that local control, I mean
affirms of like um.
Uh, zoning codes and all that,
you know, that's
That's local, that, that's not,
you're not gonna try to get
around that, that's important
too.
So I guess that's all I have
dementia. Thank you, Senator
O'Malley, and next time you have
my permission to say, hey, if
I'm moving too fast, just, you
know, when Senator Sheer moves
on a due pass, I'm not gonna
pass that up a whole lot. But I
do have Senator Bergman's and
then we'll go to Senator Sha
list are other questions.
Just a quick question, Madam
Chair, and I'm sure I don't need
to really ask this with two
sponsors being on the finance
committee, but do you expect the
24 million to be in hospital
too.
That is the uh
$11.4 billion question right
now. Uh, it'll all depend on,
um, as we know, we have to
adjust these amounts when we get
the budget in a HB2 right across
the hall, and um and so I would
imagine that figure will be
adjusted, that's my only smart
answer I can give you this,
because we don't know what sort
of capacity will come over from
our good friends over on the at
the House of Representatives.
Thank you, that's all.
Alright, thank you. Any other
questions or comments from the
committee before I go back to
Senator Scher.
Good
All right. So what we do need to
have, um, Senator Scher is a uh
move a do not pass on Senate
Bill 169 and a due pass on the
committed substitute for 169.
I do not.
It's not meant as a committee
substitute, right? Yeah.
Work
That doesn't happen, uh-huh.
That's
Ding ding ding. Thank you very
much. All right, we have a
second. Senator Jaramillo is the
2nd. All right, if you will,
please take the vote.
Senator Figueroa.
Yes
Senator Jaramil.
Senator O'Malley.
Senator Paul
Senator Ramos.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator Scher.
Worth is excused Senator
Bergmans. Yes. Senator Hamlin.
Yes. We have 9 yeses and 0 noes.
So 9 to 0, you have a pass on
your committee substitute for
Senate Bill 169.
Thank you very much.
Yes, please. I've got you
clustered. I'd I'd want that
just knocked out, Senator
Padilla, so you're in the zone.
Thank you very much. So this one
does have an amendment to it.
That's what I was thinking,
yeah, that, and you and I both
got confused, so you're gonna go
ahead and present the bill and
then uh address the amendment
and then we'll move the
amendment. Thank you, Madams of
the committee, uh, the amendment
is very simple, but we'll come
to that. So essentially what uh
Senate Bill 170 does is it
specifically targets
definitions, fund allocations.
and interest rate provisions,
uh, this bill is sponsored by
me. I'm the chairman of the
interim chairman of the New
Mexico Finance Authority, um.
oversight committee, as I
mentioned, and um
We, we, we definitely, um, are,
we are very supportive of trying
to ensure that the, the, the
First bill that you just looked
at is coupled with this one, so
that once we have folks on the
hook, if you will, we can do all
the other wonderful things that
they need to have done. Uh some
of the key, uh I do want to say
that this is also sponsored by
myself, uh, Representative Dixon
and Representative Joshua
Hernandez, uh, the key
provisions in the bill are that
we again we revise these
definitions. We update and
clarify some very specific
things that were completely
outdated. Uh, we have a fund
allocation adjustment the bill
proposes modifications to the
allocation and management of
funds under the
New Mexico Finance Authority's
purview aiming to enhance the
efficiency and effectiveness of
financial resource utilization
and make it for things that are
growth areas rather than things
that we probably don't want to
be investing in. Um, and then it
includes provisions to adjust
interest rates associated with
NMFA loans and financial
products potentially impacting
borrower costs for
municipalities and, and other
entities. Why would we want to
do this again, we want to we
want enhanced clarity and
consistency with how we approach
economic development, uh,
improved fund management. Uh, we
do
believe that there's gonna be
some potential for cost savings
here, and then I think that by
making these this modernization
of these of this act, and this
piece will see increased
flexibility. Um, I do once again
have the cabinet secretary
designate Rod Black Rob Black
here with me, um, before we ask
him to say a few words, uh,
well, actually I might have him
describe uh why this bill is
important to their department,
but then also um the amendment.
Madam Chair, uh, members, uh,
Part of the reason we think this
bill is so important and it's
really a companion to 169. is it
allows for a quicker deployment
of utilities to a strate an
economic development site.
So if the Economic Development
department identifies the site
and certifies it as a strategic
economic development site.
The, uh, utilities would a
utility would be able that's
regulated by the PRC would be
able to go to the PRC and ask
for, ask for an expedited review
process, uh, to, uh, within a
six-month period with an extra 3
months that they could be
extended to review that and, and
determine whether it's a yes.
Amended for a no. So they have
the, they have the rights to
make that determination just
like they do today under a
normal certification of
convenience and necessity uh CCN
process.
Um, and then there would be a
process where, and it's the idea
is to allow for that utility to
pre-deploy prior to an
individual customer being
identified on the other end.
Because what we see happening
now is we'll have a a customer
or a company that wants to
locate here in New Mexico, and
we go through the process of,
well, we don't have a site that
has electricity today.
And it will take 3 to 5 years to
get you electricity.
To meet your needs. And then
that company leaves, they go to
Arizona or Texas or someplace
else where they have a site
that's ready, or they can deploy
the utilities in a much faster
fashion. So we're really trying
to do with this is increase the
speed to market for those sites
by helping creating a process
for that utility deployment we
worked with, uh, the chief of
staff of the PRC on the
development of the language, but
we also worked with, as the
senator mentioned that New
Mexico Finance Authority.
Cause we wanted to make sure
that our local co-ops, or
regional um co-ops and rural
electric co ops could take
advantage of this program. So
we've added the
Rural Electric Co op, to
eligibility for a PPRF loan, so
that they can pre-deploy those
utility infrastructures and make
sure the sites in their district
have the ability to be
competitive for economic
development as well. So that's
really the, the scope of what
we're trying to do with the.
We do have an amendment. Yes,
so, uh, can we have a move the
amendment for discussion
purposes, please.
So. So moved.
Second to move.
Thank you. All right, go ahead
and, and discuss the amendment.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'm
gonna ask the secretary to
describe this one as well. I
think I've been talking for too
long here.
So, uh, on page 2, line 16, we
just strike the word electric
utilities at the first part of
that, we found that that was
redundant. Uh, we, we add that
as a qualified entity on the
next page, uh, and that just,
uh.
is a clarification there, you
know, and then on page 12, um,
we insert, uh, we wanted to say
a public utilities total system.
And what that allows for is
looking at um
Say El Paso Electric, which only
has a little bit of their their
portfolio within New Mexico. And
so there is a cap as to how much
the utility could pre-deploy
based off of their peak load.
Uh, and we wanted to make sure
and clarify that that peak load
was system load, not just within
that, within Donana County, so
that they would have the ability
to deploy more uh
infrastructure. So that's,
that's really the reason for
those two amendments.
All right, thank you so very
much.
Is there any opposition to the
amendment?
see no opposition. We'll go
ahead and you can launch that
amendment.
Now live, isn't it?
Fancy.
All right, if we, so now we have
um Senate Bill 170 as amended uh
by a show of hands in the
audience, how many are in
support of this bill.
123. Keep your hands up, please.
78,910. All right, 10.
We have 10. Is there anybody in
opposition?
Of uh Senate Bill 170 as
amended.
Right
All right, we do have 3 people
online, Eric Casey and Duval, so
we are noticing that we do have
that. Um, and we have, uh, all
in support in the audience, so
just for time's sake, if do we,
why don't we, we've wrecked,
we've recorded that we have 10
folks in the audience who are in
support. In addition to the 3
online, um, unless you really
want to have public testimony,
we can go ahead and go to the
committee. We have registered
your support of this. So at this
point, I will go to the
committee.
Senator O'Malley.
Thank you Madam Chair. You were
right, Senator Sher. I was gonna
say something.
Um, so the concerns I have and,
and, you know, I may be the only
one that has them, so, you know,
I just think that, you know, it
basically goes around the
regulatory.
Uh, you know,
Uh, processes that we have, you
know, it's sort of fast
tracking, I think without um the
adequate review, um,
So I have some concerns about
that and who's gonna end up
paying for it in terms of like
the ratepayers, and I think
that's why we have this process
of review whenever we extend
utilities and that sort of
thing, so.
Um, that's, those are my
concerns.
Thank you.
I'm sure Senator, um, so thank
you for that question and I, and
when we get into utility
ratemaking and this sort of
process, it is confusing work.
Um, and I'll do my best to try
to make sure that
I'm, I'm, I'm as clear as
possible.
Uh, within the context of what
the current process is. Uh, we
are not short circuing short
circuiting any of the
requirements that a normal C CCN
would, would have, um, in the
sense of, uh, if once we
economic development department
certifies the site as an
economic development site.
A utility would have to take
that certification and then go
to the PRC.
And request a certificate of
convenience and necessity, which
is what they would do under a
normal circumstance.
Um
What then would happen is that
would be expedited and into a 6
month versus either a 9 month or
15, 9 months to 15 months, it's
expedited into a 6 month.
To 9 month process.
Uh, so that does happen.
And then the, then there would
be a follow on.
Where if, if the PRC says yes,
you can move forward.
Um, as part of that application
to the PRC for that CCN they
would they would include a
request to say, and we're going
to deploy this capital.
Uh, we would like to get our
interest rate of return on that
capital deployment.
Um, typically that is done
within the con they asked for it
upfront, but they, and they will
ask for a number, but the PRC
won't make a determination at
that stage. Typically, what
would happen is they would come
back at a later later time when
they're ready to move that into
either the rate base or into a,
a, a great writer, and they
would have to go through another
process to show with the PRC
this doesn't change, that they
um
Investments were prudent and
appropriate and responsible.
So that all of those steps still
take place. It's just happening
at a faster rate. But also it
does do,
is it allows for the utilities
to put an asset. So if they
predeploy this this.
Uh, utility infrastructure, and
after it's, it's completed and
there's not a, not a customer on
the other end.
Waiting to take it at that exact
moment. They can roll it into a
regulatory asset, meaning they
don't have to declare it as a
non-useful asset and write it
off. They can hold it in that
regulatory asset until one of
two things happened. One is a
customer comes in and starts to
take that load, which point they
could put it into a rate right
or a rape case.
Or 2, they show, they can go
back to the PRC and say,
By by bringing this asset
online, whether that's a
substation that provides
redundancy and resiliency or
additional capacity that's
needed now with other customers.
They can show that it is a
benefit to the customers
already. If even without that
pre-identified or with without a
a customer at that unique site.
So those are the ways it could
get pulled into the rate
structure, but it doesn't change
that PRC oversight and review of
that, that it has to be prudent
and responsible investment.
And Madam Chair and and Senator
O'Malley, I'll take you also to
page 16, really starting at the
top on line one. So the
commission still exists in the
review process. I want to make
sure that's very, very clear.
Um, I think what, what, what,
why we want to do this is
primarily, you know, speed to to
market. I mean we all get
overlooked in a lot of ways
because we just don't act
quickly, and with the, the bill
that you all just passed through
this committee and this piece of
legislation, you're going to
see, I believe, much quicker
action, and so essentially
there's a 6 month period.
here where these determinations
need to come, come forward, uh,
you know, 6 months, that's a
really long time, it's half a
year. And, and, and if um if
the, the commission does not
follow through on that, there's
also a provision here that they
can extend for an additional 3
months uh for good cost show so
this could potentially be a 9
month review. I mean, today I'm,
I've been made aware of, you
know, PRC reviews, even in our
new iteration of the PRC takes
12, 36 months to get things done
there. That's just completely
unacceptable.
New Mexico's getting run over or
or flown over because why would
you want to bother? Um, if
you're gonna have to invest all
that time, energy, and all that
other stuff to get this done.
So there is still a review
process.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I, I do
have some concerns. I mean, as
you mentioned, that if um if the
If if a decision isn't made
within 6 months with extension
of 3 months possible, then the
application is automatically
approved.
And I am concerned about the
ratepayers, because basically
it's saying that
You know, that somehow they got
to recoup their costs cause
that's what they're gonna want
to do and, and, you know,
obviously that means that we're
already
Uh, and, you know, tied into
this, so that's my concern, um,
Uh, you know, we've, we've dealt
with this issue of
Of uh Rai is having to pick up
costs, I mean, the county was
involved in that or
good brief years it seems, and I
am concerned about that, so.
Um, you've made it clear what it
is, you know, you want to do.
And I appreciate that. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator O'Malley. Any
other questions or comments from
the committee, Senator Figueroa.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, sponsor. I appreciate a
really good economic development
bill. Um, they're, there are
questions I have about this
again around repair protections,
and we might spend a little more
time going over how they're in
here, but one of the things
That's, um, we haven't mentioned
that is in here, that's an
economic development bill
characteristic is the sunset and
a cat.
So we talked about that before,
but would you?
Madam Chair
And sponsor, take us through
where those are in the bill,
cause those are really
important.
And I'm sure, uh, Senator, yes,
absolutely.
There are 2 sunsets articulated
in the bill.
One is for the
Uh, as part of the PPRF program.
So it allows for um
One of the things that that is
changed. I, I should, I
apologize for not highlighting
this.
Um, within the PPRF right now,
it requires a legislative action
for a loan to be made through
the PPRF.
That means is it requires an
individual bill be run to
approve of that loan, which
could put us back a year, 2
years in the process to actually
move a PPRF.
So, uh, in conversations with
Marquita Russell, uh, she
requested that we, in order to
continue with the expedition
expedition process and allow for
our rural electric co ops to
take advantage of it in a timely
fashion that we create a, uh,
eliminate those that language
for a 10-year period, so that we
can test to see how that works,
uh, using that fund, and that is
on page 7 lines 23 and 24.
Thank you, Senator.
Um, and then the second place.
is going to be
As it relates to the main core
of the
Expedited review process and uh
as you see on page 10, line 19,
or economic development projects
implemented after the effective
date of this act of this 2025
Act, um, so it, it states the
day of the act or the year of
the act, and then later in that
same section.
It states under page 11.
Line
10 through 13, all projects
shall be certified by economic
development department and
approved by the commission prior
to a 10 year sunset of this
section.
Um, so it ties back to that 2025
start date.
Mhm
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Mr. Black, and the cap is
on page 12.
Lines 11, it's a, it's a
capacity cap.
I think you might want the word
existing in front of capacity.
On 912.
Um
And your your amendment expanded
that cap.
For those utilities that only
are
And geographic proportion of the
state, but still, the cap is
there.
So we have those safeguards
around in economic development
bill, and I appreciate the fact
that the Rural Electric co-ops
are included and given access to
this revolving fund.
That Madam chairs a lot of
potential to get these projects
out in the areas that need them
the most.
Um, but I share
Senator O'Malley's concern about
a failure to issue an order is
automatic approval.
Given that Madam Chair, you've
stated that the commission
sometimes takes up to 36 months.
To get these done. We're giving
them a tight deadline, and I
think that's great.
Um, but we're also saying if
they don't, this is lines page
16.
Line 5.
If they don't get an order out
within that 6 month time frame
or the 3 months extension. It's
automatic approval, and that
seems, Madam Chair, a little bit
risky on something so new.
And Madam Chair and senator, I,
I appreciate your thoughts on
that. I, I really do. I just
want to see faster action here.
I think the whole reason that we
reformed the public regulation
commission and our, our
adequately budgeting them and
helping them to achieve their uh
their professionalized staff is
so that we can get this done in
in a time that puts New Mexico
in contention for multiple
projects which quite frankly,
we're not even considered for.
Madam Chair and sponsor, I
absolutely agree, and I think we
need some kind of teeth to
ensure it. But we are putting
the consequences on the
ratepayers here if the PRC
doesn't get this done in a
timely fashion, and I wonder if
there's another way, and Madam
Tay, I don't have an amendment
to propose here. I'm gonna trust
the sponsor to look at this and,
and consider it before it goes
through.
goes through to the next stage
cuz.
Going to finance, oh boy.
Um
Thank you.
Uh, my other concern is, is page
10, and I have spoken to um the
expert witness about it, Madam
Chair. There are a lot of shells
on page 10.
And I wondered, um,
Line 12.
The commission shall allow
sounds like we're the commission
is
No longer has that duty, and
that is in contradiction to
actually what the bill states
later, where the commission can
accept or deny.
So it clearly state later they
can't accept or deny, but here
the shell is pretty tight, and I
think you might want to.
Make that one a may.
Because the shell is repeated on
20.
And the shit and line 20.
And the shell is repeated at the
top of page 11, line 1. So we
are putting.
Um, we have to make sure that we
are not completely hog tying
their ability to approve.
All right, we'd like to comment
on that one.
Senator, uh,
Madam Chair, Senator, uh, I
think what on the the shell that
you mentioned, that is shall
allow public utilities to
recover prudent and reasonable
costs. So that evaluation of
prudent reasonable class is
something that the PRC does all
the time.
And so, uh, requiring them to,
to allow for prudent and
reasonable is what they do every
day. So it's the unprudent and
unreasonable costs that they
would disallow.
And so I think that's why uh
that language is there, and then
you have later on the
requirement.
Uh, that or the allowance to the
commission that they can amend,
deny, or approve.
The application, so it it again
it keeps them with that
authority.
And the the piece to the as it
relates to the 6 and 9 months,
and if they don't make a
determination by 9 months, under
current statute, if the
Application for
Uh, an application for a CCN
goes before the PRC and it is
not approved by the nine-month.
To 15 months, the same thing
happens. It's deemed approved.
So it's just we move the
timeline back. So that, that
process is already within the
context of how the PRC operates.
Thank you, Madam Chair, thank
you, that's very helpful. Thank
you. Any other questions or
comments from the committee.
What is the wish of the
committee?
I do pass.
in a 170 is amended. OK, we have
a Duest. We have a second.
from Senator Jaramillo, if you
will, please take the role.
Senator Figueroa.
Yes.
Senator had a meal. Yes. Senator
O'Malley. No.
Senator Paul.
Senator Ramos.
Senator Sanchez.
Send to share as excuse.
Senator Wirth.
Yes.
Senator Bergmann. Senator
Hamblin. Yes.
We have 7 yeses and 2 nos. So 7
to 2, you have a do pass Senator
Padilla, thank you for your
rapid Fire Bill presentation 3
in a row. We appreciate that.
Right, we have Senator Campos in
the room. So Senator Campos, you
have two bills. You have Senate
Bill 162, and then Senate Bill
31.
And then what we will do is have
Senator Jaramillo present
Senator Schendo's bills and then
uh we're gonna reach out to
Senator Trujillo when we get to
uh Senate Bill 158, Senator
Sindo's bills. OK.
All right.
Senator Campos, you have Senate
Bill 162, I believe you have an
amendment for that. Yes, thank
you very much, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, if you
will, uh, before I begin the
explanation in terms of what
this particular measure does,
uh, we do have an amendment.
And Senator Campos, if I may
just interrupt just a second,
um, so this is, we, we typically
have a 24 hour in advance, and
this is where I asked the
committee, given that it is a,
I, I believe it's a simple
amendment.
Um, and it is really up to the
will of the committee if they
are willing to accept that
amendment. Lisa, do you need to
see the amendment?
OK.
Um, if indeed this is something
that you would much rather have
debated on Thursday, we can move
it to Thursday.
It's entirely up to since it's
just the two of you, the
pressure is on Senator Ramos and
Senator Paul.
You're fine?
All right, so the record shows
that the committee, the rest of
you, are you fine with the, the
amendment?
we didn't have it for 21st. All
right, so thank you, Senator
Campos. Please continue. Thank
you very much, Madam Chair.
Thank you for your indulgence.
Thank you to the members of the
committee. So in terms of the
amendment itself, in essence,
what it does is it goes ahead
and raises the cap, if you will,
from uh the 700+ million to $1
billion. And so that in essence
is what the the amendment does.
discussion.
Right, we have the amendment
move for discussion.
Any opposition to the amendment,
the then Senator Cos thank you
very much, madam, uh, chair
members of the committee and
with me also is Mr. Brandon
Gray, who is with the
Legislative Finance Committee,
and if I may, uh, since we're on
the discussion of the amendment,
uh, what I would like to do is
to at least start there and then
uh I have the explanation in
terms of the bill. But again,
Madam Chair, I take your
direction.
That's fine. Um, if you want to
go ahead and continue moving on
or we'll go to public testimony,
thank you very much, uh, Madam
Chair. So just to go back, are
we, uh, on
Discussion of the amendment or,
OK, so discussion of the
amendment. And again, I have,
uh, Mr. Brandon Gray, who is
gonna assist me with the, uh,
explanation of the amendment.
Madam Chair, committee members,
uh, thank you. Uh, my name is
Brendan Gray. I'm an economist
at the Legislative Finance
Committee, uh, Senate Bill 162
is an LFC endorsed legislation.
So I'm testifying here in
support of the senator and of
the committee. Um,
I think that the best way to to
to explain the amendment and why
it's important is to explain the
bill at large, so if it's all
right with you, Madam Chair in
the community, I can start
there. Um, and I think I'll
start from the highest level I
can. Um, you, you heard this
interim, there was a lot of
headlines around.
Um
That severance tax, uh, excuse
me, that interest revenue,
revenue coming from state
investments is going to surpass
severance tax revenues,
beginning in 2039. Uh, that was
a headline, uh, that was, um,
based on estimates from the
consensus revenue estimating
group. Um, and if you think
about that as a strategy for the
state, instead of being uh
primarily reliant on severance
taxes will be primarily reliant
on
interest from our investments.
That's of course a much more
reliable and consistent form of
income. Um, and 2039, that's,
that's a ways out. Um I'll
borrow an anecdote from the
state investment officer John
Clark, who is here at 2039 is a
a ways away, but I hope to be,
you know, still working for the
state in 2039. That's a ways
away, but it's not that far
away. So, um, because of the
work of this legislature,
because of the work of this
committee, the state has totally
changed.
game with its dependence on
severance taxes.
Why is that? Uh, we're
investing, um, tons and tons of
money into the severance tax
permanent fund. That's right now
our, our primary strategy to
make um what I was just talking
about happened is the severance
tax permanent fund.
The, the reason why this bill is
important, the reason why the
amendment is important is
because um currently the the
investment approach isn't
working for the severance tax
permanent fund. For as long as
I've been at LFC, uh, the Sever
tax fund has been performing in
the worst of state funds. It has
the lowest returns of any fund,
uh, not only that, it has lowest
returns of all funds in the
country, probably, I think most
recently, the number was in the
96th percentile, um.
For that fun performance in of
all funds in the country.
Um, and so, you know, that
vision of having interest,
interest replace severance
taxes. That's, that's reliant on
strong performance from this
fund. There's not strong
performance for this fund and
what this bill is trying to do
is to offer a change in the
status quo, uh, for how some
investments are made. OK, so
that's the, that's anecdote. Now
a little bit into the technical,
um.
Right now, about 90% of the
severance tax permanent fund is
invested in market rate
investments, SAC, Mr. Clark,
they go out, they do a great job
getting the highest rate of
return that they possibly can
for the state.
10%, about 10%, is invested in
what's called um.
Economically targeted
investments. Investments that
are designed to support the New
Mexico economy. Uh, one of
those, 2% is allocated to the
small business investment
corporation. That's a great
program they have consistent
positive returns every year, um,
about $500 million.
is invested in the New Mexico
small business recovery program
that's a program created by the
legislature during the pandemic.
Um, that's also supporting small
businesses. Um, and then the
largest component is a program
called the New Mexico um Private
Equity Investment program, uh,
through that program, SIC makes
investments um into funds that
subsequently invest in New
Mexico companies, um, and the
purpose of that fund is to
stimulate economic development.
And to uh generate a return for
the severance tax permanent
fund. And what we've seen is
that um that second prong of the
mandate just hasn't been
happening.
Uh, in the, in the one year
period, I think that uh program
has
At the returns of that program
are -10%, so a decrease in
market value by 10% over that
period, um, over the last 10
years, it's basically stayed the
same, actual returns have stayed
the same, um, and so the
legislative Finance Committee
believes um that that program is
a large contributor to that
underperformance that I was
talking about earlier. Um, and
then,
So, the status quo, what's
changing? What does this bill
change? What's changing the
status quo? Well, this changes
the allocation to that program,
the private equity program, the
in-state private program from a
percentage, the 7th tax
permanent fund to a dollar
amount.
So currently, State Investment
council can invest up to 11% of
the severance tax permanent fund
in the private equity program,
but this bill would do is you
would put a dollar cap on that.
And as amended, um, it would,
that dollar cap would be $1
billion. Um,
And so that's, that's what the
bill does. That's what the
amendment does. And um
You know, I, I briefly wanted to
make a couple additional
comments. Um, I, I know the
committee is running late. Um,
so there's 3 amendments in uh
that are made.
Items 2 and 3, if you look on
the amendment sheet, those are
technical in nature. Um, those
were included by uh our drafter,
our interpretation of those is
that they didn't have an impact
on the legislation, but the
agency raised that concern in
their analysis, and so we're
being responsive to them and um
Making the changes in items 2
and 3. and then the amendment in
item number one, is also in, in
to being responsive to the
agency.
They flagged that as introduced
in the 162 may may have
overstepped contemplate
overstepping the legislature's
appropriation, constitutional
appropriation authority and
crossing that boundary, um,
potentially in violation of
Section 2, Article 19 of the
Mexico Constitution, which says
that the the legislature can't
pass a law that impairs an
already obligated contract.
So they've already obligated
contracts, $700 million and so
by putting the cap at $700
million we unintentionally were
violating the Constitution. So
with this, with this amendment
we believe has addressed those
constitutional concerns, um.
In, in, yeah.
And I think that that covers my
Uh, thank you very much, Madam
Chair, and of course, uh we're
still on the amendments, so I
don't have any other uh
statements to make regarding
that, and again, we're available
for questions. All right. Thank
you, Senator Campos. Since we
moved on the amendment now what
I would like to do is go to the
audience to see if there's
anybody in the audience that is
in support of Senate Bill 162 as
amended.
CNN, is there anybody in
opposition?
OK.
We've got one noted in
opposition. What about online?
No? So why don't you go ahead
and come on up, John.
Great. Thank you very much,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. My name is John
Clark. I'm the state investment
officer for the State Investment
Council. I first off, really
want to thank Senator Campos and
the Legislative Finance
Committee for their work on this
bill.
We, as the council have shared
some of the concerns that we've
heard from legislators about the
performance, and I would say
underperformance of the
severance tax permanent fund.
Uh, there are 3 components to
that, 2 components we cannot
change because one is the small
business investment corporation,
uh, which was mentioned the
other was the NMFA Small
Business, uh, loan recovery
recovery loan fund during COVID,
we had no control over that. The
third part is something that we
did have control over, and over
the last two years, we have
already made internal changes to
how the program is structured,
what we invest in with the
specific intent that we achieve
market-based return.
or something very close to that.
We are, uh,
I'll already doing that. We've
been doing that over the last
two years, but unfortunately,
the underperformance from the
early 2000s through 2016, still
shows on her books. Those are
still gonna show on her books
for the next 10 years.
So when you look at the
underperformance of the
severance tax permanent fund
today, it has nothing to do with
the commitments that we made.
Uh, last year or the year
before, most of those
commitments, a lot of that money
has not actually been called
yet. It is legally committed but
not called. Most of that
underperformance is due to prior
decisions from the State
Investment council. There were a
decade or more old.
And it is a program that we have
completely changed. That program
that was dragging down our
performance, we officially
changed our policy. We're not
doing it that way anymore.
In addition, we are still very
um
Uh, willing to acknowledge
concerns that we, that our
primary goal needs to be
offsetting future revenue losses
to the state from oil and gas,
and that we need to make sure
that the severance tax permanent
Fund is able to help do that. We
believe we can do that while
still operating in New Mexico
program. We don't believe that
they're mutually exclusive.
We think that we can achieve
market rate performance, uh, but
still invest in New Mexico.
We've already made those
changes. Uh, this bill both in
the united form and amended
form, we believe still
contradicts the New Mexico
constitution, because even at
the $1 billion mark.
We have made more than $1
billion in commitments in the
New Mexico program throughout
its history, and so we could be
in immediate violation of it,
upon enactment of the bill.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you so much, Senator
Capos. We have 5 minutes to
respond. Uh, thank you very
much, uh, Madam Chair, and of
course, members of the
committee, so going in and we're
dealing directly with the, uh,
the amendment itself, uh, within
that, the billion dollars is the
amount that uh the threshold
that we've raised and uh the
understanding of course that
within those obligations and
commitments, uh, that we're
still, if you will, under the
threshold. So, uh, we, we
disagree, we don't believe that
we're, uh, in violation.
The second part of this is as we
move forward, uh, primarily by
the year, uh, fiscal year 50,
uh, the concern for us as a
state is that as we move
forward, uh, with less, if you
will, of the revenues from oil
and gas moving towards, if you
will, uh, resources that will
definitely be needed for the
general fund, uh, what we're
indicating is that if we don't
not able to go ahead and pass
this piece of legislation by
that period of time, we could
be, if you will, uh,
Um, not in the deficit, but, uh,
losing hundreds of millions of
dollars in decreased general
fund revenue, that being the
case, as we continue to go ahead
and see rising costs within the
uh general fund with their
general appropriations Act, and
currently at the $10.8 billion
we could see is then the need to
possibly retail services and uh
cut back, if you will, in
essential areas uh where we
continue to go ahead and
provide, if you will, uh, the
essential.
s to uh the uh taxpayers and the
people of the state of New
Mexico and along with that, uh,
Madam Chair, if I may, I'd like
to defer again to Brandon to
make, uh, a short statement
again regarding the uh the
particular information that has
been brought forward I'll be
shorter than that, Madam Chair,
committee members, I, you know,
I think the senators right in
our interpretation, um, the
amendment addresses those
constitutional concerns, also
acknowledge that the agencies is
the expert here, and I think
there are amendments that could
be made in.
Committee or subsequently that
would address those
constitutional concerns, um, I'd
be happy to talk about those as
I see it, um, but would just
like to offer that up to the
committee before we take our
next steps.
Thank you, Madam Chair. That's
all we have in terms of
response. All right, thank you,
Senator Campos. Now I go to the
committee.
Senator Figueroa.
Madam Chair and sponsor, um, the
amendment.
Remove some of the strikeouts,
but I did not remove the
stricken language on page 4.
Line 16.
Could you please explain the
purpose of that strike.
Uh, Madam Chair, and again, uh,
uh, the expert will go ahead and
respond to the specific
question. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Madam Chair, Senator, great
catch. I'm gonna do my best, uh,
here, uh, this, I believe it
does remove those strikes. So if
you in in on page one lines 20
and 21, uh, remove the brackets
and the line through in addition
to the investment, so it removes
the strike from last 20 and 21.
And then it strikes the word no.
Uh, and then,
And it decapitalizes the word
no.
That's right, and then it
changes that from 700 million to
a billion. So I think it can you
please give the page that you're
on?
yeah, Madam Chair and sponsor on
the amendment, it says on page
one, lines 20 and 21. So I'm,
I'm looking at page 4.
Oh
Line 16, just to clarify.
Madam Chair, Senator, I think
that is, that is a technical
error.
Uh
So Madam Chair, do we want to um
amend
The removal of that strike.
What would you like to do,
Senator Campos?
Um, Madam Chair, just, uh, if,
if I may, just a couple of
seconds real quick. Let me
confirm with the expert. Mhm.
So, so, Madam Chair, uh, of
course, uh, Senator Figueroa as
we deal with that, uh, it's a
great catch, and it would be
considered a friendly amendment
if we were to go ahead and uh
and remove that, that strike.
But again, uh, and, and as we've
been dealing with this, Madam
Chair, um,
I don't know if the, if the need
would be that we do this and in
uh in writing to ensure that you
do have, if you will, the uh
information uh exactly as it's
presented and as we would accept
or or or pose if you will, uh,
opposition to the, to the
amendment.
What, what I would recommend and
certainly appreciate feedback
from the committee is that if um
we'll continue to go through,
uh, just to see if there are any
other corrections that need to
be made to the amendment.
And then, um, either decide to
make one brand new amendment to
this, or have you make the
changes and then you come back
for a quick presentation, uh, on
another day on Thursday. So, um,
let's continue on. Senator
Figueroa, I'll let you continue
the conversation, and if there
are other members of the
committee who want to ask
questions.
Um, Madam Chair, I think that's
all for me, um.
That's it.
That's it. OK. Are there other
members, other questions from
the committee.
I'll just ask to clarify.
The amendment. Yes, for the
amendment that Senator Figueroa
suggested.
I think we noticed it because in
our committee analysis, it
points out that that's
Limiting
How the fun could be used.
By saying that it must be used
for these this list of.
Fields
Are you sure that's wrong?
Or was that your intent?
Madam Chair, and, and of course,
Senator Bergman says we, uh, we
deal with it, uh, the intent, of
course, was, uh, but not limited
to, but that was struck, and so
that would be considered if you
will, uh, an oversight, uh, on,
on our behalf.
OK, I would just.
I would be all for senators
Figueroa's amendment then.
What about the rest of our
committee? Are you following the
amendment? Are you following
what we're, what we're doing?
All right, Senator Figuero, if
you would, would you please
repeat um, what you're
requesting so that we can make
that 2nd amendment.
Hm. And then we'll move it
today.
Madam Chair.
But on page 4.
You
I'm
Also give the lines on page 4,
line 16.
Strike the brackets.
And the line through but not
limited to.
that
That's it.
Madam Chair considered a
friendly amendment.
That makes sense.
All right. So we have a movement
on the amendment.
Second movement there, it's the
2nd Amendment.
We go. Yes, I move a 2nd
Amendment.
As stated,
Thank you very much and Madam
Chair, we're still on the
primary amendment, but that was
a subsequent amendment, so you
just adopted that, I understand
as you're moving forward.
Is there opposition to that 2nd
Amendment, seeing none, we've
got uh
Twice amended.
Thank you very much
thank you very much for that as
we go forward. So I will be back
on the bill. All right, we're
back on the bill twice amended.
Are there any other comments or
questions from the committee?
Senator Sanchez would like to go
ahead and move for a due pass
passenate Bill 162 twice a
minute. All right. Do we have a
second?
Senator Rason the 2nd.
All right, Rebecca, if you will,
please.
Twice amended Senate Bill 162.
Senator Figueroa.
Yes.
Senator had a meal. Yes. Senator
O'Malley.
Senator Paul.
Senator Ramos.
Senator Sanchez.
to share is excuse, Senator word
is.
Senator Bergmans.
Yes.
Senator Hamlin. Yes.
We have 8 yeses,
8 to 0, you have a do pass on
your twice amended bill. Thank
you very much, Madam Chair,
members of the committee.
Absolutely, Senator Campos, can
you stick around for Senate Bill
31?
All right, and then we will go
to Senator Trujillo cause I
think I saw her.
So there you are, thank you.
So we'll go to you next.
And then we'll finish.
All right, Senator Compos,
whenever you're ready. Thank you
very much, Madam Chair of the
committee, uh, in essence in
Bill 31, uh establishes the
natural disaster revolving fund
to provide zero interest loans
to political subdivisions of the
state and electrical operatives
that have been approved for
federal emergency management
agency or FEMA public
assistance, uh, funding
following the federal declared
natural disaster or disasters,
and uh there's more to uh to
discuss, but uh
with me, Madam Chair, if I may.
I'd also like to defer to uh my
expert today who is uh Ali Ryan,
of course, there may be others
who we're going to speak on this
behalf, but in essence, uh, as
we dealt with Senate Bill 6 a
few years back. Uh, we provided
resources, if you will, to those
that were adversely affected by
the fires and floods, uh, not
only in northeastern New Mexico,
but it would have been available
to others that were uh afflicted
by some of those uh those same
instances. Now what we're
looking at since the
forces have become uh totally uh
committed is to be able to move
forward because we do have
additional floods that are and
fires, um, that have occurred as
an example in the Lincoln County
area and so within this bill,
what we're looking forward to do
is to go and set a uh a 0
interest loan, uh, the amount
that we would put into this fund
would be 150 million, and that
again would be available to
those uh public subdivisions or
divisions, if you will.
Uh, within the state of New
Mexico that have been affected
by uh by our fires along with
that, uh, those resources would
be paid back, uh, particularly
as they deal with FEMA and
within that FEMA then indicates
that this is something that
could be reimbursed, and so this
would be to help the committee,
the communities, uh, that have
been affected, if you will, by
the devastation that has
occurred here in New Mexico. And
if I may, Madam Chair, just very
quickly to go ahead and ask Ay
right to uh further
respond to what we're
Madam Chair, members of the
community, um, are, yes, sorry,
committee, our community, thank
you, um, thank you for having me
here today, uh, first of all,
this is a bill that isn't very
near and dear to my heart, um, I
was, uh, the expert witness for
Cinabel 6, and then I also um
help support HBO in order to get
funding out to these
communities, this bill would
make this reoccurring so that
way when future disasters also
incur those communities can come
forth and be able to
Um, tap into this funding. It
also opens up for Warren San
Miguel from the Hermit's Peak Ca
Canyon disaster, and then our
communities in Lincoln County
and our communities in Chavez
County to still be able to go to
this bill and ask for more
dollars as they are going
through their recovery process.
We are sitting here 3, almost 4
years out from Hermit's Peak Caf
Canyon, and we have a lot of
work still left to do, and a lot
of that boils down to the
funding aspect. These
communities are very small, they
have small taxes.
revenue and they just don't have
the funding in their pockets to
be able to get out there and fix
it. Unfortunately for a hermit's
peak calf Canyon area and now
also what we're seeing in the
Riodoso and Lincoln County area,
they don't just get hit once,
they get hit time and time and
time again. Every time it rains,
every time it snows, the damages
that they've already gone out
and fixed. They're having to go
back out and fix again, so that
just means those dollars are
continuously coming up and they
don't have a chance to come up
and catch you.
Um, the breast that they need in
order to get ahead or be able to
do the other fixes that they
need around their community. Um,
I will tell you right now, uh,
you know, Hartman's P Ca Canyon
was the first time that we did
this, those dollars got out
fairly quickly, but for example,
in the Lincoln County area,
those dollars got out. It was
100, 100 million, no excuse me,
$70 million. Those dollars got
out within a week. That's how
desperate need these communities
were and needed that funding.
The other thing that I would
like to point out across all
three disasters, so Hermit's
Peak Caf Canyon, Riodoso and
Chavez County. We're sitting at
close to $2 billion worth of
eligible projects. Those
projects are continuously still
being written, so those dollar
amounts are gonna go up, so we
are extremely grateful for the
$100 million that you gave in
Senate Bill 6, the $70 million
that was given during HB1 and
the $150 million that we have
allocated in this bill, but as
you can see, it's gonna be one
of those.
things where people are going to
be fighting for that money so
they can get out there and
rebuild.
Um, I think, I think that's the
best way that I can open this up
and I'll stand for any questions
you may have. Thank you very
much, Madam Chair, members of
the committee are available for
questions. Thank you, Senator
Campos, and just to, to, for the
committee that aisk is that it's
an emergency clause. So at this
point, um, can we have by a show
of hands, uh, those in the
audience who are in support of
Senate Bill 31.
1234567, 2030, 45.
All right, um, if, uh, is there
anybody in opposition?
I had the same look you did.
Uh, anybody online then. All
right, so let's go ahead and
have everybody, uh, come on up
for one minute, please.
You want to make a due pass?
So are there any other, hold on
just a second, Carrie. Are there
any other questions or comments
from the committee?
Senator Jaramillo.
Cuz it looks like the committee
is very eager to move on this.
However, we do have some
questions or comments. Carrie,
why don't you go ahead and sit
down?
It is noted how many people in
this room supported that, uh, we
have a record of
I think it was 10.
8, thank you. Um, so we have
that, so, um, hold on, hold your
thoughts, Senator Sanchez. Let's
go to Senator Jaramillo. Uh, is
there anybody else in line?
Thank you, Madam Chair, and it's
not a question, but it's just a
comment to somebody who
represents rural New Mexico and
political subdivisions of land
grant Merced. This is huge for
us in the sense that land grants
don't generate funds but are a
political subdivision. We don't
have money saved in a bank, it's
errors who pay a membership fee,
but we're seeing that we're so
close to disaster with climate
change, and what we've seen in
Water County, we're worried that
the same might happen to us in
Riba County now and.
the area that I represent,
Menales became a flood zone
because the whole terrain from
flood scars, even from the fires
in Los Alamos that we still
have, have flooded my, my
district, and these emergency,
this emergency clause and the no
interest loan is huge for us.
When we start thinking that our,
our common lands in land grants
also have a secs, which then go
in to help those of us who farm
or who rely on this water.
to make a living and so I just
wanted to thank you, Senator
Campos, for always thinking
about Nortenos and our land
grant Meds and the impact of
bills like this can have on
rural New Mexicans, no
questions, no further comments
about him. Thank you.
Senator Bergman's O'Malley, did
you have anything? All right.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, no
questions, just to comment, uh,
Senator, I just wanted to thank
you and the others that had
sponsored this bill, um, my good
friend, Representative Vincent
out there, uh, you know, I think
we fully understand how
imperative it is for these
communities that have been hit
by some form of disaster to be
able to turn around and take
immediate action. FEMA has not
been the quickest to responding
and getting monies back into
these communities and it's a
detriment to these.
Uh, the fires and flooding that
happened in Lincoln and
specifically hit Riodoso,
Riodoso Downs, and then the
resulting flooding that we saw
in Chavez and Roswell this last
year, uh, is proof that when
those natural disasters hit,
they need to take immediate
action. Businesses have suffered
because they can't get back out,
you know, the, the members of
the communities have suffered
because there's they're just
sitting around waiting, so I, I
applauded all you for taking
action to find a way to be able
to help.
Our fellow New Mexicans out, so
thank you.
Thank you, Senator Paul. Senator
Bergman's and then Senator
O'Malley.
Thank you, Madam Chair, I just
have a quick question that.
I wanted to bring up just since
we were talking about FEMA, what
would happen to this whole
entire program if FEMA suddenly
stopped offering loans or
assistance.
Uh, thank you very much, Madam
Chair, Senator Bergman, I'm
gonna go into defer again to
Miss Wright to uh respond to
that and then I, I may have a
comment after if I.
Adam Chair, Senator, um,
I don't, I don't have, I don't
have a complete and total answer
for you that that scenario is
kind of very much up in the air.
I will tell you I'm sitting on
quite a few committees who are
trying to advise the White House
and let them know um how this
would impact, um, there's pros
and cons to, you know, the, the,
the proposal that's on the board
from the White House and from
the president, um, I think that
the position that we're in right
now, I don't think that no
Mexico as a whole, I mean, we
are flush with cash right now,
but New Mexico is.
hole and over the coming years,
I don't think we want to put
ourselves in that position where
we are the ones straddled with
um mobilizing as quickly as
what, um, FEMA should do and be
in the bearer of that, um, they
do plus up so one of the things
that I think is it's very known
for many folks if you watch us
in our LFC, we're a small
agency, we roughly have about 83
people when a federal disaster
does occur, and don't get me
wrong, I don't think that they
do move quick enough or supply
funding quick enough, but they
come in in droves, 300, 400,
500.
people that get out there and do
the on the boots ground work
that is needed in order to help
these communities know where the
damages are, know where the
impacted residents are. We just,
we don't have that capability.
So with that, I would also say I
would strongly recommend that,
um,
That doesn't play a factor cause
it would, it would hinder us
immensely. Um, but to get back
to your original question.
The dollars that you currently
are seeing, so the $2 billion
that that we just talked about,
those dollars are already
allocated. They're already out
there. They're already in
projects written, they're
already sitting in an invisible
bank we'll call it, um, for
those projects to be able to be
pulled down and paid for, so
The funding is there. I don't
foresee it impacting us to the
point that you're gonna, the
state would be out the dollars
if that's what you're ultimately
getting at.
Madam Chair, Senator Bergman's,
if I may, and I, uh, you really
bring up a very valid point as
we deal particularly with FEMA
at the federal level and the
kind of issues that uh
definitely could occur. I would
say with this, uh, one
particular bill and a total of
about $320 million with 3 that
we've, uh, uh, two that we've
taken action on already, when
hopefully that we'd be able to
take action on as well. In
essence, then what would happen
is, yes, these loans would be
out there, and at that point,
then we would need to bring this
back to the
legislature to see what the next
step would be, but right now it
would be the loan process, the
other part, though, again, we're
gonna have to watch very
carefully what FEMA intends to
do in the near future. But
again, we're going to continue,
Madam Chair, uh, Senator
Bergman's with uh your
assistance is to ensure that our
communities have been afflicted
by uh the fires and the floods
that they do have the resources
in a timely manner so that we
can help these people uh
recover, so we're able to go
ahead and move forward as a
state.
take care of our communities
that have been afflicted. Thank
you very much, Madam Chair.
Thank you very much. That's all.
Thank you, Senator Bergman,
Senator O'Malley, and then I've
got Senator Ramos.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair. So
this is a 0% 0 interest loans,
um, and so,
Senator Jaramillo mentioned the
Seas or Sea associations.
So, and he made it pretty clear
they don't have the ability to
really, they don't have any
revenue, they don't have the
ability to pay back. So are
these loans forgivable?
Uh, Madam Chair, and, uh, of
course, uh, as we move forward,
Senator O'Malley, not at this
time, no, they're not.
But they could be.
Um, Madam Chair, and of course,
Senator O'Malley, that would be
the discretion of the
legislature in future years if
we were to consider that, uh,
since it would go ahead and be,
these would be uh public
entities, uh, then conceptually,
yes, it, it, it could be
forgiven.
OK, um,
chair, so this is being, this is
being managed by
What department again?
Department of Homeland Security
emergency.
And, and Madam Chair, if you
don't mind, I, I'd like to add
on something, so the grant is a
reimburseable grant, so it means
that what you spend up front is
what you get reimbursed from the
feds. So the dollars that the
state is giving is virtually
giving that isaka that upfront
money to go out and get the work
done. They turn in the receipts
and then FEMA reimburses us for
the for the work that it's done.
Madam Chair, is FEMA going to do
that? Have you, has it been
clear that FEMA will do that,
Madam Chair, Senator, yes,
ma'am, it is. So we already have
projects virtually in Hermits
peak Cafan and we actually have
a couple in Riodoso but those
dollars are already starting to
be turned back around. OK. Thank
you. Thank you. Thank you,
Senator O'Malley. Senator Ros,
Madam Chair, Senator, Senator,
thank you very much for bringing
this in front of us as as uh
disasters all over the state of
New Mexico are are are occurring
and seems like it's.
A lot more rapid than we'd ever
want, of course, um, but I, I
was looking at the FIR on uh
Workers agency fiscal
implications.
We're, uh, looks like uh
You're providing 260, 250,000
for administrative fees and
it's, uh, I guess on the if if I
are stating at 172,000 for 33
individuals would be 266,000.
Um
Should we up that amount before
it goes to the next uh.
Uh
Finance, maybe uh.
Before it goes to finance
because at 250,000 for 3 people,
that's not gonna be suffice for
the administration fees.
What, uh, would be a friendly
amendment to opt out to.
Madam Chair, if I may please,
and again, uh, thank you very
much, Senator Ramos. I'm gonna
defer to uh the expert because
they're the individuals who
continue to administer the
resources and uh and manage this
program and then from there, I
may have a comment if I may,
Madam Chair, Madam chair,
senator, um, we were trying to
be conservative in the amount
and not ask for too terribly
much, but if the committee is
willing to increase that dollar
amount, we would be happy to,
um, to, to, to have that
amendment. Madam Chair, if I may
quickly again, Senator Ramos,
uh, as you indicated with the
fires, floods, the devastation
throughout the state, it could
affect any of our forest areas
or any part of our state, uh, in
the near future, and so within
that, as we continue to use the
resources to administer the
program. I know that, uh, uh,
Ali and others as they deal with
this or uh definitely strapped
with uh with time. Uh, if I may
very quickly, uh, Madam Chair,
Senator Ramos, uh, Miss Allie
Ryan.
I have been working with each
other now for uh about a little
over 4 years. And within that,
it's uh 724365. In fact, we're
dealing with another situation
in Las Vegas regarding our water
situation and that's occurring
as we speak, so we're constantly
dealing with these issues, and I
know that the FDC the FTE is
definitely would assist, uh, in
the administration of, of these
resources if this bill were to
pass. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Manage would be a friendly
moment to uh.
You strike on page 5.
Um
Line 8, I just.
Senator Campos, does that work
for you? Uh, Madam Chair,
members of the committee,
Senator Ramos, it's considered a
friendly amendment. We
appreciate that. Thank you.
If so, ma'am sure I still move
that we uh replaced 250,000 on
page 5, line 8 with $400,000.
Uh, before we move on that
amendment, Senator Bergman, do
you have a question on that?
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I'm
just quickly trying to read the
whole section it's in.
But would that deplete the fun
too quickly?
I don't know if that question
makes sense. I'm trying to read
where it is, Madam Chair, and of
course Senator Bergman's at the
uh the question does make sense
and, and I appreciate the
conscientiousness in dealing
what we talk about the, the
resources that are going to be
available. Uh, this definitely
would be a small portion to try
to go ahead and get the total
of, of the $320 million out to
administer, to manage, uh,
because that's in 33 bills and
it would be 333 portions of
of resources, uh, and again, the
FTEs to administer this are
definitely needed, so in terms
of depleting the fund, uh, it
would be applied to uh actually
ensuring that the resources are
exercised and used for their
proper purpose. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you very much,
Senator Berns.
I say, so you don't think it
would deplete the fun too
quickly, Senator.
Madam Chair, Senator Bergman,
no, I would not, uh, it would
not.
Not further deplete the fund, it
would be used to help to enhance
and to manage the resources that
we have, that would be available
for the devastations that have
occurred in these counties, and,
and others that would go ahead
and uh qualify, if you will
through FEMA and be able to use
the resources.
OK, that was my only question
about. All right, thank you, uh,
I want to make sure that Senator
Figueroa that your question
doesn't have to do with the
amendment or do you
Madam Chart does not have to do
with that amendment, but in case
we need another amendment, do we
want to hold off and lump a
couple things together.
Yes, according to Rebecca, who
would be doing all of those,
yes.
So we'll, we'll hold on to that,
that amendment of increasing
that, um, Senator Figueroa, go
ahead. Madam Chair and sponsor
of my concern is on page 2, it's
something that was identified in
the fiscal impact report.
Um, line 21, page 2.
Line 20, says the political
subdivision will repay the loan
within 30 days of becoming
eligible for reimbursement.
Um, but then if you go up to
line 13. It says the political
subdivision shall pay the loan
by providing a release. So just
to clarify that I'm
understanding this correctly.
Um
They're not repaying the loan
with the money.
That has arrived from FEMA. It
might not be here yet. They are
repaying the loan by signing
something that says you get our
FEMA money, and they can sign
that paper within 30 days, no
problem. They do not have to
come up with the money in 30
days. Is that correct? Uh, Madam
Chair, and, uh, uh, Senator
Figueroa, if I may again defer
to my expert witness with me
today, uh, to further respond to
that because she's already had
actual experience in dealing
directly with other
this works. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Madam Chair, Senator, you are
correct. So what it is saying is
once they receive the funds they
have 30 days in order to get
that federal dollars back to the
state.
So they will sign the waiver
agreeing that they will do it
and then once they they actually
physically get the federal
dollars that federal dollars
then is given back to the state
and they have 30 days in which
to start that process.
Madam Chair, and expert witness.
I, I wondering then if the
language says exactly what you
needed to say of becoming
eligible for reimbursement.
It's not the same as within 30
days of receiving FEMA money.
So which is it because they have
to be eligible for FEMA in order
to get this loan, correct, so
they have something that says
FEMA is going to give you money.
And that's the point at which
they're eligible, but FEMA can
take years.
To come through with the money.
Um, so I just wanna be sure
these political subdivisions
aren't.
It sounds like they have to come
up with it within 30 days of
being eligible. So Madam Chair,
Senator, I hear you loud and
clear, and I, and I think the
reason it's a little, um,
written that way is it's
language that we use on the
federal side. So what happens is
the applicant will turn over all
of their documentation that
proved that they spent the
dollars. BHSEM then reviews all
that documentation to make sure
that was spent appropriately,
how much money they actually
expended, they could cause they
could have potentially gone.
over the amount that has been
allocated to them from DFA, um,
and then it is then sent to FEMA
by the blessing of the state
saying, hey, we've reviewed all
this. Everything is great. FEMA
will then say good to go, you
can release the funds back to
them, so that, that is the
mechanism in which it occurs and
then once that that occurs, we
immediately issue a check over
to them. Thank you, Madam Chair.
No amendment required, Madam
Chair.
All right. uh, thank you. Any
other comments or questions from
the committee?
And so we are good with the
amendment and no additions to
that amendment.
So Senator Ramos, if you want to
go ahead and repeat the
amendment.
Um, to make sure that you've got
that and then we'll go ahead and
we'll take a vote, Madam Chair,
I move that we amend page 5,
line 15.
Uh, I'm sorry, I'm sorry, I'm
sorry, uh, page 5, line 8, and
replace 250,000 with 400,000.
400
Yes, 400,000.
Was it 450 before?
400? OK.
All right. Thank you. Can we
have a second on that amendment?
OK.
OK, dual seconds.
All right.
Uh, is there any opposition to
the amendment?
See no opposition, go ahead and
record that all.
In attendance are in support.
All right, we have that other
amendment. Any other
conversations on the bill as a
minute.
And what is the will of the
committee?
Um, Bill, I'm sorry.
Senate Bill 31 has amended.
Mhm. A do pass. We have a second
from Senator Figueroa.
You ready?
Go for it.
Senator Figueroa.
Senator had a meal.
Senator O'Malley.
Senator Paul.
Senator Ramos.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator Cher.
Senator work. Yes.
Senator Bergmann's.
Senator Hamblin.
We have 9 yeses and 0. So 9 to
0, you have to do fast.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
we really appreciate that. Thank
you very much. We have Senator
Trujillo.
She's got 2 bills that should be
fairly.
Fairly quick.
And then Senator Jaramil, you'll
take care of Senator Sendos.
We'll, he'll finish this up.
Thank
Sorry
Yeah.
Yeah.
Um, 179.
Uh, hold on just a second.
I
Already, Senator Trujillo. Hi,
Madam Chair, and thank you
for your,
uh, since you haven't been to
this committee before, you have
20 minutes, so I don't think
you'll need 20 minutes, but you
have 20 minutes along with your
expert to go ahead and present
the bill. Any public comment,
you are also offered, uh, uh,
have the opportunity for 5
minutes to respond.
But this committee is being very
efficient.
And moving through things that
uh they feel can move on
through, so go ahead, Senator.
Thank you, Madam Chairwoman and,
and I think I'd have to talk
very slow to take 20 minutes. I
don't think we want you to.
Thank you, thank you. So I have
an expert witness um online. His
name is Steven Cobb. I'm not
certain that we're gonna need
him, but he is there in case and
I just wanted to point him out.
Um, so Senate Bill 179 updates
the New Mexico rental Purchase
Agreement Act to include
electronic disclosure
requirements for rental purchase
agreements entered in through
e-commerce. The bill mandates
that when a customer consumer
enters into a rental.
Purchase agreement
electronically, regardless of
where the customer views the
property, the existing
disclosure requirements of the
Act may be met through
electronic means, as long as the
required information is
displayed clearly and
conspicuously before the
agreement is finalized. So why
do we need this update? It
modernizes the act for the
e-commerce um purchases that
have become more and more um
popular and convenient. Um, the
existing
law obviously was written before
rental purchase agreements
became common and electronic
rental purchase agreements
became common, and um and
protections to apply those um
electronically. So, overall,
it's very pretty simple. Senate
Bill 179 just modernizes
consumer protections, making
rental purchase agreements more
transparent and fair in both the
physical and the digital
markets.
We stand for questions. I thank
you. Do you want your expert to
say anything or would you rather
go to public testimony? Let's
go, let's go to, um, right, uh,
just by show of hands, is there
anybody in the audience who is
in support of this bill?
All right, Jason. Anybody in
opposition?
Jason, you want to get up just
for giggles and get and do a
minute.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I'm not gonna take a
minute. I think, uh, Senator
Trujillo almost called her
Representative Trujillo there
for a second. We've all done
that, but Senator Trujillo
explained it very well, uh, the
reality is that this is a bill
that is intended to prevent bad
actors in the e-commerce space.
Right now there is not a
specific requirement that says
that they have to give the
disclosures electronically, um,
and so the hanger tag option is
still there. Hanger tag.
doesn't work great for an online
purchase. So now the electronic
disclosures will be clearly and
conspicuously, um.
Required every time an
individual enters into one of
the, these agreements, uh, for a
rent to own.
So this is a good bill, we urge
you that the uh uh uh committee
pass it and by the way, I forgot
to say I represent P P R O G
Holdings.
Which does engage in some of
these types of uh rent on
purchasing.
If
Anybody online.
All right, thank you. Um, at
this point, I go to the
committee.
I'm overdue pass 2. All right,
um, Rebecca is, um, indisposed.
So y'all are way too fast, so
can I, I mean, I just need to.
You just need a vote sheet.
Here we go.
Let me give that to you. I don't
know if that's for the bill or
not. She's gonna be so mad at me
for messing things up.
179, no, this is for the bell,
so.
All right, so we have uh a due
pass from Senator Bergman's and
then a second from Senator
Figueroa.
Thanks for knowing this.
You want to go ahead and call
the roll?
Senator Figueroa.
Yes.
Senator Armio.
Senator O'Malley.
Senator Paul, Senator Ramos.
Senator Sanchez.
excuse.
Senator Shers excuse, Senator
Worth. Yes.
Senator me, yes.
Chair Hamblin.
Yeah.
8
808 to 0, yeah, but do pass on
that on Senate Bill 179. Thank
you, madam. Thank you very much.
Thank you, vice chair.
And thank you for that.
It's hard for me.
It's the committee. Oh no, we
just looked through.
So
No amendments, nothing else,
just
Whatever you need to do there.
Um, I know Senator O'Malley has
to leave. Uh, so we're now on to
Senate Bill 180. Thank you, uh,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Senate Bill 80s some
changes to um statute in regards
to storage units. Um, it does it
allows occupants to designate a
third party. So when you rent a
storage unit, this gives them
the option of putting in a third
party. That's one more person
that could be contacted if you
forget to make your payment, if
you
default on your payment. If
something happens, there's one
extra person in the event that
you're out of the country, your
phone number's been changed. Um,
it also changes the total
notification period from 90
days, which I will just say is
the longest in the nation to
what is more normal, which is 45
days without eliminating or
altering any other
notifications. It also
established the valuation limit.
So on items that are stored to
In an establishment, um,
You don't want someone to store
something that is millions and
millions of dollars, not that
they would, um, but you don't
want things that are highly
valued to be stored in a, a
storage unit and then they have
to be covered. So it, um, it,
it, it lets the storage unit
owner set a limit for what's the
maximum valuation of um
merchandise or material or
product that can be stored in
the, in the storage unit. It
also does allow
owner to charge a late fee of
$20 a day or 20% of the monthly
rent per month, whichever is
higher.
Um, and Madam Chair, I do have
an expert witness here with me
today.
I'm Randy would like to say
anything. Just go ahead and make
sure you identify yourself. Yes,
um, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Randy Traynor
representing the self-storage
Association. Um, this bill is
kind of like the Groundhog Day
for this committee. It's been
here several times, um, and I
would say that uh every time we
come back, I think we make a
little more headway, but I think
we had a, a breakthrough moment
this year, uh, prior to, uh,
well, up until this time.
Uh, we've always had an issue
of, uh, what I call grandma's
tea set, where, where we're
trying to perfect a lien here,
and we've just always had that
one last notice, just in the
case that something of value is
still in that uh shed and we've
made every attempt to contact
that person. Uh, I don't think
anybody would be real surprised
to know that in reality, that's,
that's pretty rare. It's, it's
usually something that usually
doesn't have enough value to
cover the the what is owed back
to the owner.
But that has always been an a
major issue with the New Mexico
Press Association. So, um, this
year, we talked to the Press
Association prior to the
session, and we proposed a, a
different uh alternative. What
we have done is we've not
changed any of the notification
requirements which was their
concern, and we did like um the
senator noted, we changed that
note that length of time to
perfect the length of the lien
from 90 to 45 days, which is
again more in the middle of the
pack.
For across the country. And so
the press association isn't here
this year, so that's because
they're OK with the bill. Um,
and so I think we've made a lot
of attempts to, uh, to, to make
this work, uh, bring it up to
speed a little bit and I was
helping the questions. Madam
Chair, I did forget to mention
that there is a provision that
requires the storage unit, um,
entities to notify current
owners that they have the right
to add a third person.
So those who are currently have
an agreement for storage, will
be notified at their last known
address, and they will be given
the opportunity to add that
third party.
All right, thank you very much.
Um, just by a show of hands from
this very large audience that's
remaining here, uh, anybody in
support of this bill?
Anybody in opposition?
OK, you're waving your hand, you
gotta remember I used to, I used
to teach college. Are, are you
in opposition or support?
Support? OK. Um, we're just
gonna go ahead and note. Is
there anybody online?
At this part of the day, they're
probably already have dinner.
Um, at this point, OK, so we're
just gonna go ahead and mark
that you're in support. Um, uh,
now I go to the committee.
Senator Paul.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator for bringing this
bill for somebody who is
involved in the storage space, I
appreciate some changes being
made to the to the self storage,
self-service storage leanite.
One follow-up question as far as
the notice to existing
customers, can you give me a
little more detail because it
says that for a rental agreement
entered into this is page 2,
line 21, for rental agreement
entered into before the 2025
changes, the owner may comply,
so is this going to require that
owners have to send out to all.
Previously existing customers
noticed that that they uh
Have the ability to add another
party to that Senator, that's a
really good question. And the
way that I, I read this is that
yes, they, they have to comply,
but they may do it through this
means. It may be that they, you
know, when you come in to pay
your fee, um, they give you the
opportunity to add someone, but
this is a way that gives them
the opportunity to comply. They
have to comply.
I'm just clarify that. Thank
you.
Thank you, Senator Paul. Anybody
else on the committee?
You know the comments you got to
get, you know, you know you
gotta get faster. Sorry, Madam
Chair, I'm trying to formulate
my question, um, which is from
our committee analysis which
says, I don't entirely
understand the sections they're
referring to, but it says 4811
7A.
says that the notice, it
requires a lien notice to be
sent to the occupant and the
alternative contact 4811D allows
the notice to go to either.
Is there a conflict? What's the,
that's what I was trying to
figure out also, it's.
I think it's on page 2.
I see, I see on page 4, line 10
or line 11 and 12, it, it says
the alternate alternative
contact, if any, at the last
known address of the occupant
and alternate contact, is that
what you mean for the first one?
I think so and then in section,
subsection D, um, that starts on
page 5 and then.
Last known address of the
occupant or alternative contact.
It does seem to mention that.
That's how I'm reading that it
is in line 9.
They would pay you.
Um, age 6, line 9.
So if the owner sends a notice
of electronic mail and does not
receive a response.
Return receipt or delivery
confirmation from the electronic
address to which the notice was
sent within 3 business days, so
they've already had to do it
after the day on which the
notice was sent, the owner shall
deliver a one-time notice of by
verification mail, which I
imagine would be certified mail,
um, to the last known address of
either one or the other. They
don't have to send the certified
mail to both.
They do have to send all of the
other notifications. So this is
just like, you've got
notification. Now it's been, you
know, there's time has lapsed,
and now we're gonna send you
this certified mail.
And the certified.
OK, it sounds right to you, then
I trust that. Thank you, Senator
Ramos, Madam Chair, um, senator,
thank you for bringing this bill
to us, um, so what's the
consequence if if a rental
agreement specifies the limit on
the value of personal property
that may be stored in an.
occupants lease space, the limit
is beamed, uh, deemed to be the
maximum value of the stored
personal property. So if you put
an amount of $500.
And something happens, they
don't pay, you have to recoup
your, your monies.
Um, what happens if they have
something that's worth $1000.
I'm gonna let my expert witness.
OK, so if, if I'm an owner and I
have a maximum value of 500.
OK, and say that uh you know, we
go through the process, uh, we
have to recoup our, our monies,
um, and we find something that's
worth $1000. What, what's
What's the problem at that
point? It's, man, I'm sure if I
might uh defer to, uh, Mr. Joe
Dougherty here from the
association. If you will go
ahead and please come on up. You
can sit in this chair and use
Senator Trujillo's microphone.
Madam Chair members of the
committee, thank you Senator
Ramos. So if, if there were the
scenario you you're referring to
and the property was sold for
nonpayment.
Any amount that's in excess of
what was owed by the tenant
would go back.
the tenant or if the tenant
didn't.
Uh
Did not, uh, get that property,
get that money back from the
storage owner. It will go to
unclaimed property.
That's the only question I have.
Thank you. Right. Any other
questions from the committee?
Better figure out what to give
you a chance now.
All right, see nun, what is the
will of the committee?
Who would you pass Senator Worth
with a due past. Do we have a
second? second from Senator
Paul.
You can fight over it later over
a beverage.
Right, Rebecca, if you will.
Yes.
Senator had a meal. Yes. Senator
O'Malley.
Us.
Senator Paul.
Senator Ramos.
And to Sanchez is excuse and to
share is excused Senator work.
Yes. Senator Bergman, yes,
Senator Hamblin. Yes. We have 7
yeses and 0 no. You have a 7 to
0 do pass.
Congratulations.
Senator Jaramillo is going to
present the last bill of the
day, Senate Bill 158, uh, on
behalf of Senator Shchino, and
then that will finish off our 12
bill slam fest today.
OK.
But I'm sure we had a place that
uh.
We had to move our chairs around
cause this is my luck.
Your lucky seat,
Madam chair, Senate Bill 158
insures all parent data
reporting practices on the
state's flagship economic
development programs, local
economic development Act and the
job training initiative programs
also called or known as most of
you as Lena and Jatip will
continue. This is part of
several initiatives designed to
strengthen LFC's evaluation of
economic development programs,
including a 350,000
non-recurring appropriation to
the LFC.
for economic analysis software
and the feed bill. Currently,
the economic development
department internally collects
and monitors performance data
regarding Lena and JTip by
practice, the department shares
this information with the
legislature and the public. Now
this bill, Madam Chair,
formalizes that practice into
statute, ensuring that current
data and sharing practices
continue regardless of the
administration. Joining me as my
expert witness is Jolisa
Rodriguez, who has a few
comments.
Thank you, Madam Chair. um, good
afternoon. My name is, or good
evening, I guess. My name is
Julie Rodriguez and I'm the LFC
analyst, um.
This
Uh, Bill is committee sponsored,
um, so I'm here being as the
expert witness to testify on
behalf of the LFC.
Um, as a senator covered, this
bill is taking existing
evaluation and reporting metrics
and putting them in statute, uh,
for Lita and Jed, um, there's
nothing that we're asking the
agency to do on top of what
they're already doing. We're
just codifying that instead.
Thank you so much.
Um, I have a feeling that we're
probably not gonna have any
audience participation, unless
there's somebody who's really a
glutton for punishment online.
All right, you're all alone over
there. All right. Um, is there
anybody in the audience that
would like to comment on this
bill?
All right. We're just wanting to
ask, um, uh, any comments from
the committee or any questions
from the committee.
Madammo would do pass. We have a
Du pass from Senator Brisman, so
I want to make sure that there
are no questions or comments
beforehand.
You're all like, can we get out
of here before 6 o'clock?
All right, uh, do I have a
second for Du Pas. Second from
Senator Figueroa, uh, if you
will, please take the role for
the record.
Senator Figueroa. Senator had a
meal.
Senator O'Malley is excused
Senator Paul. Senator Rum.
Senator Sanchez is excused
Senator share is excused,
Senator work.
Yes. Senator Bergman, yes.
I
Yes. Senator Bergman, yes. Let
your hand.
We have 6 yeses.
660 do pass. Congratulations,
Senator Sendo AKA Senator
Jaramio. Thank you, Madam Chair
I'm sorry, that was 7070, my
apologies, 70 to pass. All
right, thank you. Committee,
thank you very much for your
persistence. Uh, it is 5 till 6
o'clock. We are adjourned.
Yes. All right. Um, so what I'm
gonna do is I'm gonna look over
this stuff tonight, um, and
start kind of like going through
the.
I'm gonna come in tomorrow and
got, I've got a build in
conservation on Thursday
morning.
Well
Uh
But it's not opposer.
That's good. Um, she's not going
to sign on to it, but she's not
gonna be close,
so let's meet tomorrow at 4.
OK.
Is that cool? We'll sit and
we'll talk after the first one,
OK,
and then should I still
then after I don't know what
time to get off the floor, hold
off on, uh, releasing the
agenda. Yeah, that's I'm gonna
