All right, so we do have a
quorum.
All right, let's get into the
nitty gritty. Thank you all for
being here today. We are going
to start off this committee
meeting with a presentation from
our taxation and revenue
Department. We have mark
Chicken, who is the deputy
secretary here in person? I
believe Stephanie Taxation
Secretary. So if you, uh madam
share of search interrupt, I'm
getting a message from the
secretary saying, my login says,
waiting for host to start the
webinar.
While we're waiting to be able
to let the secretary and we will
have four bills today, that
should be fairly quick. Nothing
would
We have SP 36 from Senator
Morris that has an amendment. We
have Senate Bill 54. The school
gross receipts weekend dates
from Senator Pope.
We have the local news
fellowship programs and Bill 57,
and then we'll finish up today
with Senate Bill 65 demoted.
We will be holding three of
those four bills. The fellowship
program will hold three of the
other ones because they
previously included in
legislation last year in the tax
package. We will be holding
those to the tax package this
year, checking on the back end.
Adam cherish. She's saying she
can call in as well, if that is
easier.
Alright, let's okay.
You can go ahead and send it.
Alright. I'm gonna let you all
take care of that with Rebecca
will go ahead and we'll start
So just let her know as soon as
you send that email so that she
can go ahead and do that, Mark.
Don't we go ahead and have you
start? Um And then if you let
the secretary know that she'll
be getting a new link, and just
a moment
But we'll go ahead and we'll
start. If you're comfortable
with that. We'll start with you
first.
I'm sure I've let her know and I
will. I will go ahead and start.
we were going to do this. And
the reverse order that I'm gonna
start in. The secretary was
going to start with slide number
two. I hope the committee has
the materials. Excellent. Does
have these and so thank you for
your flexibility. We appreciate
that.
Thank you, madam Chair members
of the committee. Good
afternoon. My name is Mark
shaken, and I am the tax policy
director to the Taxation and
Revenue Department. And we're
here today. I'm here with the
secretary who will be joining us
shortly.
To discuss executive tax
priorities for the 2024
legislative session. You do have
a handout. May I ask that you
please turn to page two of that
hand out and I will get started.
Um
So the first slide that we have
is about the fiscal capacity for
tax changes.
The fiscal year 2025 executive
budget recommendation includes
$500 million in recurring
reductions to general fund
revenue while maintaining
reserves of 34%.
The executive proposes recurring
tax cut capacity of $300 million
The executive proposals up to
200 million in redirection of
General fund revenue to other
state funds, such as the Health
Care affordability fund, and
we'll discuss that in more
detail.
In the rest of the presentation.
I guess I'll just continue,
Madam Chair with your consent.
Thank you for being very
flexible. We're having some
technical difficulties. So do
what you need to do. Mark. Thank
you, madam Chair. There were
some technical difficulties in
house energy this morning.
These are wonderful, but I guess
there's still working out some
kinks. Um, on the next slide. I
want to discuss the advanced
manufacturing equipment tax
credit.
This is a new proposal. It is a
companion to the federal
advanced Manufacturing
production tax credit that was
created in the Federal Inflation
Reduction Act was passed in
August of 2022 and signed by
President Biden.
Um, it's in particular relates
to tax credits that are coded at
26. U. S. C section 45 X
So these are entirely new
renewable energy tax credits
that were implemented by the
federal government in as part of
the inflation reduction Act, the
federal credit incentivizes
production and sale of solar and
wind energy components such as
film that is used in solar
panels and other components like
that.
Uh, wind energy components like
turbine blades and other
components of those enormous
wind mills that you see around.
I'm sure that's not the right
word. But
You can see them all over
inverters qualifying battery
components and applicable
critical minerals.
Ah, the credit is being
proposed and that I don't
believe the legislation has been
filed yet, but it is state pit
and CIT credits that's personal
income tax, corporate income tax
credits that will complement
those federal credits again. The
federal credits are for
production and sale of the
components.
The state credit will be for
equipment to equip a facility to
manufacture those components. So
it's one step earlier in the
process. It's to encourage and
incentivize capital investment
in the factories that will
produce the components that will
then receive the federal subsidy
when they're sold.
So this state pit and CIT
credits will give New Mexico a
competitive advantage by
offsetting the cost to equip
facilities to produce those
products during their
construction phase, so that
would be before the federal
credit is available from the
sale of the products.
The credit will be the lesser of
20% of the equipment costs or 25
million per project.
And we anticipate probably if
we're fortunate one project a
year is what we've heard is a
good projection for that credit.
The proposed credit does include
a claw back if the facility
ceases operations for 100 and 80
consecutive days within two
years of claiming the credit
again, we will be giving this
credit before the facility
actually commences production of
the 45 X equipment, so we we
need to know that if they say
Oh,
We're not producing that
anymore, or we've decided not to
go ahead with this project that
the state can claw back any
credits that it's granted to
that person or
Taxpayer. We estimate not more
than one large qualifying
projects per year but likely
less. That's in consultation
with the Economic Development
Department.
Do we have the secretary on? I
don't want to steal all her
thumb. Okay. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Um Another bill was HB
140 clean car tax credits. I was
just in house energy this
morning where that bill received
a do pass.
Ah, the new personal income tax
and corporate income tax credits
for the purchase and lease of
clean cars and associated
charging equipment. The credit
will apply for new and used
vehicles. That's a new aspect of
this credit, the inclusion of
used vehicles it will apply to
E. V s plug in hybrids and fuel
cell vehicles.
Um, the tax here. The credit
starts in this tax year, and it
will terminate at the end of tax
year 2029 and it will decline
over time starting in after tax
year 2026. So for tax years,
2024 through 2026, the original
credit amounts for MVS or $3000.
Used $1500, and you'll see that
in each case the credit for the
purchase release of it used
vehicles, half the amount of
that for a new vehicle for a
plug in hybrid or fuel cell
vehicle. New Create new vehicle
credit $2000 used $1000.
Ah, the There's also a
complimentary credit for
Chargers and charging stations.
There's a slight distinction
here, Uh, level two Charger is
for public residential or
commercial builders. That credit
will be for $400 for installing
one of those. There are also
fast charger or fuel cell
chargers. The correct those are
much, much more expensive to
install.
We informed the House committee
this morning that the cost of
those can range up to $300,000
and those are generally
applicable to an apartment
complex, say or a commercial
space where you want to have a
lot of spaces where someone can
plug in their vehicle and charge
it quickly. These are fast
chargers and the credit for that
is
The credits are refundable and
transferable.
They're transferable at full
face value only, and that is to
provide cash on the hood on the
day of the purchase. So if I'm
purchasing an electric vehicle,
for example, I can get the
credit and immediately transfer
it to the dealer and have it
taken off the price of the
vehicle. That's how that's meant
to work.
Um, and they're refundable to
ensure that lower income
consumers benefit fully so the
consumer will have a choice as
to whether to transfer that
credit to the dealer or to keep
it for themselves and get it,
uh, refundable tax credit
because again lower income
taxpayers are less likely to
have tax liability against which
they can offset the credit.
So we make it refundable so they
actually get cash in their
pocket at the end of the day.
Um, and that's to ensure that it
has utility for lower income
tax.
Um, the
Thank you, Madam Chair.
regrets. Thank you, Um, the next
slide slide number five,
Discusses House Bill seven
Health care affordability fund
distribution that is being
sponsored by Rep. Chopin Ski.
The health care affordability
fund was created in the 2020
session by Senate Bill 317.
Um And it is, uh, increased
insurance supreme surtax on
health premiums from 1% to
3.75%, and that was to replace a
discontinued federal fee on
insurance companies. And I do
recall that, um
That's not a promising. I do
recall that
There is provision in that bill
If the federal tax came back
then the state tax would go back
down, but that has not occurred.
New revenue was distributed
between the Health Care
Affordability Fund and the
General Fund.
Uh, with revenue going to the
health care affordability funds
scheduled to phase down from 55%
of those revenues to 30% of the
premium surtax on July 1st 2024.
That's this July 1st.
This bill would maintain the
health care affordability fund
at 55 the distribution to the
Health Care affordability fund
at 55% of Premium Sir Tax
revenue.
6000 small businesses are
currently benefiting from a 10%
premium reduction as a result of
the health care affordability
fund positively impacting
41,000 new, well New Mexico
enrollment and that's the state
health Care exchange. Increased
38% over the last year with
57,000.
New Mexicans currently enrolled,
and Native American enrollment
has more than doubled in the
past year.
So this bill just continues to
build on the success of the
Health Care affordability fund
and that distribution of the
premium tax to continue to make
health care affordable for
businesses and individual New
Mexico taxpayers who seek health
insurance through the exchange,
mark, I'm gonna go ahead and
interrupt you here because it
looks like we have secretary
Shark, So thank you, Secretary
for your patients.
I appreciate that, Um, Mark has
done in in in amazing job going
through the first five slides of
your presentation. I don't know
if you are able to hear on the
Webcast what he was talking
about. So at this point, if
there's something secretary that
you want to go ahead and add
into your welcome to do so we
can see you up on these fancy
new television screens here and
thank you, Madam Chair members
of the committee. I can see
myself and and those weird big
screens to it's very
distracting. Um, thanks.
You're working hard to get the
webinar working for me, and I
apologize. I can't be there in
person. I have a
Child who is sick with covid,
which means I have close contact
with Covid. And I'm just, you
know, waiting several days
before I want to expose anyone
else to that possibility. So
thank you. Um, I was able to
listen in on the regular
Webcast. And so I know where
we're at. And I think, um, if if
Mark had did did he have a
chance to finish slide five.
Yes. The only part. Okay. Um,
only thing I want to add on
slide four about clean car. A
tax credits is that the LFC
released its F I r. Last night
on this bill, and you'll see
that they have a slightly
different fiscal impact estimate
than we show. Um, if you look at
the phase down percentages of
that credit, you might be
confused. You know, why does it
face down? It's such an round
numbers and what we did is try
to target a maximum fiscal
impact in any fiscal year of
45 million. And so, um, but the
LSC is coming up with a slightly
higher number and we're working
together today and probably
tomorrow to form consensus with
them.
And then, um, I can pick up its
light six and then go from
there. Um, so another governor's
bill that will be coming your
way. Think it should be
introduced very shortly, um, has
to do with the health care
access assessment and how I like
to think of this one for the
members of the Legislature that
were here a few years ago in the
2019 session, you enacted the
healthcare quality surcharge,
which was a surcharge on nurse
skilled.
Nursing facilities and it it
works a lot the same way. So for
those of you that we're
We're here in 20. That can be a
point of reference, but based
Basically, um it's a little
complex, but we put an
assessment with federal CMS
centers for Medicaid, Medicare
services. So with CMS approval,
we add an assessment to these
taxpayers. And then that
assessment comes into the seat
and in a circuitous way it ends
up feeding into the Medicaid
budget, where it can ultimately
go back to kind of build the pie
for all of health care needs
across New Mexico.
Um And so, uh,
Um, there. There's some timeline
contingencies that will be built
into the bill that depend on
with us ultimately does give
that approval. But this is
something that's going in place
in different states, and we do
expect it will be approved. It
includes all hospitals except
federally and state owned
hospitals other than miners,
Colfax
Rural hospitals would come a
lower assessment. I believe it's
a 50% assessment and the new
revenue as I mentioned would
come into a newly created
healthcare access and delivery
fund to be administered by the
Health Care Authority
Department. What
Previously he so that just H s D
or the health care authority
will distribute out that money
into this access fund, um, to
basically grow the pie like I
say, for all healthcare needs
statewide, Um, at the last
bullet there, um, you know, just
want to emphasize that the
assessment itself is expected to
bring in 326 million per year in
new revenue, depending on when
it goes into effect after CMS
approval.
Um, but because of the way that
the federal Medicaid match
program works, it would also
bring in 1.2 million billion of
new dollars through federal
Medicaid match.
And that is our last slide for
the committee. Um each of these
buildings will eventually make
its way. We hope through your
committee and will go a deeper
dive into each one at that time,
But for now, we're here for your
questions.
Thank you so much Secretary,
and, uh, and thank you mark for
being here. Do I? Okay? Senator
Gregg's
I know. Thank you. Make sure
your microphones on these are
funny microphone. Thank you.
Thank you, madam. Sharon Terry.
You know?
When we asked, integrates move
the mic a little bit forward
because what we're finding is
that these microphones are hard
to hear on, zoom in on. So, um
The is there. Is there a message
to
To do that, Madame Sheriff,
Senator Gregg's, uh, what I know
from my discussions that we've
had our department has had with
the Economic Development
Department is yes, we are
expecting larger manufacturers,
The to manufacture the types of
things we're talking about. Will
take a large capital investment,
so I there is no minimum
investment, So certainly the
credit is available to
Smaller companies who are going
to come in and do this if they
have a plan to build a facility
that will manufacture something
that is covered by the 45 X
credit. Anyone could be eligible
for this, but my understanding
is that the capital cost to
begin production of these types
of things are fairly large, so
we're expecting more in the
nature of
Larger projects, but no one is
excluded.
You know, be here because just
then then make exact sense to
me, but it is that they're going
to
Uh, I don't know. Secretary
wants to answer that. Or mark.
You want to answer that?
Either way, will
I take it? I'm happy to take a
stab at it, and I always
appreciate an assist from Mark.
So, um, the language and the
draft bill you know, talks about
like Mark said that if a
business or a successor in
business of the taxpayer ceases
operations for more than 100 and
80 days within two years of
claiming the
Credit club. They would
basically
Remit the credit amount back to
the state. Um, part of the
detail that we didn't go into
here that might clarify it. This
credit will have a two step
process that I can best of
compared to the way the film tax
credit works when someone goes
to seek pre certification from e
d. D from the film tax credit
that sort of similar to what's
um, envisioned here they would
go for pre certification.
From the energy, Minerals and
Natural Resources Department to
just basically have a
conversation and review
documentation to subsidies
substantiate.
This business is about to build
and equip a facility and that
the components that they will
ultimately produce and sell will
be eligible for the federal
credit under section 45 X. So,
um, that would happen at the
front end. Then they would go
build and equip their facility
and ultimately claimed the
credit for the equipment costs
for up to 20%, or 25 Million of
equipment costs.
And at that point after that,
this two year clock would run
under during which a clawback
could occur if they cease
operations.
I hope that helps. Madam Chair,
madam. Yes, she's that bill yet.
Mr Mr Chair and Senator Gregg's.
I think we're very close to
having the bill draft Jack.
It did friction We've been, of
course, working with Pam Stokes
the last couple of days and I
don't know for sure. I don't
have confirmation And yet which
house? It's which chamber it's
starting in and who the primary
sponsor is, but we'll have
That he shortly
Okay? And I'm sure we talked
about
Genuine concerns Always been,
uh I'll leave it at that. I look
forward to seeing the field. You
don't get more.
Thank you. Senator Gregg's any
other questions from the
committee?
Senator Worth Madam chair.
So a couple of questions on
I'm trying. I want to understand
the fiscal impact of the health
care affordability fund.
If we keep the premium at 55%
were currently is
Um, just explain to me I'd want
to understand down below. We've
got a 24 and then 81 Million.
Assume, correct, though, that if
we keep it at 55%
Status quo. So if we reduce it,
obviously
Yes, Mr Chairman and Senator
worth first of all the partial
year Fiscal impact in FY 24
might look a little strange
because the distribution is
scheduled to go back is to, um,
scheduled to step down on July.
1st has to do with, uh, How do
we basically the last quarter of
FY?
24 is paid in FY 25.
So that has to do. That's why
there's a partial year impact in
FY 24, but, um, yeah, you're
You're correct that, um, the
table we show here shows how
much more revenue would go to
the health care affordability
fund instead of the General
fund. If this bill is enacted,
um and I while we're on, I can
pull up effect sheet that if
it's helpful that gives the full
amount of revenue that has been
going annually to the fund, if
that would be helpful to put
this in context.
I think it would be helpful.
Okay, let me pull
All that up. If Mark wants to
add anything
Um
Madam share Senator Worth? No, I
have nothing to add to.
I think the table just shows the
impact. The Kraken assumed that
we were going down to 33% or
Sergeant 30%. And so this is
Adjusting that you know what the
projection had been based on the
lower figure.
Yeah, I think the key thing,
though, is that we're not. We're
not losing it. We're losing 81
million that we'd have if we if
we went ahead and lowered the
percentage of status quo and
basically we're right. $81
million coming out of the chair
Senator worth? I think that is
correct. So, um, if it's helpful
in the past couple of years
under current law in FY 24 the
health care affordability fund
is projected to have received to
receive 152 million and, um
So here's a comparison in FY 25
once the distribution goes down
under current law.
Um, the health care
Affordability fund is projected
to receive 98 million rather
than 100 and 79 million under
this proposal, House Bill seven,
So that's your difference of
81.4 million
Yeah, that makes sense to me
Just second question is on the
Couple of things about this
explain the benefit for
especially the members that
weren't here.
Absolutely. I will. Madam Chair
and Senator worth I'll do my
best done that with the caveat
that I'm not a health care
expert, but I sit in the room
with some sometimes. Um, So my
understanding, though, is that
the taxpayers here the hospitals
are willingly agreeing to this
assessment, which is rare
because they know that the the
legislation will require that
when they pay the assessment, it
comes back to them and then some
with federal match through
To enhance provider
reimbursement rates. Um there's
more detailed detailed to it
than that. But that was the case
with the healthcare quality
surcharge. And it's the case
again with this proposal that
Um you have a rare instance
where taxpayers are supportive
of a higher tax or assessment on
their industry because it
ultimately increases and
enhances their ability to
deliver healthcare.
Thank you for that. I do
remember well going way back
when I first was in the
Legislature bed tax that did not
team just final question. Just
walk us through the difference
between
House bill. One forties, clean
car credits and what used cars
plug in hybrids. Just just
explain that you can between so
to clarify Madam Chair and
Senator Worth Are you looking
for the difference between House
Bill 140, the governor's clean
Car Bill and Senate Bill eight
or the version of the electric
vehicle credit that was
considered last year.
Correct, Madam Chair. I just
like the piece that that was
part of the omnibus bill that
got vetoed. And then this is got
It looks like it's bigger than
what we did before. Yes, Okay,
So let me take a stab at that.
And again if I forget anything
I'd love to hear from Mark, but
maybe the most important
difference is that this bill
this year will allow the credit
for used vehicles.
Which is also a part of a
federal tax credit for E. V s.
So we're mirroring a federal tax
credit and that allowance of the
credit for used vehicles is part
of the assurance that low the
lowest income to Mexicans will
be able to benefit from the
credit. Another difference is
that Oh, and before I leave used
vehicles, we thought about how
to make sure that credit for
used vehicles can't be sort of
artificially claimed multiple
times.
And so one of the technical
things you'll see in the bill.
is that any sale to be eligible
for the credit has to go through
a dealership. So, for example,
if I Stephanie, um in three
years have a son who drives I
can't sell him my electric
vehicle and claim a second
credit if you will, And so
that's also something that
mirrors the federal credit.
Um, another thing That's new
this year includes plug in
hybrids, which wasn't included
in in last year's bill or in
this year's Senate Bill eight.
It also includes fuel cell
vehicles, and they're charging
units Now, if yourself vehicles
would be hydrogen fuel cell
vehicles, and I just want to say
there's no fiscal impact, too,
including that at this point and
and probably none expected
through the sunset of this
Um, the passenger vehicles for
that aren't really readily
available. There are a couple of
models, but they're nowhere in
New Mexico because there's no
charging infrastructure for it
yet where that could be
important in the bill is
incentivizing the installation
of fuel cell charging units. So
if if it works well, we may see
a few of those in the
infrastructure to charge those
vehicles could be incentivized
through this bill.
Um, another minor difference.
That could be important, though,
is I think last year's bill only
applied to residential charging
units. This one allows it to be
in a commercial area, but where
we contain the fiscal impact on
that is to limit one credit per
taxpayer per year. So a business
or a corporation partnership. If
you will, they could claim the
credit.
But not to build a whole fleet.
Just one credit protects period
career so that better targets
the tax relief to smaller
businesses that might just need
one and then another change is
last year's bill was just for
personal income tax credit. This
is also a corporate income tax
credit. We felt that if
partnerships could take the
credit under, um personal income
tax filings that it was more
fair to also allow for
corporations
And no last. Um, there is no
cap. There's no explicit cap in
this bill as it's drafted,
rather than capping the credit,
knowing that the number of
electric vehicles and and
charging stations is expected to
grow so much over the coming
years, rather than cap it, and
then kind of get ourselves into
a situation like we've had with
the solar tax credit where
people are denied just based on
timing of their claims.
Um, Instead, we manage the
fiscal impact through the phase
down amount. You know, we faced
it down such to try to target 45
million per year, So I hope that
all made sense.
No, it does. I think that's
helpful. And for the folks
listening and the folks on the
This is the House bill, and so
the house is that they just
final thing, and I really
preached helpful to also get a
sense of the $500 million
request. Just one final question
is motor vehicle, Madam Chair
and Senator Worth. I definitely
think it could be, you know, in
the capacity for tax changes
slide that mark covered with
you. We mentioned the governor
envisions about 200 million of
redirecting money from the
General fund into other state
funds, and we mentioned the
health care
Affordability fund stepped down
legislation, but I think that
could also include road fund. It
could include liquor excise tax
distributions, things of that
nature to be determined.
And I appreciate that. I think
that you're about transfers.
Thank you, Senator Worth Senator
Tallman.
My question was thank you.
Great. Thank you. Any other
questions from the committee?
Alright. No other questions.
Thank you, Secretary for zooming
in. Thank you, Deputy Secretary
for coming in in person. We
appreciate that. We know that
we'll see you around the
roundhouse.
Secretary. We look forward to
seeing you back in person soon
and hope that your kid starts
feeling better and symptom free.
So thank you very much.
I hope so, too. Thank you very
much. Thank you for being on the
Jumbotron.
Yeah, I just have to right now.
Alright. So we do have, um,
coming up. We have Senator
Morris your SP 36 following that
will be senator Pope.
Ah, then the local news
fellowship from Senator Worth
and then we'll finish up with
the motor vehicle text
distribution. We are voting on
just the local news fellowship
program, the others we will be
holding in for a tax package
that we will roll in together
like we did last year.
And so Senator Moore's We do
have an amendment on yours. So
if I can ask for a motion to
discuss the amendment
Senator worth a second on that
motion.
Second. All right. So, Senator
Morris, you are welcome to go
forward or actually, just such
changes.
The amendment was actually some
cleanup language that we noticed
that when we defined copay,
sometimes now, copays aren't
just a fixed dollar amount,
which was in the original
language. Sometimes it's
percentages so that actually
cleans that up a little bit.
Dollar copay or 10%.
So at this point, um, any
questions on the amendment?
Okay, So let's go ahead and go
on to be so I'd move the
amendment. The amendment. Thank
you very much. Do we have a 2nd
2nd Senator Driggs. I'll give it
to senator
Yes.
Thank you, Senator Morris,
You're welcome to discuss the
building. Thank you. Manager on
the piece of legislation is
cleanup legislation from a bill
that Senator Smitty's and I ran
last year that took the
groceries and copays and we just
did, And, um, that was rolled
into the omnibus tax bill and
what we didn't do when it got
rolled together is defined what
a copay was. We defined what a
deductible was. But the copay
was not included.
The apartment has been, um, um,
processing this as we intended
copays, but they wanted the
second future, So that's what
this does where? What a copay
actually means.
So that you're good on that
clean up clean up from last
year. All right, Thank you. Do
we have any folks in the
audience in favor of this bill
just by show of hands.
Anybody in opposition? Anybody
on zoom in favor of this bill,
If you'll raise your hands or
zoom master can see that.
Anybody in opposition.
All right. Any questions from
the committee?
I'm sure just just to be clear,
So I think I heard being
applying this
Without the definition, Madam
Chair Senator Worth Absolutely
yes, and that's dust. There's no
day I noticed there was no
fiscal impact.
On a bus bill as a queen, too.
To respond in that there are no
other comments from the
committee. Thank you, Senator
Morris Appreciate you and my
expert witness and your expert
witness. Thank you very much for
your time.
No, we don't.
Yeah, Rolling. Thank you.
Thank you very much. All right.
Next is Senator Popes. This is
also going to be a bill that we
are
All right, Senator. Pope
whenever you're ready.
Thank you, Madam. Chair Senate
Bill 54. This bill amends the
back to school shopping, grt tax
reduction, and it does this in
two ways.
First, it's going to basically
move that deduction from the
first Friday in August, back to
the last Friday in July, so it's
going to happen a little bit
sooner. And then the other
change would be that
Um, the item limits for
purchase, which were set back in
2005.
We want to increase the limits
By course, you know, we've seen
what's happening with just the
cost of items and inflation.
And so that's really what this
bill does. In a nutshell.
Senator Pope anybody in the
audience and supported this.
Anybody in opposition?
Everybody online and support
Anybody in opposition. Alright.
Any questions from the
committee?
Um
Thank you say that any other
questions from the committee?
Demon? Thank you, Senator Pope.
We are holding this Senator
worth you are next. Your
building will vote on.
And then Senator Gregg's will
finish off today with you.
Thank you, madam Chair members
of the committee last session as
well, dealing with an
appropriation just a little
closer to you. Those seem to be
a little bit lower in volume.
Check. Check.
Thank you, sir.
All good Santa Bill 57 is
sponsored by myself and
representative Joyed Garrett. It
makes an appropriation to the
Workforce Solutions Department
for local News fellowship
program.
I'm delighted to say that this
is a follow up of our bill last
year and through some junior
money, we were actually able to
kind of give this program a
little jump start and Mark Laser
is going to talk about what's
happened and how it's worked.
Uh, it's run through Workforce
solutions. They've been happy to
do it.
And I just think it's a super
important, um, goal of working
on
Uh, placing fellows in rural
underserved communities, and so
what I'd like to do is yield to
mark Laser to explain
How it's worked in how we're
going to keep this going.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair and Senator worth
especially Marc Lazar, director
of business and program
development at the local news
fund. Um, our organization is
dedicated to creating
sustainable ecosystem. Local
news to serve the information
needs of all new Mexicans. I
know this is just a 30 Day
session. You'll want to get out
of here, so I'll be brief.
As many of you know, there's a
crisis in local news in America
in New Mexico, and especially in
towns that have only one or no
local news sources. In those
places. News is spread by word
of mouth over social media and
disinformation flourishes. Many
newspaper chains are owned by
hedge funds have closed or
become hollowed out as ghost
newspapers.
Where there is no local
employees or reporters.
Newspapers owned by Gannett and
Alamogordo and Ryudo. So are
just sharing one reporter
between both newspapers.
One solution we found the
problem is through the local
news fellowship program, which
places journalism students and
graduates in newsrooms all over
the state from Carlsbad to
Silver City Gallop to Taus. We
pay for students from U. N. M
Mexico State and Eastern New
Mexico University to work in
those newsrooms.
For summer internships and nine
month fellowships program
creates a powerful classroom to
career pathway for young people
increases the capacity of local
news organizations and
encourages innovation and
strengthens democracy.
This fellowship is a proven
workforce development program
managed by a University of New
Mexico is communication and
journalism program.
In fact, our local news
fellowship program here has
inspired other states such as
California and Washington to
launch similar programs with
state funding.
Last year, the state Legislature
provided $125,000 in funding for
the program, with funds going
through Department of Workforce
Solutions and then to you and M
Thanks to your funding, we were
able to double the size of the
program to have eight interns
and seven fellows and expand to
more communities, including
Deming, Roswell, Clovis and
Balan.
In fact, since 2019 we've placed
fellas in nearly all of your
districts.
Our program at meeting all of
you on the committee. Um, our
program is currently being
supported through grants to the
local news fund from national
and local foundations along with
the state Legislature. It's a
true public private partnership
SP 57 would help us expand the
program to serve even more rural
and underserved areas extend the
program to a second year for
some fellows.
And launch innovation fellows
that would help newsrooms on the
business and technology side.
The bills, funding would again
go through Workforce solutions.
Which has been very supportive
of the program. The majority of
the newsrooms that host fellows
are locally owned small
businesses. They range from
public media to TV stations to
community newspapers.
This bill would truly strengthen
the program to make sure that
more communities in New Mexico
get the important news and
information they need to be
civically engaged, making our
democracy stronger. I've talked
to many of the senators on the
committee, um, who have special
knowledge, especially some
former recovering journalists.
Senator Hamlin, Senator Meo, who
really appreciate the importance
of the program. Thanks for your
support.
Thank you so much.
Uh huh.
Any, um, comments or any
audience.
And we've got three. Why don't
you go ahead and come on up? Do
we have another mic at all? Like
we had a warning.
All right. But in the meantime,
do you mind if they go ahead and
share your mike? If you will go
ahead and come on up, you'll if
you say your name, um
And, uh, and a brief statement
of state you don't have to say
it. You can go ahead and stand
if you don't mind. Um hi. My
name my name. Excuse me. My name
is Rashad Mahmoud I'm the
executive director of the New
Mexico and I'm obviously I'm
very strongly in support of this
bill. Um, with the fellowship
program has been one of our most
successful programs at the news
fund.
You know, we funded ourselves
for a number of years with grant
money. And then as we saw that
many states around the country
were experimenting with public
support of local news in various
forms. We had a brainstorming
session with Senator Worth and
he really seized on this
fellowship program as a new
Mexico. Um, and we're extremely
grateful for you to build on
that.
Great. Thank you so much.
Hi. I'm Michael Market recently
retired from the University of
New Mexico. I started the
fellowship program through the
communication journalism
program, uh, testified here, um,
to this committee last year, um,
your interim committee over the
summer. Um, Basically, I'm here
to answer any questions if you
have greats
The supervisor of the program is
not going to be Gwyneth Dolan
And I just want to say on behalf
of our chair, who is, um
Uh Ilia Rodriguez and our dean
and president.
And our provost. All have spoken
up and favor of expanding this
program to make journalism go
well for the state and to give
opportunities to anybody in the
audience and opposition.
Anybody online? All right. Thank
you. We have Senator Had Amelia
Who wants to ask some questions.
Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, So
I don't have a question. I just
want to thank senator work for
bringing this forward earned a
bachelor's in journalism from
the University of New Mexico and
my hometown Espanola did have a
fellow at the Rio Grande son And
I want to thank you for this
because when I was a young
journalist
It would have been really good
for me to have this opportunity,
which definitely is a workforce
development opportunity, So I
wanted to thank you for this
bill, and I will definitely be
supporting Senator had amigo
Senator Tallman.
Oh, thank you, Madam Chair. I
don't have a
And the business. No other
questions.
If I can make a comment, and
then I'll ask for you to move
for a do pass. That's all right.
Um So thank you very much, and I
and I have to remind myself of
my origins of broadcast
journalism, and I went into
colleges to figure out how
things get built and just how
they work. But when I was
falling asleep in my mechanical
engineering core force and jerk
myself awake and the guys behind
me and in high school I was the
students were and so I figured I
needed to go in and after
earning a bachelor's and
broadcast journalism from the
University of Texas at El Paso
And a master's in communication
studies from New Mexico State
University. I had the wonderful
honor of working at care, Wgcl
broadcasting students.
And so, um, you know,
understand seeing many of them
throughout the state still
working the thing that that is
so frustrating for me is that
you know, we have large
organizations that shall not be
named here but have been, um,
that are taking over our local
news outlets. And, um, we are
losing that local flavor and we
are losing that local voice
regardless of whatever the
affiliation is.
We are losing those local voices
because we are having
organizations and corporations
take over our local media that
have no investment whatsoever in
our local communities. And I
know through the local we will
have people who are invested in
our communities and making sure
that all the information gets
out to people. So I support
support this and mark in your
crew. So thank you very much. So
if there are no other questions,
I will go ahead and set in
motion. Have a second from
Senator how to me if you will
call the roll.
Yes.
Yes. All right. Thank you. I
don't think unanimous from this
committee. You have a do pass
and congratulations. Thank you
very much. Thank you. Committee.
All right. Lastly, we have
Senator Griggs with the motor
vehicle tax distributions.
This is also a bill that was
included last year and so we are
going to hear the bill.
And then we will adjourn for the
day.
Thank you, Madam. Chair. You
ready? Yes, sir. If you will
bring the microphone just a
little closer to you.
Are you can't just is that
better? That works. Okay, uh,
this is, uh, this Senate Bill
65. It moves the motor vehicle
excise tax back from the General
fund to the road fund. It
separates that in death.
60% to the State Road Fund 40
Project Fund. This is exactly
the same bill.
Bright by Senator Kernan last
year and was included in the in
the tax package. I don't I don't
know if the split changed when
it went into the tax package. I
do know that BOT prefers or
split that instead of 6040 is
7525, and I believe there will
be a another mill coming from
Senator Gonzalez.
That may do that. Shame thing,
So, uh, this one is is the one
that I've got, And whichever way
we go as far as 6040 or 7520 is
not a you know, it's not a big
deal to me. Uh, but I thought we
needed to get to build the bills
out. And if we can, you know,
hold on to it, and she what his
is and
Be happy to do that, Um, anybody
in the audience in support of
this legislation?
Okay. Why don't you go ahead and
come on up?
You're welcome to citizens. We
don't have a portable Mike.
You're welcome to sit and speak
into that microphone is still
just make sure the green light
is on
And say your name.
Thank you, madam Chair members
of the committee Gerard on
behalf of the New Mexico
Municipal League. Um, roads are
in bad shape. Everybody knows
that this bill will provide the
funding local communities need
to invest in the road
infrastructure, and we thank the
sponsor for bringing this bill
forward.
Thank you, madam Chair members
of the committee. Rick PT,
executive director for the
Department of Transportation.
And, like Senator, Graves
mentioned, um, you know, talking
about the split on this bill. I
think we are neutral on this
particular bill. I think we're
in favor of different of a
different split. And I know
Senator Briggs just mentioned
that to you all, but we want to
thank the sponsor for bringing
this bill forward. I think it's
a great idea and we support the
legislation. But we are neutral
at this point.
Thank you so much. Anybody in
the audience and opposition of
this bill.
I'm in support. Okay, if you
will.
Very cold afternoon ahead and
speak.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Good
afternoon. I'm Terry Cole,
president and CEO for the
Greater Albuquerque Chamber of
Commerce. We support Senate Bill
65 because it puts motor vehicle
tax payments where they belong
back into our roads and
transportation projects. This
bill would dedicate 100% of
those monies to the state road
Fund and Transportation Project
Fund. This change will insurer
recurring source of revenue to
get and keep our roads and
bridges in safe traveling.
Shape today, the road and
transportation funds have relied
on revenue from gasoline and
diesel taxes, Commercial
trucking fees and vehicle
registration fees. These have
not kept pace with the increase
in costs to repair and build.
The roads were also excited to
join with the New Mexico
Municipal League in support, and
we urge your support of Senate
Bill 65 today. Thank you, madam
Chair members of the committee,
Terry nobody else, all right.
Thank you much anything from the
committee.
Senator Wirth. Thank you, Madam
Chair. I just want to
understand so the 40% to the to
the Transportation Project Fund
Is that local What exactly is
the transportation project? But
how does that distinguished
from?
The road fund. I get a
microphone on
Madam Chair. Um Senator, um to
the project fund was developed
back in 2019. And it was a fund
that is currently now funded,
but it helps the local the LPs
both municipalities and
counties. Um
Provide money for their
projects what they feel is
important to their communities,
and it's Monday Monday we funded
we could waive the match for
some of those communities that
are that are having trouble
providing the match, so it's a
good program for them, and it's
a broad variety of projects we
can we can use on that money.
We're from walking trails, two
roads to sidewalks and lighting,
so it's a very broad and what
they can do with the money.
Um, and also it's a tremendous
program for computer programs.
So my manager. I appreciate
that. I think that's important.
Clear.
The need for rodent. One thing I
just want to flag and
You know, this is a trend of
look at those differently, and I
think one of the things that we
need to talk about. As we look
at the capacity we heard from
the secretary, the $300 million
recurring tax cut. Look at this
is last year we put it in the in
the billion dollar package, and
perhaps that's why the thing got
so expensive. Think one of the
things that that will explore
with finance having this be run
as a separate
Bill Ah, and again looking at it
as a transfer that obviously, if
things went south, we could pull
it back. Pretty easy tax cuts in
place. That's much harder to
flag that given the because the
key thing is the size of this
$166 million more than half of
the
Capacity that executives
proposing and legislators that
200 million
So I just think I just want to
throw that out there and thank
you.
Thank you, Senator worth any
other comments or questions from
the committee?
Alright. Um, thank you. Senator
Gregg's for doing that. This is
a bill that we will hold on to.
as Senator Wirth was talking
about. Do appreciate that. So
you're welcome to come on back
up here. Thank you. Everybody
for being here today that is
concluding our committee meeting
today on Friday. We are on
Thursday. Uh, the only bill that
we will be hearing is paid
family medical leave, so we will
see you 30. Minutes after the
fourth session on Thursday in
this room.
And just man. I'm sure why don't
you explain the process? Just
give everyone a heads up on how
you're going to run it. So, um,
Senator Shindo is out, so I will
be cheering the committee that
time we will hear from the bill,
sponsors and then we will open
it up for support and opposition
both in the audience and online
all, depending on how many
people are here. We will do an
even number of folks who are in
opposition.
Folks who are in support both in
the audience and online and then
we will open it up for the
committee to ask questions as
well. We are a lot in the whole
afternoon for that.
So that we can have that just
final thing. I think Senator
Smith. He's new on this
committee was not delighted to
have you here and he said, I
don't know if you want to.
Say anything about tax. I mean,
it's a new place place for you.
Welcome.
Thank you very much. Senator.
Speedy's having you moved from
conservation up here to text so
it's good to see you here and
