So because we are starting as a
subcommittee, we will not be
taking role until we get a
quorum, uh, but I do want to go
ahead and make sure that our
presentation can start today.
And so for those of us watching
on the webcast, thank you so
much for tuning in. Uh, the tax
business and Transportation
Committee does meet every
Tuesday and Thursday at 1:30 or
30 minutes after the 4th
session, um, and we are going to
have presentations today from
Ricky Serna, who's cabinet
secretary for the Department of
Transportation, and then we'll
have Rob Black, the Secretary of
Economic Development. So we're
very grate.
Grateful for those presentations
today, and I do want to uh let
everybody know that, uh, today
is the last day of major
presentations and then we will
start on Tuesday, bull swing
with Bill's bills, bills, um, so
we're very excited about that.
So, um, Secretaryerna, thank you
so much for being here. I'm
gonna go ahead and turn that
over to you, um, and then if we
do, uh, just for the committee
members, if we do get some more
committee members, several have
other things that are happening
right now. Um, and so when we do
get a quorum, then we will.
Call roll.
Um, so, Secretary Serna, thank
you so much. Appreciate you
being here. Thank you, Madam
Chair, and thank you members of
the committee. It's a pleasure
to be in front of some of you,
especially some, um, new
legislators, uh, Ricky Serna is
the chair said, uh, secretary
for Department of Transportation
going on 2.5 years now. And so,
uh, we have a short presentation
for you, but of course, we can
dive into whatever questions you
have or colleagues behind me
that are prepared to answer
questions for which I'm not, um,
prepared to answer on my own.
For right now, we're gonna hand
off the first couple.
of slides to Denise Peralta.
Good afternoon, chair, senators.
I'm Denise Peralta DOT. I'm
executive director of Asset
Management, traffic Safety and
Planning division. So you have
the slides in front of you, um,
with the blue senate DOT yes.
OK, so on slide 2, I'm gonna
talk about the two biggest
assets here at the DOT, the road
conditions and bridges. So you
can see here I also mention, uh,
information from the Mexico trip
report, it just came out, it
comes out every January. The
trip report is done by a
nonprofit organization who that
evaluates and distributes the
economic and technical data on
surface transportation.
Needs. So the first bullet is
about the 2025 trip that just
came out and you can see here
that it states 3.6 billion
annually is needed for New
Mexico's deteriorated roads. The
other thing to point out is 5.6
billion.
I needed for unfunded
transportation projects here at
the DOT.
Um, the third, uh, the other
thing I want to mention is for
DOT projects when we select a
project it's all data-driven.
And so the key categories for a
data driven project is safety
condition that that's when we
look at the condition of payment
and bridges, uh, mobility is
another one. Freight multimodal
and economic development. So
every project that we do from
planning to design to
construction is data-driven.
The other things on the slide,
slide 2 is our payment
conditions, and you can see
here, I put the payment
conditions from 2021 to 2023.
And also the latest 24 payment
conditions. I do want to note
that with our current funding
constraints constraints, the
payment numbers projected for
the poor for the interstate are
gonna probably increase by 5.6%.
in 2031.
If you don't mind holding on
just a second, there's something
with the microphone, I think, I
think maybe move it back just to
move it towards me a little bit.
Yeah, and it may not be hitting,
it may not be catching the, the,
the popping of the peas and
breath and that may, we'll see,
we'll see. Thank you. Yes.
The 2nd, so slide number 3 is
bridge conditions, and on this
one I do have the bar graph of
bridge conditions from 2016 to
2024, and you can see the trends
for NHS and non-NHS, um, and
again, FY 24 bridge deck area,
you can see that.
With our projected.
Current funding, uh, the poor is
probably gonna increase by 6% in
2031, and I also didn't know
what the 2025 trip reported on
our bridges 5% for poor, 60% for
fair, and 35% for good.
Mm
Madam Chair, members, I'll try
and do the same thing. Hopefully
that'll help. Um, on slide 4, I
want to go over our operating
budget and I think um it's
paramount, uh, having been, um,
In roles that other state
agencies, I don't want to
oversimplify our budget, which
you'll see broken down into two
different parts of a of a of a
line graph here, but uh uh I do
want to essentially say that the
sum of our $1.2 billion annual
budget is um a combination of
federal apportionment funding
that we receive from Federal
Highway Administration at USDOT
and our state, um, tax revenue
distributions that we receive
from a number of distributions
that I'll share with you on page
5.
And so on page 5, this very
complicated chart is probably
the most simplistic way to look
at how the states portion of the
DOT budget is generated. We
essentially receive over $550
million a year from various tax
distributions, and we've listed
them all here on the left-hand
side in green. If you look
across in the light brown or
beige, you'll see what we
generate from that tax to the
state road fund.
It'll distribute a percentage
and then on the right hand side
underneath where it says July
2024 forecast, you'll be able to
see what in millions of dollars
that percent distribution is
generating for us. So, for
example, in the green box, uh,
that indicates gasoline tax, we
received just 76.27% of the
gasoline tax, and in 2026, it's
estimated to generate about 112
million on its own. And so
that's how this table
essentially um presents the
distributions to the state, um,
road fund. This is important
because we're very different
than a lot or most of state
agencies in terms of uh.
Budgets. We received no
recurring general fund from the
legislature as a state agency,
none whatsoever. We do receive
one time special appropriations,
but for the most part, we
operate with the within the
confines of our federal
apportionment, our state road
tax distributions and any
federal grants that we receive
for projects.
On page 6, we try and break down
that larger table into a pie
chart that shows you primarily
the 5 largest distributions to
the state road fund in this
order. So as you'll see here in
2024, we received about $524.6
million of revenue from several
state tax distributions, and
they fall in the following, uh,
order, gasoline tax generating
about 111 million special fuel
tax, primarily.
diesel fuel generates 129
million weight distance tax,
which is tax assessed on heavy
trucks at various categories
depending on the size and weight
of their loads. And then vehicle
registration fees at about 87
million. The fifth largest tax
distribution for the agency at
61 million is the motor vehicle
excise tax, and then the
remaining 6% of our budget is
from various other sources and
fees that you can find on, on.
the previous table.
What's important to note on page
7 is how we fare relative to
revenue generated predominantly
by gasoline tax and some other
states in, in the general area.
And so you'll see here that
leading the pack, Colorado's
reliance on state transportation
fund revenue is the highest at
nearly 60%. And then we're 3rd
after Nevada at 46.5%. And why
is this important? In the next
few slides, I'm gonna talk a
little bit about what vehicle
efficiency and vehicle
electrification is doing to
states like ours.
And these others as vehicles
become more efficient from a
fuel perspective or they become
totally reliant on, on, on
electricity for uh for fuel and
so on page 8, you can look to
see what the four major
contributors to contributors to
the state road fund has been
doing going back to 2010.
Keeping in mind that this does
not fluctuate with the cost of
fuel because what remains stale
for us is the percent of the
distribution and the
% of tax that's assessed. So
you'll see here that we're
reaching a peak in 2030,
especially with gasoline and
special fuel tax and going
beginning in 2030 to 2050, it's
essentially forecasted that our
state road fund revenues will
decrease by about 20%. What's
important to note here is that
generally speaking from 2020 to
where we are today, our state
road fund revenues have remained
pretty flat. And if you go back
to that first chart where I
broke down our
budget by state and federal
apportionment. Overall, our
budget is remaining flat. Since
2020 to 2024, we've assessed
that the cost of construction in
this industry has increased by
at least 20%. And so with our
revenues remaining flat and the
cost escalation getting into
double digits like that, we
essentially can share that we're
doing about 20% less work today
than we were in 2020.
On page 9
You'll see on the bullets to the
right how we break down that
forecast of 20% from 2030.
You'll see a 9% decrease in 10
years from 2030 to 2040, and
then another 11% from 2040 to
2050.
And you'll see what's happening
here, the red line is the
combined state road fund revenue
from the previous slide, and the
blue line is the transportation
construction price index, so
we're just showing you that
inverse operation between the
two of them. And so what we're
doing fundamentally, of course,
on our end is working with
contractors to identify whatever
efficiencies we can in
scheduling and letting, um, at,
at some point, I think we're
gonna need to get to a place
where we really do a review of
our specifications to ensure
that we're
strong roads in the most
efficient way possible, but
short of doing some things to
address the decline in state
road fund revenues, uh, it,
it'll require a lot of, um,
creativity.
On page 10, just to summarize
some of those state road fund
challenges in a way that I think
are important to this committee
as a uh tax business
transportation committee. What
are some of our challenges when
we look at our financial
outlook. One is motor fuel
taxes, um, are the state road
fund's largest revenue source.
And we're not just talking about
electrification here. We're
talking about vehicles that are
now 30 MPG and above that don't
have to plug in at all, talking
about plug-in hybrid vehicles,
and of course, over a period of
time.
we'll see an increase in
electrification for the state
right now, only 3%, about 3% of
total vehicles registered in New
Mexico are full electric, but
The reliance on gasoline tax is
going to be a challenge that a
lot of states are already
working on. Our fuel taxes to
that end have not been increased
or addressed in many, many
years, gasoline tax was last
changed in 1996, and special
fuel tax in 2004. We are the 5th
lowest, um, tax for gasoline at
17 cents per gallon in the
nation, and you'll see how we
fare relative to the US average,
which is just about a little
more than half of what the rest
of the nation is charging, and
you'll
see the same a third of what the
national average is on special
fuel. The same is true of some
of our other large tax funds or,
or distributions, New Mexico's
vehicle registration fees are
significantly lower than they
are in other US states. And of
course, um,
Something that we're gonna have
to look at is turn to other
states like Utah and Oregon that
are really looking at things
like road user charges as a
model for collecting revenue for
state transportation systems.
And so, um, that would require a
lot of administrative
infrastructure and technology
on, on the agency's part to, um
to move in that space, but it's
fundamentally where I think we
need to move.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
Maller Mon not assembly
administrative Services director
on page 11, we will go over the
executive budget versus LFC's
budget, I would like to mention
that the department is unique
that we do not receive general
reoccurring general fund.
Therefore, our budget goes
through the budget negotiation
process, which is made up of
house transportation analyst and
LFC analyst and DFA analyst
along with the department, and
we negotiate our budget during
the session so that we're all on
the
Same page. So as you see here on
page 11, you'll see the
executive recommendation, the
top part are the revenues, and
you'll see that there's a
difference of $53 million that
$53 million is brought in by the
LFC recommendation. They are
proposing that we use $53
million of unallocated cash, um,
during the negotiation process,
as I mentioned, we will
negotiate this amount. It might
be 53 million, it might be
lower, it might be higher. Um,
the second portion are
categories, the expenditure
side, CA 200 is the payroll and
benefits at 300 is our
contractual services, 400 is our
grant debt service payments and
field supplies activities, so
the total request for the
executive budget is at $1.25
billion dollar request for LFC
is $1.3 billion on the um right
hand side, the special one-time
general fund appropriations.
Again, we compare the exact.
ation versus LFC, the department
has requested 10 million in
beautification. That's for
litter pickup, 12 million in
rural service enhancement and
then 300 million for
construction and maintenance
activities where LFC has um
requested 188 million and
construction and maintenance
activities, 100 million for the
transportation project fund, 50
million for wildlife corridor
and 12 million for equipment.
And the last chart shows the
department's capital outlay
request which consists of $20
million in an electric vehicle
chargers, uh $32 million for
petrol and district improvements
and $10 million in equipment.
Um, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, just to stay on slide
11 for, for just another comment
and important to point to the
capital outlay request here on,
on this page, you know,
something that, you know, we, we
talked about early on in my
tenure here at the Department of
Transportation was, um, the
agencies's inability for many,
many years to secure capital
outlay. We have the 2nd largest
physical footprint of any other
of it, all the state agencies in
New Mexico second only to New
Mexico Corrections Department.
And what we're tasked with
fundamentally is paying for what
we need to operate as an agency
from salaries to uh capital
maintaining our buildings, you
name it, from the State Road
fund. So whereas other agencies
may receive capital outlay for
building maintenance deferred
maintenance and upgrades,
received general fund for pay
increases to offset legislative
pay allocations, things like
that, all of that comes from the
state road funds. So for
example, last year when the
legislature and the governor
authorized a 3% pay increase for
state employees.
That would cost us $9 million
that would come out of roads. We
need $32 million to fix, uh,
critical infrastructure things
in our patrols, if we don't get
it in Capital Aley that $32
million comes out of roads and
so it's just a, a, a point to be
made that underscores how um
there are pros to not being a
general fund agency like moving
cash cash, you know, balances
forward.
are finding a space that allows
for general fund and capital to
make its way in.
On slide 12, we just have a
couple more things. I think, um,
always with an audience to share
our legislative priorities, the
first of which is related to our
capacity over time. Um, House
Bill 145, I apologize, I should
have listed the sponsors here,
um, representatives Hoffman V.
Hill Lundstrom and Art de la
Cruz are supporting state
transportation commission
bonding authority bill. For
those of you that have uh been
around long enough to remember
the grip legislation providing
for bonding authority to the
State Transportation commission.
This bill would authorize state
transportation commission $1.5
billion be with billion with a B
in in in construction bonding,
and so, um, this legislation
again pre presents the option
for bonding to the commission to
that, um, amount of money. There
are some statutory limitations
that ensure our total aggregate
debt at any single time, not
exceed 1.1 billion. So this 1.5
would serve as a line of credit
against which the commission
could bond.
And so we look forward for that
bill to make its way onto the
Senate side, and I imagine that
it'll be before this committee,
um, before, uh, before too long.
The second legislative priority
is paramount for us from an
agency safety perspective, um,
Senator Bobby Gonzalez is going
to introduce a bill for highway
construction zone automated
speed enforcement cams, um, we
are in an interesting situation
where the Department of
Transportation can authorize
local government.
s to place speed enforcement
cams on our roads, but we can't
authorize ourselves to do that
uh by state statute. And so we
are going to uh receive um legal
authority to work with the
Department of Public Safety to
play speed cameras on state
roads during construction to
ensure that our workers and
those of our contractors remain
safe, and you'll see here the
finds that'll be imposed for the
various MPH over the speed
posted speed limit in a, in a
construction zone, so.
Um, we look forward to those,
um, those hearings as well. Um,
and so with that, Madam Chair,
we'll stand for any questions.
I certainly appreciate that,
yeah, and so this is what we're
finding in this room is that
there only one mic at a time,
otherwise we're getting that
really bizarre echo, uh, in
here. So, thank you, Secretary,
for that. I appreciate that. Um,
we do have questions from the
committee. First, we have
Senator Jaramillo. Are there
others who have questions for
the secretary and his staff.
Senator had to me I'll go ahead
and start. Thank you, Madam
Chairwoman, and some minor
comments and not questions, but
I can't believe we need $10
million to ensure we pick up
litter in the state of New
Mexico, and so it's a shame to
see how much litter is on every
state by way, if you come into
Senate District 5, we're having
a major issue with our land
grant meeds where they're coming
in and dumping their garbage
there, so, um, the major, um,
comments I wanted to make is,
first of all, thank you for all
of the work that you do, cabinet
secretary.
Thank you to your leadership
team and to the employees who
are out there every single day.
Now I at least visit Senator
Hamlin twice out of the year in
Las Cruces, and it's not rare to
me, for me to see members of
your crew working on my drive
from Espanola to Las Cruces, and
it's no matter where I go in the
state, I honk my horn when I see
NMDOT because they're
hardworking individuals that I
see out every single day, and if
you can send back my thanks to
them. But Madam Chairwoman,
NMDOT holds a special place in
my heart, I.
carried an agency bill for them,
which is my first bill as a
freshman senator that got
passed, and that was really
exciting. And the last two
things I want to mention are the
two individuals sitting at that
table are proud natives of the
Espanola Valley, Mallory is
someone who was at the Espanilla
Valley High School when I was
there. I'm so happy to see you
in this position and cabinet
Secretaryerna is my godbrother
and my cousin, so it's really
good to see you back and see you
sitting there. I want to thank
you for all of the work that you
do in my district and.
Take back the many thanks to the
people who work with you and for
you. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator, and I think
if I remember correctly, in one
of these times when we had snow,
you were out there with the
crew, uh, in the snow plows. You
didn't have anything to do with
the naming of the snow plows,
which by the way, was brilliant.
But you did do that, Madam
Chairwoman, I did do an
overnight with NMDOT for those
of you who are out there, I
changed out of a suit and got
into lined pants and gloves were
on.
And we drove throughout the
Senate district with the storm
that rolled in, and I couldn't
believe how heavy those blades
are, but we had to get off of
the vehicle to maneuver the
blades, um, the visibility was
bad, how they're depending on
these antennas at the end of the
truck and that I still couldn't
believe New Mexicans were
passing us at 65 miles an hour
in a storm, but the work that
goes into it is not easy, and so
I'm happy that I got to
experience that and just so you
know, I'll be joining the
environment department crawling
under the sword.
the best vanilla to see what the
issues are when it comes to
wastewater and store treatment
in the Espanilla Valley.
There are a lot of things I
could say that are really not
appropriate for public
consumption, knowing that you're
going to be down in it. Um,
thank you, Senator Jaramillo.
Um, Senator O'Malley, did I see
that you had a, you had a
question. Yes, thank you, thank
you. And so first of all, my
apologies for being late. And
now I've got to switch topics
and that's probably what happens
a lot, um, uh, up here. Uh,
could you explain, uh, let's get
back to the, um,
Executive budget versus LFC
budget 11, could you explain
that again? Uh, and particularly
as it refers to this fun
balance.
Yes, madam Chair, Senator, so
the fund balance is um think of
it as the department savings
account. It's cash that has not
been allocated. So each year we
put back that cash into our
budget. We don't submit it
during our request, but we will
we will negotiate it through the
process.
So we will be putting some of
that back, if not that amount or
more, just depends. OK, but that
wasn't in your original budget.
That's not right. That's OK. All
right. I was just like, all
right.
OK. Well, that, thank you. That
explains it.
That's all, Senator. Vice chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair, staying
on slide 11 and not to dry out
this too much, but could you
just briefly explain the rural
air service enhancement.
It's a, it's a grant program,
right? And then does it need to
be replenished or what is the
funding balance of it? Sure. Uh,
Madam Chair, committee members,
from time to time, the
legislature sets up a fund that
might not receive recurring
appropriations, and in this
case, this fund was set up to
support.
locally owned county municipal
airports that are interested in
establishing commercial air
service to and from their
locally owned airport. The rural
Air Service enhancement Fund
ensures for those commercial air
service providers that the
community can sustain a certain
level of tickets or passengers,
and so you're absolutely right,
they are granted out to those
local governments based on their
proposals for that commercial
service.
The proposals are weighted on
studies that are done to ensure
that the destinations being
identified in that um program
are going to be sustainable over
time and so each year as a
result of not having dedicated
funding source to that fund. Um,
we make a recommendation based
on what we believe would be is,
um,
Um, sufficient to fund everybody
that will ask because we don't
like to say no, and so if we get
enough money, we don't have to.
Thank you.
Thank you, Vice Chair. Uh,
Senator Paul, and then we'll
have Senator Ramos after that.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, Mr.
Secretary, uh going back to
slides 8 and 9. So when we're
looking down the road, 2030 out
to 2050. Uh, it's noted on slide
9 that obviously costs of
construction are going to grow
is as time moves on, but that
you're expecting revenue to
shrink and maybe it just didn't
land with me when you guys were
talking about what's the state
actively doing and, uh, game
planning for how do we make up
that difference is, is, you
know, we potentially go.
to, to more electric and we're
losing that revenue, um, from
fuel. How do we make up for that
down the road. I know that there
was mention, uh, of road user
charges, but is there, have you
guys been looking at that?
Great question, uh, Madam Chair,
Senator, um, absolutely, in
fact, leading into this session,
the Department of Transportation
assembled the task force, um,
the stir stir task force, right,
sustainable transportation
infrastructure revenue. I
thought of that on my own. Um,
and we pulled together a number
of individuals that specialize
in transportation policy both at
a state and national level, bond
advisors, financial advisors,
etc. And we set out to do two
things primarily. One is, what
is the rest?
of the country doing to sustain
its transportation revenues over
a period of time. And 2 is, what
is New Mexico kind of looked at
to try and do that and um that
would allow us to spend more
than 24 hours to turn around an
FIR right? to really dissect
those things, and there are, uh,
some things that came from that,
um, um, that exercise. One of
them is the bonding bill. There
are some states that have been
able to leverage the
introduction of other types of
fees that come to consumers that
are supported.
the state's capacity to borrow
for road infrastructure, one of
the examples is um Minnesota and
Colorado has added a surcharge
to third party delivery fees
like Walmart, Amazon, eBay that
generates enough money, not for
long term sustainable road
revenue, but for bond debt
service repayment to address
some of these things. Other
states like Utah and Oregon are
far along in road user charges,
um, as a model which is
essentially how do we charge
drivers for their road use.
As opposed to just charging
those who are using more fuel,
right? And so we're looking at
models in fact, there's an
entire network called Ruck USA
or Ruck America, that's working
on that and um a lot of states
have received a lot of just
grants to study and and look at
those measures, so, um, there's
good news and bad news. The good
news is, is that New Mexico
isn't missing the boat on a lot
of front, you know, cutting edge
technology or policy on on
funding. But the bad news is
there are
aren't a lot of developed areas
out there, right, but to be sure
over the next year, we'll look
at some of those, um, from what
electrification will do other
types of um tax distributions we
may look at New Mexico's
position because we have a lot
of valuable resources that other
states and other um uh regions
in the, in the nation are
interested in and perhaps those
present opportunities to move
away from fuel tax to reliance
on other types of revenues.
Thank you, Madam one follow up
question.
And you, when, when we say road
user charges, can you help me
better understand what that
entails. Sure.
And so, um, take for example,
there are some some states that
began with emissions testing,
right, in every single year or
every so often vehicles would
have to report somewhere to
complete an emissions test, and
at that time they would report.
The number of miles that they've
driven, and that essentially
captures road usage and so this
began with a lot of states who
were really working hard on
electrification and wanted to
figure out a way to charge
electric vehicle users knowing
that they weren't going to
charge a fuel tax. And a lot of
folks might think, well, let's
just tax them when they go to
plug in and charge, but the
large majority of charging is
going to take place at home, so
we can't tax them based on what
they're using at home. And so
the idea of tracking miles
driven by
individuals who own electric
vehicles, began this notion
that, well, why don't we just do
that for everybody so that if
you own a car and drive a whole
lot, if you drive a heavier car
a whole lot, you drive a heavy
truck a whole lot, and we're
going to charge you relative to
that usage. And so it's
fundamentally charging you a per
mile fee based on your vehicle
weight and how often you drive
it.
Thank you.
All right, Senator Ramos, Madam
Chair, thank you and, uh, Mr.
Secretary, thank you so much. I,
uh, it's good to see you again.
And uh just want to say Highway
180, the first project is
ongoing, and I want to thank you
so much for getting, helping us
down in the in the Grant County
and Luna County. Um, it's always
a pleasure to talk to your
personnel down there. Um, we
come over the heel over
Hillsborough, so that's always a
rough ride. And when we call him
it don't matter what time they
pick up.
And uh thank you so much. That's
the only comment that I had, Mr.
Secretary, and uh looking
forward to working with you.
Thank you.
Like
Any other comments before we let
them go?
You are free. Thank you so much.
We appreciate it. Thank you. And
I know that we're gonna be
seeing you quite a bit, uh, in
committee, given the, the nature
of this committee, um, but if
you want to, uh, like recognize
your staff because I have a
feeling you've got other people
here. If you wanna do that right
now, Secretary, you're welcome
to do that. Go ahead, I figured.
I'll start over here, um.
Why don't you turn on your mic
though.
Oh, I'll do that so I can hear
everybody, so Mo Moe joined us
for 4 months, uh, 42 years and 4
months is what he says because
he's been in this industry for
42 years, um, and, uh, he joined
us as deputy secretary over our
engineering support sections.
Yeah, you brought him up from
Donana County. Thank you very
much. Yeah, you did.
Or should I say, um, we accepted
him when he needed to, you know,
take a break from all of that. I
don't work for the county, so,
but I'm really glad.
Uh, Rick Padillaz, our executive
director of highway operations,
um, working directly underneath
him is John Romero, director of
Highway Ops, Jerry Valdez is our
special, our executive director
for special projects, namely,
leading our effort in
electrification, um, Christine
Malsi is our comms director, and
oh, David Harris oversees our
motto programs which includes
rays, um, rail aviation and
ports. Did I forget everybody?
Oh, they met Denise earlier, she
talked.
I,
I think, um, that's it, and
we'll be at your service as you
need us.
Thank you so much, Cabinet
Secretary. I appreciate you
very, very much. Um, I see that
our next man of the hour is here
in the room.
Before we do that though, there
are two bits of, you're welcome
to sit down, secretary. Um, we
are going to go ahead, we now
have a quorum, so, uh, the
secretary is going to call role.
The quorum is just for going
ahead and establishing that we
are not taking any action today.
We have presentations today. Um,
obviously, a quorum is still
needed in order for us to vote
on bills, so that's what we're
hoping for for next week. Um,
but if you will, Rebecca, please
go ahead and take the role.
Senator Figueroa.
Here
Senator had a meal.
I.
Senator O'Malley.
Senator Paul,
Senator Ramos.
Senator Sanchez excuse, Senator
Shar is excused, Senator word is
excused.
Senator Bergman, Senator Hamlin.
We have 7 present, 3 excuse, we
have a form. Thank you very
much.
Um, also, before we get to the
secretary's presentation. Uh, I
just want to remind the
committee I gave, uh, many of
you a blue, I think I gave all
of you a blue sheet of paper
that talked about the joint
committee, um, informal
gathering that is taking place
next Monday night, February 3rd.
Um, if you need it, follow me to
my office because it has the
RSVP, the, the hosts would like
to know who all is coming. So if
you need to just send Ramos I
saw you write that down. I do
have it in my office. I'll have
all that information. If you
don't have the email to RSVP2
follow me to my office after the
committee meeting, we'll get
that, but the host would really
like to know who's who's going
to it, and uh it should be a
been to one already at this
location and the food was
absolutely delicious. So, um, so
we're gonna have that along with
the house taxation committee.
And this will be a good
opportunity because to give you
a little bit of a forecast.
We have several tax bills that
are coming down. We're having
conversations with the house. So
what we're, we're leaning toward
the several of these tax bills
going into a tax package. And
this and for the newer members,
this is really instrumental
because what it does is it
allows us to work with the
house. We all get together on
this, and we have stuff that's
from Republicans, stuff that's
from Democrats, it's taxes that
will help our community. We work
with the house on that. It works
really well last year. And so,
um, I've already spoken to Chair
Lie about this. He's very
excited about doing this again.
So this is a good opportunity
for us to meet the health
taxation Committee, that will be
on Monday, February 3rd. Um, and
so if you need the RSVP I'll be
able to my office.
So thank you very much,
Secretary Black. It's always
nice to see you. Um, even though
I kind of bailed on the last
meeting that we were supposed to
have about cannabis, um, because
I was working.
Um, I'm very glad to see you
here today. I'll let you go
ahead and start.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, thank you for the
invitation. I, I think I bailed
on you at the meeting before
that because there was a fire.
Yes, we had a, we had, it wasn't
even it was actual fire alarm,
uh, and I had to run out of the
building and make sure my staff
got out, so we'll figure it out.
We'll figure it out. Thank you
for your patience. Uh, it's an
honor to be here. My name is Rob
Black. I am the cabinet
secretary designee for the
economic development department,
uh, with me, I have my deputy,
Isaac Romero, uh, and we'll
Talk a little bit about um our
mission, uh, what we do every
day, the team that we have to do
that work, uh, what our
priorities are, uh, and, and
address hopefully uh the issues
that they're the chair asked us
to make sure we cover uh in this
presentation, you know, and I'll
start, uh, I think you have the
presentation in front of you. I
don't know if they'll do it up
on the. No? OK.
All right. It is the, the, the
big blue.
Bundle of joy bundle of joe. I
love it. Big blue bundle of joy.
Um, to get into that big blue
bundle of joy, uh, I think it's
a great way to start with, with
our mission, uh, which our
mission is to improve the lives
of New Mexico families by
increasing economic
opportunities and providing a
place for businesses to thrive.
That is our official mission as
a department, and it's something
that I take a great deal of
pride of, as does my team, uh,
that every day this is what we
get to do for a day job.
to try to create pathways to
prosperity for New Mexicans. And
I wanted to, to frame that a
little bit about why we think
it's so important.
And, and, and the role of
economic development, because
investing in New Mexico's
economic development isn't just
about creating jobs or
increasing our GDP.
It's about strengthening,
strengthening the very fabric of
our communities.
And in our democratic
institutions.
Harvard economist Benjamin
Friedman talks about the role of
economic development in a
seminal book.
The moral consequences of
economic growth.
Doctor Freeman demonstrates
through his research that when
we, when communities experience
broadly shared economic growth,
they become more open, tolerant,
and socially cohesive.
The ripple effects extend far
beyond immediate financial
returns.
By investing in New Mexico's
economic future through
strategic development
initiatives. We can create the
kind of sustained, inclusive
growth that fosters greater
opportunity, reduces social
tensions and builds more
resilient communities.
We've seen this in periods of
New Mexico's history, when
economic expansion led to
greater social mobility and
civic engagement.
But the inverse is also true.
During periods of economic
stagnation, we've witnessed
increased social friction and
declining faith in our public
institutions.
Investments that create
Pathways to prosperity for our
citizens are more than just
investments in infrastructure
and business development. It's
an investment in the moral and
social character of our state,
creating the economic foundation
for a more democratic, equitable
and united New Mexico. That's
what we do every day at the
Department of Economic
Development and why we do the
work we do.
And next slide.
We'll take you and this is page
3,
it tells you a little bit about
how we do that work.
So from our signature economic
development programs of LEDA,
our local economic development
Act, and JTIP, which is our job
training program, uh, which has
been in place since 1972. It's
one of the most respected
programs in the country, uh,
around job training, uh,
From our, uh, those are, those
are programs that are really
focused on growing our economic
base here in New Mexico,
economic-based jobs to Mexico
Main Street program to our
healthy foods financing and
technical assistance programs to
outdoor recreation, creative
industries, to the New Mexico
Film Office to the Office of
Strategy, Science and
Technology.
EDD is working directly with
industries and businesses all
over the state.
um
We know we have, and again, we
have a very dedicated staff that
that helps drive these
initiatives throughout the
state, including field reps that
represent districts all over the
state that are embedded in your
communities.
Um
These divisions have many moving
parts, um, example of that, I'll
use outdoor recreation has a
couple of different programs.
One is the trails Plus program,
uh, which helps build outdoor
recreational trails in rural
areas and in some urban areas
around the state, but the
importance of thinking about a
trail in that trailhead that
leads into uh a mountain
community, let's say TRC and
creating a trailhead that allows
people to launch from that area,
create
It ties into a Main Street
program helps build that
economic vitality for those
rural communities and helps get
people out indoor outdoors and
really enjoying the beauty of
New Mexico while creating
economic opportunity. They also
fund our outdoor equity fund,
uh, which helps fund in uh our
beautiful state's ecosystem.
We also uh attached to EDD are 3
different, uh, divisions that we
administratively support, and
that's the border authority,
which does a lot of
infrastructure investment, uh,
our spaceport Authority, which
manages Spaceport America, and
then the Office of Military Base
Planning. Um, we have taken on
since I've been in the role, a
much more active role and
participating with those
divisions and supporting them,
uh, we, we think it's really
important that they're
integrated into our broader
economic strategies and that
we're supporting.
Their efforts and that we're
learning from what they're
doing, uh, in those areas.
Uh, the next page.
Is our, our, our session
priorities.
So, um,
Oh, we're gonna hit them in a
little more detail, but will the
four main pieces is site
readiness, utility
predeployment, uh regulatory
transparency, and then quantum
computing. So I'll start with
the next page on is quantum
technology, um,
How many of you know what
quantum computing is.
Yeah, I'm kind of like, that's
been my thing too, and um I've
learned a lot since I've taken
on the role. Um, but it's a,
it's a different type of logic
that logic-based computer. So if
you remember when we were all
learning, thinking about how
computers worked. It was ones
and zeros, right? And you would
program based off this binary 1
and 0.
The difference between quantum
computing is that it's not
binary, it's both. So it can be
a 1 and a 0 at the same time,
thus creating a level of
efficiency exponentially
different than supercomputers
today. So the speed at which
this these trends, these uh
processes take place is way
much, much, much, many thousands
of times faster than the fastest
supercomputer today.
So we're seeing great advances
in quantum computing technology,
uh, Google announced about 3
weeks ago that they had a
significant breakthrough around
error reduction in their quantum
computer computing technology.
The unique thing about New
Mexico is Sandia National Labs
has a quantum computer fab on
site.
And has for years, and there is
an ongoing partnership with the
University of New Mexico.
Where their doctoral program in
computer science are partnered
with
Cindy, getting into the fab,
working with the fab, which has
resulted in UNM being the number
one pipeline in the country for
quantum computing uh doctoral
programs and workforce.
That is a unique advantage that
we have as a state that no other
state can match. Um, CNM is
already building out a quantum
uh trade program. It's because
the thing about quantum is you
need to get it really cold close
to 0 °C. So you need plumbers,
pipe fitters, HVAC
professionals, so your trade
skills and your PhDs. Again, a
perfect fit for New Mexico.
Um, we'll be running a couple of
bills. There'll be governor's
bills this year. One would
create a GRT exemption for the
expenditures supporting the
development of a national
quantum testing and validation
lab. We're in conversations
with uh several federal
government agencies in regards
to this. Um, this could put us
in a very, again, unique place
where New Mexico is the place
where you come and test your
quantum computer to see how
efficient it is, how well it
works, you would
Define us as the hub of quantum
computing over forward.
Similarly, another bill, um,
that would create a refundable
tax credit for companies moving
to New Mexico and, and building
physical infrastructure here,
uh, a refundable tax credit
similar to how the film tax
credit works, but it would have
to be actual construction in New
Mexico. Um,
About 3 weeks ago, 2 weeks ago,
Maryland announced a billion
dollar investment into quantum,
uh, previous to that, the, the,
the governor of Illinois, I
believe it was about a $250
million investment, um, there
are other places competing for
this, but I think New Mexico has
some unique sticky things like
Sandia and Los Alamos National
Labs that make us unique and can
be quite competitive. So that'll
be one of our priorities going
forward. Uh, next, next slide.
I, one of our early successes in
the quantum space, um, the
governor announced during the
state of the state that we have
secured a commitment from
Quantinuum. Uh, it is the
world's largest quantum
computing company. Uh, they're a
subsidiary of Honeywell. Uh,
they will be building a research
and development, uh, facility
here in New Mexico. Uh, next
page is site readiness. This is
another one of our priorities.
It's SB 169, um, 1 of the
challenges we have in New Mexico
is we have a lot of companies
who want to come here and work
because of a variety of reasons,
maybe the universities, it may
be uh the policies we have
around uh advanced energy and
the opportunities there, uh,
etc.
But we don't have places to show
them.
We have very few sites that are
ready for development. And so
when we do show them some, you
know, dirt, and we say this
would be great for you, when can
we start?
Well, it might take 3 to 5 years
to get your utilities.
They're gone.
We need to be between 6 and 18
months.
Ready to go.
So, 36 other states have what's
called a site readiness strategy
that have invested in these sort
of, of the ability to do site
characterization work.
Uh, the vision would be, uh,
working with tribes, counties,
cities, property owners, 20 to
50 contiguous acres or larger,
one property owner.
Uh, working, uh, would, would
ask EDD to do a site
characterization work of that
site.
Its location rail, does it need
an environmental review? What
are the traffic studies? Can we
do a housing study for that.
Understand what are the best
utilizations for that property,
working with the local
jurisdiction.
And then that gives us something
to start to market. It also
identifies what sort of
investments would a lot would
You be able to do with your
capital outlay to have the most.
Economic impact in your
community. I say, let's, let's
make sure we get a, you know,
fiber connection to this
property. Let's make sure we
pre-deploy uh water, wastewater
because we know this is a very
valuable site, and that makes it
much easier for us and your
local economic development
organizations to sell that to a
particular industry. So that
will be one of the big pieces
for us is really developing that
site readiness strategy, and we
again would work with
communities all over New Mexico
providing technical.
technical expertise to local
communities, counties who may
not be able to do that site
characterization work and that
analysis. And so we will provide
that uh through this program.
Next, next slide is our utility
pre-deployment side that's a pay
bill SB 170, which aligns to the
site readiness bell.
If we have EDD has certified a
site as a strategic economic
development site.
Uh
Xcel Energy
PNM
El Paso Electric local co op,
could take that certification to
the PRC.
Have them conduct an expedited
review of the strategic economic
development site, as, uh, and,
and be able to pre-deploy
utility infrastructure to that
site.
It allows for a much, much more
secure process for rate recovery
for that pre-deployment, because
today what they wait for is we
actually signed the deal that
says X company is going to be
here.
But if it takes 5 years to get
utilities, they're not gonna
sign that deal. They're gonna go
to Arizona or Colorado or Texas.
And so we want to get to it's
much closer time frame, so when
we sign the deal and the
utilities and things are, are
ready to go.
Uh, through this process, we
think we can de-risk that
capital from our co-ops, from
our, our investor owned
utilities to be able to
pre-deploy. Uh, it also creates
a funding mechanism, including
co-ops into the PPRF, the
public, uh, the, the
Public. Thank you, Deputy.
Public Project revolving fund,
administered by the NMFA and it
would include co-ops in that
because an investor owned
utility can float that
investment. They have
shareholders, they have ways to
raise those funds, co-ops very
difficult. We need to make sure
that co-ops can participate in
this, because what, you know,
I'm a, I'm a kid from Lee
County, Lovington, uh, Lee
County Co op.
Um, how willing are they gonna
be to pre-deploy that capital.
Uh, to make their a site
developable. It's difficult for
them in a co op environment. The
funding mechanism here, de-risks
that or the co-ops, um, because
we need to be, especially in our
rural communities, quicker to
market.
Or we're gonna lose our kids. We
continue to lose our kids
because we don't have those
economic development
opportunities in rural New
Mexico. We want to help expedite
that, and we believe this will
go a long way in helping make
that happen. Um, and then
finally, our billing permit
data.
They are regulatory transparency
bill. Um, this is something
we've been working with RLD on,
uh, the long and short of it is,
uh, at the state level, county,
city level, uh, we will require
any entity that provides a
permit or license for uh
construction to publish.
Every quarter, the average time
from application to
determination of that permit or
license.
That's it. It's just get that
information out there because I
guarantee you as now I sit in a
government role.
I don't know how long it takes
my team necessarily to pro
process an application for
something.
And we should know that, and we
should be able to make the let
the public know that, but it
will also make me a better
manager if I know that it takes
me 6 months to do something in
my.
should take 6 days.
Because I have too many
processes, I mean too many
people touching it. I don't have
the right IT, whatever that
might be. So we see this as both
a a tool for managers in
government to understand what,
how their systems are working,
but also for the public sector
to know this jurisdiction can
move a building permit in 3
weeks. This one might take 6
months. Where am I gonna invest
my dollars, uh, because that
regulatory certainty is very,
very important and and
financially valuable. And next,
uh, our additional priorities
that, that will be
that we're working on and we
hope to publish within the next
probably 1 week, week and a
half, isn't uh more detailed
update to our state strategy, a
state strategy was first
published in 2021. Um, we've
been working internally, um, as
well as with the Harvard Growth
lab, uh, on the development of,
of an update to that, I think
you will really trying to target
our focus, um, but also make
much more actionable, um, make
the plan much more actionable,
action oriented.
As well as looking at how are we
setting goals as a department,
as a state to make sure that we
can achieve uh achieve benefits
on behalf of the citizens of the
state. And finally, again, this
this next slide uh talks about
that plan in power and
collaborate that update, um, and
we are, um,
We have completed approximately
40% of the recommendations in
the original 2021 plan, um, and
we're excited about where that's
headed.
And then finally, uh we'll get
into our film office.
Um
Pardon me.
I lost my sheet of paper.
Thank you.
My deputy stole it. Um, I'm
gonna blame him.
Uh, where are we? Page 12. Thank
you. Um.
You've probably heard that, you
know, the good news that 3 of
New Mexico's metro film hubs,
Albuquerque, Las Cruces, and
Santa Fe made the moviemaker
list again.
This is for the 3rd year as the
best places to live and work as
a filmmaker. Um, this is a great
testament to our goals in
economic development, uh, as the
industry people who lift, who
Uh, as industry people who left
the state are now returning here
to work and live and buy a home
and pursue their passions here
in New Mexico. Um, in
particular,
This committee has been very
supportive of our film office,
and I can tell you that the
industry notices that, um, that
New Mexico's efforts have been
consistent, and they've been
bipartisan over the last 5
years, and that makes a real
difference when, um, the
industry is looking at where
they're going to locate and
where they're going to spend
their money. So I want to thank
you for, for that support from
this committee. Uh, on the next
slide, you'll, you'll see
looking at our, our production
spend since 2019, New Mexico has
been
seen significant increases in
our in our production spends.
There was a, a decrease in uh
FY20.
Um, because of COVID, which, you
know, that affected the entire
World's production.
Um, but the industry really
bounced back in 21. However, in
2023, we also saw a down trend
due to the WGA and SAG after
strikes, uh, which also slowed
slowed production going into the
first part of 2024.
Uh, but we are seeing those
productions ramp back up.
On the next slide, page 14, uh,
you'll see.
And this, this is, um,
This
is not the easiest to
understand, but I'll, I'll
explain it. Um, the, the maximum
amount of credit you can get if
you're filming in a rural area
that is 40% credit back. Um, the
base credit is that
That 25% that you see in the the
middle.
Uh, chart, uh, but the average
that productions actually get is
that 19%. So that's really what
film are are typically getting
on their, on their uplift.
Uh, on the next page on page 15.
This uh talks about the rural
uplift in 2024, the rural uplift
zone was updated from 60 miles
outside the city limits of Santa
Fe and Albuquerque to 60 miles
outside of their respective city
halls, the uplift has um also
and that gives the the chart of
what that area. Um, and the
uplift was also increased from
5% to 10% to further incentivize
filmmakers to film.
outside of the main metro areas.
Uh, this allowed for much more
inclusive, uh, participation in
the program with our rural
communities. The next page, page
16.
Um, this update, this shows
since the change of the uplift
zone production spin increase in
the out in the rural zone has
gone up 88% from the previous
fiscal year. So we believe
that's working very well. Uh,
and as it tended, as intended
driving more production into the
rural communities and dollars
into those neighborhoods.
Finally, on page 17, uh, the
film industry in New Mexico is a
huge driver for high paying jobs
in the state. Uh, the median
hourly wage for full-time New
Mexican crew members hits a
record of about just under $37
an hour. Um, the median wage in
the state is just under $21 an
hour. Um,
So, we do believe that this is
bringing additional revenue into
the, into New Mexico and New
Mexico families, uh, because
they're getting these higher
wages and building skills that
are very transferable. And
finally, on slide 18, um,
This is the, uh, the tax payouts
per uh
TRD, uh, TRD is paid out just
over 100 million in film
production tax credits in each
of the last 2 years split
between both non-partners and
partners, so the partners are
the ones who film partners are
the ones who've invested
physical capital infrastructure
like NBC Universal, Netflix, so
they're getting sticky, they're
investing hard dollars into
physical infrastructure, um, and
then other productions who who
come into the state. Uh, these
pay payouts are made and claimed
and therefore primarily for
productions that.
We're filmed in prior years, so
they won't align with production
expense totals for these
particular fiscal years, there's
a lagging aspect to that. The
average tax credit payout
historically has been 80% of the
total production spend. Um, and
then finally,
EDD resources. These are the
ways that we try to communicate
and support, uh, the community,
uh, whether it's our quarterly
or EDD newsletters, um, we will
make sure that all of you are on
the newsletters as well as your
new staff, uh, because we wanna
make sure you have that
information for your, uh, your
constituents. Um, there's things
around grant deadlines, there's
things around programs that are
happening, other types of
announcements are outdoor
recreation newsletter is a fan.
fantastic new laser that if you
don't get it, you should, you'd
love it. I mean again, we'll,
we'll make sure that you're and
your staff have access to those,
and we have a toolbox that we
have created, um, we published
again this last fall, both in
Spanish and English, which
outlines all of the various
incentives and structures, uh,
that EDD does to support a New
Mexicans, uh, in New Mexico
businesses. Um,
And the last page are my, my
leadership team, uh, the folks
who help really every day, uh,
whether across film, economic
development, or creative
industries, uh, outdoor rec, uh,
help drive change here in New
Mexico and create opportunities.
So with that, I'll pause for
questions.
Thank you so much, secretary,
interim secretary or acting
secretaries at the official.
official title. I do have to
say, um, you know, I, uh, have
the toolbox, it's, uh, outside
my work.
Um, I think if you have a
graphic of that front page, I
would love that because then
I'll just slam that out, um,
because we do give those out for
free, um, and to our, to our
members uh of the green chamber.
So I'm appreciative of that.
You know, and I hear what you're
talking about in terms of sight
readiness, and you're familiar
with long in Santa Teresa, we
have the Border Industrial
Association, which is run by
Jerry Pacheco, who's around uh
in the area this week. Um, and
he commonly talks about sight
readiness, because at that area,
we have so much uh importing and
transferring over from the
border at that area and I know
that for, for our newcomers
during the interim, uh, if
there's a meeting down in Santa
Teresa.
recommended, I think Senator
Sher, you've been down there.
It's fascinating what's going
on. And so am I gathering that
like what you're trying to
replicate is what they've been
able to do out there because
they're, they're trying to stay
ahead of site readiness because
there are so many businesses who
are coming in and saying that
building is ready for me to go
into next month.
And if it's very difficult, if
we don't have that, and they're
like, I'm gonna have to wait a
year and a half to get that
building up.
And so we're we're missing out
on those opportunities, Madam
Chair, thank you for that.
Absolutely. And, and I'll, as an
example, uh, one of my Mark
Roper on my team took two
companies on Monday.
The Tour
Buildings in Santa Teresa, and
there are 135,000 and another's
138,000 buildings that are up,
ready to move in, and that is
very, very easy for a company,
instead of dirt.
That we have to develop. So the
closer we can get to that
vertical building, the, the
better we are at being able to
capture those sort of
investments.
And, and with that, though, and
I think all of us, you know,
we've, we've, we've learned this
in in our uh roles as policy
creators is that there's,
there's multiple things that
affect that nice little thing
happening, right? And so then we
start talking about water
availability and electrical
infrastructure and housing and
transportation, and so, you
know, those are some of the
things we're not just talking
about having a building a shell
ready to go. There are so many
other factors that work on
making that new.
new location for the new home of
some, you know, potential
business, uh, in order for it to
be successful. So we, we really
do have to think about all the
different components, and I
often use the wheel of a bicycle
tire, and then the spokes from
that because I think we all know
that there's not just one
solution to something that we
have to really look at all of
the different things that make
up that wheel. And, and so I'm,
I'm excited about that. Um, so
at, at this point, I would, I
think, Rob, did you want to uh
respond to that or are you ready
for questions from the committee
instead of me just blabbering on
and on.
Well,
I'm sure, I, I love what you're
saying, so keep clappering. It's
fine with me. But with that, I,
I think I wanted to to
articulate the opportunity that
you've kind of are you stressed,
and that's almost like the
spokes of the wheel.
Um, what we're going to help you
do as a local community, as a
leader, is if you again can work
with your local economic
development organization, uh,
county city, and you've got land
that you're interested in.
We will help build the spokes,
so we can come in and say, let's
do an environmental review on
this site.
Let's do a traffic study. Let's
take a look at what is the
housing needs. We've assessed
that this would be best for
warehouse or intelligent
manufacturing or whatever that
might be based on the criteria,
and we'll work with a national,
a site selector firm to help us
do that site characterization
work, and then we're gonna give
you and your county and city
that information.
So again, working to be your
technical experts on how to
develop that, you, as a
community will develop how you
want, and that's, that's what
you should do. It should align
with your values, but we're
gonna fill those folks out so
that you know what you've got
and and make it as, as easy to
move forward to develop those
sort of assets in your
community.
I appreciate that, secretary.
One of the things for the border
Industrial Association is it's
right on the border with Texas.
And I am always like stressing
to Mr. Pacheco.
Um, how do we make sure that New
Mexicans have first crack at the
job. I grew up in Texas, New
Mexico is my home, but I want to
make sure my neighbors and my,
the people that I get to work
in, get to have those jobs and
so when you're talking about
different other site readiness.
This is kind of a unique
situation with Selmon Park in
Santa Teresa, um, but we do have
to also think about, and I think
this is something that we all
have a tendency of talking about
is making sure that we have the
people to work.
And to to be able to be trained
in that and to keep our young
people because something that I
think is heartbreaking for all
of us is when our young people
have to leave because there are
no jobs for them. So again, the
wheel of a bicycle and looking
at all those different spokes.
Um, I do want to commend, um,
Union Pacific has an industrial
training academy, so they
started that at Donana Community
College, which allows people to
learn the skills that Union
Pacific actually needs, and
that's a great model for not
just railroads, but for other
industries, it's like, let's
grow our own.
So that they can stay and make
good paying jobs. And so, and I
know that you and I both are on
the same page about that, given
our chamber work uh together. So
I appreciate that. Um, I can,
Rob and I can continue to talk,
so I don't wanna uh hug that. So
are there any other comments or
questions, Senator O'Malley,
Senator Jaramillo. Thank you,
ma'am.
So on the site reading a slide,
you talk about improved site
readiness for publicly owned
industrial sites.
And that's what this is for SB
169, the 24 million. I just want
to be, it's publicly owned
industrial sites.
page 7.
Me and chair, Senator, it would
be for publicly owned, but would
also be available, we would be
able to do site characterization
work with private sector as
well, if they meet certain
criteria and they're
contributing back into, to fund,
help fund that process. OK, and
this is kind of a little bit of
my concern, uh, and a lot, of
course, the large pieces of land
are usually on the edges of, of
the community, for example,
Albuquerque.
And if they're on the edges,
right? So it's, it's usually,
it's not.
You know, when you've got big
pieces of land, right, they're
not in the urban core, they're
not near the urban core, which
means, of course, extending
utilities out.
And
And, you know, it's my
experience that, and we've had
many companies come in. There's
been promises, and there, and
then before you know it, there's
somewhere else, they chose
somewhere else cause it's so
competitive.
My concern would be, this is a
lot of infrastructure maybe to
put into, let's say, a private,
uh,
A piece of property.
Which could or cannot, you know,
this, they may not be uh
selected for the site.
And so when I think about that,
and I think about the resources
that for transportation for
infrastructure, etc. that
competes with maintenance of
existing roads and other things
like that.
So, so that would be my concern
for that area is that that kind
of investment that you're asking
for, and you don't have any
insurances, especially in a
private sector that, that, that
site, you know, that, that
business is gonna move there and
we've had that happen many times
in Berlio County. So I just
wanted to know that that would
be my concern.
Madam Chair, uh, Senator, I
think that's a very valid
concern. Um, the, the
It is a uh how do we become
competitive?
And, and you, you mentioned the
idea that sometimes that's what
they're looking for and, and how
do we, how do we do that? And I
think we're trying to be, we're
trying to solve that, that
problem both with the
combination of the site
readiness work and the utility
pre-deployment work. Uh, when we
do the utility pre-deployment
work, that's gonna be up to, we
won't make that decision. That's
up to the water water authority,
the uh wastewater authority, the
utilities, um, but we're going
to have done is characterized
the site to say,
Here's the opportunity here, uh,
we'll provide to the
legislature, here's the
opportunity for capital outlay
for this project, again, that's
most likely gonna be your, your
public sector side, where it's
public, you know, public land,
um, but we're, we need to figure
out where we can market for
customers who want to come into
New Mexico and invest in our
state and grow jobs here. We
need to have product to sell
them, uh, as a state and, and,
and I'm not selling them. I'm
helping sell the state.
Uh, but I think that's, that's
really what we're trying to get
to is develop that inventory so
that we can be competitive. And
again, there's 36 other states
that have these sort of
programs, um, and that we're
competing with. And if, if we
can't get quicker to market,
we're just gonna, we're gonna
continue to miss the boat on
some of those investments.
Uh, and, and again, I just
wanted the state that that there
are just so many factors in how,
how companies choose to come
here, and a lot of it is
training, its job training, it's
all kinds of things, and um,
And so, I, I sometimes I want us
to sort of be realistic about
that, right? That, that just
because we're in the, you know,
on the list, right? Does it mean
that
You know, we actually, I've been
very disappointed about a lot
of, put a lot of energy into
sight readiness or sight, you
know, uh, getting folks over
here and, uh, and I guess
basically the concern I have too
is what is our rate of return?
Uh, what is it, what, what
exactly, when we put out an
investment, and what are we
getting back for the public?
What is our rate of return? I
think sometimes we don't even
think that far.
So that's also a consideration.
Madam Chair, Senator, I'm so
glad you asked that question,
uh, because we've actually been
working on a case study around
that. And I'll use, and I, I'll
use one that everyone knows and
it's meta.
Right? In Los Luna.
In 2015,
Um, Meta's annual or less, less.
Los Luna's annual GRT.
Was
$11 million.
And last month, it was almost $4
million for the month alone.
And if you look at, if you think
about 2015 is your base year.
And then you take the increase
over the last 10 years.
Um, of GRT just to the village.
It's $144 million more than base
year 2015.
If you look at the increase that
it had.
For the state GRT, so money
coming back to the state, it's
$189 million so combined, your
close to quarter of a billion
dollars of enhanced GRT. That
was a $10 million LIDA
investment.
That's a pretty strong return.
Now,
I want to be clear that all of
that's not just me.
But I would argue that
Amazon doesn't go to Los Lunas,
unless there's already a Fortune
100 or Fortune 10 company
already there, showing the
pathway.
The next terra wouldn't have
built the solar farm between
Berlin and Los Lunas. The
service meta had that project
now started. So all of those
things start to build a hub. So
when you start to get those
successes and, and the
chairwoman mentioned kind of
that what's happening at Santa
Teresa. They're building that,
that community, that ecosystem
that feeds upon itself because
you've got workforce there
already, and they can, you know,
people can move between
companies. That's the type of
environment you want to build
towards.
Los Lunas has done amazing work
in that over the last decade, to
transform that community, and
it's transformed their tax base.
So I think there are some,
especially I have a whole
another deck on kind of the ROI
on the JTI program and the LED
programs, and you see 100% like
multiples of like 600% value
back ROI directly, not just
economic activity, but directly
into the tax base.
Finish, um, something similar
happened with the Amazon, um,
you know what, just, uh, Burnley
County, just outside of the city
of Albuquerque, Berlin County
and, and I carried that bill to,
to put some infrastructure in
for Amazon and also the
infrastructure also was for
other companies to move in. So,
you know, I can certainly see
that in it, and it has happened,
right? Uh, but I, I always
thought our investment relative
to, you know, what the return
was is pretty small.
And um, and I just say that
because um
You know, we're just really, we
hurt for, for especially
maintenance. There's so much
deferred maintenance in our
communities for roads and
infrastructure and, you know, we
compete, you know, for those
dollars, so that's really
obvious. Madam Chair, Senator, I
absolutely, but hopefully that
additional quarter of a billion
dollars of GRT can help fund
those sorts of infrastructure
maintenance programs.
Senator, you're finished.
All right, Senator Jaramillo.
And if there are any others?
Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Thank you for being here and for
your presentation. And so I
represent two Pueblo's Santa
Clara Nokia Winger, in addition
to the Hikaria nation. And so
I'm wondering how much of the
film industry action are we
seeing on tribal lands? And are
there any type of tax credits
that are being applied when it
comes to that type of activity
on our pueblos or in the Jicaria
nation, or even the Navajo
Nation, any type of tribal land
in New Mexico.
Madam chair, Senator, I'm going
to ask our director, our new
director for films, Steve
Graham, uh, to join me and, and
help to answer that question.
You can go ahead and sit next
door and just sit, sit in that
chair with you and just share
your mic if that's all right.
And I'm glad you're, I'm glad
you're here cause I have some
suggestions.
No, don't worry. It's they,
they, they're easy. It's all
marketing. I'm Adam shows ready
for us to be in a, in a movie.
We could do casting video, Madam
Chair, uh, Senator, thank you.
Uh, I'm Steve Graham, uh, the
new, uh, director of the film
office. Um, I, so I've been
there 2 weeks, uh, 2 months, so
I don't have all of the details,
but I do know that um one of
our, uh, sort of key series in
the state, Dark Winds is filmed
uh out at Camel Rock, uh, they
have a studio there. Um, the
pueblos and and tribal lands
currently don't, aren't
incentivized, uh.
Uh, production shot on those, in
those areas are not
incentivized, that's certainly
something that uh has been
discussed, and I think would be
interesting. Um, however, any of
the other um work that's done
outside of the actual shooting
location, meaning, uh, any of
the, the work that are in
offices that are outside of
there, really anything that is,
that generates GRT, that's sort
of the, the baseline. So if
there's uh activity in the state
that generates GRT, uh, it's in
advisable.
Thank you for that. And then
just a couple, go ahead,
Senator, and I did want to
follow one more and I'm gonna
blank on the name of the, the
short film that Senator Shindo
helped fund.
Um
That was done through our media
arts collect academy and Ryan
Begay produced it, and it was on
Native American Veterans of New
Mexico, and it just has been
recently accepted into several
film festivals, and I'm
on song is the name of it, and
that was a, a grant that came
from Senator Shinto through the
film office to support the
production of that that film.
Thank you for that. I'm seeing a
former governor in the room from
one of our pueblos, maybe we
need to start a discussion on
how we can attract the film
industry more onto our tribal
lands to see how we can
collaborate and, and both
benefit from that, not just two
comments, um, I'm the chief of
one of the chief of staffs of
Los Alamos National Laboratory,
so I'm happy to see the
quantum-based refundable tax
credit as the chief of staff,
but as a senator, I'm happy to
see that it would keep the local
tax in place. So the credit,
Madam
would be coming out of out of
state tax, but keeping our local
tax in place, and I'm thankful
for that. And then the last
comment is we're having a hard
time in northern New Mexico and
and bringing uh industry in, and
the major issue is housing. We
don't have much housing when it
comes to rural New Mexico, even
though we're bedroom communities
to the Alamos National
Laboratory, but we're we're
working with Los Alamos National
Laboratories, I mean, Los Alamos
counties, Daniel Doran, who's
gonna be working with Rio Riva
and Santa Fe to work on.
regional housing. And so I may
be reaching out to you as we
start to move forward on what
our plans are. Um, we're working
on trying to team with Pueblos
to see what we can do. And so
I'll be in touch if you don't
mind when we're moving closer,
um seeing how we're going to
implement housing in northern
New Mexico. Thank you, Madam
Chairwoman. Thank you, Senator,
and, and before I go to the vice
chair, uh, we in the interim
committee, the Economic and
Rural Development Policy
Committee, we had a couple of
filmmakers, uh, from tribal
communities. And so I do want to
echo Senator.
Romeos. I think there's,
there's, is there a sovereignty?
as to why those movies like
movies can't be incentivized on
tribal lands.
Uh, sure, I'll have to get back
to you on that. I assume that
that's what it is, yeah, I, I
believe that that might be part
of that, but I, I really would
love because we've got so many
talented people and
We're crying out loud. We have,
you know, over 20 tribal
communities. It's, it's, it's
really kind of, it's not fair.
Um, and so, uh, and I was very
excited to hear during the
interim that Dark Wis was funded
for season that was ready to go
for season 3, and this is before
they even started filming. And
when I drive by Camel Rock and I
see the car, so I'm, I just get
really excited. So, um, thank
you so vice chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I just
have a quick question about the
regulatory transparency bill, it
doesn't exist yet? Does it have
a number?
Madam Chair, uh, Senator, it
should be introduced.
It should have been introduced
today if not tomorrow, so we'll
have a bill number tomorrow I'll
be introduced in the house.
Thank you, that's all.
OK, um, really quick, since
you're here, um, a couple of
things that I had suggested
regarding film, whenever I watch
a movie made in New Mexico, I
have to want to wait to read the
credits.
One of my suggestions to your
predecessor was to put a red and
green chili, cause if you've
ever seen the, the HBO series,
um, Ozark or any movie made in
Georgia.
You see the piece, right? You
see the peach.
How can we cross-brand our
movies? I mean, I know that they
say Made in New Mexico and have
the locations, but visually, as
a suggestion,
Well, no, I mean, our, so it's
synonymous with our license
plate though that got, you know,
recognition on the Colbert show
show. So, I mean, something to
consider, um, as somebody who
does public relations in my job
for, for my members. Um, the
other thing is, um, you know, I
think like whenever we're
watching Breaking Bad or Dark
Winds or anything that was
filmed in New Mexico, we kind of
do this whole, oh, I've been
there.
I know that building. And I
think that would be like just a
really great like passport.
Throughout the state, um, and
even for not just visitors, but
for residents, you know, and,
um, there was the, there was a
television show about um people
in the witness protection
program that was filmed in
Albuquerque, Mary McCormick was
the star, and I forgot that it
was, it was a while ago, but the
thing is, is that I
deliberately, when I was in
Albuquerque, looked for the
buildings that I saw in that
show. And so I can't be alone
and, you know, and especially
since we're recognizing that
Breaking Bad is still iconic
with the whole trash, trash
campaign.
There are things that I think
people and people will come, and
I mean, I guess the house in
Breaking Bad is up for sale. Um,
and it's got a big old fence
around it. I mean, we're missing
out on these opportunities for
PR, and I think this is a good
opportunity to, to, to partner
with other
Uh, visitors' offices like I
think a visit Las Cruces,
because we've had some films
filmed. I mean, we just had my,
my, our downtown was blocked off
because of a film being filmed
there. And you probably know
what the film is, and I don't,
but um, you know, I mean, those
are the things I think it's,
it's also, it could be a game,
it could be a whole campaign of
really connecting people with
the places that we have in our
community. It can be a tourist
and economic development
opportunity, especially for
small communities to go and stay
at a hotel that was featured in
a
motion picture, um, and, and I
think we're missing those
opportunities. So those are the
two things that my, my
suggestions as my creative brain
has a tendency of doing is let's
put a red and green chili made
in New Mexico on the end of
every television show and every
movie.
And then let's do a
Did you see that campaign or
something. I don't know, I was
just, those are just my comments
and it's, it's it, like many of
us, it's hard to not have those
multiple hats. Thank you. Uh, we
do, it's, it's not the red and
green chili, but we do, uh,
require that our uh state film
logo goes on the end of every
production that gets
incentivized.
It's um, it's a rather stately
black and white logo, um, but,
uh, we'll certainly.
Sorry. It's yeah, you know, and
I, I appreciate logos. They're
very important. I get them for
branding, but
I do the
chili we will certainly take
that under consideration. I
mean, there's no pressure. It's
just a a suggestion and as
somebody who is a consumer, who
is also very proud and I think
all of us are very proud to talk
about our regions. It's like if
we can say, hey, go to this
website, um, in the, in the,
yeah, you've got your stickers.
There you go, lowrider right
here. Yes.
So we, we do, we do that
branding I think, and the thing
is, is that you've got 10 people
here who would be probably the
biggest spokespeople for you in
terms of sharing that out, um,
oh, thank you, Debbie Moore, my
colleague with the greater
chambers listening. She's in
plain sight is the show that I
love so much. Thank you, Debbie.
Um, but, you know, the thing is,
is that I, I think we've got
these opportunities here and
there are all sorts of ways and
that's what I do for a living.
You do something different, but
somewhat different similar. And
if you ever want to just brain
storm over a beverage. I'm more
than happy to do that. I'll be
in Las Cruces, yes, yes, and
we'll go and eat the senator
burger at Salute de Mesa, which
is my concoction just what she
lets you know, not Senator
Brantley's. I do have the
Chili's on my license plate, so
I understand, uh, the appeal,
uh, uh, I do want to mention,
thanks for bringing up the, the
tourism aspect, um, first of
all, there's a kiosk in at the
Sunport that was uh a joint um
project with us and I believe it
was the Albuquerque tourism.
uh uh department there that um
has it, it has a map, it lists
uh all of the locations where
films have been shot in New
Mexico, uh, and then if you,
it's interactive, so if you
click on them, uh, and then it
brings up a little bit of
information about the films that
were shot there, uh, and, uh,
and when they came out and and
you can, you can search and kind
of play around with it. Um,
we've also been working with
the, I'm gonna get the name
wrong, the uh Center for
Marketing Excellence.
Um, which is a, a project that
is, it's housed in tourism, but
it's um uh a group that is
helping state agencies uh
market.
And we have a project with them
uh called uh It's the light, as
in it's the light in New Mexico,
uh, and a component of that is a
web interface, very similar to
the Sunport, um, a kiosk that
has a a map with that on there.
So we'll be working with the,
with the Center for Marketing
Excellence to expand the tourism
idea, and we have, uh, have a
meeting scheduled with state
tourism, I believe next month. I
appreciate that because, um,
there's El Paso, which is most
of us in southern Mexico.
use that airport, um, and people
who are coming to visit the
Oregon mountains, Desert Peaks
National Monument. I work with
Mrs. Mijo a lot on the state,
those things. So, uh, you know,
it's, it's without sounding uh
pissy. Um, it's, there, there
are things that exist outside of
Albuquerque. And so, uh, you
know, I think for those of us in
our rural parts, we'd really
appreciate that because
Alamogordo also uses the El Paso
airport.
So I would like to just
Make that that point, Senator,
I, I, I will, uh, defend my, my
director a little bit. He, he
did go to NMSU, um, and he's,
and he's from Southeast Mexico
as well. So you know that you
know that that the challenges
and the pain. So, yeah, I think
especially those of us in rural
communities, I think we're more
than happy to work with you to
highlight our areas, um, but
also to be cheerleaders for what
happens, because we've also got
Silver City, which is beautiful,
um, and I don't know if there's
been some things filmed there,
but, you know,
we've got it and and they're
just and I also understand
capacity as well, so I, I
certainly want to recognize
that, but I think there are
opportunities there, Madam
Chair, 100% agree and Secretary
Lansing Adams and I have
actually talked specifically
about film tourism, uh, and
that's kind of where, uh, Mr.
Graham is taking this, but uh
100% agree that this there's an
opportunity there, and, and
we've been working incredibly
well with tourism, with EDD,
both through our outdoor
recreation division, but in
other ways.
And this is one area where a
Lansing and I are looking to
partner, uh, to help build out
exactly what you're talking
about.
Thank you, Secretary, I
appreciate that and I look
forward to talking with you and
working with you cause I think
there are a lot of things that
we can do, so I appreciate that.
Any comments or any other
questions from the committee?
I'm sure I just want to say I'm
very supportive of our rural
communities.
There are a lot of, a lot of
hidden gems there that we don't
talk about, but we, we all know,
but we're like, do we share them
with people or do we keep them
to ourselves. So, thank you,
Secretary, given that there are
no other comments from the
committee. Thank you both very
much. I appreciate all the work
that you're doing, and I know
that there's a lot. This is a
big bicycle tire. And so I'm
really grateful for that and
grateful for the work, and I
know that this committee is very
excited about those
opportunities and very invested
in how they happen in their
communities as well as in the
states. So thank you very much
for being here. Um, appreciate
you greatly.
Uh, so on that note, so that is
all of our business for today.
Um, so a couple of things.
Reiner, if you want to go to the
February 3rd event on Monday
night. Follow me to my office. I
have those flyers in my office
because you'll need the RSVP to
the the sponsors of that. Um, we
will be starting bills next
Tuesday. Um, as you can tell, I
do try to like move things along
and I appreciate all of yours
willingness to do that just to
give you a heads up on the bills
that will be heard on Tuesday
we'll have the official agenda.
24 hours in advance, but we've
got um a pipeline Safety Act
violations from Senator Souls,
Senator Stephanics' volunteer
EMS and firefighter tax credits,
increase of cigarette and
tobacco product taxes,
apprentice and training program
contribution state road fund
distribution increase, corporate
income tax to state road fund.
As I've mentioned before, I
think there's another one in
there too. Southern Mexico
communication infrastructure
from Senator Brantley.
Um, there are going to be some
bills and, and I'll note those
at the beginning of the meeting,
that there are some that we will
hear and we will debate and, and
ask questions, but if they are
regarding any taxes, we will put
those into a tax package because
what we have to do is, whatever
we give tax rebates to, we have
to find some place to pay for
it. So what we'll be doing just
for, for our new members is we
will be listening to the bill,
but we will hold it.
And then as a committee, we will
vote on a tax package, uh, uh,
you know.
Middle to, uh, last quarter. Am
I right? Is that what we get to
do? OK, so I didn't say anything
out of line.
Oh, OK. All right. So on that
note, if there are no other
comments or suggestions or
questions, thank you very much.
Committee is adjourned.
