These fancy hearing aids boards
you could probably worsens all I
can say.
Okay.
I think we're good now but I
think Senator Brandt.
Senator.
Here.
Hamlin.
Here Senator.
Here Senator how to meal.
There.
Senator.
Senator.
Senator Wirth.
Here.
Senator.
Senator Padilla.
President.
Shindo I didn't get senator
Wirth but I think he's you.
The I don't have it in the
dumpster.
He may not be in right now okay.
We have a.
Okay.
Let's see we've get rules echo.
That was better Mr chairman you
weren't echoing it when you said
that just now.
What what what what what what
what.
Yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes
yes yes.
We see.
We need to behave I see my
County treasurer here she's
going to get mad at all of us
and give us to merit Mr chairman
to get me in trouble over here
you know I you know I I I was in
trouble all my trial high school
career.
He pinches my cheek on my face
every time I see her so.
I have my weekly meetings with
the principal was I I call it my
leadership meeting.
I love it.
I think we're good so I want to
go ahead and get the Senate tax
business and transportation
committee of
going so with that I we do have
a quorum so let's go ahead and
get started we have quite a bit
of agenda so
I hope you guys got it a big
lunch and have a lot of snacks
because we're going to try and
get through all the bills we can
so with that I'm gonna we do
have our our our first Senator
of Senator Rodriguez SB sixty
four federally insured
obligations that we thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee this bill labor
miglior to now I maybe other
members of the committee I have
bill originally about two years
ago are now and then last year
we decided one word one word
bill you and I were talking
about in the chamber recently
that one word needed to be
changed to clarify the type of
placement services that County
treasure's throughout the state
and that as we mentioned before
County tracking are very limited
in your investment options and
so we want to make sure that
whatever language we not have to
be made from previous lost that
we can clean up that money so
they can proceed to generate the
highest returns that they can't
for the public in style of the
bill more only change your one
word and I will go into that
then it was passed unanimously
last year in both chambers but
I'm not in the schedule in the
house chamber at the and and so
for that reason we're coming
back you want to restart the
process now the the I have Nancy
Pierce your before I forget
she's the chairman of the county
treasurer's ability to New
Mexico if we have any further
questions and this bill is a
technical amendment.
Thank you you can't can't
replace what call the registered
service mark of NMAA and if not
Haidle the certificate of
deposit account registry service
and the staff they registry you
should think placement agents
thank them again the most
accurate would be a neutral
language the investment is the
certificate of account deposit
account placement services the
work placement.
The word registry and that I for
the for the statute to clear and
allow the cure Act treasures to
invest the way they should the
way it is now Mr chairman the
having the word registry and
they're really limits the county
treasurers they are not hi this
registry as a privately that
private enterprise basically
private we help our and that is
that with the network the
financial institutions but it is
not a if the college worry
promise right behind your
that investment and as a result
of that during the meeting so
this other work by putting out
placement services in there will
be much better and that's what
the association counties which
county treasurer all.
Thank you Mr chairman that's all
it does require that one word.
Thank you Nancy do you have any
of the expert witness that wants
to speak or if you have on your
chairman I did not comment on
that but my expert witness is
that county treasurer Nancy
beers from Bernalillo county and
she's the chair of the Nancy
would you like to say a few
words.
Thank you Mr chairman of thank
you Senator Rodriguez said
members of the committee I
appreciate being here and like
you said it it so it is just
that one word change that we
need to make to look up to not
have a registered service mark
in our state statutes
I refer to it last year as
saying let's say facial tissues
instead of having clean acts as
a trademark maintenance state
statute
we want to be it this is a
product that's now available in
many many
No banks of that we have across
New Mexico so we like to be
taken advantage of that at our
local banks and not have to use
a yup I'm not a national network
that has that registered service
product name to it.
so that's that's the simplicity
and in New Mexico and I stand
for any questions thank you.
Thank you thank you for that and
so what we'll do now is go out
to the audience I'm not sure we
have anybody speaking in
opposition what do opposition
first and then supporters Mexico
Martel.
For Senate bill sixty four I do
not have anyone listed in
opposition are there any members
of the public who wish to speak
in opposition to Senate bill
sixty four.
One more time are there any
members.
Sorry we're having so many
technical difficulties today
early you have them anyway one
more chance for those who wish
to speak in opposition to Senate
bill sixty four it could please
raise your hand at this time
using the reactions of the
bottom of the screen.
Okay it is all we have any here
to speak in opposition us so
going to support we will hear
from Mister Brian Moore Mr Moore
are you available.
Thank you for telling of thank
you Mr chairman members the
committee of Brian more New
Mexico counties in New Mexico
counties board of directors
stand strongly behind Senate
bill sixty four of our very
favorite senators who sponsors
all these pieces of legislation
to clarify and of course our
treasures of the late thank you
Mr chairman.
Thank you Mr Moore are there any
other members of the public who
wish to speak in support of
Senate bill sixty four.
One more time this is support
statements percent of bill sixty
four.
And that concludes all the
public statements at this time
thank you.
Thank you Micaela now will go to
a.
Committee for a.
Questions.
Mr Chairman the center branded
movie do pass okay now we have a
a.
All second thank you all right
so okay so we have a due pass
motion by Senator Brandt and a
second by Senator Padilla
linking the federal court with.
Senator Brandt yes.
Senator great.
Senator Hamblen.
Yes.
Senator Hickey yes.
Senator how to mail yes.
Senator Kernan yes.
Senator.
Yes.
Senator Tallman.
Senator Wirth yes.
Senator.
Right.
Senator Padilla.
My vote is yes I believe Senator
Senator Griggs is available now.
Senator great.
Yes the governor now twice.
Okay that's okay I just counted
you want Senator Shendo.
Yes.
The first one the.
Okay okay.
Okay all right so we have a ten
in favor of one excuse of.
Senator you have a do pass on
Senate bill sixty four Senator
Rodriguez thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee and
thank you to my experts witness
also to the public the in their
and our.
Mr always helpful thank you have
a good afternoon thank you
senator so we'll move on to a
Senate bill ninety three
broadband access and expansion
act Senator Padilla and senators
to phonics Senator thank you Mr
chairman and members of the
committee I think that we all
know it Mr chairman I'm gonna
have a brief slide that I'm
gonna share with the committee
as I introduce the bill I I do
see that I have the option of
sharing my screen I just wanna
let you know that ahead of time
but again I think that pre
pandemic we knew that we had a
problem here in New Mexico a
post in inner pandemic it hit us
front and center and we see it
clearly now we did have a pretty
successful year in two thousand
seventeen on broadband I was
able to put to be about seventy
seven bills introduced on the
topic I have been chairman or
vice chairman of this committee
and interim committee on science
technology telecommunications
every other year that I've been
in the in the Senate.
And every year that I've been
Chairman I've been trying to
make it to your broadband and in
doing so and I know you heard
part of this this morning Mr
Chairman but I'm gonna just run
through some of it again but
what I will tell you is in
seventeen we had about seventy
seven bills introduced eleven of
them passed about seven or so
we're signed one of them I had
to go to court on with the
previous governor as a result of
of its legality in in terms of
the chat during it but that year
we were able to bring broadband
in place in the local
infrastructure act because I
think we all know that it is
it's a water line it's a it's a
a lighting system a sewer system
water system aside Walker road
and exit the its infrastructure
in our communities now because
it does these massive critical
things for us and brings
economic development job
creation to our communities
distance learning as we are all
front and center dealing with
right now and of course that
telemedicine telehealth.
So those are the big three that
they do for us so also in
seventeen I was able to reform
the USF Fund which really was
upside down and it was placing a
lot of our dollars on our our
our local in our telephone bills
that little feet that we all
want to work I was it goes into
something called the universal
service fund well about eighty
ninety percent of those dollars
are being used for dyeing
technology called talks lines
plain old telephone system lines
which generally are going away
they are still very important
they still serve a very
important purpose however they
are going away so we flipped
that script and we put broadband
front and center in about two
thirds of those dollars need to
be spent there I went in and re
wrote all of our
telecommunication laws in the
New Mexico telecommunications
act two thousand seventeen.
And our our New Mexico
telecommunications act was
modernized we had modernized it
since before the internet came
along surprisingly took me about
three years to get that done.
And then of course fast forward
now we've had a couple of other
things happen along the way and
as I mentioned earlier we have a
full front and center with us
now well one of the things I
come to discover over the past
eight eight or so years of
almost nine years now into the
Senate is that we deliver
broadband at the state level but
we deliver in about seventeen or
seventy three different ways and
the throughput the efficiency of
our dollars the efficiency of
projects are the coordination
our linkage up to the federal
government from an FCC Steinborn
USDA etcetera standpoint it just
isn't there of the the the value
of a dollar invested in
broadband is woefully under as a
result of all of these different
ways that we deliver broadband
so we don't get the did the
value of a dollar every for
every dollar we spend.
So I come forward with you today
with Senate bill ninety three
which establishes the office of
broadband access and expansion
this brings it all together all
of this work that we've done up
to this point all of the steps
we've taken all of these dollars
we brought into New Mexico
through the cap wanting cap to
funding which has been somewhere
between ninety and a hundred
million dollars which is a big
chunk of what we need but we
need so much more and we need to
make sure that we're using those
dollars efficiently.
Mr Chairman I'm gonna share with
you what but Senate bill ninety
three does.
the host needs to of allow me to
share my screen Mr chairman.
But as they do that
I'll just keep talking about the
bill itself but so essentially
we bring some consistency across
the continuum of the delivery of
broadband with Senate bill
ninety three.
We put a centralized staff in
place it in in statute we're as
most states that have not placed
broadband the broadband offices
in statute are sort of in the
condition that we're in we're in
the lower forty five to four to
fifty range but when they placed
it in statute you know it's an
ongoing process and it makes
everything so much more
meaningful for their for their
people and so now I'm in a place
a screen.
Tab on your screen can you see
that Mr Chairman.
It should say Senate bill ninety
three creation of the New Mexico
office of broadband access and
expansion.
Can you see that Mr Chairman.
Okay wonderful so Senate bill
ninety three does six different
things
and these answer a lot of the
questions that we have on
broadband here in New Mexico.
So when I open my business about
twenty one years ago I went over
to the bank you know my very wet
behind the ears to know how to
go fast for a loan whatever I
never borrowed a penny in my
life and I went in there without
a plan without a business plan
without a financial plan I was
laughed out of the bank so when
I when found a bunch of advisors
to talk to me and gave me some
really good ideas we put
together a business plan that we
put together a financial plan.
I knew I had a need I knew I had
the best idea and I know I want
to get this done but I didn't
have a plan.
With this office will do is we
will own the New Mexico
broadband plan from top to
bottom every nook and cranny
where is it where is in it what
are the speeds upload download
what are we capable of where the
pockets where we don't have it
and all that business that plan
will also consist of a financial
plan which will help us to
understand exactly what is the
cost
the department of information
technology has come forward and
said that the need is somewhere
around one point three billion
dollars with the B. and I know
that that's a huge number but if
we do everything we did in two
thousand seventeen I have about
eight or so bills this year and
broadband we have a whole bunch
of other legislators working on
broadband I believe the need to
somewhere between five hundred
million and eight hundred
million to get that done because
we can use our dollars to
leverage against federal dollars
and then bring in other
investment dollars in other ways
so this this office will only
official New Mexico broadband
plan it'll include a financial
plan the second thing is when we
go to talk to the FCC or the
USDA or any other federal
department or anywhere the other
person in my one invest in New
Mexico we have about fifteen or
seventeen different broadband
Max and these maps tell us a
number of things to tell us how
much it cost based on their
study they tell us
one of the upload download speed
but they're all very different
and vastly different.
What this bill does is it is
office does if it owns the
official map of broadband links
up with federal communication
commission standards USDA
standards which has a lot of
investment dollars for broadband
in rural parts of New Mexico and
all the other groups and it also
tells us that when we say that
we have this much coverage of
broadband that we know that it
makes us competitive around the
country and around the world and
so that's why we need an
official broadband map of New
Mexico this office will own that
official map also the office
will also have the
responsibility of negotiating
rights of way an easement access
we have a lot of political
subdivisions within New Mexico
cities counties.
Tribal lands a sec yes
neighborhood associations
homeowners associations parks
federal government federal lands
etcetera this office will help
to coordinate and get that done
in a lot faster action.
manner the fourth thing that the
office is going to own is is a
vast amount of reporting and
analysis of where we are with
regard to broadband we'll be
able to report that to the
people of New Mexico to the
federal government to the
legislature to the governor it's
cetera and that analysis is
going to continue to help us on
where we are and and where we
need help.
The office is also going to have
it I just call out three to five
specialist it might be three
specialist it might be you know
they're gonna have to determine
how best to make that work.
But when you think about our
political subdivisions in New
Mexico cities towns counties
etcetera we call out the mayor
of Columbus as an example
wonderful human being really
cares about the people that he
leads and the leaves down there
in that area.
but he wakes up every day and
says I need to bring broadband
to my to my people to my town
here just doesn't know exactly
how to do it because Mr chairman
he he's like you and I and and
members of this committee is
like all of us is a volunteer he
doesn't receive a salary and he
doesn't have a staff in place to
get this done health and get
this done what this office will
do is have the specialists that
will be specialist in designing
developing funding and
implementing broadband plans for
these political subdivisions so
now they're gonna have this arm
it's going to know how to do
this and every time that they
have to do it again somewhere
else in the state they're not
going to have to reinvent the
wheel pay for a lot of reporting
and analysis because there are
gonna be able to pull that
through this office and I'm
gonna have to rewrite legal
documents because they will
already have had that pull
together in the center
repository and they'll be able
to develop these plans in a lot
more efficient fashion manage
the dollars that are available
to those communities and get
these dental these things done a
lot faster the six thing that
this office is going to be
responsible for is leveraging
our investment dollars here in
New Mexico as I mentioned
earlier the department of
information technology is saying
that there's about one point
three billion dollars worth of
need to meet Federal
Communications standards for the
vast majority of our state.
Well this office will have a
specialist that will be
responsible for leveraging those
dollars with other investment
dollars in making this work for
us.
And the last thing that I want
to mention.
And when I was waiting to put
the slide up for you to look at
Mr chairman and members of the
committee is we're gonna place
this in statute and we're gonna
have some appropriate funding to
get this done today we have
about one to one point five full
time equivalent staff members in
the department of information
technology that work on this and
we have multiple individuals in
other parts of state government
to do this so that would
broadband I am asking for an
appropriation of already spoken
to the finance committee which I
know this is where this bill
will eventually need to go and
I'm gonna be nine hundred and
fifty thousand dollars to staff
and establish the office.
Get online and never going to
work in the next a subsequent
legislatures to make sure that
it's staffed appropriately and
and budgeted appropriately.
So that being said I believe
that with this will wind up
doing for us Mr chairman members
of the committee is helping us
to meet those federal standards
helping us to make sure that we
find ourselves in a pandemic or
some other in a catastrophic
event here in New Mexico that
we're leading the way it rather
than playing catch up the way
that we are right now I do have
multiple letters of support I
think you're gonna hear from
some of the Mr Chairman kind of
showing these I'm gonna take
that all all stop sharing my
screen now.
Me take that off of there yeah
but I do have.
Quite a few letters here
including the Albuquerque public
school board I have chambers of
commerce and various
organizations that are very
supportive of this initiative
because you know I would liken
it Mr chairman to a really very
wrinkled shirt when I brought to
you the early childhood
education and care department
and in two thousand nineteen we
passed into law and I'm so proud
of that bill and getting it
signed we were very and wearing
a very wrinkled shirt and we
didn't know that need new
pockets the need to be ironed
was it big enough was it small
enough to need a caller what
what it the chair of the you
know that calm New Mexico
broadband really need well what
we need is coordination what we
need is a plan a business plan
financial plan we need
specialists and know what the
heck they're doing and that's
what this office does so with
that Mr Chairman I'm not going
to be open to any comments or
questions from the committee
thank you.
Okay thank you senator of.
It is that you don't want
anybody is the have anybody
expert witnesses or or I don't
because I think you're gonna
have a lot of experts from
around the state anyway so I
think that that's fine we'll go
to a public comment I know we
got quite a few listed I don't
know if everybody is available
so will give each of the
individual about a minute
the to to speak first will take
opposition and then we'll go
with the of support.
Good afternoon we will be
beginning with statements of
opposition for Senate bill
ninety three we will begin with
Mister Jeff.
Mr Worley.
One more time you Mr Jeff
Worley.
Okay moving on Mister Dennis
Conner are you available Dennis.
Yes I believe Jeff to realize he
was.
Go ahead.
Thank you very much to noon
chairman and members of the
committee Mr histology I spoke
to last week in regards to the
legislature and appreciate the
tend to come back to get.
I'm speaking on behalf of the
school is to to to retell
coworkers in New Mexico who are
not able to be an issue meeting
and Phyllis if they were to
testify would enjoy retaliation
for example is we definitely
want to see board that expect
and appreciate the legislation
coping all committed to sixpence
include thousands of uncertain.
And that's.
what I would like to share
briefly that during a economic
dollars senator Neville I do
agree which I attended concerns
were raised affordability coming
out without bility the audience
was issue of the issues were
addressed the slide presentation
well let's pull it created PRC
that is skilled staff none of
this is current languages that
the alleged status I would
appreciate you would reconsider
this thank you very much.
Thank you Mr Connor will go back
to Mr just go ahead Mr Worley.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee members my name is
Jeff we're really retired
employee current customer.
CenturyLink I never thought that
I would be here asking for more
regulation or oversight in the
industry.
But as you see in very small
business your success or failure
is determined by your
responsiveness to your
customers.
Your customer service determines
if you'll be in business
anymore.
Our.
In large business or medium
sized businesses your customer
service driven by shareholders.
As a customer our repair or out
of services and experience the
cost to be controlled these
times of increasing work from
home reliability is critical.
For many working whole.
Customer service agents and
others their job depends on the
reliability their phone internet
or voice over IP connection.
form asking you to be our voice
and.
Thank you Mr Worley we will now
hear from Mr Reekie Alumasc.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senators.
I'm Ricky massing on the region
three vice president for the
communication workers of America
local seventy seventy six.
State of New Mexico public
workers.
Is the position of local seventy
seventy six yes.
Being ninety three does not
provide enough oversight.
Workmanship maintenance except
for a of the broadband
infrastructure thirty seconds it
needs to be inspected regularly
many of state employee.
New Mexico public workers are
working from home.
It is of utmost importance for
our state of New Mexico public
workers and all state of New
Mexico to have reliable
broadband services especially
now.
We need good regulatory control
of the quality of our
infrastructure.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator for let me say today.
Thank you Mr Massey will now
hear from Mister who then had a
diet I tell you I apologize if I
mispronounce that.
No worries New Mexico then had
IT bit that communications
workers of America thank you
again for the opportunity to
appear before this committee and
I agree with another petty are
closing gaps in broadband
availability are of utmost
importance but I recommend that
this bill be amended to provide
clear authority and mandates to
establish and enforce
appropriate oversight and
regulation of for you and
broadband whether under the
office of broadband access in
and expecting an expansion or
under the PRC in order to meet
the goals of universe are high
quality and affordable access.
And I I assume some of you may
wonder if there is no there is
if either are preemption over
broadband regulation in New
Mexico but this is no longer the
case as at two thousand nineteen
the sister could growing
overturn the FCC's authority to
impose preemption mandate I
requested I broadband as an
information service so this has
opened the door to states
regulating brought.
Thank you.
I thought was for the opposition
are there any other members of
the public who wish to speak in
opposition to Senate bill ninety
three please raise your hands at
this time.
Okay it does look like we have
any other posters will now hear
from Mister Bob balance.
Thank you members of the
committee and Mr chairman I live
and work in senator Wirth
district where I operate the
center for internet is
infrastructure I served as a
White House presidential
innovation fellow in twenty
sixteen and twenty seventeen
excuse me.
During which time I worked with
the broadband USA program at the
national telecommunications and
information administration in
prior to going to Washington I
was a distinguished member of
the technical staff at Sandia
national labs.
While working with broadband
groups across the country I've
learned it's the second house
and supports strong broadband
offices are better able to
convene stakeholders establish
priorities set meaningful
standards and goals manage their
broadband information as an
asset in ultimately sure that
everyone could connect to the
internet as they choose when the
shape.
State broadband offices help
shape their states futures.
Senate bill ninety three takes
important steps towards an
effective state broadband office
all noted that bill ninety three
should be aligned with house
bill ten which also disk thank
you Mr balance we will now hear
from Mr market around and you
know just for clarification we
are only having one minute for
this particular Senate bill for
public statement is because we
have so many people so just
repeat it is one minute which
books you go ahead Mr chair on.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee and committee mark
Duran I don't represent any of
clients today but I have served
as the chairman of the New
Mexico inner.
The technology commission and
also The New Mexico telehealth
commission I would just say Mr
Chairman that there is a lot of
the talkin issues associated
with broadband need for
broadband I think everyone
agrees with that what has to
happen is there has to be in
order to approach to it that is
well thought out Senator Padilla
has a history of developing
departments to do this very same
thing I think his approach is a
good approach I think it's the
organizational structure we need
I stand in support of Senate
bill ninety three thank you.
Thank you Mr.
We will now hear from Williams.
William.
One more time to Mr Williams
saving.
Okay moving on Mr GT billing
please.
Thank you very much members of
the committee Mr chairman this
bill this is JD Bullington
speaking on behalf of the
greater Albuquerque chamber this
bill seeks to answer question
will we fully meet the challenge
of delivering broadband access
throughout the state without a
dedicated and focused team of
professionals helping to
coordinate funding organizes
work the chamber thanks the
answer is probably not and
that's why we need Senate bill
ninety three a well staffed
office and state government that
is accountable for extending
broadband across New Mexico is a
sound investment thirty second
Senator ninety three will
especially go a long way in
making reliable internet more
affordable for local governments
and families as users by
leveraging the state's
negotiating power and knowledge
of available funding resources
so the chamber urges support for
this bill we look forward to
seeing it make a difference in
our local communities thank you.
Thank you Mr going to.
We will now hear from Mr Penn
Baker.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee by name spent they
Kerr of the United States Navy
suffering that battery.
In a representing both of New
Mexico democratic veterans and
military families caucus and the
contractor the American veterans
for equal rights we are in favor
of the Senate bill ninety three
the bill supports expansion of
internet access throughout New
Mexico there are a lot of
reasons for supporting this bill
some of them include providing
veterans accessory second to
telemedicine access to the D. O.
H. vaccine registration
application in a loner veterans
to participate in our government
as I am right now thank you very
much.
Thank you Mr Baker we will now
hear from Kevin Greenwald seven.
One more time for Mr Kevin
Greenwald.
Moving on Mr Edward Richmond.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
and members of the committee it
was more registered lobbyist for
the New Mexico rural electric
cooperative association.
I would like to thank the
sponsor for bringing this
broadband bill forward.
Many rural areas remain on
server when it comes to
broadband infrastructure
especially the most remote areas
in rural New Mexico.
We are hopeful that federal and
state investments in broadband
infrastructure as a result of
COVID nineteen pandemic improved
connectivity in the most rural
regions of the second.
For those reasons we stand in
support of Senate bill ninety
three and we look forward to
working with the sponsors.
Rural communities are part of
the broadband expansion plan
since rural electric cooperative
serves over eighty percent of
the land mass in New Mexico
thank you.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
they will now hear from Diane
Lindstrom Diane.
You Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Diane
lane's German I'm a volunteer
advocate for a a RP New Mexico.
For two hundred forty thousand
members in New Mexico we stand
in support of Senate bill ninety
three.
This bill is a step in the right
direction for those of us in the
fifty plus year old category and
it will provide what has been
spotlighted by the COVID
nineteen pandemic it will
provide access to all of the
services that the rest of the
thirty second half I thank you
very much.
Thank you Mr.
We will now hear from Carla
clicker.
Carla.
One more time from his car lot
Krueger.
Moving on we will hear from Leon
Samuel.
Misalnya.
Yes thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee my name
is Rhiannon Samuel and I'm the
executive director of the anti
New Mexico beyond is a
nonpartisan nonprofit that seeks
common ground solutions to
issues that are facing every New
Mexican and broadband is our
focus utilizing reports that
came out from the LFC and do it
both reports indicate that New
Mexico needs an office of
broadband to coordinate this
effort and secure both state and
federal money to appropriately
address it we want to commend
Senator Padilla for working on
this issue for so long and we
are in strong support of Senate
bill ninety three.
Thank you we will now hear from
what little we urgent the left.
Let me hear you here.
One more time for miss Lee Irvin
left.
Moving on we will hear from
Mendham gonna call.
Hello chairman members of the
committee and Mindy McConnell to
registered lobbyist for Economic
Forum we stand in support of
Senate bill ninety two because
it provides an important
we working in our state actively
builds broadband infrastructure
today Albertsons spending
disbursed seemingly somewhat
haphazardly our situation here
in New Mexico in dealing with a
large expanse of land limited
funds we anticipate this bill
will enable creating cornerstone
for maximizing our resort
making which is imperative thank
you.
Thank you Mr.
We wanna hear from Catherine
Croatia Catherine are you
available hi thank you Catherine
Kerr shot a thank you Mr
chairman and centers and thank
you Senator Padilla for once
again bringing forth some
critical legislation to address
our digital divide in New Mexico
I'm a registered lobbyist with
eighteen T. and we support this
legislation and I echo all of
the remote remarks already
previously shared broadband as a
critical infrastructure need in
New Mexico we are woefully
behind especially when it comes
to speeds and so this
legislation.
At and I just want to thank the
senator for working with A. T.
and T. on some of our comments
nice on your presentation
referencing FCC standards so we
do appreciate that thank you
very much we stand and support.
Thank you Catherine we will now
hear from Mister mark we sure go
ahead mark.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee on mark Fleischer
I'm a registered lobbyist for
shaking when communications we
stand in support of this
legislation remain the region's
already been stated it's clear
we need apartment to help
coordinate the statewide they do
it's a great trait place to be
we appreciate senator up India's
efforts to try and move forward
for expanding broadband Mexico
we didn't support thank you.
Thank you.
We will now hear from Ashley
Wagner go ahead actually.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I am
Ashley Wagner director of public
policy for the New Mexico
chamber of commerce we support
Senate bill ninety three and
applaud the Billsponsored
efforts to bring more and better
broadband to New Mexico finding
ways to increase broadband
access in the state and remove
the barriers holding us back
have been a top priority for the
chamber for a long time and we
also know that Senator Padilla
has been working on this issue
with the industry for many years
we appreciate how he continues
to speak with industry to
provide clarity around any
concerns in the bill so as to
ensure that we get more private
investment in New Mexico not
less thank you so much and I
urge you to support this bill.
Thank you.
We will now hear from Sharon
Berman Mr Berman co.
Thank you and good afternoon
Mister chairman and members of
the committee.
My name is Sharon Berman.
I'm a civic engagement and
policy manager at New Mexico
First and I'm also registered
this for New Mexico first we
support and Senate bill ninety
three and think Senator Padilla
for sponsoring this legislation
in our latest town halls and
health and education over one
thousand participants from
around the state overwhelmingly
agreed that fair access to
broadband is key to the well
being of New Mexico and its
people as emic has revealed that
not everyone has the access they
need to thrive.
This access and expansion act
would provide an essential
improvement as well as a central
place for this work to live New
Mexicans need for access to
reliable broadband in order to
thrive thank you for the
secretary opportunity to speak
in favor of Senate bill ninety
three.
Thank you Mr chairman we will
now hear from Mister Tom Solomon
go ahead turn.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee my name is Tom Solomon
a co coordinator The New Mexico
chapter of three fifty dot org
the group devoted to fighting
for a safe climate on behalf of
our eight thousand members three
fifty New Mexico thank Senator
Padilla for this bill to create
a strong a states broadband
office for all the reasons
stated but also because
broadband access is fundamental
to a just transition to a
sustainable economy of lifting
the standard of living for all
New Mexicans so we strongly
support this bill thank you.
Thank you Mr Solomon we will now
hear from Tiffany Rivera go
ahead W..
Mr chairman members of the
committee to near their
registered lobbyists for New
Mexico farm and livestock bureau
we'd like to thank the sponsor
for caring this important piece
of legislation Asian.
Our culture needs accurate
coverage map so we can
concentrate resources on areas
that need access to high speed
broadband is no longer a luxury
it's an essential component to
the modern farmer rancher and
dairy producer we need access to
reliable connections in order to
make in order to market and sell
our crops participate in virtual
education and access services in
our many rural communities we
appreciate the steps that the
Sanchez taking and Senate bill
ninety three in order to make
broadband more accessible for
the residents New Mexico thank
you.
Thank you Mr president that was
the last person who sent it
ahead of time to speak in
support of Senate bill ninety
three are there any members of
the public here in room at this
time would like to raise their
hand to speak in support of
Senate bill ninety three.
Mr Jason Espinoza co had.
Chairman members of the
committee Jason Espinoza
registered lobbyists with the
New Mexico technology council on
and we stand in support of the
legislation I think the sponsor
for bring it bring it forth
thank you.
Thank you very much Mr has been
as anyone else want to speak in
support Senate bill ninety
three.
Thank you and that concludes all
over public statements at this
time.
Thank you Micaela so now we'll
go to the.
The committee for any questions.
Senator Hamblen.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for everybody who spoke up today
a you know I think there are so
many people who have been
talking about the importance of
broadband or can activity of for
many years and the pandemic is
really exacerbated that and a
lot of folks from different
sectors including business and
education and and health are are
all coming forward and and I'd
like to really mine is more of
just a COVID of commending
Senator Padilla for having just
the vision of this for many
years and being able to see the
bigger picture because it is a
complex situation that we're
dealing with in the state and it
has a lot of moving parts to it
and so I'm excited about this
you know is is I've had a
conversation with center video
about making sure our rural
communities and especially our
tribal communities get this
access first but first we have
to have an office that can
coordinate all that and so I
appreciate the efforts and I'm
very excited about supporting
this op from many levels thank
you Senator Padilla thank you Mr
chair.
Thank you Mr chairman I was
going to ask for your permission
to just address a couple of the
COVID whatever you would like me
to from some of the opposition
that spoke but whenever you'd
like that to get through the
committee and then the okay.
Senator Kernan that I've Senator
Hickey.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Senator Padilla I have a
question that may help you if
you would clarify
this is not a regulatory piece
of legislation in my correct
thank you Mr chairman and and
Senator Kernan thanks for the
question Mr Chairman this is
what I was hoping to address all
of the folks that spoke I just
want to say thank you to
everybody you know this is how
we make good things happen in
New Mexico we learn from how
people feel one way or the other
and then we take that back and
we make things better with all
its legislators into our
freshman or you're going to go
through that it's going to be a
fun experience for you and
sometimes can be a painful
experience and it's going to
make good things for New Mexico
but but on to the put the
question in the point so
everyone that spoke in
opposition was from the
communication workers of America
and I've been to the union hall
multiple times on a number of
pieces of my legislation Mr
Chairman over the years but I
just want to reassure the folks
that spoke in opposition today
this is not at all a regulatory
bill this does not touch
regulation at all we have an
office that is across state
government called the public
regulation commission and we are
going through some changes there
right now and I hope that it
comes together as as what we all
wanted to be that are charged
with regulation and regulatory
oversight and quality of service
and deliverability what have you
this office is is charged with
consistency across the continuum
financial accountability owning
a statewide broadband plan and
and and most importantly
designing developing and
implementing broadband for all
for all New Mexicans so no
regulatory and thank you Senator
Kernan for asking that question.
Thank you very much and I'm glad
you could clarify that just
wanted to make one quick comment
at you talked about mapping and
that this department would be
responsible for determining
where we truly have a broadband
what the nature of that.
Is I think that is probably the
number one bank that need
apartment needs to do first
because I think there is some
confusion out there about what
is truly available I think that
I know in my area of some of the
the mapping that's been done
it's not particularly correct
this time we need to make sure
as we expand that we have
correct information so I and I'm
assuming secretary Salazar's on
board in and out this is
something that he welcomes and
yes Amanda going forward is that
correct thank you Mr chairman
Senator Kernan yes we've had
talks with him I mean he he's
literally.
Building an airplane while he's
flying well someone shooting at
it well people are falling off
of it before jumping onto your
plan this is going to give him
the help that he needs I believe
to get this done in in the
fashion that we all wanted to
and I I do want to clarify one
thing because I've heard it in
the public comment and now
Senator Kernan Mr Chairman said
this is not a new department I
want to underscore what I said
in my presentation this is an
office of broadband access and
expansion what this does is sit
administratively and for the day
to day and tying in with the
rest of the state of state
government in the office I'm
sorry the department of
information technology and the
individual actually works out of
the governor's office that's
how statutorily in other states
it's worked out very well so
that that individual has the
ability to get that the the the
job done and get get the
budgeting and all that other
stuff that they need.
Thank you very much that's all
all right thank you thank you
Senator Kernan.
Thank you senator that we have
Dr Hickey in an Senator Tallman.
Senator Padilla again as
everyone thank you for bringing
this bill forward and I'm sorry
I couldn't get my signature on
to be a co sponsor but I will be
there the next day or two this
is and tastic this is like water
and electricity and I'm gonna
ask what may be a dumb question
but being in very active to do
that
as you lay out right of ways and
so forth for the broadband and
also thank you for that I think
it's.
Some magical Hindenburg program
that's going to do this for all
of us to members whenever that's
replacement again operate were
but as we look at solar and as
you look at right of ways
is there as you coordinate that
I'm wondering is as Reese
develop solar we might want to
use the same right away thank
you that in any way interfere
with broadband cable going
forward thank you Mr chairman
and senator Dr Hickey it could
very well could and and today it
does but the reason that I
wanted there to be a a a portion
of this office that's charged
with and responsible for is to
help avoid those issues that you
that you just mentioned there
were a lot of right away is a
lot of these and all those
things already exist we just
don't really have sort of a of a
defined central repository that
tells us what's allowable what
is an allowable and then and
then what the office will wind
up doing is is saying okay what
we're we need to take this
entire you know swath of the
state well we've got seven
hundred and ten rights away and
easements we need to work out
can you imagine the herculean
task if you didn't have a
planned organized office the new
what they were doing that's what
this office is going to that's
one of the sections of this
office that is going to be very
helpful to all of us.
Thank you senator day and again
thank you for bringing this
forward and that with that I
yield Mr chair thank you for
taking.
Thank you Senator Hickey and
they'll go to of.
Senator Tallman.
Thank you Mr chair thank you the
center for bringing
This bill forward I just want to
publicly thank my good friend
Senator.
Padilla for his hard work and
foresight and leadership he's
exhibited over the years this
issue I'm particularly impressed
with the fact that most of the
people he's going to help.
With this don't live in his of
his district that I'm I think
it's safe to assume that there's
not a problem with with
broadband in the in the south
valley so Senator thank you for
all the hard work and use that
done on this issue thank you
thank you Mr chair okay thank
you Mr chairman and senator Tom
and I I will say that
surprisingly the south valley
one of the most historic and and
older portions of New Mexico
you'd be surprised how many
issues we still have and so I
think I think even in your
districts under Tom and I think
you're gonna find their pockets
that have been and don't have
and and have faster speeds and
others this mapping in this plan
is going to help us to
understand and see all that and
more you know clear perspective.
Thank you for that clarification
center appreciate Mr chair.
Thank you senator one of Senator
Griggs and and senator out meal.
Thank you Mr Mr chairman and
senator Betty has been working
on this long time
you know we used to have now I
will go there at Senator has a
has really shown great
leadership in this particular
issue I guess what I'm concerned
about somewhat on on this is it
we're creating.
The way it looks to me like a
whole a whole new Department and
age organizational structure is
somewhat different maybe than
than any that we have because
we're not we're not making it a
cabinet level spot but we're
putting it in the office of the
governor.
And then part of it in in do it.
I am I am I correct with
passionate thank you Mr chairman
and senator grace and yes I I
did have a lot more here when
you and I met each other you
have so much more here than me
still and I don't know my life
is darker you know well there we
go this is so to answer your
question the office will
entirely sit within the
department of information
technology they will have a
responsibility to a governor
they can help them to get things
done so that's that's one thing
I would I would mention their
the difference one of the huge
differences is that we will put
this in statute there is really
no office that is responsible
are charged with delivery of
broadband services that there
there are snippets here and
there there's something in PED
there's something in the P. SFA
there's something and even in
the department of corrections
but there's no statute that
requires it to deliver anything
this will actually require that
this will have it in in in in
with with charged with the items
that I listed in you know when I
rolled out the the bill a little
while ago earlier and and I
think that that's that's where
you see the real difference in
the real action taking place I
think I would envision that over
time you're gonna see those
other offices probably
become a part of this office the
only be no real thing that we
can say that this coordination
is is one full time it's called
out in the FIR one full time
staff member that reports into
the department of information
technology now and that is with
everything I've laid out for you
all the comments and all the
questions are all the different
questions that we've had that
there in lies the problem is now
you're gonna have someone that
there are a group of people that
are specifically responsible for
this and I just want to clarify
one more time this is not a new
department this is an office
within a department.
And the Mr Mr chairman and
senator the I guess some of the
stuff that that is is a little
bit troubling as far as that
goes I mean the the
organizational.
Roach is that.
We believe or or do you believe
that the issue is is the is the
right way
do it I guess who's going to why
there have and that and as you
already mentioned earlier
they're kinda overwhelmed with
what they have it to at the
moment.
It just looks to me like as as
we go forward
it could readily be.
You know I don't have do it
structure is the secretary and
then the.
Have they come down out of there
but it seems like that could
certainly be a a spot.
And just do it could organize it
instead of us organizing it and
in statute
and I have to to say I have the
the opportunity for my broadband
my internet to go down just for
a brief time while you were
while you were giving your.
Spiel about it all in stride
mission to that so I I didn't
get to to hear some of the stuff
that you said Senator but but I
I don't know and and you you may
actually have the have the right
approach I just I'm just
concerned it may be maybe we are
we have to bring it from them
telling us how they think they
need to do it instead of us
taking it to them and say and
dishes what you're gonna get to
do show up so thank you Mr
chairman senator thank you I
mean I know I know this stuff
close to you and I know you want
to do it all well in right so I
I appreciate your hard work.
Appreciate that Mr chairman and
senator Greece I would just call
out one one little thing based
on your comments so in Cherry
the interim committee on science
technology and
telecommunications just this
year and pretty much every other
year we've had a report of the
state of broadband in New Mexico
shared with the legislature I
think you and I were in Espanola
one time when it was shared and
and I know that recently it was
shared
you know and I interim
committees are online if you can
get online to watch these and
that there were specific items
called out in a report from so
it's not like we're just okay do
what you gotta do all this do it
to do it I know what what this
is is it addresses a lot of the
concerns a lot of the issues
that they are already called out
publicly to get done the
difference one more time is that
this puts the requirements and
the expectations in statute so
therefore they will they shall
be done if if we just leave it
where we have it today we may
continue to get what we get
today and it's just not working
for us thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you senator I the Senator
Hotmail.
You Mr chairman so Senator by
the at my cabin is off because
broadband during storms in
northern New Mexico isn't the
greatest thing I'm excited about
this happening for two reasons
one in my district in one school
district alone we've lost two
hundred students we can account
for and restoring its because of
the lack of broadband and the
ability for rural New Mexicans
to connect and so to ensure that
rural New Mexicans are covered
and that the pueblos in my
district are covered our major
for me and so in reading your
bill I see that it's I F. T. E.
that would be hired I just think
it task this big is going to
take a lot more than I F. T. E.
to take on broadband in the
state of New Mexico expressly
when you see how big rural New
Mexico is in the state.
What brought up thank you Mr
chairman I couldn't agree more I
but I think what you're gonna
want to provide as I I wanted to
come forward with the
establishment of the office I
think I have called out what the
charges the office are going to
be but then I think what you're
gonna find is they're going to
come forward and say look here's
how we need to just like we do
with any other office I didn't
want to you know blow out of
fifteen million dollar a five
million dollar budget your and
and and and have you all laughed
off the virtual committee run
out of the virtual committee
Representative I thought what I
would do instead is give them to
do to get it off the ground and
then come forward with exactly
what their plan needs to be so I
would say that that's how this
is going to remain in any way
shape or form but it'll be
something to look at that the
item off the ground perfect
thank you senator thank you Mr
chairman and if you want to try
out with the pilot program will
bring you up to northern New
Mexico you can start in my
district.
Senator thank you thank you Mr
chairman you Mr chairman other
questions.
A thank you I don't think we
have any other.
Questions the questions that I
had entered of the regular chair
Senator Brandt or yes Mister
chairman I'm sorry I I'm having
to use a different computer
because my other computer died
on me and it doesn't have a
thing to raise my hand for some
reason yes I need to update my
right here on hand right I I did
I raise the the.
Yeah
it happens you've got what you
know sixty people on the screen
so it happens.
We'll go with Senator Kernan for
the second time right is that.
Well.
The cashier Senator Brandt okay
Senator Brandt thank you thank
you Mr chairman thank you
Senator Padilla so I I just have
a couple of questions did as
into it ask for any more funding
for additional personnel to to
deal with broadband.
Thank you Mr chairman I I think
you said into it or do it do it
how do Mr chairman they did come
forward with I'm not sure if
you're able to hear that portion
of my response to to the to
Senator Griggs questions so
apologize but they did come
forward with a plan that I'm
sorry state of broadband and
there were several items called
out there that need additional
manpower person power to to
accomplish yes.
When they did their Mr chairman
server the when they did their
budget request.
Through finance through the
executive did they ask for
funding for additional
staffing for this Mr chairman I
believe they asked for staffing
they didn't call out I don't
recall the date that they
mentioned in any particular you
know I think that they did ask
for additional staffing
but I would want them to answer
that I don't have that directly
right in front of me but I do
know that they did ask for some
additional staffing yes.
Mr Chairman center there on here
are they.
I don't believe they are here
today I well it Mr chairman ask
if they are but I don't think I
see anyone from there.
I don't think we have any
worker.
Mr Chairman center you're
wanting to create this office
within do it.
That would have.
For staff members to I.
Mr Chairman the the the rules
that are called on legislation
or approximately five director
and some additional staff I'm
not sure how much of this you
heard with the previous
question section with Senator
how to meal you know I did call
out that this is the
establishment of the office I
don't I did not want to come
forward and ask for you know
eighteen because I don't know
how many they're actually going
to be I don't know exactly what
they're gonna have all of them
do exactly they need they are
charged with what's called Adam
legislation they will come
forward with the plan once they
are established.
And then the director is
appointed by the governor is
that is that correct yes it was
a debate that I had I did have
that that into that debate you
know I looked across the the
fifty states I I found that the
most effective rules were to
have it in their department of
as ours Department of
information technology
administratively day today but
to have the the the the the
power to get things done that a
lot of these offices that are
incredibly effective are
appointed by governor and
reports the governor's office.
So Mr chairman Sir with with
they then come through with the
process process of confirmation
by the Senate.
Mr chairman we don't call that
out now no we don't that's an
appointed position that we do we
don't die when I died we did
call that out disappointment
that the need to be confirmed no
thank you I I I struggle with
having another office in any
more government our government
has exploded since the Gary
Johnson administration that's
more than double the size it
used to be we have more
apartments than.
Than any other state with our
population or anywhere near our
population and we just continue
to grow government and you know
we've got one bill out there
that would actually take three
point seven billion dollars out
of our recurring fund I don't
know how we would pay for the
expanding of government if we
pass that bill so I have a real
struggle with growing government
right now I do agree with you on
that there needs to be someone
is held accountable for
broadband
it seems like do it's the right
place but as we know do it
doesn't seem to do it very well
at least let you know that's
kind of been the joke around
since you and I came in the
office this Senator Padilla the
do it just doesn't seem to be
able to get the job done so
maybe we need to make some
changes and do it and not create
another office and not create
more bureaucracy thank you I
appreciate what you're trying to
do I just don't agree with how
you doing.
Appreciate that Mr chairman
thank you and and I think in
well the the the thank you very
much for this Madam thank you.
Thank you senator Brent Senator
Kernan for second time.
Thank you Mr chairman and I
think my questions were answered
I didn't I did read in the
analysis that
do it had requested additional.
FTEs and and I thought operating
there that think for I'm also
going to be maybe utilized by
about the office being
established but I'm not sure of
that I do think that
Thank you well I'll leave it at
that that I think that done
probably we do need to to do
whatever we can to expand
broadband and I know in my area
we have some good areas that are
that are covered in some that
are not and again just going
back to two first figuring out
where the greatest need is sent
and then going from there thank
you.
Thank you Senator Kernan thank
you Mr chairman thank you
Senator Kernan
Missy.
I don't believe we have any is
questions from the committee.
What is the pleasure of the
committee.
For the past Mr chairman.
It's the second Senator Hamblen
and the second by Senator
Tallman.
lane can increase of coral.
That Senator.
It is Mr chair Senators
Steinborn yes that it is only
for the.
Senator Brandt.
No.
Senator Hamblen will yes.
Yes.
Senator had a meal yes.
Senator Kernan.
Yes.
You
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Shindo yes.
Eight four three no.
Thank you essentially have a due
pass Senator a.
Yep thank you very much Mr
chairman members of the
committee all very good feedback
I appreciate the comments.
Thank you.
All right now we move on to the
Senate bill one twenty one St
from bonds for projects Senator
Gonzales.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee.
with so Senate bill of one
twenty one this cements the bond
statute to allow the New Mexico
department of transportation to
issue the remain the remaining
authorization authorized amount
of two hundred and thirty four
point six million in bonding
authority.
The proceeds of the bond will be
funded projects authorized in
the two thousand nineteen.
This was during the regular
session and for additional
projects at the New Mexico deal
T. has developed including the
state transportation improvement
program of the state the state
project.
And the New Mexico department of
transportation has sufficient
projects developed and ready to
move to the construction yes
there is funding available Mr
chairman members of the
committee of this is so
necessary what the two hundred
and thirty four point six that
is the capacity that the
department has at this time and
other believe they know on the
this part of amending the this
of bonds statute that it would
be more efficient for everyone
including the department and
also to have projects to be out
well we do have all members so
out in the state to support this
so so so ciation for contractors
for New Mexico supports this
casada con contractors in the
area.
Mr chairman members so I do have
some expert witness from the
department of transportation
then I'll probably ask them see
if they can identify themselves
so I think there's been some
changes.
Giveaway Senator that's fine of
anybody from being able to do
that so I.
Yes Mister chairman good
afternoon can you hear me yes we
can thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee first
of all I like to think Senator
Gonzales for Karen this bill for
he's been a great partner
profanity you too can we
certainly appreciate him Mr
chairman of the bank to provide
history of how we got to Senate
bill one twenty one if you would
allow Sir.
Thank you.
Yes Sir.
It director for high we
appropriations I'm sorry Mr
Chairman.
Mr Chairman we go back to the
legislative session of twenty
nineteen twenty nineteen House
Bill to prove four hundred
million dollars to amendment to
U. N. M. D. O. T.
of special appropriations for
projects identified in section
nine of that legislation on the
four hundred million came from
from surplus right.
and then in June of twenty
twenty during the special
session Senate Bill I was
enacted would revert at seventy
five million of the the
probation and twenty nineteen
provided to NMDOT but what it
also did Mr chairman is allowed
NMED to to work with NMFA to
issue seventy five million
dollars the bonds after July
first of twenty twenty two so
give us the flexibility to bond
next summer right
now enter Senate bill one twenty
one so thanks Representative are
to be like Senator Gonzales
mentioned this would change the
amount from seventy five million
to two hundred thirty four point
six and again like some of the
remaining amount previously also
authorized in two thousand
three.
you know under house bill
fifteen basically the grip
legislation hello so it does
change the mounted to a thirty
four point six and all allows us
to issue bonds basically
immediately would partitions
the summer I'm in a lot of them
do to to want to take advantage
of these extremely low it's
we're likely to see a rate below
one percent.
And so it is for good thing
we're not we don't want to carry
this out more than ten years so
we're looking at ten year
funding package you Mr chairman
if you could I also have of
Secretary Santa on the land he
would like to show some slides
related to our routed to our of
our bonding capacity and our and
some other things so I could
just defer to secretary Santa as
well Mr chairman but that that's
fine secretary of Santa where.
Thank you Mr chairman Mike Santa
secretary of the New Mexico
department of transportation and
we appreciate the center
bringing this forward just to
give you an idea of what our get
looks like and and like Rick
mentioned.
Bonding rates are at historic
low numbers right now we just
switched out some bonds this
last fall save the department
seven point seven million
variable to refinance bonds at
point six percent
which this is less than one
percent we do already have
bonding authority for seventy
five million but we it's not
till July first twenty twenty
two we're looking to just on the
rest of the remaining funding
authority and take advantage of
these low rates so you probably
want to know what are bonding
more debt payments look like and
if I can Mr chairman of my
camera is working but I can
share my screen let me know if
this works or not
I can show you exactly what are
debt payments look like and what
they would look like moving
forward if this bill were to
pass so let me try and do that
Mr Chairman you should have
received these handouts as well
showing a graph of bonding
payments let me try and do that.
Yes go ahead I think you're
about to show you screen.
Mr Chairman can you see that yes
we can make sure.
Who is also basically Mr
chairman if you look at or
existing debt which is this
orange line here these are from
past funding programs going all
the way back to governor Johnson
you can see that twenty twenty
five is a very big year for the
department as in twenty twenty
five are bonding payments drop
No sorry the actual numbers from
about a hundred eighty three
million down the coast to
seventy million so that's a big
year for us because we're gonna
gain some capacity within the
department kind of levels out
and eventually in twenty thirty
two we would be out of debt with
the existing authority that we
have that was passed during the
special session last year
with our seventy five million
would be the blue lines are kind
of follows very closely what
we're trying to do is just pay
interest payments up until we
get to twenty twenty five but it
is very close to what we would
originally pay and we're not
going out past twenty thirty so
we don't want to put the
department anymore further debt
beyond ten years we've had
thirty years of debt we
certainly certainly don't want
to extend that but we want to
take advantage of of the low
interest rates and then the
Green Line would be what if this
bill were to pass what that
would look like very similar we
have more level payments going
forward all the way to twenty
thirty so it's much better for
planning we don't get these
little spikes here and we would
be Jerry of giving of folk if
you're not talking can you
please mute.
The rear of the conversation
going on the background
appreciate that thank you go
ahead senator secretary okay and
that would be the Green Line if
this bill were to pass I'll just
show you that real quickly and
numbers here's our debt payment
we're says total what we're
looking at now if if this second
the last column on the right
what it would look like with the
seventy five million and then on
the very right well it would
look like with the two thirty
four we still came quite a bit
of capacity in twenty twenty
five these first three years
would just be interest payments
and then the principal would go
on the rest of the time as you
can see and in FY thirty we
would be completely done paying
these off with this to ten year
time period taking advantage of
the low interest rate you're
probably wondering what bonding
what projects you would use to
buy on this for I'll just show
you real quick what we are
looking at
we've supplied this is well
we're not earmarking projects I
think that's what has happened
in the past when we have done
other bonding programs as we put
amounts and specific projects in
there we would go off this
particular list depending ups
what's ready you want to be
equitable with the different
areas of the state so we want to
make sure that all areas urban
real would get some of this
funding money but we want to be
flexible so that we would be
able to get as many of these
projects done as possible as you
can see these are all projects
that can be let in the next two
years and we're just trying to
get through these next four
years before we get that
capacity built up in twenty
twenty five make sure that we
have a consistent construction
program for these next four
years as our bond payments are
pretty high but if we can get
through these next four years I
think there's greener pastures
Mr chairman come twenty twenty
five so this would be our
request and this would be what
this bill does and we really
appreciate your time today and
ask for your support thank you.
Thank you a miss secretary and
go back to a Senator Gonzales.
Mr chairman bill with that will
stand for questions.
Okay at this time will go up to
the audience will anybody in
opposition of this bill.
at this time we don't
have time to be on the list of
opposition is there anyone in
the room who wishes to speak in
opposition Mr Jerry fanning also
you had your hand up earlier
this ought to speak in
opposition or support.
Mr Chairman this jury fanning
with the county we stand and
support and I would like to make
a few comments.
Okay I'll connect you.
Is there anyone else I wanted to
speak in opposition for Senate
bill one twenty five.
Second partners.
We will now hear you Mr Eric
Martinez.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Eric Martinez I'm speaking on
behalf of the unmissable soul
development group we stand
support of this legislation we
support it because we believe it
will help accelerate completion
of of of a crucial pieces of
transportation and highway
infrastructure that that's
critical to the economic
development expansion and and
recovery of New Mexico so with
that we we stand support of
legislation thank.
Thank you.
We will now hear from Mister
Jerry fanning go ahead Terry.
Yes Mister chairman members of
the committee my name is Gerry
fanning and the public and
government affairs director for
Eddy County a county can't stand
in support of Senate bill one
twenty one we believe that this
will help insure the funding for
road projects in southeast New
Mexico and as a result of having
the better roads in southeast
New Mexico we will be able to
continue to safely produce a
wonderful oil and gas resources
which only New Mexicans benefit
so greatly thank you.
Thank you Mr standing we will
now hear from the national all
right go ahead.
Thank you very much good
afternoon Mister chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Vanessa let aid
and I represent their
development we represent the
property that just brought in
the Amazon distribution center
on Albuquerque's west side.
We are bringing the largest
building of this size to at New
Mexico additionally thousands of
jobs to the state unfortunately
we've run into some
transportation issues we don't
have the capacity to move the
products on the roads we've
worked diligently with our local
governing bodies the regional
government and department
transportation with regards to
the Santa con Senate bill one
twenty one allows for bonding
eligible state projects
identified through the local
regional state priorities this
bill Senate one Senate bill one
twenty one will support over
forty five hundred permanent
jobs and over one billion
dollars of additional
construction jobs just
Representative Akan and
certainly we need jobs so
therefore I stand in strong
support of Senate bill one
twenty one and want to thank the
sponsors on the department.
Thank you.
Are there any other members of
the public who wish to speak in
support Senate bill one to.
One more time supporters if you
could please raise your hand.
Okay that concludes public
statements percent of twenty one
thank you.
Thank you Martel I just want to
say that I did get a text David
Silva was having the technical
problems but he is a speaking on
behalf of the associated
contractors of New Mexico and
the stand in support so just one
for the record.
So with that I will go to a the
committee.
For questions.
Chairman.
The.
Senator Padilla.
Thank you Mr chairman I just I
think this is something that
long overdue and I'm very
excited that the Senator
Gonzales is bringing this
forward to making this happen
you know for our state I don't
know if he wants to feel this
question or if the if the
secretary does but you know I'm
so in support of of it because
of the economic development and
job creation that it's going to
do for the state can you shed
any light on that do we have any
data that tells us you know what
we're gonna see as a result of
these these changes from an
economic standpoint.
Mr chairman Senator of the of
the.
at this point you know you did
here the comment that was made
by a micellar read but I will
also defer to all secretary
Seneal.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Senator Padilla we haven't put
all the numbers together we it
would obviously depend exactly
how many how much proceeds we
would be able to get from the
two hundred thirty four million
we think we're gonna end up
getting somewhere between two
hundred seventy five and three
hundred million dollars worth of
projects will be sent out but we
know they're significant and we
know because the money that the
legislature has provided to us
over the last year it's really
kept our economy moving during
this pandemic we've put over
about two hundred fifty million
additional dollars into the
economy over the last sixteen
months in I know that's helped
us cities counties with gross
receipts tax and jobs we're just
trying to get through these next
four years we had debt payments
upwards of a hundred and seventy
million dollars now and the
leaves us very little for
construction and we know there's
some big economic development
opportunities we have projects
are very close to being ready
and with interest rates as low
as they are we think now is the
time to act and this can only
help our economy Mr Chairman
Sanders I can't give an exact
number but I think we all know
that it'll be a big benefit.
I appreciate that Mr chairman
and and again you know one of
the things that you know my
business does is we do site
selection for call centers we do
site selection for a number of
those types of businesses and
it's all within you know the
type of work that I do and you
know we're kidding ourselves if
we don't think that site
selectors hop on their own
airplanes are on commercial
flights and come into towns and
cities and drive around and see
how quickly their employees can
get to and from work and and how
they can get their goods and
services or goods you know on
the roads and moved along and
what have you so it's just a
super important and I strongly
support but I just wonder if the
secretary but their thoughts
were thank you Senator Gonzales
thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you senator.
You're out.
I don't have any questions from
the committee of Senator
Gonzales this is probably too
Senator of the US secretary of
the these projects that were
listed still go to the regular
of the spirit of.
process is that how they're
vetted Mr Mr chairman of that is
correct.
Okay.
And I think the other part that
is also very important as he was
mentioned is settled it is being
kept to ten years on the
bonding.
So this will not be a very long
twenty or thirty year funding
for all would be at ten years.
Okay I appreciate that.
Okay.
The the the hands up from the
committee members what is it
passed motion for do pass
At the.
Please call role.
Yes.
Yes.
Just.
Yes.
You.
Yes.
Senator Kernan.
Yes
thank you yes senator Clemente
yes Senator Wirth.
Senator Padilla yes.
Senator Wirth.
Senator Shendo yes.
When you can for.
Senator you have a group pass
Senator Gallegos.
Mr chairman thank you for
calling thank you committee.
Right so we'll now move on to.
Senate bill forty nine I believe
we have a committee substitute.
So hopefully everybody receive
that was sent out by our
committee secretary.
So with that of will have us
Senator Woods to explain
disrupted again.
Refresh our memory of so.
We'll chairman.
Well.
I guess the we need to take
action of do not pass.
Mr chairman I'd move it do not
pass on Senate bill forty nine
and a due pass for purposes of
discussion only
Committee substitute for Senate
set Senate transportation Senate
tax business transportation
committee substitute for Senate
bill forty nine which one you're
if you want your bills to pass
better get this committee to.
I better get it right.
All right we do have a motion of
we're not passive for discussion
purposes us to go ahead.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Yeah that's quite a title now
and it.
Senate tax business
transportation committee
substitute for Senate health and
public affairs committee
substitute for Senate bill forty
nine.
That's quite a deal.
As you can see this is been a
work in progress Mr chairman.
I want to tell you a little bit
about what this bill does.
By changing the current law that
allows municipalities of any
size to provide financial
assistance to retail business
using their own funds.
You don't use any PRC of state
funds.
The current population cap is
thirty five thousand and we're
eliminating that cap.
It allows for the state to
provide financial assistance to
retail businesses located in an
unincorporated portion of the
county and it removes the
restrictions that state funds
can only be used for projects
that is more than ten miles from
the closest municipality with a
population of more than fifteen
thousand.
It allows for the rehabilitation
are remodeling of the building
not just the construction which
is under current law.
By using a qualified entity
that's kind of what the bill
does
I've got a couple of expert
witness amber's with me from per
tell us.
She has been our economic
development person there are Mr
chair I'd like for her to speak
on the bill if that would be
okay with you.
That's why Senator go ahead.
Our Mr chairman Mr Browde boards
here with me also I hope maybe
you can speak to the bill.
What more do you want to speak
on the bill.
Well Mr Chairman amber Hamilton
Mistry's one more time with
them.
All right.
You.
Senator because we're screen
sharing so I'm going to cancel
the screen shared IB that people
are having a hard time finding
the items so I'm going to
temporarily stop sharing just
for one moment.
Are there any expert witnesses
who wanted to speak to possibly
can find the button earlier now
that it's moved go ahead and
take the opportunity to say
something.
So we can hear in the bill.
Senator Woods can you hear me
yes this Jon Ryan I believe more
Mike Morris is is on and and
ready to speak if.
If you wanted to.
Please why don't you have Mike
Morse speak please Sir.
Go ahead the miss more.
Thank you good afternoon Mr
chairman and committee members
I'd like to think Senator Woods
step backs and senator grace up
for for Jerry and this bill in
helping with this as Senator was
explained this central to this
effort is the our is expanding
the allowable uses of the local
economic development funding to
include retail as economic
development projects and that
would include both expansion of
existing as well as recruitment
of New and I hope that we have
your support for this as a more
I I can tell you that you know
when I watch what's happening
with retail and in my New Mexico
City I I feel like we could use
more tools in the toolbox with
which to adapt as you know
retail is is actually a
significant economic driver
providing jobs well as first
receipts revenue.
And and a communities retail
offering contributes to the
quality of life of the residents
and so you know I I.
I hope you'll support this week
we need this at the local level
and I think you'd be good for
our New Mexico city's good for
the state is going to keep more
dollars at home is going to give
us the opportunity to to adapt
and and and respond to the
changing needs of our our local
economies by supporting and
encouraging growth of our our
retail sector.
Thank you.
And Mr chairman Mr John Ryan's
also here if you would speak
word.
Mr chairman members of the
committee that this isn't a bill
that Senator Woods and senator
great to have worked on together
with with some of cooperation of
other other members on this
committee.
Senator Stefanics and senator
Wirth had also had some
discussion on Senator Woods bill
when it was out last week and
incorporated into the bill are
the provisions a center which
just mentioned but it it's it's
basically a combination of
Senator Woods and Senator Griggs
bill that deals not only with
the municipality to fund but
also the state the the funds and
I I'm here to us specifically
talk about different provisions
that are now in this committee
substitute if if there are any
questions on that thank you Mr
chairman.
Okay great thank you of.
And Mr chairman if US senators
to phonics is in the the room
I'd like for her to speak to the
bill.
Senator is the phonics are you
on I don't believe the she's on
the call.
Okay
With Senator Griggs was a great
help on this and he might want
to say a word.
he does have his handout so we
are going to go to the public
comment before we go to the
committee also Micaela if we
have anybody for a.
Public comment we'll start with
opposition.
That's what this time we don't
have anyone to speak in
opposition personable forty nine
is there anyone who's already in
the meeting that is a member of
the public I would like to raise
their hand at this time so they
can make a statement in
opposition to Senate bill forty
nine.
And it does look like it's we
will move on to statements of
support first we'll be hearing
from Mr G. St Espinoza co
hencexor.
Mr chairman members of the
committee Jason Espinoza
registered lobbyists with the
New Mexico idea which is state
statewide economic development
association and we appreciate up
all Sanchez bringing us into the
conversation to really March
these bills and stand in support
thank you.
Thank you Mr Espinoza we will
now hear from Mister Tom Solomon
go ahead Tom.
Thank you.
Yes my name is Tom Solomon I
spoke previously M. co
coordinator The New Mexico
chapter three five dot org
devoted to fighting for safe
Clemente you may ask why.
A group devoted to climate
change
and protecting the environment
is supporting a bill for lead to
funding for local retail
businesses well we are facing a
future where New Mexico's gonna
need to pretty rapidly
transition away from reliance on
fossil fuels and that is going
to have a big impact on our
state we're starting to see some
of that already and so there are
many many things that New Mexico
will need to do to enable a just
transition to a sustainable
economy less reliant on fossil
fuels this bill is just one of
those many things so for that
reason three fifty New Mexico
stands in strong support of this
bill thank you.
Thank you Mr song.
Are there any other members of
the public who wish to make
statements of support for Senate
bill reporting that one more
time these are only statements
of support president according.
Thank you very much public
statement at this time thank
you.
Okay thank you market a lot of
now we'll go to Senator Griggs
since you of the merging of the
two bills so if you can speak a
go ahead Senator.
Thank you Mr chairman and
they're made to think or Senator
Woods and and senator phonics
for for their hard work on on
their bill and the fact that
we're able to to combine these
bills to try to address the
needs of the communities across
the state when the when the
local economic development act
was passed in the nineties the
whole push at that point time
was to bring in economic base
jobs manufacturer bring things
into our state to.
Provide for higher wage jobs
what is happening now is you
we've got opportunities for
other shortage of jobs which
were or retail job.
Quality of life time
Thanks for our individual
community and in order to maybe
help a community like clover
should community like
Alamogordo.
Community like Santa Fe
community well in an area like
the south valley of Albuquerque
this provides ways to where
there can be some incentive
funding for those particular
places.
Either through the state or
through that that governing
bodies owned.
Lead funding shot believe that
you know the time is come for
this I believe it's best to
leave it up to the local
entities on how they who they
think they need do they think
they need retail do they think
they need manufacturing but
leave it up to them because our
for our first effort into this
you know twenty years ago twenty
five years ago.
We're focused away from that.
But I think.
The communities can see what
they believe they need and I
believe it's up to us to help
them have the opportunities to
help themselves show up so Mr
chair in and members of the
committee I certainly hope that
all of you can stand in support
of this bill because I think it
will ultimately be good thing
for a New Mexicans.
Okay thank you Senator Griggs.
Are there any other further
questions from the committee I
don't.
See any hands up of.
The senator would I know that
last time we had a conversation
about the
funds not being provided for
folks I think you know stealing
businesses from a one town to
the next town and so forth but
what what if what what is the a
business wanted to rid you know
is in the same town but wanted
to.
Moved to the downtown area from
mineral the Backstreet or or or
something you know in in the
same area those with those types
of so move the eligible for this
kind of funding that they want
to revitalizing the downtown
area maybe there.
So wanted outskirts but want to
move closer to town or something
because that.
Yes that's that's also Mr chair
that is also included for an
expansion.
this is this is included in this
bill also.
Okay our thank you Senator
Tallman.
Thank you Mr chair.
just a quick comment I heard to
spill and public affairs and
I was pleased to see it they
combine the two bills and I
Hello and please with the
changes that have been made
thank you Mr chair.
Thank you senator.
Mr chair and move to patch.
Okay thank you have a motion for
two passed by Senator Griggs.
Senator Hamblen I second Senator
Hamblen second.
Lane can you please take grow.
Senator Brandt.
Yes.
Senator Griggs yes.
Yes.
Senator
yes Senator have Leo.
Yes.
Senator Kernan.
Yes.
Senator said.
Yes.
Senator Clemente.
Yes.
Senator Wirth.
Yes.
Senator Padilla.
Yes.
In addition the.
Yeah eleven.
Thank.
All right.
Senator Woods project binomial
passes to pass so Senator Woods
thank you very much Mr chairman
thank I think the committee
members.
Thank you.
So we are now moving on to
Senate bill twelve revise
uniform low on photoreal axe.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee did this on the
half on Senate bill Ronald
news be careful as you pronounce
the ballot is the revised
proposal on the aerial acts not
oriel acts on but it's not.
The last.
There are is also in New Mexico
right now we actually have
a a you know a we have our state
laws on no carrier oil and wax
and then we had and we also have
the uniform law under tab L. X.
and what this bill does is that
it actually works here is both
of those articles and replaces
it with a single article which
is the revised general plan law
under Terry all of this comes
from for those of you who are
not familiar yet with a unicorn
laws there's the uniform law
commission which is the National
Commission all of uniform law
commissioners appointed from the
various different states and
they get together to deal with
I'll tell to promulgate a
variety of different uniform
laws it is desirable that we
have laws that are are some of
the different states are there
are very good
There are there are their most
notable are on drugs is uniform
commercial code.
But they also there's a variety
of other uniform laws such as
you the public for the prior
code etcetera one of the codes
that they have is uniform.
What were the the accident was
you know from all under Gerald
Max this is been
realized over the years
commissioner of the commission I
used to be one of the from all
commissioners are from New
Mexico and actually.
When this when this revised
uniform monetarily acts was
initially our primary gated by
the overall commission was
during the time that I was on
that I was arguing for
commissions actually got this
may in in the winners of the
their force for the various
different provisions are bye bye
to the to the two existing
articles a different tax that we
have right now in New Mexico in
the single act what we do is we
remove all different conflicting
provisions and
allies right by doing the
revised uniform on the parallax
we revise the
R. as under general acts here in
New Mexico are there are a
couple important changes that
this makes over the status quo
in terms of material and one of
them is that it right now while
it is morning replying to the
secretary of state's office
eight nine number public
commission in section the
governor the requests the
commission and then while we're
in then it is but it's secretary
of state continues to do it on
the road making but then it's
the governor of the dust on the
the impacts and and so your
first year of this kind of this
our adjuster position between
the two what this does is it
actually puts it primarily
within the secretary of state's
office which centralizes the
administration of of the
republics in Waukesha right it
also is going to a lot of times
when and insist particular
property records where where a
lot of times it's included with
the price in normalizing is
actually.
That's a lot of things and there
were doing is is where everybody
gets commission is going to have
a permission member this is what
happened in the past and I'm
your current public stand in one
hundred commission number one of
your very easy for people to
verify if you're on a legitimate
Republic.
In order to be able to maintain
integrity but that with no
public process.
Where are we have the the
Enforcement being done
also through the secretary of
state's office I've I've been
some conversation secretary of
state's office and they've
indicated that that is going to
be a bit of a burden on them and
and so we're actually looking
we're conversation right now
about moving enforcement in the
back to honor the word is what
now and right across the budget
for the staff four or maybe some
other options such as the the
the ethics commission or or or
or some other appropriate place
and actually that's a good
public policy that that the
officer who administers a
program should not be in the
office or resources that broke.
And and then we also
On the other the other thing
about about this act is that it
it does also implements our
family members nations this is
been a particular issue off of
the business community and find
people actually particularly
during the pandemic are we have
a few states that it brought to
Normalization is beginning with
Virginia.
And and and so what we did is
that when you look through the
proposals funding commission and
the report proposals for the
American land title association
to see which ones have the the
greater level of accountability
and those of the ones that we
adopt it in this in this act and
so and so this we will be able
to to transition also during
that in a verifiable manner
and and we're thinking about how
that way than than just about
any of the state is done on that
and so with that Mr Chairman I
do of the I will note that the
secretary of state's office this
presents in the in the room
right now as it is also on the
representative of the New Mexico
land title association as well
as the New Mexico mortgage
lenders association and so I
will are you go to them and then
anybody else west public comment
this
and one last thing if I may
Mister chairman I also note that
we are also joined right now
with special chronic why is she
has been a little more
commissioner are planned on one
the state legislation with them
and that
should.
Transaction over time
commissioner she's been there
from what we're and she needs
that she wore on the general you
put err on this on the terror
acts.
Given the commission and has
shoplifted we are from loss of a
share on it's only through the
current version of it right now
and she really is I mean we are
so blessed in New Mexico to have
on the nation's expert on how
madam chair acts and should work
and what the best practices are
as well as Jack Burton who
coordinates much of the work the
implementation so that Mr Monson
of miss questions and we have to
be able to okay thank thank you
a senator for bringing this
exciting bill to the committee
it's not about yeah.
So if any of your experts want
to speak of a.
You
I can just more correct in this
order to show on piano David
Letterman Iran David R. Jack
Burton and then pass thrive
because she represented in the
gaps of anything we missed okay
appreciate that thank you.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee that I'm sharing
Pino the deputy secretary of
state we also have with us today
Christine at Chavis are director
of business services I would
like to thank the sponsor for
bringing this important bill
certainly the secretary is very
supportive of at many aspects of
the bill which modernize the
Natori process I'm there is a
strong need to again move
forward with our ability to
perform a certain the remote
notarization we've noticed in
these times but even with the
pandemic aside there is the need
to modernize that process to
allow for remote notarization
I'm it's it's more in line with
the manner in which formal
transactions are currently
conducted.
also I in the bill the ability
for judges attorneys and court
clerks who already handle formal
documents formal proceedings
their ability at the end to
perform material acts
noted in our FIR and I I believe
that the sponsor also pointed
out and the secretary of state
does have some concerns that we
had that the aspect of the bill
which calls for our office to
perform enforcement we currently
do not do that and are not I
really situated or have the
staff to do that I know that
that is currently being done
through the regulation and
licensing Department.
And so we have as the sponsor
noted at at Senator Ivey so do
we have been in communication we
thank him for being sensitive to
those concerns and really add
talking to us about how we might
and make some changes in the
bill to maybe put in force meant
with either where it is right
now status quo with regulation
licensing or maybe another
agency that is more students to
perform of the enforcement tax
and of course we're available to
answer any questions that the
committee may have thank you Mr
chair.
Thank you.
Next.
Thank you Mr chairman members
committee Larry heard and
registered lobbyist for the New
Mexico mortgage lenders
association in the New Mexico
land title association I
actually do have to affirm what
Senator Ivey Soto said he is
very excited about this bill
we've had we had several hours
long conversation about it over
the summer as he was putting it
together so this really is a
passion of his but we do
appreciate the senator he worked
with both New Mexico land title
and mortgage lenders association
but we also included
conversations with the national
mortgage bankers and the
American land title association
and we all had input in how this
bill can work and there was a
model act that was put out by
the American land title
association in this legislation
really closely aligns with that
although it does have some
improvements and some changes
from what the altered version
was
and it and he did point out I I
was on a call with the board of
the mortgage lenders today and
one of the one of the actually
the board president also has his
company works out of Colorado
and they've adopted remote
online notarization and
especially with COVID it's
really been useful for them to
close real estate transactions
and recordable transactions and
what they're actually finding
out is with remote online
notarization and the safeguards
will be put in place including
what's in this legislation it
actually has almost more
verification and in person
notarization so we really think
when once you all hopefully pass
this legislation that is going
to put those safeguards in place
of the we make sure that our
transactions are recordable and
and M. so it's good for the
county clerk's it's good for the
industry is good for the people
to make it convenient for them
to help close on their real
estate transactions and so will
be available for questions but
we we support the legislation
appreciate the efforts that have
been put into this over the last
couple years.
Thank you next.
You might speak if not that I.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
Senator Ivey Soto members of the
committee I stand in strong
support of the bill I have
suggested certain amendments to
the sponsor and will be working
with them to make those
amendments to make the bill more
uniform and to conform to
existing New Mexico law of
wherever he wishes to put on
those amendments but for now I
urge this committee to report
out this bill with a do pass
recommendation thank you.
Thank you.
Mr Chairman members of the
committee.
This is Patricia for all.
You're on your on okay great
Senator Ivy Soto thank you for
all the work you've done on this
I echo Jack Burton's comments
strongly support the bill I
think it would be a major
benefit to
New Mexico and updating its
notarial laws I know that the
original uniforms on notarial
acts was enacted in New Mexico
in nineteen seventy eight so
we're forty plus years on and no
Senator Ivy Soto I wasn't there
for that one.
But I have been working on the
revised uniform on.
Welcome since about well let's
say for a dozen years.
One thing nobody is mentioned is
is one of the major things this
does is recognize and enable
electronic signatures on
electronic records.
Absolutely necessary for gonna
have remote notarization but as
we all know our roads become
very electronic This bill
contains protections for
consumers for the signers of of
records but also very much for
the those who rely on these
records and as you you've
already seen.
Much of that reliance comes from
the mortgage lending area but
also
people want to know to rise
things like end of life
documents
and the ability to get a notary
particularly if you're ill or
otherwise
Lockdown is is.
Are very difficult I'll be happy
to answer any questions and I've
plan or I hope to work with
Senator Ivy Soto as this bill
goes forward I'd ask I'd echo
Jack Burton with a request for
it to pass.
Thank you.
Senator Ivey Soto so.
What questions after.
Representative Masser for public
comment another was available
for questions okay what will go
to a public comment the.
We'll
help.
At this time I don't have any
statements of opposition or
anyone who signed up to speak in
opposition ahead of time is
there anyone within the meeting
I would like to speak in
opposition that is a member of
the public that was provided the
opportunity prior.
All right we will go ahead and
move on in the years in history
and credit score has the act.
Thank you good afternoon Mister
chairman and members of the
committee senators my name is
Lee and credits and vice
president of government
relations for fidelity
investments here in New Mexico
and we're very much in favor of
Senate bill twelve remote new
notarization technology is safe
proven and already successful in
use on a permanent basis in
twenty nine states.
Specially at a time when
physical distancing is a public
health necessity remote
notarization of financial
documents provides a solution
that harnesses readily available
technology to ensure that
Americans have access to their
savings when they need it most
develop investment stands the
strong support of Senate bill
twelve and we are very
appreciative of Senator Ivy Soto
bring forward this very exciting
bill thank you.
Thank you Mr.
We will now hear from Mr Leary
heard wrong Larry are you
available.
Thank you Mr chair I already
already spoke thank you.
I didn't have any other people
sign up for public statement are
there any members that would
like to speak our.
In support is Senate bill Walton
are members of the public.
One more time since for
statements of support for
Sierra.
Thank you very much public
statement at this time.
Okay.
Okay just congratulate this
committee on its voice of god
it's fantastic.
We are blessed.
Thank you I will go to committee
for questions about we'll start
with Senator Griggs Kernan and
video.
Thank you Mr chairman I I really
don't have.
Well maybe I can addition is the
word notarial Senator Ivey Soto
no Ariel.
Research center could you say
that again.
Mr Mr chairman and senator.
This really kind of reminds me
of another bill that you know
people have a lot of fun with.
It was a bill that dealt with
the Scribner's errors and so
Senator Shendo were Mr chair
Senator Ivey Soto that was a
that was a dandy as well did a
lot of good surprisingly you
know when you see some of these
things you think will.
But they really do accomplish a
lot when you're talking about
transferring title getting some
of that stuff done and so
they're they're very important
bill show our Mr chair Senators
thanks for for bringing the bill
and I look forward to you
getting it passed and
pronouncing that constantly.
Thank you senator and will move
to Senator current.
Thank you very much Mr chair and
senator.
Ivy Soto you know it every time
you bring a bill that I I just
feel very intimidated by by you
and by how intelligent you are
about so many so many things so
I just want to ask a few
questions about this particular
bill that I'm just trying to get
my arms around I certainly
support the rebel that number
recession all of the things that
we're talking about with regard
to electronic electronic signing
transactions related to real
estate that that just kind of a
little bit of a concern in
reading the analysis is
I'm what we're what we're moving
over to the secretary of state's
office with regard to requiring
enforcement being there.
And as I read the analysis she's
that they're going to need to
add seven more FTEs to carry out
provisions a prosecutor a law
clerk and was special agent
legal counsel maybe it's it's
almost like they're becoming a
I don't know what what all
that's going to entail but
that that concerns me a little
bit if you can be left at R. L.
date public debt not have been
in the bill that we could just
leave all of that it R. L. D..
Mr chairman and senator I agree
with you on and the the the
secretary of state's office as
they reviewed this act
and and provided impressed both
before it was introduced as well
as afterwards
you know that is that is been
one of the areas of discussion
that we have had and we are in
the greens that the enforcement
should be someplace other than
the secretary of state's office
you you identified are very
thank you points are with
regards this bill and and so
we're just we're just at this
point we're just having some
conversations our with our V. as
to whether not we can we can
keep it there whether we should
move it to some other place all
right it it actually it should
not be in the secretary of
state's office of that is that
part is outside of the real
house and our and so and so on
before this bill gets to the
floor our plan is to have a new
home for the enforcement.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
thank you senator and you
mentioned a potentially the
ethics commission why would it
be fair.
Mr chairman and senator in some
part of that is part of the part
of discussion in terms of of of
whether should stand RLD are we
are ecstatic I think I think
that's the place of greatest.
Work in the end is to leave it
where it is
on that bus that is the real
house quite a bit on the other
hand the thing about students
commission is there an
independent agency their job is
to make sure that those
that that there is
accountability in terms of
public officers and the notarial
commission is a public
commission and has been when
somebody number rises up and
opulence under under Terrill
Commission there are different
so we are on behalf of the state
of New Mexico.
They are certifying are the the
identity of the person who was
signing that document so that is
where there's been some
conversation about potentially
having it and the ethics
commission are about to it might
our preference right now right
we end up is leaving it in the
are at an all the way this.
Thank you Mr chairman one last.
One last question also at is
there a change at all to
To impress with regard to this
to request certain documents is
that already allow what why is
that part of the bill.
It's it's.
I was in New Hampshire but again
actually hurt your arm
Senator actually actually had an
Oscar drugs all of us some
depends what kind of dirty you
have in the bill is I'm sorry
Sir in the world.
And public maintains a law.
And and so those those of us who
may have gone to a bank at some
point to get something organized
are you know in addition to
signing the document in front of
the house of the notarial office
for you also have the you also
signed the logbook.
The general officer.
Miss Holly just on the side was
was the subject.
It will generally be alright
that on arrival it has to do
with realization about.
And everything was all what.
I want is not.
So it's.
Our representation the
requirements that are not
criminalization that has to be a
video captured all the
transactions
well remote online notarization.
Once again some great as a
question was actually properly
normalized rural and remote
online notarization process more
the accessibility.
So how does your family act
under public commission the
state of New Mexico.
What was.
And we're making it subject
inspection public practice are.
Learning what you asked me a
particulate ready.
So so that you so that just
means we also are balance out
doesn't simply get this part of
our State Bank I want to see
every single video of every
single realization as our
happened.
Reporter some and not
productive.
Well what was is that if someone
is interested to see are you are
on the on the twelfth of January
on Benny Shendo our director of
the dead at eighty eight signed
the documents remote on that
plan and organization and I see
that snow but please we're
making that subject inspection
public park.
Okay thank you very much Mr
chair thank you senator and of
course.
You know with it Brett.
There many request that how
would you present at the
multiple request from occurring
and and I'm not saying you
should be able to request that
you mentioned just a small
snippet would be allowed out is
that at it would that be stated
in the bill are sending or three
some sort of rule making just to
make sure.
That expand thank you dear so Mr
chairman and senator current you
turn to page twenty two of the
bill beginning at line sixteen
what it says is a request made
pursuant to subsection eight
which says that as part of this
section shall remaining number
Terrill Act transaction in
documents requested related to
the notarial act with
particularity the name of the
documents subject to the apparel
Act in requests.
Now we are we are keeping from
the abuse.
Thank you and I I did pull that
thank you very much and I
appreciate your answers and
clarification thank you thank
you.
Thank you Senator Kernan a
Senator Padilla.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
thank you Senator Ivey Soto Mr
chairman this sort of anti or
witnesses I guess the the the
the just have a few questions
one is want to make sure that
with the electronic signatures
all that's permitted today is
that right.
Mr chairman and Senator Padilla
so let's go president opted
thank you the the uniform of a
product transaction costs are
and and we have adopted some of
the other on taxes that a such
as you open up
and and and so the other acts
that that allow for electronic
signatures what we do here is
that we integrate the house
within the notarial act as well
so there's a seamlessness
between them so that you're not
stock finding something outside
of this act are completely
without any reference
whatsoever.
I can appreciate that Mr
chairman and senator Ivy Soto I
just want to make sure that
we're not going to shrink the
but it it seems to me like
you're gonna expand the places
you can go to get this done is
it in mice reading that
correctly I want to make sure
that you know in my half I think
you know Senator Ivy Soto you've
been to my annual what kinds of
before we've been on the stage
together you've been driven into
the some of the most rural parts
of my district to get there when
I make sure that you know have
city have County that we're not
going to take away the ability
for folks to easily get their
their their business or their
transaction completed
don't want to shrink the ability
don't all have to I'm trying to
think of my eighty eight year
old great aunt heading out to
get this done and want to make
sure that she's not going to be
limited in her ability to get
her whatever done to transact
whatever she needs to get done.
What was chairman and served AS
well actually we're gonna make
it much easier and it's it's
interesting there are there are
tuned demographics that I think
are are particularly benefit
from the remote online
notarization and you just
mentioned both of that one of
the more people are more state
which is frankly of the the
greatest portion of our state by
geography for Martinez Porsche
trusted by population and that
makes it very difficult to get
documents notarized sometimes.
Or is our seniors
Representative bility problems
and and need for difficulty even
just getting another car to
drive some place that actually
have much more to facility to be
able to notarized documents in
both cases than they have today.
Thank you Mr chairman and Mr
Chairman so I just had maybe one
other question so on the fiscal
in the F. I. R. Mr Chairman
bullet number four on the second
page
expands I was it was I just want
to make sure I was reading this
correctly it's I believe it's
the difference between Otero no
notary expands those allowed to
perform notarial acts to include
judges lawyers and court clerks
but prohibits judges lawyers and
court clerks from being
notaries.
Explain that to me real quick to
make sure that I feel
comfortable voting for this bill
certainly so first of all under
existing laws Georgians workflow
and judges and clerks.
Notarial officers act were also
making years notarial officers
there's a there's a distinction
between a notarial officer and
under an enormous public.
It is one form of a material
officer and and so the number of
public as somebody who applies
for permission and gets a
commission uses a form your
commission from the state in
order to
and and then they also to give
on in order to to perform under
terrible on.
And so I privilege of having the
noted public commission maybe
come in Ontario office.
Was that judges programs in
under this act years automatic
material officers are able to
perform notarial acts based upon
while they're there the position
and again one of the things that
we do in terms of accountability
within this act is actually the
and and and and I will point out
one of the places that we depart
from you on this also some of
the things that we do more we
expand upon the in from out is
that is that if if I as an
attorney provide monetary law
act instead of a commission I'm
gonna miss more and more we'll
see.
And so concern we have we have
that level of accountability if
a judge were to do it then then
our the judge would indicate
which judicial division our
judicial district and division
they are in some of that block
would be reported on the on the
staff the end of the quarter in
that in the context of
performing their duties as a
court clerk
would also indicate that more
than one place that we depart
from what law is that under the
uniform law the people to
register stamp NMSA president's
office.
Alex.
Officers don't have to register
state because they're
automatically are under general
officer under this act actually
what we do and this creates a
eight incredible kind of it is.
This is an attorney
the if we pass this.
You know Jared officer.
But the secretary of state's
office know that I'm going to do
it.
And also have my stamp
registered with the secretary of
state's office was a judge.
The error rate in chairman
officer but we also have them
register with the secretary of
state's office in order to
perform on the material so
there's actually a greater level
of accountability I think under
this act than what exists under
the standard uniform are
provisions are aware of where
the only uniformed officers
don't need to register they
simply can do.
Thank you Mr chairman and Mr
chairman that definitely will be
on the exam so you might want to
write that one down
so what we're where is this
going to say it one more time in
the secretary of state's office
who's going to be responsible
they're going to have badges and
they're going to be sworn
officers to run out in force
this stuff I I kind of got a
little confused on the seven
additional head count to enforce
this or what what's what's all
that about yes thank you Mr
chairman and senator none of
that is going to be the case by
the time we see the sun part of
this this bill keeps moving okay
on all right alright that
currently exists under the
I think the least disruptive in
still need more about under on
all the in terms of the
enforcement's concerned and the
administrator shin art would be
over the secretary of state's
office and and quickly if you
want to apply to be in the
Republic you would apply to the
statistics office you were
actually have to present your
staff for approval to the
president's office and you
actually requirements
In order to protect on on on
on that we
on on on on the on a terrible
all up front hello attention is
that you do and so that will
continue to remain at the center
states office and which the fort
Department Division Mr chairman
as it said in the secretary of
state's office rentals on the
business services this
president's office and we have
the director of the business
services office here today I
believe additional Chavez this
presents thank you wonderful
where and they and they're
comfortable doing all of this
and having all this in there
over that they already have it
all in their office right.
Is that what you romanization
and and there are probably just
as excited as I am in terms of
the provisions of this act I was
super excited to hear that to so
thank you very much Mr chairman
and I think we're in good hands
there that's all I have Mr
chairman.
Thank you thank you senator
They don't believe we have any
more a questions of the
committee and the Senator Ivey
Soto I appreciate you and I did
have a conversation in my office
prior to the committee here in
regards to the enforcement issue
so hi.
We can now move this bill along
and work that before it gets to
the floor so I appreciate that.
So with that what is the
pleasure of the committee.
Nearly.
I will move it to pass Mr
chairman okay we have a motion
for the past by Senator Padilla
Senator how to me I second
Senator a meal second lane of
please call role.
Senator.
Yes ma'am.
Senator handler.
Yes.
Senator had a meal.
Yes.
Yes Senator Kernan.
Yes Senator.
Yes Senator Tallman.
Senator Wirth yes.
Senator Padilla.
Yes.
Senator Corman.
Senator Shendo yes.
Has Tom yes.
Okay thank you hello.
Okay.
Eleven.
Okay
you have to do pass on Senator
Ivy Soto.
Mr chairman thank you very much
members of the committee for the
conversation today.
Thank you.
So now we'll move on to the
Senate bill seventy nine small
business but they make taking so
reparations Senator Pirtle.
Mr chair and members of the
committee today I have before
you Senate bill seventy nine
small business reparation
takings Act essentially what
this bill is for is it for small
businesses to
because of the COVID nineteen
pandemic and the shut down that
resulted because of it they were
deprived of private property and
so we know that there's going to
be quite a few to you court
cases and that's going to be
litigation involving this and so
we want to get ahead of it and
ensure that the kid on the
budget is a little bit more
control a little bit more
planned out and so that we can
make sure that we don't take
take the brunt of this all in
one.
Budget year and so this was
within taxed right have a
similar situation that we use
for eminent domain a very
similar process that we use on
page one I.
Section three the purpose of the
small business pandemic take
taking preparation to implement
the provisions of article two
section twenty of the
constitution of New Mexico
providing just compensation from
the state for private property
taken or damage for public use.
And so I think at this point
myself I'm not arguing right
wrong or indifferent with regard
to the the shut downs issued by
by the governor what I'm arguing
is that for the public safety we
deprive the public of their
private property and so we
passed quite a few bills trying
to help small businesses but
this is a piece of legislation
that really help for small
businesses this pays them back
for for having having to suffer.
Being closed down for the public
good and for the public health
and safety and this would be
limited to businesses with one
hundred fifty or fewer employees
there would be a process for
them to prove up how much
they've lost
and and so I think this is a
really great approach I'm I'm
hoping to be a bipartisan
approach that we can do
something substantial for our
small businesses that this can
really ensure that main street
is able to survive this pandemic
we're sitting at almost a year
and you know for Valentine's day
my wife and I had to sit help
twenty degree weather and have
our Valentine dinner so I know
the restaurants here Ross we're
still suffering still trying to
just make payroll and things and
so this is a way that we can
ensure that for them closing
them doing more than their part
to ensure public safety that
they're compensated to the level
that they need to be and and
with that Mr chair of stand for
questions I also have with me
Blair done just to help with
some of the legal questions that
might arise so if we if we need
him he's there if not then you
know the questions can be
directed to me thank you Mr.
Thank you senator borough of
we'll go to a public comment.
At this time I don't have anyone
listed our statement in
opposition to Senate bill
seventy nine are there any
members of the public there are
a within the room that was like
an opportunity to speak
opposition please raise your
hand at this time using the
reactions at the bottom however
if you don't have access to that
issues that split the camera on
the way I can at least see.
And one more time these are
statements of opposition for
Senate bill seventy.
Okay any statements of
opposition I also don't have
anyone listed to give statements
of support are there any members
of the public are already in the
meeting like an opportunity to
speak please go ahead and raise
your hand at this time.
One more time this is for
statements of support for Senate
bill seventy nine.
Okay and it looks like we don't
have anyone that concludes
public statement at this time
thank you.
Thank you mark tell us so at
this time we'll go to a.
Committee for questions.
Don't everybody raise your hand
at once.
Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman for ****
Sir parole I actually really
appreciate this bill I think it
the.
Your within what thank you so
whether or not you agree with
the governor's orders.
Is irrelevant which way on which
side you fall on that and that's
not what this is about all the
fact is that we shut down and
actually still have some
businesses shut down to this
day.
businesses the government
ordered that they be closed
taking away their ability to
earn an income you know I I had
a business in California that
got rocked
we were there they came in at
night and broke in and stole the
register all the money in.
shut down for a couple of days
my insurance company paid for
all that but insurance companies
don't pay for it when the
governor or when the government
says you can't be open.
So but our constitution says
that if you take someone's
property that you have to.
Pay them for the taking of the
property and that's that's all
this is doing correct is
allowing those businesses to be
able to recover their losses.
Mr chair and senator that's
exactly what it does it and I I
want to point out that you know
our courts are already backed up
from from the same pandemic in
the closing and things along
those lines so our courts are
already backed up so as these
lawsuits are going to come in
for for the takings clause
claims against the state the
state is gonna have to pay even
more money out of this for
litigation and so this is a way
that the state can get ahead of
it ensure that we don't cost
ourselves any more money than we
have to remember these are small
businesses that may be claiming
eight ten twelve thousand
dollars well for them to pay an
attorney and go through this
process it's gonna cost him a
thousand just to claim the
twelve thousand and so I think
we want this money in the hands
of businesses this is the same
process we do
with with other claim similar to
this with eminent domain and so
this is a hundred percent about
getting the businesses that we
owe them the money they they
closed their business over the
public safety this is a thank
you this is what we owe them the
constitution I would hope we
would do this without this
articles are article two section
twenty but I think this is
something that as we move into
the future is it is something
that we're gonna all of these
businesses and this is a way
that we can do it through tax
credits and and really control
how that money is.
Appropriated over a period of
time so it's not all in one year
is is the real cost of this so
it's trying to to strike that
win win with the state and with
the business owners who were put
out.
Well Mister chairman Sir I
really appreciate that because I
think you're right you know what
we as a state you know we need
to comply with what the
constitution requires that we do
I hope that we will we would do
that without having to involve
courts I don't think we really
need to Judiciary getting
involved in making sure that
these businesses who through no
fault of their own and through
no fault of ours had to be shut
down.
and so you know now that we
you're hopefully getting back up
we can get some of these
businesses back online but they
have that time that they lost
the ability to be open and two
are in New Mexico and so this
just districts you're paying
them so I really appreciate you
bringing this bill I think is
the right thing for our state to
do without having to get into
the politics of of whether or
not the response was correct
we're just gonna do the right
thing and make sure these
businesses are taken care of so
thank you very much for
bringing.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator
thank you Center bread Senator
Padilla.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
thank you Senator Pirtle I I had
to really think about this one a
little bit more than I did your
last bill that you were with
here and
I am a little concerned about a
couple of items if I can ask you
about those Mr chairman.
So.
All the red staff.
I
don't know who that is Mr
chairman are we not but the red
stuff is good.
The.
Okay I think they muted their
line so Mr chairman and senator
Pirtle so just walk me through
help me out here this is
different from the business
applying for the items that
we've already made available in
the special sessions and then of
course now in this session to
aid small businesses will how is
this how is this different.
Mr chair and senator I really
appreciate that and in and I'm
not trying to discount the
things that that we've done I
think we we've done some some
things that will help a few
businesses but let's be honest
taking on more debt when you've
been closed for a year and you
don't know if you're even gonna
be able to to be open once
restaurants are allowed to be
open to full capacity and things
like that is concerning for for
a lot of businesses trying yes
this is.
Making sure New Mexico gets in
front of the inevitable and
that's that there's going to be
litigation revolving around
article two section twenty with
the taking of private property
for the public use public safety
and so I I think this is just a
way that we can be proactive we
don't want these businesses
going through litigation free
for five years from now and
they're out of business we want
to make sure that they have
access to these funds that they
have the reparations for closing
down for our state the so that
we can keep on in business so we
don't have to start over from
scratch and that's what this
bill does is it ensures that the
businesses that we did take
their private property we did
take the right to make a living
for the public good in the
public safety that we get the
reparations to them in an
efficient way and in a way that
can keep them in business we we
have some down and Rossell some
really great businesses that
were closed down that sell
things similar to the big box
stores and let's not forget the
big box store stayed open right
we all remember when that
happened and we solve our small
businesses are closing down one
that sells
Clothing really cool boutique
place down and down also called
she's a dandy you know it's
taken a lot for for her to build
up this business making T.
shirts and doing things and this
is a way to ensure that she
stays there so that she doesn't
get closed down and then we have
to start from scratch and
hopefully another boutique movie
we already have one she closed
down to keep us safe if she has
claims for per have been closed
down chairman efficient way
through the tax and
Representative department that
that that claim can be made in
the reparations can be done in
the position where that's not
expensive litigation going to
court after court for for many
years.
I appreciate that and I'm I'm
with you one hundred percent I
mean I've been a staunch
supporter of the legislation and
the funding that's been made
available to the small business
community in New Mexico and I
knew we needed to do more
insurance if we came right back
strong as the Legislature and
made that happen and and so I'm
I'm just trying to figure out
what else is available to these
businesses and are they able to
apply to both of them at the
same time some of them are
grants not not not large amounts
but they are small businesses
are I'm hoping that they're in
line with what is helpful want
to find a way to help them as
much as we possibly can there
are some issues that were drawn
out here I want to go to page
I want to say page three under
significant issues the attorney
general's office came forward
with some information.
the statement was that the
seventy nine.
I'm sorry yes seventy nine.
Hinges on a significant
constitutional issue whether the
state's emergency health orders
brought on by the COVID nineteen
pandemic constitutes a taking
the New Mexico Supreme Court
recently heard oral arguments on
this question and the court's
decision is pending what what is
that going to do to your
legislation is that going to
further complicate what you're
trying to get done here.
Well.
Mr chair and senator I I think
you know that that the
separation of powers that the
million in play of the AG that's
within the executive branch and
yet the judicial branch of
course doing doing their thing
but then where the legislative
branch and so this is just a way
that we can be proactive in
understanding and and the way I
interpreted I don't know about
you Senator Padilla but the way
I interpret it is that under
article two section twenty they
were deprived of of private
property did to keep the public
safe and so I know there's a lot
of lip service about you know we
believe in small business when
do everything we can for small
business but this is something
that we can do to ensure that we
don't stand as a state in
litigation more money than what
most of these businesses have
coming let's be more efficient
with our spending and and the
reality is this is a super
nonpartisan issue Democrat
businesses were closed the same
as Republican businesses it
wasn't something along those
lines it was New Mexicans doing
what they had to to keep other
New Mexicans safe and this is
how we can step up and say we
appreciate you for doing that we
the the article two section
twenty definitely applies here
the orders were ruled by the
Supreme Court to be legal so I
don't think that's the argument
here either we all know that
what we had to do to to stop the
spread
it is what we did and.
They need to be
help hold in and kept kept hope
for that in this way that we can
we can do that.
I appreciate that I'm.
Trying to to get my hands still
around that one component that
the AG's office pointed out of
the term a eight how is that
going to be
proven.
To to avoid things like fraud
and other items that could
potentially come as a result of
this this option being available
I I want to help you with the
senator I really do but I also
want to make sure that we're not
putting something on top of you
know of a potential solution to
create another problem.
Senator absolutely I I I
understand that and that's
that's why we're here today
right we got to work through all
of this and figure out and make
sure that logistically it works
and it sets out and and directs
the tax and rent to come up with
a system to to have that exact
same exact thing happened it
puts in time frame of of your
income levels and and the money
that was coming in before
the the shut down and the and
the shut down orders to ensure
that that they approve of the
businesses have to prove a
how much they were harmed in it
just turns it into an
administrative process as a as
opposed to going through the
courts in every single business
having to do it separately
streamlines the process
Not much different than you do
when you apply for the PDP lawn
that you bring forward how many
employees do you have wondered
what's the pay level all of
those things how many did you
have to let go because of COVID
nineteen and you have to prove
that up we'll have to do the
same thing here you'll have to
prove it and then I'll can be
issued or a certificate and so I
I think the it's laid out pretty
clear then there is the
flexibility given to taxed Rav
to do what they need to do to
make sure that they can
implement this efficiently.
Thank you Mr chairman I
appreciate that that response I
think in the PPE it's pretty
clear you have to produce tax
documents you have to produce a
number of employees you're
paying.
Raul taxes I I do that in my
business I was you know didn't
participate in any government
whatsoever at all zero for my
business is the type of work
that we do anywhere in the
country
but I'm trying to figure out
that you just walk us through
how is this going to be proven
how how is the business going to
document this particular.
You get the right turn here
taking.
So taking defined on page five
line twenty five.
means the substantial
deprivation of the right to the
free use and for enjoyment of
private property
and then further down it and.
Talk about the tax credit
created by the section revert to
as a small business pandemic
reparations tax credit.
And if you keep reading down.
It lines out detailed
how the the business will go
about applying for that and then
how the tax and Representative
department will go through their
process I think it's on page.
For page eight.
The end of page seven actually
Starting in subsection one it
really lays out there some
really large paragraphs and all
accounts so Mr Chairman was
but it it it definitely goes
through in detail how they will
have to prove
What they are owed it's not just
a I claim fifty thousand dollars
no you have to show that this
was your income level going in
this is how many employees you
have this is a realistic number.
And so Mr chairman I was the
taking was that defined because
of your bill for New Mexico law
or was that a federal definition
where did you get that
definition for your legislation.
Mr chair and senator almost
Mr dines on
With where that definition
Exactly come from.
I am thank I'm happy to help
with that.
So
One of the things that senator
dole did not cover is that in
the the minister can direct your
comments through the chair thank
you I apologize yes Mr chair
Senator Padilla I I apologize
for the the formality oversight
there
In the two cases that the
Supreme Court is has had thus
far both of welding that this
body has has delegated authority
to the governor they did so
under to set the statutes wanted
to at issue here is NMSA twelve
best in a to fifteen which is
the public health emergency
response act I'm in that there
is actually a statutory
provision that defines
compensation for purposes of
taking and it actually says.
Of and I quote the state should
pay just compensation to the
owner of a health care's health
care supplies a health facility
or any other property that is
lawfully taken appropriated by
the secretary of health sector
public safety or the director
for any temporary or permanent
use a public health emergency
you madam compensation cell do
shall be calculated in the same
manner as compensation do
partaking property pursuant to
nonemergency into demand for
procedures as provided by the
end of Mancos provided that the
amount of compensation
calculated and shall include
lost revenues and expenses
incurred due to the taking
appropriating of property
including a health facility so
the definition in the bill
reflects that the compensation
is the lost revenues and
expenses incurred due to the
public health orders and and the
circle back going to be other
questions on other assistants of
Business might have that we go
into this calculation the bill
also discusses that if
somebody's receive some other
sort of assistance that
essentially the government
received credit for any other
assistance that the the affected
business owner has has received
from any other source thank you
sorry again.
I think that's great thank you
for that explanation Mr chairman
and and Senator Pirtle Mr done
appreciate that I'm still a
little confused on that one but
I'm gonna keep reading so full
stop I just want to talk about
the funding portion of the it
seems that it's ambiguous
ambiguous on the fifty five
million dollars that the credit
is going to cost is that right.
What what is what is the
potential high and low of this
this particular.
bill from a funding standpoint.
Excuse me fiscal.
Mr chair and senator that's
that's the big unknown
as as litigation would come
forward essentially the state
has written a blank check to our
small businesses with regard to
appropriation we're just trying
to get something in place that
we do have a little bit of
control or oversight and that we
can plan input these cost into
future years I think it's up to
twenty years that the pants can
be made into and so I I I think
that's the real goal here so
that we don't have litigation
coming coming forward and just
basically have to write all
these checks and one year
because I think they could
amount to quite a bit more than
than the fifty five million and
and that is language that's in
here that how we would handle
amounts over the fifty five
million would be going into
future years as as credits and
so I I think.
That's the million dollar
question is how much is it going
to be well we've written the
blank check
as you heard with with the
definitions within the public
health emergency order act the
authority that we've already
given the governor so this is
the way that that as the
Legislature we can try to.
Keep the the damage to one
single budget year as minimal as
possible and and so that's
that's the reason for the
language discussing the pay out
and and to provide.
But fifty five million is it's
just a good start I think at
this point to ensure that we
have some funding in there to
ensure that that businesses have
access to
reparations and in this first
fiscal year.
I appreciate that Mr chairman
and senator pirtle I I I just
I'm still trying to figure out
what's is really going to cost I
mean it just seems like you
could literally run outcomes and
bankrupt the state based on what
in addition to proving which
you're you're taking was or
whatever are their damages also
could potentially be awarded
here and say there was a
political philosophy that blue
one way or the other.
In in the political wind and and
you know I I just wanna make
sure this doesn't turn into a
fifteen billion dollars tab in.
I appreciate that question
that's a great question and
answers no instead of very
similar to
the.
Eminent domain legislation so
there's not any question where
you can claim you know lost
sleep for.
Excessive stress or something
like that it's it's concrete
numbers yet to come up with
concrete numbers it shows that
you were armed with reality in
in your questioning Mr chair and
senator is the blank check has
been written it's up to us to
pay for it how do you want to do
is we want to do it in a
controlled way which is what
this piece of legislation does
or do we want to just find out
every year through litigation
how much money we and so I think
this is a way that we can within
a year find out what that number
is and then we can plan
accordingly moving into the
future instead of having each
case come up one by one by one
we can come up with a number
that we know that we're gonna
have to pay and and plan for
that accordingly going into the
future.
I appreciate Mr.
Sorry Mr chairman can I add on
to that point with more patient
go ahead.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Padilla of there is another
component to this which is that
New Mexico jurisprudence
supports that there could be an
award of taking are of a
attorney's fees if this were to
if this that this were left just
simply to litigation to resolve
this no I'm I'm not speaking
clearly in my best interest here
when I say that this is a way to
head off attorney's fees the
state might also actually occur
if we left this to the to the
court system purely to full to
to to figure this out so yet
here again I'm arguing against
paying people attorney's fees
and don't tell my friends.
Thank you Mr chairman and and I
was going to ask if this is
going to turn into a Attorney
bonanza where does this bill go
next Mister Senator perlite I
can look online I guess but you
can just tell me real quickly
what what what committees will
this Landon.
Mr chair and senator I know it
is up in finance
By way of Judiciary I waited
Judiciary would appear Mr chair
and senator so I'm sure we'll
get another healthy hearing in
Senate judiciary if it if it
does make its way out of this
committee
What we're we're trying to keep
it from being Mr chair and
senator I a lawyer the man's I
think is that the the term that
that you used and and so I think
we're trying to be as efficient
as possible keeping this out of
the Courts in trying to save the
state money we know that we
hello this amount of money do we
want to pay lawyers fees
attorneys fees court fees and
everything on top of that or do
we want to just.
Go out and do the right thing
right from the beginning.
I appreciate that Mr chairman
and much like my legislation you
know I'm sure it's going to get
a ton of help over Judiciary to
be in its best Sunday clothes by
the time it leaves I appreciate
that Mr Chairman I'm sorry for
all the question Senator Pirtle
but you know how these things go
I want to make sure I understood
it I am I'm I'm on the fence on
this one so I'm gonna listen to
more thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Senator Padilla I have
Senator tall men and and senator
of worth of so I'm going to ask
the chairman if you can gonna
continue I need to step out just
for a bit thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman will go to
senator Tom and now.
Thank you Mr.
Chair
Going down a slippery slope
here.
For instance a.
Somebody went out of business.
Because the particular city had
a drastic drop in population so
they don't have any customers or
what if
They had a fire insurance didn't
cover the entire Los so with
the.
When we were going down a
slippery slope here I.
And we so I'm I I'm against this
for three reasons of I find
Senator Pirtle very personable
guy does a good job of
representing his district but.
I think we're going down a
slippery slope here we don't
know secondly we don't know what
the cost is going to be number
three we've already appropriated
what three hundred half a
billion dollars to help small
businesses so thank you Mr chair
and that that's all I have thank
you.
Thank you senator Tom in a
Majority Leader worth.
Thank you Mr chair and
Senator pearl idea it's been fun
to watch your legal career
blossom here and I really hope
you are going to at some point
make the decision to go and
actually go to law school
because again I I really do and
I and I don't mean this at all
in a sarcastic way I I think
it's it's great that you up.
You know have have are able to
to navigate through bills and
it's it's particularly fun now
that you're on Senate Judiciary
so you're going to have even
more fun because that's an
amazing committee where you just
learn learn and learn
You know I there's just there's
a couple things one I just I
think you said that we've kind
of done lip service to
businesses and and you know I
don't think that's fair we
really bent over backward and
you've been part of that and I
appreciate your votes on those
you know there was a hundred
million dollars for businesses
across the board not across the
board there are some exceptions
back in November of course we
did a hundred million for.
Restaurants have doesn't balsam
hold harmless maybe is a little
less than that and and and then
you know Senator Candelaria this
bill is five hundred million
that's loans little different
and then there's a lead a bill
that I've been going back and
forth that is not yet come out
of Senate finance so that's
another discussion that's there
But I just think the the
incentive Padilla asked exactly
the right question this is a
matter that's pending in front
of the Supreme Court
and.
You know those are and Mr done
is made the argument there and I
think I think he was the are the
lawyer in that case and it's
pending there and and certainly.
Yeah health the issue of of
legal fees is always interesting
as a as a lawyer myself on but I
guess I'd rather leave in the
spring court and and let Mr done
get just get as fees if the
court rules that way I I
honestly do not think they will
as a lawyer who's you know
practice thirty years and and
realize we're all and kind of
uncharted waters so I guess Mr
chair I think the question is
this is a tax credit that cost
fifty five million dollars and
so the policy in this committees
not to move these forward
you know that's a choice for
Senator Pirtle or I can make a
motion
you know that that he might not
why but I just I don't think we
should move this this bill
forward and again that it would
be inconsistent with our our
policy of holding these tax
credit bills and this is a fifty
five million dollar tax credit
based on the FIR and I think the
point you raised Senator Padilla
could be or maybe Suazo Sierra
and you know what's the the
eventual limit of this we just
on now so just just my thoughts
and and again leave it up to the
chair as to how procedurally we
want to proceed with this thank
you
Mr chairman and Senate Majority
Leader if I may
I I did not intend any.
Thing with the lip service
comment I did not intend that
toward the legislature in any
way
I I mentioned earlier that that
we've done so working I'm not
discounting the work that we've
done up to this point I just
feel like you know we can do
more in this is a way that we
can we can do it directly to
those who have been directly
harmed by my COVID nineteen so I
didn't mean any anything towards
the work that we've done some
some great work
Twelve fourteen pieces of
legislation a little bit here
and there you might be happy to
know that
over the Christmas holiday I
enrolled in college for the
first time is thirty five years
old with the intentions of going
to law school so all right.
Added to my plate of opening a
business and and everything else
so
I don't know that makes you
happy or not but that that is
the goal
never too old to learn something
new I feel like I lived a
lifetime
already on the farm so it's on
to the next adventure so I
appreciate your your comments
and I appreciate that
encouragement Mr chair and Mr
majority floor leader well I've
I appreciate the insights and I
think that is super exciting and
we have had members that have
done the done the full jungle
and been able to go to law
school and and so you'll have to
do that step number one but that
I think that's terrific and of
course you know I think we both
agree there's been a lot of good
work done by the legislature and
we can't do it quite frankly and
I'm gonna be and I think that
it's been bipartisan work and
that's that's something we can
really be proud to be part of
that thank.
Thank you Mr chair thank you Mr
Majority Leader thank you
senator pirtle
hi should notify the Majority
Leader I'm also considering law
school to so it's going to be a
fun house once we're all done
with law school
I had Senator Sanchez on the dot
on the list of speaker of a next
I don't know I think your hand
is down senator Sanchez did you
have some comments or questions.
No good.
Mr chair all right thank you and
not seeing any others and I
don't see the chair back at this
time I am going to make a
decision on behalf of the
committee because I think that
we need to be is in a consistent
as possible and in with Senator
Pirtle
it think you may know that we're
that we're putting all of these
bills what we're calling sort of
a parking lot and having them
sit there until we're ready to
review no to act on each of them
individually I happen to me the
other day as well and and I
expected that so I think we'll
let it sit I don't think we need
an actual action.
and we'll just move forward
thank you very much Senator
Pirtle for answering all those
questions I think it's very
helpful to the committee.
Mr chair members of the
committee on I just appreciate
having my bills heard this is
a unusual for me actually
getting a chance to present them
I think we're doing New Mexico
service by I'm gonna respecting
every single member with the
legislation that they bring
forward that we give it the time
in the hearing that that the
that they deserve it and it's
showing respect to my district
and every other district that
number just give every bill
hearing and so I just appreciate
your time thank you Mr chair
thank you Senator Pirtle
excellent comments we will now
move forward committee I am
showing our next action will be
senator Tom and for Senate bill
one twenty nine amending the
work and save acting while
you're preparing senator Tom and
I'm an update the chair we did
have the tax credit bill Mr
chairman put in the parking lot
like all the other tax bills
that we've had so far I just
wanna let you know we're at so
back to you Sir are appreciated
go ahead you can continue.
For a little bit.
Okay we'll just go on Senate
bill one twenty nine senator Tom
in your you have the floor.
Thank you Mr chair
This.
Senate Bill.
One twenty nine is an amendment
to the.
The bill that.
You and I sponsored last year at
you and I are the proud sponsor
of the bill that created the
work in safe.
Program that was created because
there's such a huge number of
folks in New Mexico have
inadequate savings to lead a
safe and dignified retirement
thirty percent of New Mexicans.
Hey who are in retirement are
living on social security only
in the average amount of the
payment annual payment is only
fourteen thousand dollars New
Mexico has the highest number of
folks who are not part of
retirement savings program.
So this first take the amendment
Mr chair which does has two
major aspects of the first is
that
It changes the deadline to.
Implement the market place
program from July of this year
to July of two thousand twenty
four and a change is the
deadline to implement the Roth
IRA program from January two
thousand twenty two to July two
thousand twenty four the second
major aspect of the settlement
Mr.
Chair is to.
This too is part of the clean up
to clean up to
Find some cleanup provisions
which are intended to remove any
ambiguities.
To the board's mandates so Mr
chair that is the.
Essence of the amendment to
which
We will take up now Mr chair we
have three.
Expert witnesses all of which
are eminently qualified we have
went off then chairman of the
board of work in safe we have
Claudia me home which is
executive director of the work
and save board we have Sam
Collins who is the deputy
director of the office of state
treasurer.
Thank you senator Tom and and I
just want to let the committee
know you should have received
these amendments via email
either last night or today so
you should have had those ahead
of time per Senator I'm sorry
chairman Chandos rule on on the
the advance notice now did you
want to senator Tom in your
experts to speak on behalf of
the amendments or did you want
to have them speak after we act
on the amendments it's certainly
up to you.
The.
Will afterwards okay.
Can we have an a motion for
purposes of discussion on the
amendment.
Motion for a discussion on the
amendment.
Thank you.
You Senator Hamblen if there's
no opposition will let senator
Tom and give us a little bit
more if you wish to on the
amendment.
Are there more than one I don't
remember not looking at them at
the moment.
Well there's basically two up.
Aspects of the number one is
often change the deadline and
the other one is to
Address some technical clean out
provisions which are intended to
remove any ambiguities to the
boards mandates if anyone has
any questions will be glad to
answer them Mr chair.
Thank you senator Tom and and
we'll go to members of the
committee on the amendment with
the two sections.
And I don't see do we have
anybody wishing to okay we have
Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman trying to
find the amendment
It would have gone to you today
Senator Brandt.
One twenty nine right.
Yes we are.
I'm just trying to look to see
what time you would have gotten
those today.
The amendment is up.
Okay.
Having a.
Senator Brandt.
So
All right I'll just I don't have
anything I just I I did not see
the amendments
I don't know if the.
I was just looking in my email I
got amendments for our meeting
in two days from now.
but I do not see amendment for
today on this bill so thank you
Senator Brandt and Mr Chairman
with your permission lane at
what time for those to those go
out and and did Senator but was
Senator Brandt on the
distribution.
Usually M. yeah well for about
RO four PM yesterday afternoon
okay.
Okay.
Any other questions on I can't
see everybody at the moment let
me see maybe I can do that that
might help me we have other
questions for senator Clemente
on the amendments on the
amendment.
Okay having none please Senator
Kernan would like to speak
Senator Kernan.
Thank you very much so
Just going through I did get I
did get the amendments and and
I'm kind of looking through the
analysis right now can you
explain to me I'm.
In the amendments the reason for
removing permissions for blanket
sure aren't.
So thank
thanks.
Mr chair and representative.
That's part of the bill itself
the the two specs I just talked
about the amendments to the
amendments so that will come
later.
Okay I'll just wait until later
thank you.
Okay members do we have I'm
looking through and scrolling
through the list of participants
for I can see hands raised are
there any is there are there any
other questions on the
amendments on the amendment
excuse me.
Okay seeing none do we have a
motion on the amendment.
so moved okay we have a
Motion on the amendment to we
have a second Senator Hickey
seconds the motion all right if
the committee just write
secretary would take the role.
I'm sorry the broken.
Yes.
Yes.
Well yes.
Senator Hickey yes Senator had a
meal yes.
Senator Kernan.
Yes.
Yes.
Senator Clemente.
Yes Senator Wirth yes.
Senator Padilla yes Senator
Shendo.
Yes.
Eleven all right thank you lane
in center Tommy have an amended
bill and now we'll go to a
public comment on Senate bill
one twenty nine and the last
miss Clinton to manage the
public comment.
Thank you
Mr Mr chair excuse me.
So if.
Have a brief explanation of the
the bill itself.
Your that's perfectly fine I
thought you'd introduced to
before but if you'd like to
walkers I just I just talked
about the amendments that would
talk about the bill briefly okay
that's fine sure go right ahead
thank you Mr chair you're doing
a great job.
The chair the bill Mr chair is
would make some narrowly focused
changes to the the work and save
act which.
The you and I sponsored last
year along with three others
Sanchez.
The.
The the the board the board will
one of the changes that make so
board will that be directly or
indirectly manage program
participant funds.
Also Mr chair the employees are
not responsible for any losses
implore you might have due to
the poor performance of the
employees investment selections.
And the Mr chair these the state
of New Mexico in the border not
guaranteeing investment
performance results.
Furthermore the board replaces
the recall.
Wireman that the board purchase
a blanket security bond with
liability insurance and
indemnity and domestication
products.
Mr chair there is no fiscal
impact to this this bill the
bill would create a non
reverting fund but there's no
fiscal impact the bill does not
ask for appropriation the bill
inserts language giving the
board permission to work with
private and nonprofit entities.
Mr chair what does the bill not
to it does not change the
voluntary step that is the
programs both the employer and
the employees participation
remains voluntary.
In the bill does not change the
legislature's original mandate
that the board will design and
implement the retirement plan
market place and the payroll
deduction.
Roth IRA program two of the
major aspects of the program.
And the work so Mr chair what
has the work done so far all
because of the pandemic
appointments to the work of
board to the work and say board
were delayed.
And however since October the
board has met three times and
they have another meeting
scheduled for this coming
Thursday the board is forming
committees to more efficiently
perform their duties and
responsibilities but they need
more time that is why Mr chair
we have extended the deadlines
from July.
Of this year.
For the payroll plan workplace
program.
To.
July of two thousand twenty four
and were extending the deadline
for the payroll deduction Roth
hire a program.
From January twenty two two July
two thousand twenty four.
So Mr chairman that concludes my
remarks in the okay opened up to
public.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator Tom and and and thank
you for your patience miss
Clinton if you can walk us
through public comment please.
Okay miss Clinton if you're
still with us if you can walk us
through public comment thank you
very much.
At this time I don't have anyone
who signed up to make statements
in opposition to Senate bill one
twenty nine.
Is there anyone who would like
to speak in opposition okay go
ahead.
He amendment state president go
ahead.
You're still muted sorry
speaking for I'm sorry.
No problem.
Are there any other members of
the public who wish to make
statements in opposition of
Senate bill one twenty nine
again these are statements of
opposition.
Okay it doesn't look like we
have any one of us so we will go
to the list in the here for
Mister Rogers your first go
ahead.
Good afternoon Mister Mr chair
and members of the committee my
name is Roger career and here is
the volunteer state president
for a a RP New Mexico and the co
chair of the consumer team for
A. R. P. a R. peed New Mexico is
in strong support of Senate bill
one twenty nine amending work
the working save act we would
like to thank Senator told one
for bringing this bill forward
thank you very much.
Thank you Mr Greer we will now
hear from
Miss Christina.
Are you still available Mr chair
I am.
All I'm Christina Fisher and the
associate director think New
Mexico and we work with A. R. P.
and the sponsors and others last
year to develop the work in
state act I'm really appreciate
the strong provided support for
this law which is going to
dramatically expand access
retirement savings for thousands
of New Mexicans Senate bill one
twenty nine contain small court
cleanup language that will
ensure the smooth implementation
of the law and we urge the
committee to support thank you.
Thank you Mr are there any other
members of the public who wish
to give statements of support
presented by one twenty nine.
I see hand
Dion did you want to make a
statement.
I do think you.
Can you hear me OK I do on the
Valencia I am the advocacy
director for a a RP New Mexico I
am also very I'm proud to be
sent state treasurer to Mike in
Berg's appointee to the board I
currently serve as the vice
chair of the board and on behalf
of the R. P. this is one of our
priority pieces of legislation
and we ask you and urge the
committee to support this bill
and it will it will ease our
implementation we have an
excellent board and I hi we
continue to support this thank.
Thank you so much yeah are there
any other members of the public
who wish to make statements of
support.
Thank you very much includes
public statements for Senate
bill one twenty nine at this
time.
Okay thank you miss Quinten and
thank you senator tall men will
go to the committee now and I
don't at the moment have any
hands raised I'm looking on the
big board to see if we have
anybody.
Just physically raising their
hand.
And I don't see any.
I'll wait a couple of seconds
there just to make sure once had
an opportunity.
All right thank you very much if
you'd like to close out your
presentation senator Tom.
Before we entertain a motion.
Thank you for the thank you for
asking I don't have the.
Closing statements other than I
appreciate the support
from the members for this a very
worthwhile legislation thank you
Mr chair.
Thank you senator Tom and if
there are no other questions
I'll entertain a motion at this
time.
Motion FOR do pass okay.
Senator how to meal moves for to
pass Senator Kernan seconds if
the secretary will take the
role.
Hold on will.
Yes Mister chairman.
Yes.
Over the which is for now
Senator Brandt.
Senator grant and yes.
I think she was calling Senator
Brandt please continue miss
Quinn okay Senator Griggs.
Yes.
Senator Hamblen.
Just.
Senator.
Yes.
Senator huh.
Yes.
Senator Kernan.
Yes.
Senator Sanchez yes senator Tom.
Yes.
Senator Wirth yes.
Senator Padilla yes.
Senator Shendo.
Yes and one more time Senator
Brandt.
You are muted I'm sorry I missed
a missed you.
Okay Senator grants isn't
available we can try to get that
again.
And the account is going to.
At ten.
For yes would have stayed at
this moment okay thank you Mr
Clinton representative Tom you
have to pass any comments.
Well thank you Mr chairman thank
you members of the committee for
your support thank you thank you
senator thank you Mr Clinton.
The chairman would you like me
to continue or would you like to
continue one more you're doing
great.
Hey all right we're working as a
team here let's move over to
Senator souls now I see him
online we have Senate bill one
thirty purchase of electric
vehicles.
Thank you Mr chair and Senate
bill one thirty and I do have an
amendment and if someone would
like to move the amendment for
discussion because it's.
Easier than trying to talk about
the bill do the amendment then
talk about the bill.
Okay I guess I I guess we're
we're comfortable doing that I
just want to make sure that
we're hearing to the chairs
requirements.
And was the amendment produced
ahead of time.
Mr chair yes it was and it's up
on on the screen now okay and if
we send that to committee
members ahead of time.
Mr lane or.
Yes.
Excuse me sorry.
This amendment was sent out at
the same time as the other
and then that's what I thought
okay thank you miss Clinton okay
can we have a motion for
purposes of discussion of the
amendment please.
Hello.
Okay we have a motion for
discussion is there any
opposition.
Hearing none Senator souls to
explain the amendment.
Thank you Mr chair of the
amendment just strikes the on
page two a line nineteen number
four.
It was found that that is
redundancy purple listed cetera
with the procurement code it's
already covered in there about
the actual procurement this is
just where it's talking about
what qualifies as an electric
vehicle.
Thank you senator souls are
members of the committee is
there any discussion on the
amendment I'm trying to move
back and forth to see if we have
any.
Okay.
Are there is no discussion on
the amendment all entertain a
motion for for a due pass on the
amendment Mr chair if I could do
for the motion yes seven thirty
to work thank you so I just want
to make sure I understand.
What was this attempting you
just purchased or leased because
the language is being stricken.
Was a was a limitation I think
on or did was defining electric
vehicle purchased or leased by a
more from a deeper.
This is procurement being done
by.
General Services I just.
I mean you mentioned was
superfluous can you just explain
that a little bit more Center
souls.
Mr chair and senator my
understanding is you know
procurement of vehicles is all
within the procurement code and
so having any of this you know
there is not required is not
necessary and this where it's
actually talking about an
electric vehicle I'm so yeah
that that was believed to be
unnecessary and again
superfluous with what is in
there opcode for how they go
about purchasing vehicles.
As explained to me.
Yeah Mister I appreciate that it
does seem to be.
It just seems to be dealing with
something very different than
what we're talking about so it
just doesn't it so I certainly
would make a motion but the past
motion on the amendment we have
a due pass motion on the
amendment to have a second.
Thank you Mr chair okay we have
a second by Senator Hamblen the
secretary will take the role.
Miss Renfro honest Clinton were
thank you for what.
No.
Yes on the amendment.
Yes.
The question Senator Hickey is
on the amendment and your vote
please.
Yes I'm sorry I just got a
message and unstable yes.
You.
The real test.
Yes.
Yes.
Senator Corman.
Yes.
Work yes.
Yes.
The.
Yes.
One one eight thank you.
Thank you mistras all given
amended bill if you want to take
us through the the bill now
thank you Mr chair of this bill
It is part of
climate change and the emissions
that are being put in I just our
report today that the the
secretary of the of the energy
sector where most C. O. T. C. O.
two is being emitted to the
atmosphere is in the
transportation sector and as we
move forward and take seriously
that we do have climate change
that is happening that is
occurring we must deal with
moving into more electric
duplication of our
transportation secretary.
The young man trying to get my
my thoughts and things all all
together here it's been a long
afternoon thanks
This bill would require that the
state.
Purchased by twenty thirty must
have seventy five percent of the
state we must be hybrid or
electric and hybrids must be
more of what are typically
considered the plug in hybrid
level I just bought a Prius I
look very carefully at the plug
in hybrids and the I could get
from Santa Fe to Los crucis with
a plug in hybrid currently but
the technology has been changing
rapidly so my regular Prius
would not qualify for this the
plug in Prius is what
but for the state to move
towards electrification of the
State Street by twenty thirty I
would like to point out that the
FIR is around this as many of us
about many FIR is are you a
student that the state was going
to have to purchase seventy five
percent of the total fleet by
twenty thirty without any of the
what are the current
replacements every year the the
General Services Department
replaces the number of the
vehicles that are already part
of the budgeting process all
this we do is propose
replacements should now be
coming with electric clever
reply again or all electric
vehicles and so the FIR indeed
students that it's a hundred
percent to be bought already
there are going to be a
replacements up approximately
seventy five percent of the week
between now and then at least
the.
Typical cost of the.
Hybrid and electric vehicles can
be as low as twenty eight
thousand dollars for ones they
come with substantial savings
also and savings are not
typically part of New York but
ought to be part of the
consideration
hybrid vehicles typically use
regenerative braking which means
when you break it actually
restores energy to the battery
and thus they do not have the
repair costs of putting on brake
pads because brake pads are
being used lectured motors are
much much simpler than internal
combustion engines they don't
require the same level of fluids
the problems with them the heat
dissipation of the exhaust pipes
there all kinds of things
electric vehicles just don't
have which makes them
substantially less expensive to
own imitate maintain which is
also a savings to the state
which is not pick up in the F.
I. R. that indicates only what
the cost would be to replace.
Seventy five percent of the
current fleet at the typical
replacement cost and again
without any understanding that
we already replace part of that
every single year with already
allocated dollars those are not
reflected in the I. part
and again this is moving the
state in a very active
aggressive manner towards
electrifying our transportation
grant and if we truly want to
get to where we have electric
charging stations throughout the
state one of the best ways of
doing that is for the state the
lead in having and an aggressive
posture on replacing our state
fleet of vehicles of the reason
that seventy five percent is
there certainly are some parts
of the the where in electric or
plug in hybrid type of the
vehicle is not appropriate I've
heard from the department of
fish and game where they may be
two hundred miles out into the
wilderness of doing checks on
hunters for the day and they may
be out of range for that length
that distance for an electric
vehicle I know there may be some
concerns people have for things
like police cars and things if
anybody is ever driven and
Senator Tallman I don't you have
electric vehicle electric
vehicles have incredible torque
and pick up and speak and though
they may not currently be used
for previous vehicles they might
be into the future of this also
might require that as people are
checking out vehicles for
various uses within the state
right that if the driving is
mostly going to be more urban
driving an electric vehicle
absolutely matters the twenty
five percent that should be more
of a standard internal
combustion engine with these for
specific uses we are the
electric of the hybrid might be
impractical due to the distance
from charging stations and other
things of that nature
I'd be happy at this point to
to.
Answer any questions people
might have.
Thank you Senator and I didn't I
wanted to make this offer I
think in the comments on the F.
I. R. did you want to have our
analysts Committee analyst
discussed the.
Her analysis of the part you
want to just see if that comes
up in that conversation.
Comes up Senator Mr chair if it
comes up and the committee
analyst is able to find
information on that it's
relevant I'm happy to have them
fill in in June so again I just
think the up by our look only at
the absolute cost of seventy
five percent of the read if we
were to go out and buy them do
without recognizing that there
already is a replacement
schedule for the vehicles and
the reduced maintenance costs of
electric vehicles.
Thank you very much Senator and
were there any expert witnesses
that you wanted us to hear from
not at this time Mr chair thank
you Senator okay let's go ahead
and go to Mr Clinton for public
comment.
Absolutely.
We will first be hearing from
people who'd like to speak in
opposition to Senate bill one
thirty first.
Hello yes.
You without recognizing.
Let's go ahead and meet our
lines everybody please.
The reduced maintenance costs of
electric vehicle.
Okay I needed everyone in the
room but myself so we will hear
from Mr call casting go ahead hi
Mr chairman members of the
committee.
My name is Paul guessing and
president of the Rio Grande
foundation were public policy
research institute based in
Albuquerque up we.
Recommended this bill would not
be adopted right.
The state should consider
whatever transportation best
service the state of New Mexico
and does the job in getting
people from place to place and
whatever other implements our
necessary rather than having a
state mandate specifically for
one particular type of vehicle
engine in that vehicle rather
than.
Micromanaging this process we're
confident that people in charge
of procurement can make better
decisions a more affordable cost
at some point yes there will be
more charging stations around
our state but at this point.
Public information says that
there are fifty one of those
even if you have a.
Significant investment by the
state there's going to be a
significant time lag there's
going to be serious issues with.
Government employees potentially
not being able to go from place
to place because the engines of
their vehicles will get them
there in the charging stations
run available also of course the
cost of this nine million
dollars over three years maybe
that's a little different based
on the amendment but.
Significant thank you.
Thank you Mr guessing are there
any other members of the public
who wish to speak in opposition
to the bill again this is
opposition to Senate bill one
thirty.
Please raise your hand at this
time.
It doesn't look like we have any
wind so we will now go to Mr
Bill Jordan Mister Jordan are
you available.
One more time Mr Bill Jordan.
Can we go ahead and learn we
will now hear from Mr Gary
Payton go ahead Mr page and Mr
Clinton this is in support at
this point.
Yes again to clarify this is
support statements for Senate
bill one thirty thank you go
ahead Mr meeting.
Go ahead you're.
We have any rights we will now
go to Mr Bill Jordan structure.
Mr rate.
Bill Jordan you can go ahead and
speak I see that you're unmuted.
We'll go ahead.
We want to carry rate.
And respond to this morning I'm
personally we're gonna have to
move on to Mr Payton.
Is Mr Chris numbers available Mr
Nevers.
Mr medio.
And I believe.
No present the coalition of
sustainable communities New
Mexico.
The coalition comprised of the
elected leaders of the cities of
Los crucis Albuquerque Santa Fe
and Santa Fe County
Representative forty percent of
the population as.
I.
Is Chris Mr chair if I may
suggest Mr thank you can you
remove the webcast from your
computer if you're watching the
webcast that's what we're
getting is an echo or at a
minimum turn down the sound
thank you.
And I believe.
The president the goals will
give you a chance to get
situated.
We will go back to Mr Chris
Nevers I saw that you did a need
for a moment go ahead.
Mr numbers you are muted.
Mr chair I just it just Mr can
you remove the webcast from your
computer.
Watching the webcast that's what
we're getting is an echo thank
you very much.
Okay it sounds like we have a
lot of background noise from a
lot of our public speakers so
one more time and everyone who's
watching the webcast to please
me of that just for the ease of
the committee that we we don't
have to listen to the echo.
It is on a bit of a time delay.
So one more time if you could
please just mute to the webcast
in the background now we will go
to Mr Burciaga members Mr Nevers
it is you're trying to speak.
Okay we'll try to come back Mr
Gary Payton are you ready to
speak to the committee.
Your meeting go ahead and.
Thank you very much Mr chair
members of the committee my name
is Gary Payton.
I represent the coalition of
sustainable communities New
Mexico a coalition that is
comprised of the elected leaders
of the cities of Los crucis
Albuquerque Santa Fe and Santa
Fe County representing
approximately forty percent of
the population of the state our
members stand in support of
Senator souls Bill SB one thirty
each of our member communities
is actively implementing their
own plans for electrifying major
portions of the.
Recognizing their decrease
maintenance costs and decrease
greenhouse gas emissions for
example the City of Santa Fe has
a goal of transitioning into
ministry of and non emergency
plea to electric or hybrid by
twenty twenty five Santa Fe
County has annual targets for
Evey adoption and build out of
its own Evey charging
infrastructure.
This is a stretch goal for
twenty thirty would stretch
goals promote new thinking new
ways of doing work and in this
case the expansion of the Eevee
charging Network statewide.
It's appropriate for the state
to have this goal for the
purchase of electric vehicles as
one more step taken in the
transportation sector to address
reduced emissions decrease
maintenance costs and the impact
of advancing climate change our
coalition urges you to vote yes
on SB one thirty thank you very
much Mr chair thank you members
of the committee.
Thank you Mr Payton.
We will now go to Mr Tom
Solomon.
Tom I see there with your hand
raised are you ready to speak Mr
Solomon.
You're still need.
Still meeting.
Yes thank you.
Can you hear me now yes we can.
Right thank you yes my name is
Tom Solomon co coordinator of
New Mexico chapter three fifty
dot org group devoted to
fighting for us I've caught safe
climate and on behalf of our
eight thousand members in New
Mexico strongly support Senate
bill one thirty and we think
Senators schools for drafting it
and helping the push this to
electrify the state's vehicle
fleet as he stated
transportation is in fact
according to the EPA the largest
single source of US greenhouse
gas emissions at about twenty
percent of the total.
and electric vehicles already
have the lowest operating costs
that are getting cheaper every
year in terms of their initial
purchase costs and will soon
well before twenty thirty of the
lowest up front costs
of any vehicles that you can buy
just because electric motors are
so easy to manufacture and far
less.
Costly then the internal
combustion engines that they
replace.
And I'd like to note for
senators will benefit that in
fact
police forces around the country
are starting to electrify their
police vehicle fleets including
Barboursville Indiana police
chief Todd Bertram recently
commented this year are like
brother last last June of that
electric vehicles keep their
value for a long time and the
police force keep their vehicles
for about six seconds and after
they broke down economics they
so they were gonna save about
twenty thousand dollars per car
so we strongly support this bill
thank you.
Thank you Mr Solomon we will now
hear from miss Tammy the record
go ahead can.
Thank you chairman members of
the committee my name is Tammy
people Corman was southwest
energy efficiency project first
week and we strongly support
this bill as well we look at
this bill is a really great way
for the state of New Mexico to
lead by example we think it's
very important that we set a
good example for others the
municipalities around the state
are also doing this type of
changeover of their fleets so
for that reason please support
SP one thirty thank you for your
time.
Thank you.
One more time Mr Chris members
are you available for public
comment.
I see that you unmuted if you
want to go ahead and get your
statements are.
I'm sorry I still can't hear you
Mr numbers on can the committee
here Mr Nevers.
No no one in the chamber can
hear your statements
unfortunately
you can go ahead and type a
written statement of what you
plan to say and I'll be sure
that the committee gets a copy
of okay.
Thank you Mr numbers was there
anyone else who wish to make a
public statement in support of
Senate bill one thirty at this
time of the members of the
public.
It doesn't look like we have
anyone that concludes public
statements for Senate bill one
thirty and I will be sure to
provide the statements from Mr
numbers to the committee thank
you.
okay thank you Mr Clinton will
now go to members of the
committee I do not see any hands
raised let me to go hello we
have Senator Kernan.
Thank you very much and I
appreciate the opportunity I
don't know that I have any
questions just a COVID I'm
watching Senator souls.
I can't sing in front of the
snow we debt yes we all
experience right now and I just
wonder how and we would be able
to tell me about the charging
stations I mean are they
currently doing how you doing
would you.
Senator Kernan.
Thank you I just maybe just a
little bit of information about
charging stations the cost of
those stations the time it takes
to charge a car and I know
that's depended somewhat on the
type of charging station that is
installed so help me understand
where the energy comes from
Ashley to charge that the
electric vehicles can you
explain that to me.
Thank you senator Mr chairman
and Senator Kernan I'm not an
expert on charging stations that
yeah we is has to be certainly
part of all of this part of this
bill is it does dry it more the
charging stations and I know
Senator Woods is one who is
worked on bills to a increase
the number of charging stations
particularly in rural New Mexico
areas
all of this becomes part of a
gap that the infrastructure in
order to have the vehicles yep
yep the vehicles in order to
fund the destruction so they
have to move together that's
part of the point of this is to
ensure that the charging
stations become more ubiquitous
and that also brings in more
people traveling to New Mexico
who have the the vehicles and
know that they can find places
to charge their vehicles when I
was recently buying a new car
one of the things that I looked
at was if I buy a totally
electric car can I get the Santa
Fe and determined that in most
cases there is a charging
station currently in Sapporo and
if I started an hour ahead of
time I could stop in Sapporo and
have breakfast in the Google
copy and things and get enough
additional charge on my card to
get me the rest of the way to
Santa Fe
electric vehicles the
performance the capacity the
distance that they're able to
travel is increasing rapidly
from just a few years ago that
several of them now have a range
of approaching three hundred
miles on a single charge that's
impressive in similar to other
electrification and renewables
the the expectations of the
experts have been wrong every
single time and in the good way
they have the performance has
increased more than what was
expected in every single
instance as to how rapidly the
would become ubiquitous of their
range everything else is rapidly
moving towards electrification
of the entire vehicle fleet
within the next several years
and most of.
You're probably aware that Ford
Motor Company announced it I
think by twenty thirty five that
they were going to stop making
internal combustion engines all
of their vehicles would be
totally electric it's moving
that direction I don't know that
I answered your question Senator
charging stations there are some
that are rapid charge what is
where you get a lot of charge
quickly and then there are ones
that are slower most charging in
homes are much lower and be take
eight to twelve hours rapid
charging stations you can get
pretty much a full charge in
about an hour to an hour and a
half from what I understand.
So so thank you Mr and and and
actually did not answer my
question because I think my
question was where does the
energy come from when you plug
it in and and and we know it
comes from whatever electrical
source.
Is in that particular area in
other words we know that
renewables play part we know
that natural gas place alright
I'm what what I guess I'm
concerned about your directing
state employees are to be
required to drive electric
vehicles.
I would think charged home what
that be charged at that.
Their particular department
offices I'm not sure where that
would occur if they're on the
road if they're traveling from
Santa Fe to Hobbs if they're
part of a particular department
that needs to make a visit to in
my area are they gonna stop in
funded charge New Mexico when it
happened have breakfast or
whatever I think all of these
things when you require state
agencies to do this at the time
involved we don't know what
that's going to be none of this
is been fleshed out we don't
know what's really going to be
available down the road I think
this this bill is way premature
I think certainly going forward
as things are developed whether
it's Sam.
Whether it's that the ability to
travel further or faster
whatever we don't know that yet
so I think in the end really fun
District cake made to combat it
Sam's that Albuquerque Los
crucis all of those particular
cities urban areas for sure it's
another example of urban versus
rural in New Mexico we simply
are not going to have available
even in the best of times the
charging stations that are
necessary and in.
Places that are so very rural
and to expect our our
departments to to send their
employees out on the road and
hope that they find a charging
station and I know it's over
time that this just really
doesn't make sense to me and I'm
looking outside the window we
have that rolling blackouts in
my area all across eastern New
Mexico and the reason we have is
our reliance on renewables
cannot make yes.
Just a minute and I will be
happy to read to you from our
utility government affairs
person who reached out to all
this today explaining what was
happening and what the fixed
wireless and I'm not going to
I'm not going to do that
publicly I will tell you it is
absolutely that is part of the
problem so you know here we are
looking at that depending for
more on on our renewable
portfolios to get this through
situations like we're
experiencing on these on the
side of the state today.
Anyway I just think this bill is
premature I think it's something
that that are departments really
according to the analysis they
have concerns miles travel.
The ability to to get places
that they need to go we'll put
this on the backs of our
departments of people traveling
from Hobbes to Santa Fe.
Whether they're working first
the department of transportation
I can't even imagine how they do
their job the number I also say
Dr in parts of this state we're
charging stations might not be a
that will so I I certainly can
support this bill and I think
it's very premature maybe down
the road we can now see if the
public wants to do that I think
that's just fine but for a
requirement at this point to
make this kind of investment
requirement I think it's just
very early in the game.
Thank you senator senator souls
would you like to comment.
For college I share I did not
ask the question I did not ask
you to thank you senator thank
you just trying to be respectful
thank you
all right so we'll now go to
Senator believe it was senator
Sanchez next.
Mr chair Senator souls thank you
for bringing the bill all there
was a few people that testified
that the cars last about six
years.
What do you do with them after
the six years.
Mr chair and senator I don't
think there was testimony that
said that the cars last six
years the testimony was that
they lasts the entry longer than
internal combustion engine cars.
Mr chair Senators soul so when
they do last week where we
recycle more where's the
recycling place in Santa Fe.
Our Albuquerque and Los crucis
the bigger areas.
Mr chair I'm not sure I
understand and you we currently
recycle cars the cars when they
are sold out of the state we
they get sold to other dealers
for recycling once they are
totally not used its like any
other part of that they are
stripped of components that
might be useful and you know I
was out in California a couple
years ago went to one of the
major Kerr recycling where it
actually goes through in India
the metals and other things they
got to the scene system for for
pulling out different kinds of
metals and products and things
that are able to be recycled
it's no different than any other
vehicle.
Mr chair Senators souls thank
you one other question can you
explain to me the difference for
a kilowatt hour and a regular
our what's the difference.
One to the other is it half the
time is a kilowatt hour half the
regular rate of a regular our.
In time that you're saying the
trouble they they choose they
charge they get about three
kilowatt hours or six kilowatt
hours and travel time.
Mr chair and senator hours in
kilowatt hours are not the same
kilowatt hours our unit of
measure of energy and ours are
measure of time they're not the
same they're they're totally
different systems I mean it's
kind of like the difference
between measuring what item
majoring Water I mean they
they're totally different.
Okay one Mr chair Center souls
so if I get six people on hours
in the car how far can I go into
time.
Mr chairman and senator that's
not a question can be answered
their energy in a car it is
based on how much energy and so
it depends entirely upon the
weight of the car and other
types of things out for one hour
which I think is that what it
indicates on the of the State.
So what hours that's the energy
capacity that must be the
battery for the hybrid and
typically plug in hybrids
currently that have about that
capacity again it depends
entirely upon the speed that the
car is going all kinds of other
conditions if it's up hill or
down hill but on average my
guess is for kids want ours is
somewhere around seventy to
eighty miles but again yeah
there are so many variables
because that's an energy density
the battery must hold.
Mr chair Senators souls thank
you.
You senator Sanchez
everyone's out of my office
right now so I can take off my
mask and take up my head set and
I can feel comfortable
I will go out to Senator Hickey.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator salts
I think this is in some ways are
very good bill because it
does force the state into taking
action as you say.
There are very very few
electrical charging stations
that I can find anywhere and
so that definitely needs to move
along and for perhaps this is
the way to leverage that.
I'm I'm wondering Mr vice chair
if I'm able to ask the secretary
Ortiz
some informational questions is
that possible.
thank you senator senator souls
are you comfortable with that.
I'm perfectly happy Mr chair
anybody that has information to
allow that the part of this.
Thank you senator and I do think
that secretary of these is
available I did see him online
before six secretary of these
are you there Mr Chairman yes I
am thank you Senator Hickey
please proceed and I'll do my
best.
Thank you very much.
Mr are secretary Ortiz and Mr
vice chairman and and senator
souls.
I don't want to put you into a
position that you may not be
able to answer but I'm just
wondering are there it it feels
to me I mean I think it's a
really good idea but there's
just so many unknowns going
forward and having to executing
against this without some of the
future loans knowing it it's
actually Chevrolet I mean that
GM Chevrolet who are saying that
by twenty thirty five they will
stop manufacturing gas vehicles
certainly for for the public use
a still have a few of the others
but
no I I do believe we need to get
these charging stations and in
the state as a leverage point
but I'm just wondering if you
feel comfortable with if that's
a fair question in being able to
see your way to plan this out
along with the planning that
will go on the solar
and
and then as that moves forward I
think we're all moving in the
right direction it's just are we
gonna be able to coordinate and
actually get to this and
from your estimation at this
time thank you Mr chairman
Senator Hickey thank you for the
question so I'm I believe this
bill is going in the right
direction sure it's region
sometime goals and time
initiatives that are governor
and set out
one of COVID a little bit about
the we and our our fiscal impact
report just for the benefit for
the.
Committee so currently I'm we
have about one thousand nine
hundred and fifty vehicles in
our mobile motor full fleet and
we have about five hundred over
five hundred of that are over
one hundred thousand miles on to
Senator souls point related to
the room the recurring budget
within GST as far as the
replacement Senator souls you're
absolutely correct in your
thinking I had the same
impression when I stepped into
this office there should be a
week recurring revenue source to
basically replace our vehicles
what I found out is in the
previous administration that
fund was swept which didn't
find a recurring revenue source
to basically replace our
vehicles on on schedule if you
will thanks to the legislature
in the last two legislative
sessions we received three
different appropriations special
appropriations totaling four and
a half million dollars that we
were able to purchase a hundred
and eighty five vehicles with
one million of the that poured
half million at this special was
targeted directly for electric
vehicles so with that we're able
to purchase for the first time
and we have an eight thirty
three vehicles that are purely
electric.
And then on a separate note
in the twenty nineteen session
we requested consideration from
the legislature and the
appropriated twenty million
dollars to do renewable energy.
All Santa Fe campus which
includes facility upgrades such
as solar panels we're installing
three solar carports in
different campuses we're doing
water I am improvements as far
as basically water efficiency
and with that we also built
thirty electric vehicle charging
stations and all of our campus
I'm to Senator Kernan splint
about rural New Mexico we're not
quite there yet but during this
legislative session senator
Allman asked how many campuses
that we think and we can
identify that would possibly be
able to install electric
vehicles we identified twelve
facilities outside in Santa Fe
area.
And not sure if that capital
request is going to be funded or
not so the the bill it
definitely is going to
Going there in in my view in the
right direction
however because we've lost that
are recurring revenue source to
basically replace vehicle
vehicles on cycle we have we've
been having to rely on special
appropriations and that's why
our FIR indicated that what we
what we did is we try to spread
out the seventy five percent of
vehicles which is about fourteen
thirty two vehicles one thousand
four hundred thirty two vehicles
over nine fiscal years to
minimize the impact of each
fiscal year so that's that's the
position you know that we're at
right now we're definitely
moving in that direction all the
infrastructure outside of Santa
Fe especially in state owned
facilities is not quite there
yet but with additional
consideration from some of our
requests going forward we hope
to get there some days so I we
definitely appreciate Senators
souls fought and and but we need
to be funding necessary to
achieve those goals if the
legislature authorizes the
passes this bill.
Thank you Secretary Ortiz that
was a very enlightening answer.
thank you for that Mr vice chair
I yield Senator so thank you for
bringing this to before.
Thank you Senator Hickey and
thank you Senator souls and Mr
secretary will now go to senator
Tom.
Work for you I think you Mr
chair and I think you Senator
souls for bringing this bill
forward you know what we're so
far behind other states.
In the.
Regards to electric cars.
Colorado has nine times more.
Charging stations in New Mexico
they have three times more.
Population so mathematically
that means they have three times
more charging stations per
capita than we do so the lack of
charging stations is not a
reason to to not connect this
bill because if we don't we're
going to be even that much
farther.
Further behind other states you
know I bought.
I had to go out of state to buy
my
My electric vehicle yeah I went
online I could find one used
electric.
Vehicle one used Tesla that so
but I found hundreds of women's
Dallas phone hundreds of women
in Phoenix and and under.
And the.
I am on my second use test slot
and both of more to come from
from out of state.
And someone asked a question
about the because cars are less
six years let's not is Mr
Senator souls indicated that's
not true in fact I read the
other day that.
Nobody really knows how long
these batteries are gonna last
because of that and make and the
model has set for the last nine
years and according to this
article
Not that the battery they don't
know how long they're going to
last because they haven't said
one of them.
They haven't expired yet.
So.
We are.
I applaud the secretary or tease
the.
This is been really progressive
on issues students trying to.
Promote the.
The purchase and use of the
electric vehicles and
I'm going to if we first.
The secretary of first you're
going to.
We're gonna build
appropriation bill but then we
found out that the more
appropriate method of financing
charging stations who was to go
through the capital outlay
process so I am a working with
the secretary to help fund much
needed
Installation of charging
stations because we are so far
behind other states thank you
again Senator souls for.
Presenting this bill and the.
Thank you Mr chair that's all I
have thank you.
Okay thank you very much senator
Tom and and and I believe I have
this right it will be Senator
Sanchez Majority Leader worth
and and senator requests senator
Sanchez.
Mr chair they're all for I was
last.
I got that wrong in my sincere
apologies to the others we'll go
to senator Wirth then Senator
Griggs and that will come
Senator Sanchez center were I'm
sorry Majority Leader thank you
Mr chair I am.
I agree with senator Clemente
and I appreciate Center cels
bringing this bill January first
twenty thirty my sense is the
whole world gonna change by then
there's gonna be electric bills
everywhere and you know whether
we pass this bill or not that
we're gonna be there and it's
crazy not to be making the
investment as we transition this
is not the finance committee the
bill goes the finance committee
are going to have to make the
decision about finding the money
to pay for this and it's a you
know nine years of four point
four million dollars a year
I think would be smart to begin
the process of making the
investment I personally because
again watching what's happening
with car manufacturers I just
saw jaguar is going all electric
by twenty twenty five so this is
happening really fast and to not
be aware of this and to say well
you know it's just it's
different it's change
It's here and I I so I'm gonna
I'm gonna vote both of the bill
and I really do want members to
remember that the question of
the cost is a good one and it's
legitimate and Center souls is
going to have to use a lot more
than as junior bill to get this
hate but you know that's finance
committee and that's the next
step so I just think as a policy
matter this is an important bill
important discussion and I
supported thank you for bringing
it Center cells.
Thank you Majority Leader worth
and that will go to Senator
Griggs now and I do want to let
Mr Solomon know that we are
beyond public comment for this
bill but I invite you to send
any mail to the committee
secretary re registered for this
meeting and she can forward that
to us thank you Mr solar year
and raised in the area there
Senator Griggs.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator soldier on I don't think
I will support the bill but the.
The issue about making the state
by cars is I mean is is
interesting by electric cars
because as senator Wirth range
out you know things are changing
and they are and you know maybe
maybe electric cars are going to
be the car of the future maybe
we will be at the hydrogen fuel
cells in five years I mean
technology changes dramatically
so that potentially could happen
one of the things I guess was
with some of this we talk about
you know a elector cat vehicles
we talk about the battery and
the battery as as I believe is
been brought up on more than one
of issues in fact we don't know
how long they'll last and and
apparently that's that's
probably true and I will I will
say that that's that's true
this point time just do
something with it.
And the battery is going to have
to either be recycled or the
battery is going to have to be
disposed of and the more these
vehicles that we get out there
it's batteries not able to be
recycled and has to be disposed
of you know that's that's an
environmental issue that we
don't really ever seem to want
to address exactly you want to
talk about the front end but we
forget to the backend and what
what that may do the same same
thing with the the wind turbines
and the same way which was shown
or patch you know as we go board
more that way we have more and
more ways that we're going to
have to deal with
don't know exactly how that will
be but but that's going to be an
issue that we're gonna have to
address shown we we talk about a
bill like this alleged rush to
this direction well that that
direction takes is quicker to
the the issue that I'm talking
about
I do want to make one one quick
statement about Colorado you
know in that and charging
station to different things and
their push maybe toward electric
vehicles eighty eighty three
percent or so of the residents
Colorado live along the front
range in front range of Colorado
is basically from Colorado
springs to for college even
though you probably won't pueblo
in there but that's we're and
that's where all the people are
in Colorado that's where all the
driving need done show up you
New Mexico you know most of our
people are probably in
Albuquerque but even Albuquerque
Santa Fe.
You know that's a it's still a
long way to Los crucis as
senator dole was talking about
she was researching the vehicle
to get we couldn't do you really
want to get a full sized about
full size but a fully electric
vehicle because you'd have to
probably stop at a charging
station were you know hopefully
get coffee but right now we
probably could get coffee but he
couldn't go state alum inside
anywhere to drink coffee because
I believe she coral county is
still in red so there's a
there's a challenge with with
that particular thing even today
so I don't know we all I mean I
I think that
you know it's it's great to talk
about we're we're we ought to be
or where we could be in I think
the you know the state as a
whole I think the
administration's will move
toward the best thing without
necessarily having to pass along
tell them to do show our Senator
sold again I appreciate you
bringing this bill I'm I'm not
gonna supported today but who
knows maybe down the road thank
you Mr chair thank you Senator
Griggs or if you're like me stop
man charged up while you get
your staff sent to get all the
steps and everything I had
Senator Sanchez next I saw his
hand go down center do you have
any comments or questions.
No Mr chair they were answered
with Mr grades are thank you
thank you senator Sanchez I
don't see any other members
hands up I will leave that for a
second.
I don't see any other summon at
Senator souls of you wants to
make any closing remarks based
on what is our.
Thank you Mr chairman I just
couple of things that we have
recycling concerns and issues
with current batteries lead acid
batteries have a serious problem
with that and how do we recycle
those and get the lead back into
recycling centers we got
recycling of oil electric cars
don't have to recycle oil like
we have to deal with recycling
other cars there's quite that we
always are going to have to deal
with some of those issues and
there are yeah will be that we
have a elector can hybrid cars
as well but the problems are no
more serious than the problems
that we currently deal with and
they have a substantially lower
emissions and other kinds of
things that we don't have to
worry about and I appreciate
very much the secretary being on
talking about the purchase cost
but I might remind people that
whether we are going to be
electric and plug in hybrid
model for purchase we still have
to replace those cars there's
still going to be purchased
requirement as the lead is
wearing out you must replace
those whether this bill goes
through we're not that is going
to be a cost borne by the state
and it's going to have to come
out of the finance committee
whether it is for this it has
reduced maintenance costs into
the future or whether it's
buying internal combustion
engines that we have to be
replaced either way and so the
FIR that is just what the total
replacement still would be
offset by some of what would be
the normal replacement costs
that we have as a state whether
it's been budget or not that
cost is coming in the very last
one and I might point out in
this is something Senator Kernan
and first Senator I apologize I
do need to make a facial
expression and other things that
was and professional B. I
apologize for that but this bill
also is not just straight
electric electric or hybrid
electric plug in hybrids the
plug in hybrid portion of it
hybrid still have a type a small
internal combustion engine that
allows they're in range to be
extended well beyond just the
battery.
Why which for those long
distance once it may require the
General Services Department of
the people that are issuing
cards to look at the distances
are where the particular going
to be going and plug in hybrids
about seventy five percent or
more of all of the driving with
the plug in hybrid is done
totally on the battery with only
twenty five percent so being
where you actually use the
hybrid mechanism for when you're
making long distance travel all
of that time totally on the
battery is a huge savings to
emissions into the atmosphere
and the cost on the vehicle so
with that Mr chair I.
I would be that thank you
Senator souls and I will I don't
see any other hands raised I'll
go to the committee for some
sort of an Action.
I would like to refer to past Mr
chair we would reduce.
Also.
And we have a second from
Majority Leader worth and the
third from Senator Tallman if
the committee secretary will
take the role.
But because I.
Senator Brandt.
No.
Yes.
Yes and Clemente.
The
best.
Yes.
Senator how to me is that a yes
or past we couldn't quite hear
you.
Yes.
Thank you.
No.
Yes.
Senator Wirth yes.
Yes.
Yes and that.
Okay can we have account please.
For a
count was three to seven.
Thank you to the committee
secretary Mr Clinton you have a
do pass Senator and Senator
Hickey would like to comment.
Thank you Mr vice chair
and thank you Senator sells are
bringing this bill
I think it gives us a kick in
the **** that we need
and I'm glad to see that but I
also see potential logistical
nightmares I had for the G. S.
the and
and and again the changing
technology as it comes and so my
comment is
The Mr secretary or he's.
If you find you're getting up in
the find in the couple years
down the vote come back and will
help you out
I I just want to be sure but
just from my experience in
business the coordination with
the energy and all the other is
going to be very very difficult
and I just you want you to be
able to have that kind of re
building will that I think we
gave these of the savings bill
before thank you very much Mr
vice chair you Mr comment to
Senator Eqis remarks thank you
Senator Hickey and Mr secretary
will take the COVID test of
recover thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee center
Hickey thank you so much for
that we are moving in that
direction we have a for example
one million dollars special
appropriation for electric
vehicles hi it's it's
recommended by the executive the
LFC has zero recommendation on
that so those are some of the
challenges that we're facing
going forward and replacing our
aging multiple thank you thank
you Mr secretary if you can do
some additional follow up of
center into that be great I'm
gonna have the rains back to
chairman sendo for our next
order of business thank you
committee I appreciate the
discussion thank you Sander
Sauls my apology Senator thank
you recollections Senator
of German Gen all of that thank
you I. Sherman for a position in
the great job
just border with the committee
we did send the email out
yesterday that was gonna be a
long evening we are going to
have a hard stop at seven PM so
hopefully we can get through as
many bills thoroughness
You know little our and a half
of the or less than a hour and a
half we have so with that we're
gonna move on to of Senate bill
one thirty three.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Gonzales.
Thank you on senator bill one
thirty three this is the rural
air service enhancement Act and
those Senate bill one thirty
three.
closest to create a new aviation
grant program within the New
Mexico department of
transportation under the rural
air service enhancement Act the
purpose of the program would be
to provide financial assistance
to regional air service
providers located in rural
communities through a grant
program administrated by the
department of transportation
Senate bill one thirty three
rely some in this all of these
are counties to procure and
administer the air service the
local government would have to
find either a ten percent match
if there is no existing air
service or a fifty percent match
if there's an existing care
service the maximum grant would
be either up to one point so.
One million two hundred and
fifty thousand if there is an
existing air service for one
million seven hundred fifty
thousand when there is no
existing air service the grant
would be for a two year period
the the fund the program S. B.
one thirty three created a rural
air service enhancement Act and
appropriated an initial nine
million in the general fund to a
fund for expenditures for the FY
twenty twenty two in future FY
years the appropriated fund will
not revert to the general fund
Mr chairman of members so.
You know this is also one of
those you know that going into
the the economic development but
to also what we're looking at
our future for mobility and with
that I also have two expert
witnesses that I would ask.
Of the chairman if you like we
deal to them from the department
of transportation for a few
comments and that is Mr Dan
Moran and I also have a Mr hello
royal from the department of
transportation.
Go ahead.
Chairman members of the
committee this is Dan Moran I'm
the manager with the New Mexico
department transportation
aviation division and we're here
to to try to find any technical
support or advice to this
committee on the proposed
legislation hi it's is proposed
to as as a senator had said is
for proposed to to advance
aviation into some of the rural
communities
and with that we were here as
as.
At technical advisors for this
legislation so I would stand for
any question.
This is in the.
Asian and I'm also us involved
in the hearing and I'm here also
to answer any questions that may
come up a regarding this bill.
The the the thank you.
Senator Gonzales.
All Mr chairman of I think that
that would be fine element said
the public comment we can step
for questions.
D. O. O..
At this time I don't have anyone
listed to speak in opposition Mr
Fleischer did you want to speak
in opposition.
That we speak in favor of.
Okay we'll come back to you.
Are there any other members of
the public that wish to speak in
support Senate bill one thirty
three.
One more time these are
statements my apologies these
are statements of opposition for
Senate bill one thirty three
these are statements of
opposition from members of the
public.
And it doesn't look like we have
anyone to Mr Fleischer the
floor's yours.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee mark Fleischer I'm
registered lobbyist for the city
of Gallup in for Vance
Caroline's in both entities
support this legislation Senate
bill one three three offers
important economic development
opportunities for rural New
Mexico cities like Gallup
Farmington Roswell Clovis and
others would benefit by being
connected to a major airport the
city of Gallup advanced airlines
stand in favor this legislation
I was asked by a member of the
committee why twenty engine prop
aircraft were selected the main
reason was safety efficiency
airports can have scheduled
service with nine passengers or
less aircraft
For small jets which are very
expensive to operate in have
thirty passenger capacity
require part one thirty nine
certification which is very
expensive for most rural
airports so that's why we picked
the twenty engine
but that's really up for debate
but the worst chosen because
it's the same aircraft and it
usually has less than nine
nine or less passengers which
would usually have part one
thirty nine required to
certification we stand support
thank you.
Thank you are there any other
members of the public I wish to
speak in support Senate bill one
thirty three.
One more time these are
statements of support.
Thank you all the public
statements for Senate bill one
thirty three.
Mr Mr chairman we would stand
for questions okay I'll go to
the committee I have a senator
Sanchez and Majority Leader.
Senator Sanchez.
Mr Chairman Majority Leader was
first.
All right Majority Leader.
Thank you
so I guess that you mentioned
Someone mentioned Roswell maybe
that was Mr Fleischer.
You know Roswell currently does
have.
Jet service I believe or did at
one point I know it's gone back
and forth Senator Kernan shaking
her head sell maybe it doesn't
it did at one point I believe it
maybe it's been canceled I guess
that's my first question is the
term rural defined in here and
would Santa Fe be able to apply
for this fund.
Mr Chairman no I would still
refer to my expert witness but I
in my part I would say yes.
This is
from the mediation Division and
the answers that Santa Fe would
qualified to apply for a grant
to the under this act.
And then since they have air
service they would I need to put
up a more money fifty percent of
the grant and also I would get a
smaller one I think it's so one
point two five million instead
of one point seven five the way
the act reach them into
buildings as it stands.
No I appreciate that Mr rail Mr
chair thank you and and senator
for the clarification and I do
think there is a difference
between those that have it knows
that don't we do have some some
Care Services gone down because
of COVID the number of routes
for sure but I was curious about
that question and then I was the
member that texted with Mister
Fleischer about the the
limitation on the type of
aircraft is that did raise.
questions for me because I do
know we have commercial air
service in New Mexico that
single engine and many.
You know again I think.
Taking that off the table I
think.
The client that Mr Fleischer
Representative actually has a
single engine plane as part of
its fleet and so I guess my
question is the the limitations
to.
Of the aircraft in the bill
You know safety was raised as
the issue I guess the question
Senator Gonzales is would you be
willing to consider an expansion
to to include single engine
aircraft I know out of out of
Albuquerque there are flights I
believe in center Kernan might
be able to answer this to go to
Carlsbad that are single engine
Rio Grande air I believe
so I just was curious about that
maybe Senator if you could help
with that.
Mr chairman and senator Wirth
will.
I don't see a reason for not you
know being able to allow that
that a.
you know I could all work on it
a little bit more on that if
that school would be a an
amendment for the next committee
because some I know that there
some concern from other areas so
we might have to.
Do you find that in the.
And I think that the discussion
that we had had was that are we
would probably bring that up at
the next committee.
Yes and I appreciate that and I
just want to flag the other side
of the equation to that there
are small jets now yes that that
maybe and so it just feels to me
like they're trying to limit the
type of aircraft doesn't make
sense so I kind of think just
take that out all together I
realized you know we're trying
not to use the fund all up at
once but
it just feels to me like that's
a an issue we should look at so
those are Mike my question in my
comments thank you Mr chairman
thank you Senator Gonzales.
Okay Sir thank you Majority
Leader will go to Senator of
Sanches and then put the.
Thank you Mr chair
And thank you for bringing this
bill I think it's a great bill
and I'm just gonna follow with
our.
R. Lee
they're worse just see if we
could change that to a single
engine turboprop as well just so
there could be some more people
out there that could be
qualified for this
you know the plot just is a
great single engine turboprop
airplane that is as a high
Record of being a greater
playing if we could just change
that to include like Mr Stewart
said to a single engine
turboprop that be great.
Thank you Mr chair.
Mr Chairman the the Senator
Rowe.
yes I you know I don't you know
I'm willing to work with that.
Great.
Senator Sanchez Senate.
Yes Mr chair okay Senator
Padilla.
Well thank you Mr chairman and I
don't want to take a lot of the
committee's time but I want to
ask Mr right allow you the
former county commissioner from
Valencia County Mister right.
That is correct I'm gonna let
the committee know that you're
looking at one of my mentors
along the way and I want to take
a lot of the committee's time
but I haven't seen them in years
but I just so happy to see you
Sir is one of the mentor from my
high school days thank you Mr
chairman I don't even have any
questions I just want to thank
you for all the service to New
Mexico over the years got a
great history of want to call
the doctor thank you.
Right Senator Griggs.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator Gonzales I just want to
convey to you that the city of
Alamogordo.
I did have a slight edge from
the city to Albuquerque and I
believe senator Wirth mentioned
Rio Grande airline drivers Rio
Grande in before then we had
west wind and they both flew at
single engine aircraft and.
Senator greater frozen.
K. Senator Griggs can you hear
us.
Was in.
Okay
Let's see I think
What
lost.
So let's kind of stay in place
if we can get back on.
He does still have the floor.
Mr chair I just sent a Textron
to to see if you can get back
on.
Yet he just texted the
connection dropped so
All.
I want to try some some staff.
Senator Griggs of put you on
speaker of so so to the
committee can you hear Senator
Griggs we can okay yes so so
okay go ahead Senator.
Thank you guys and that was that
was.
Those aircraft to be effective
and it would be our.
Would be good to have a valuable
item in the mail our show that.
That's my comment.
Okay thank you Senator Griggs
I don't believe we have any more
questions from the committee so
what is a pleasure the
committee.
We do pass motion also but the
Majority Leader and seconded by
home I second that okay Senator
census second lane please a take
grow.
Senator Brandt.
Yes.
Yes
your GP yes.
Mr chair we cannot hear Mr and
proceeds to on mute.
Okay.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
We're just.
Yes.
This.
Okay tend to one of Senator
Gonzales you have a do pass so
thank you Mr chairman thanks to
the members.
Senator Griggs joins.
good Senator.
All righty we'll move on to the
Senate bill one forty three
public private partnership act
Senator Campos are you on Mr
Chairman at Senator Campos is
tied up with another bill and
I'll take the driving seat for
him if you don't mind okay go
ahead Senator perfect and once
again it Mr chairman and
committee members I'm sorry that
I can't have my camera camera on
with bad weather internet is
shaky and I don't want to freeze
up or drop during this committee
meeting Mr Chairman Senate bill
one forty three creates the
public private partnership
backed providing legal authority
for governmental entities to
enter into agreements with
private entities to develop
public transportation projects.
Except for toll roads the bill
creates a public private
partnership which we call the P.
three and it's a board staffed
by the New Mexico finance
authority now that P. three
board would review and approve
P. three agreements that meet
the minimum threshold of
agreements for greater and
million dollars SB three is
endorsed by the legislative
finance committee and it's
effective date would be later
this summer and with me today to
help and explaining the bill and
answering questions as an expert
witness from the LFC and that's
Mr mark David M. swell at which
I yield the floor to so that he
can find a little bit more
information Mister Venezuela.
Thank you Senator and Mr
chairman I'm happy to answer any
questions that you or any of the
members of the committee would
have and I and I know your time
is brace so all all leave it at
that thank you Mr chairman.
Mr chairman thank you Mr but and
then and so well I think you and
we can go to public comment if
you'd like chairman.
The thank you senator army also
will go to the public comment at
this time.
This time I don't have anyone
listed to make opposing
statements for Senate bill one
forty three.
this article I have you listed
as savings for support.
Did you want to make a statement
of opposition.
Okay.
Was there anyone else who wanted
to make a statement of
opposition again this is
opposition statements for Senate
bill one forty three.
Okay I don't see any hands also
Mr Chairman gonna go please go
ahead.
I apologize in a long day
chairman members of the
committee we are very I am
representing economic forum and
we strongly encourage you to
support this bill we think it P.
threes are something that is
going to be sustainably helpful
to the state the way that this
bill is structured we think that
it is going to be a good pathway
in the fact that it applies to
transportation the fact that
works with local governments and
it already has oversight you
will find that this is going to
be a good way to go good right
what thank you so much.
Thank you Mr
are there any other members of
the public who wish to make
statements in support of Senate
bill one forty three.
Please raise your hand at this
time.
Thank you very much include
public statements reasonable one
forty three.
Okay great will go to committee
and I have Senator Griggs.
Thank you Mr chairman turned my
video off just in case that
we're needed out the last time.
But to your chair Senator I
guess in the.
In the bill and and P. three you
should have been at you know
something that has come up
constantly since I've been in
the legislature they've never
really found the the right way
to to do it but just wanted to
ask we define in here a public
project as a public
transportation facility or
infrastructure.
For improvement to a public
transportation for seventy other
than a toll road.
So.
Mr chair senator what.
What type of project do you
envision that to be.
Mr Chairman representative thank
you for that question since I'm
presenting this for Senator
Campos I'm gonna defer to Mister
violence wella to answer the
question.
Yes Sir Senator and thank you Mr
chairman and senator Griggs an
example of a project
when we were first up pushing
this bill a couple years ago was
one of the railroad companies
that approached the state about.
We're carrying in in in just one
or two years all the railroad
crossings that they had
responsibility for throughout
the state without throughout
their.
portion of the state and they
were hopeful that they could
invest some money with a
participation from the state
and and they would have been
able to get those railroad
crossings completed more quickly
within a couple years time
rather than waiting a longer
period of that have to do it
year after year just a few of
them so that's one kind of no
idea for our project I'm happy
to share others if you'd like.
And the thank you Mr Senator and
an expert is also something that
could be or in in your
estimation or in the sponsor who
who is and isn't here but for
the at the rail line that is the
that Amtrak.
I can't remember the the actual
name of the train runs on it
mostly but is this a means do
you believe to jointly work to
keep that line prepare in good
shape and available.
Mr chairman and senator Graham's
I I'm not sure if you're
referring to the road runner
that portion of it the road
runner I don't think would be in
a project that would use this
mechanism because the department
transportation already has.
With their partnership at the
then region council of
governments the opportunity to
approach improvements like that
so I am sorry I'm not familiar
with the Amtrak side of it.
And Mr thank you know what I'm
I'm not I'm not asking about the
rail runner but there what age
a just a few years back a lot of
discussion because the am Amtrak
was considering pulling their
route.
From Las Vegas through red tone
in on up into into Kansas.
That route also comes down to
Santa Fe or Lamy at and taken
that
Route through Amarillo maybe
clover Senator crossed to Milan
because they were concerned
about the track in show with
with Senator Campos being the
the sponsor of this bill I would
use curious whether or not that
was something that was in his
mind as she worked at a as we
work to develop this bill.
Mr chairman and senator I I'm
afraid I'm just not familiar
with the project for Senator
Campos of spots on.
Can be more helpful.
Mr chair and and that and
experts.
This is this is kind of a tough
question I Schroeder but I and I
appreciate your your willingness
to.
to do your best and that I I
thank you and but sure that's
all I've got.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator.
Senator Padilla go ahead.
Thank you Mr chairman I have a
little bit of experience with
the P. three legislation don't
laugh Senator Griggs.
If you want to but.
I have introduced a P. three
bill.
I want to say at least five
times and started out with
everything all the spaghetti on
the wall and then some of the
spaghetti fell off and then we
figure out what's but yet he was
going to say can we reduce that
that even further I'm surprised
there isn't more commentary on
this maybe you know times have
changed I guess I'm really
surprised I'm really happy to
hear didn't see this you know I
I feel like you know there's a
lot in the involved here and I
really would hope that we hear
from the actual sponsor nothing
I mean I full and utter respect
for senator how to me I think
you're in a pretty weird spot to
be caring this for another
member because it is a very
controversial bill Senator of
you
released it is has been in the
times that I and don't laugh
Senator Shendo but you know I
they they ran over my built in
the back Roman and they ran over
again to make sure they got on
in different committees met one
year we made all the way to the
floor and that was really cool
and then of course it got
hunted down and stuck on the
wall and so I'm just curious
what are all the components that
could potentially happen here
with this one and I I promise
I'm not trying to be real this
thing at all I really want to
see this finally once and for
all have a set of instructions
for government in New Mexico on
how to do P. three I I do
overtime I I learned that maybe
maybe throwing all the spaghetti
on the wall wasn't a good idea
in the and that we we learn it's
in a couple different errors
maybe that's what you're doing
here but what what all could
happen with this P. three bill
and I don't know Mr chairman I
want to put center how to be on
the spot but maybe Mr Rollins
whether could could speak to.
I'm happy to answer it and Mr
chair and answer but yeah you're
right
LFC had proposed Mrs Committee
sponsored legislation two years
ago and it was several things
thrown against the wall it was
it was a comprehensive P. three
effort or both but construction
and in other types of projects
and through that experience
the LFC has now endorsed much
more targeted
Read bill hi to public
transportation only and and and
and and that could be developer
developers of Representative
real estate or property that are
looking for opportunities
partner with their government in
that area on developing the the
roadways it could be real way it
could be it a number of things
where there is a public interest
in that project and an
opportunity to build it sooner
rather than later so thank you
for the question Senator.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
that Senator how to me Mr runs
well so I guess what we're
talking about here is
transportation this
transportations when when is
there a I I can look it up right
now and I guess I will but is
there a more build by any chance
on this in the house being
sponsored by a chairwoman
Lundstrom I'm just curious if
she's involved in this effort at
all.
Mr chairman and senator but we
had no there's not a your
version or duplicate on the
house there are chairwoman look
in her in her comments at the
LFC hearing as as they were
approving Committee sponsored
legislation just mention that
the you know given her time
frame she just didn't have the
time to to shepherd this on this
year.
Thank you Mr chairman that was
another attempt of mine I went
over and tried to get you know
some some folks to help you with
that was a fun fun time I have
to tell you that
in and so in this version of
this legislation is there a
length of time on the P. three
on the agreement and then who
owns the asset when the
agreement is complete.
Mr chairman and senator there's
a thirty year maximum time frame
it doesn't have to be a thirty
year agreement after the after
the conclusion of the of the
agreement of the governmental
entity would on the
infrastructure.
And then in the thank you Mr
chairman and senator economy on
surveillance while grant answers
thank you and so in the interim
in the inner.
The inner limit of thirty years
who's managing the day to day of
it is a public employee is at a
is that the private entity who's
engaged in managing well
building and managing the the
the.
Yes.
Mr chairman and senator by the
of the the actual construction
would be it would be developed I
mean that the conversation about
that would be between the public
partner in the private partner
presumably the private partner
would be the the builder the
maintenance in the operation
however would be the
responsibility of the
governmental partner and that's
that's outlined in the bill okay
thank you Mr chairman I think I
think that's very interesting
and I I think that's probably
what maybe that's why we don't
have such it took me about two
or three years to get to that
point with my legislation to do
documented with them maybe
that's why we don't have as much
commenter on it or could be Mr
chairman that we're almost there
what we know after six o'clock
known someone down so thank you
and I may have a few more
questions this is a really
interesting one for me too thank
you.
You Mr chairman thank you
senator sorry that I couldn't
answer since I've I've taken the
reins for center Campos but
thank you Mr balance well after
the thank you senator Senator
Kernan.
Thank you Mr chair I I don't
really have a question I'll just
listen
I think my question probably
doesn't fit this bill so let me
let me put my hand down.
Okay.
Hey.
I don't.
See the
Questions from the committee.
What is the pleasure of the
committee.
Did everybody get dropped.
If.
Question.
Go ahead senator Cormann.
So thank you.
Rain thank you Mr chairman thank
you for bringing this forward do
we have.
Is this our first venture into
public private partnership.
If we ever a.
Attempted this before do we have
any
legislation on the books
regarding public private
partnership if we ever engaged
in up the state ever engage in
any of public private
partnership projects.
Mr chairman and senator if if
you would allow me to to comment
on that.
Senator Solomon New Mexico does
have statutes on the books that
allow for certain types of
public private partnerships
there's nothing on the books
that is comprehensive and how
those public private
partnerships are handled from
the state's perspective so as an
example there's the renewable
energy transmission authority
that is allowed to participate
in projects there are there are
the energy conservation measures
contracts were state into state
entities can improve their the
energy efficiency of their
facilities by improving lighting
and seating and and other when
the windows in different things
and can engage with a private
company in a long term basis as
well this is the first effort to
provide a framework that ensures
their guard rails to describe
what those agreements would look
like and then I would also add
that the thirty at thirty five
states have legislation like
this already on the books New
Mexico is one of them that does
not have a comprehensive
framework like we're proposing
here.
I'm hopeful that that respond to
your question Senator.
Thank you.
Mark thank you Mr chair is so.
This who is.
So we do have a legislation the.
P. three but it just but this
will be a more comprehensive
legislation.
So what projects are you
envisioning that.
Has your.
Good morning this legislation
because you envisions a certain
types of projects being
Completed under this act so what
kind of projects are you
envisioning.
Mr chairman and senator
There are no specific projects
in the queue so to speak however
as we developed with through the
LFC the idea a couple years ago
the idea well it would be that
that it would be only for public
transportation projects or
infrastructure I'm and so the
kind of project would be
Possible rail projects as an
example
and and one that was one had
that had been mentioned a couple
years ago was on this on the
east side of the state one of
the L. rel operators wanted to
come in and improve the rail
crossings within a two year
capital expense expenditure and
wars was looking to participate
with the state on a more
under quicker schedule.
That can already happened that
that real operator can already
participate with the department
of transportation it just
couldn't do it on a on a on a
quick system so they were
looking to get legislation like
this to help support that
would be twenty.
Thank you I was offline for a
while I came back and you were
talking about.
Rose so that is one of the
advantages.
Of of P. three is that.
Often times projects can be
completed faster so so thank you
more can thank you Mr chair
that's all I have.
Thank you Senator Tallman of
vice chair for a second time
thank you Mr chairman I'll be
quick so Mr chairman and and
senator how to me on the strong
side of maybe you want to
respond to this this this
legislation at all tax or do
anything with the state's
procurement Corona procurement
code.
Mr chairman and senator by the
yes Sir does it actually
provides for an exemption this
this act would be an exemption
from the procurement code okay
thank you Mr chairman I I was
really hoping you would say no
and the only reason that's going
to prevent me from voting for
the bill and the reason that
that is is because the
procurement code in New Mexico
as a very well defined
documented are if the process as
all the things that go along
with our key from viability of
the private partner financially
to quality of the delivery to
they're bonding capacity all the
things that go into an R. F. P.
and if this exempt the threes
from the procurement code I
think I'm gonna have a hard time
I don't know that I can support
this I will talk with this the
actual sponsoring maybe share
with them and I think he's he's
been with us the whole time I've
been here but you share with
them the the pains that I went
through the things that I
learned from process but I can
tell you this will be a bill
will have a very difficult time
getting any further than this
committee if you're accepting
the procurement code.
Thank you yeah I just worry
about sweetheart deals and
making some relationship out
there that works in your county
your community and can I get
something done and and and
really having that but and so
there for for a private
contractor so thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator for the we appreciate
your comments.
Thank you vice chair of the.
Don't see any.
Hands up from the committee
members so what is the pleasure
of the committee.
Move to table.
The motion to table what's not
debatable so the intake of rope.
The difference.
Right.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
The.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes and that Mr Chairman
explained Michael.
Okay ninety.
Two passed motion of vice chair
of the tables are of the table
and the vice chair.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
it's Center item you can please
pass along to the sponsor that
I'm more than happy to sit and
talk and work with them on this
in in great detail thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Senator Padilla I will pass
the word.
Okay thank you.
It is six twenty the.
Senate sponsor for Senate bill
one fifty three gaming tax
credit has asked to roll that
bill over
and we have a significant number
of of of folks also want to
speak to one sixty four so what
we're gonna do is just move on
to one forty seven of Senate
bill one forty seven and that
will be our last bill today and
will roll a one fifty three one
sixty four over till Thursday so
with that of.
Senator Gallegos in Duhigg into
and we available.
Mr chair.
Senator.
Good.
They roll that over but I may be
wrong.
The request.
I got a text let me check but
double check with them.
I will.
Mr chairman I don't see you to
one of them on so.
Okay.
What we're doing this one at
nine PM.
Probably having dinner and ready
come back year prison.
I'm checking Mr chair but I'm
pretty sure I got a text.
Regarding that that let me
check.
Mr Chairman.
Yes Senator Griggs I I did get a
text from Senator guy a ghosts
and he thought they were Paul in
the bill for today but that's
that's all right now okay well
if that's the case we'll go
ahead and the here.
I just I just heard from it
keeps Senator Duhigg who's
getting on right now on Senate
bill one sixty four.
Okay.
We'll take that last bill that
will be our last bill if you can
get on.
Okay so.
Okay great.
So I'm.
Send me an email so I won't be
hearing from the taller you are
muted senator Thom McCann the
okay.
There's Senator Duhigg is on
what is the dinner Senator
Tallman.
Senator doing what you say.
Your Senator Tallman if you
commute yourself and then we
would all go through a Senate
bill one sixty four student loan
bill right to Senator do it.
Thank you Mr chair.
this is a bill that
actually I don't know if it has
ever gotten to the Senate it has
been in the house at least a
couple of times
but I think the clock always ran
out on it but this deal this
creates the student loan bill of
rights.
Student loans are the that's the
second largest consumer
financial market in New Mexico
and after after mortgages.
And New Mexico.
Already we license we oversee
all these other market mortgage
lenders debt collectors check
cash for auto lenders.
But we don't oversee and we
don't regulate student loans and
so what this bill seeks to do is
to create that same oversight
regulation that we already apply
to all these other consumer
financial markets in the state
and apply them to student loans
as well and the move Jordy of
this industry is dominated by
private out of state entities
that are collecting these page
these payments from New Mexicans
but but aren't aren't
accountable to our state.
And so here New Mexico we
actually the overall balances of
student loan debt are relatively
low but despite that we have the
second highest default rate in
the country.
and so and and and there's
there's a lot of federal
protections for repayments that
are already in place but there's
also a lot of of subpart and
loan servicing practices that
are going on that are are
denying.
Borrowers in New Mexico the
opportunity to to stay out of
default and to take advantage of
of programs that that would keep
them.
given the pain on these loans
the way that the way that
they're intended to do so and so
what's really important is is
also make clear what this bill
does not do because I know
there's been talk on the federal
level about student loan
forgiveness and discharges this
does not do that all this does
this this would still hold
people responsible for the loans
that they are taking out it just
make sure that we have the
oversight in place and the
server servicing procedures in
place to make sure that they the
people are are are treated
fairly while they're repaying
the loans that that they are
responsible for.
So and I know that you all have
been in committee for really
really long time today so we'll
try to keep it as short as
possible
my expert is Bonnie.
The trial I'm sorry but if I'm
mispronouncing your last name
but I will hand it over to her
to get kind of a overview of
some of the the specifics of
this bill and otherwise I I look
forward to the discussion thanks
so much.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Bonnie with
trial and I'm that director of
research at the students are in
fact I'm and a former former
federal regulator of the single
market at the consumer
financial.
Thank you for all I'm here today
because it's being what student
loan servicing failures due to
already struggling borrowers
I've worked with hundreds of
borrowers read tens of thousands
of their complaints including
from borrowers return Mexico and
from all as I can tell you one
thing for certain is that they
need your help being in the
state help and help.
The numbers four but I do think
they are worth repeating forty
five million Americans today or
one point seven trillion dollars
that and that's larger than the
auto in market margin on the
credit card market back to the
second only to mortgages and so
what does this mean for New
Mexico I'm in need more than two
hundred twenty thousand New
Mexico residents are collected
seven billion dollars in that
eighty nine percent increase in
only ten years and it's not only
young people living in urban
areas seventy four thousand New
Mexicans living in rural parts
of the state posted mon that
nearly twenty thousand New
Mexicans with students that are
over the age of sixty and every
month all across the state.
Hundreds of thousands of student
loan bills come due I was trying
to make their student loan
payments are out of state
companies are putting up
obstacles that make it nearly
impossible for them to do so.
For example the bar outside of
Santa Fe who had an identity
from his account it is a
complete company applied it to
another person loans this bill
today before you would ensure
the borrowers are most well the
company sort out the problem is
not as credits not harm and his
payments are.
Are from the town to refinance
your student loan paid off over
on but our students will
continue to report the old loan
on her credit eventually
reporting it as we went causing
her credit score to drop
significantly this bill would
ensure that she can get a
substantive response from the
company has a tiny Avenue for
remediation of the work to sort
out the issue.
I think it's important to make
clear up front but this bill
isn't about one.
It's not about giving people a
free ride.
It's about making sure that
we're nearly a quarter million
New Mexicans go to make their
student loan payment they have
the same protections they would
if they were paying a mortgage
or a credit card.
Right now New Mexico consumers
have more protection but retain
payday lenders or debt
collector is a hundred and
student loans because Mr loan
market still of the party you
all state oversight.
New Mexico regulates mortgage
lenders section agencies money
transmitters auto lenders but it
does not oversee the second
largest consumer financial
market just a month that.
So this bill will but New Mexico
identify the servicing practices
that are harming your
constituents stop in their
tracks it will let you stand up
there constituents make sure
they're protected what you make
sure these companies the ones
that have an enormous fall
determining the future of your
constituents are following the
law.
I'm not a new concept more than
two thousand states have
introduced similar legislation
with bipartisan support thirteen
states already have this long.
As I mentioned New Mexico
already oversees a dozen other
consumer financial markets and.
This bill simply update the
modernizes New Mexico loginh.
Financial products and many of
your constituents I think your
mom's.
I'm and so I would just like to
close the best.
Need your help they need you to
intervene to protect an entire
generation we've been option
that so this committee the clear
message of those borrowers who
done everything we've asked
around you know they went to
school they got the disagreement
on historic amount of that
is the American dream when their
struggles matter and their fight
is your fight and that New
Mexico's ominous the fires
they're being cheated by these
companies that are sitting three
thousand miles away.
Thank you.
Thank you Senator do it.
Many.
The more before we go to public
comment.
Now Mr chair.
We will now.
Positions are Senate bill one
sixty four.
There is no one on my list and
signed up to speak in opposition
either any members of the public
are in the meeting at this time
that would like to speak in
opposition this is your time to
raise your hand.
Annexing would.
Chance to move on to support
personally hearing from Mr
Andreas.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is John urged I'm with the
American federation of teachers
New Mexico and I'm here to share
our comments in support of
Senate bill one sixty four I
think Senator Duhigg and her
expert witness did a great job
outlining why this bill is
necessary and from our
perspective as advocates for
public educators across New
Mexico we know that there is a
deep need for regulation of the
student loan industry
it's true to say that this issue
cuts across all demographics and
cuts across all age groups it's
not just student borrowers that
are fresh out of college we're
seeing folks.
Co signing loans for
grandchildren or folks who have
become permanently disabled are
not able to provide support and
remediation for their loans
which should be discharged in
those specific instances we also
wanted to underscore the fact
that this does not discharge
that it is not a giveaway as the
expert mention and the final
thing I want to share with
members of the committee is that
there is a real need for this
one of the things that A. F. T.
New Mexico prides itself on as
we we institute that clinics
that help public educators
across New Mexico understand how
they can remediate some of these
issues when their loans are
being sold or they're not as
transparent as we would expect
them to be and these events and
trainings are always full there
is a great need for that and it
touches every walk of life in
our state and so we do urge your
support for this bill and we
hope that you can vote yes on
Senate bill one six four thank
you for your time.
Thank you we will now hear from
miss Lindsay Cutler go ahead and
see.
Thank you and and good evening
Mr chairman and members the
committee Senator take again
thank you for bringing this bill
my name is Lindsay Cutler and
I'm as an attorney with the New
Mexico Center on Law and Poverty
organization that provides
advocacy to advance economic and
social justice and equal
opportunities throughout New
Mexico.
College should lead
opportunities should not lead to
financial ruin and unfortunately
that is been the story for far
too many college graduates and
far too many New Mexicans of
student loan debt the student
loan bill of rights provides
crucial consumer protections
because again as you heard
student loan servicing is the
second largest financial market
in in on our state and in the
country and yet this industry
almost entirely unregulated
operates in the dark with very
little accountability and that
transparency and accountability
is necessary because without it
student bars kind of very
difficult to navigate the the
repayment process and the
companies that service that debt
simply are held accountable
this bill would protect New
Mexicans from from these
unscrupulous and and and often
predatory servicing practices
and we urge your strong support
of this bill because this is so
important for New Mexico with
the second highest rate of
default in the country so with
that we we I hope for your
strong support this legislation
we stand strong support as well
thank you.
Thank you.
We will now hear from Mister
Bill Jordan go ahead Mr Darden.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee of Bill Jordan
with New Mexico voices for
children I'll try to be brief I
just want to thank center doing
for drawing attention to this
problem facing so many young
people in New Mexico she stated
there are some bad actors
particularly among private
colleges with limited oversight
students are left to fend for
themselves and often get trapped
into a cycle of debt if we want
our young people to get a solid
start when they finish their
education this is one of the
most helpful steps we can take
we urge the committee to support
Senate bill one sixty four and
again I want to thank senator
doing for championing this
measure thank you.
Thank you Mr joiner.
That was our last public
statement in support are there
any members of the public that
are currently in the same room
with like to make a statement
support for Senate bill one
sixty four.
One more time please raise your
hands.
Be able to call on you.
And that concludes public
statement percent of the one
sixty four thank you.
Thank you now we'll go to the
the committee so I have Senator
Hamblen Senator Kernan and
Senator Hotmail.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Senator Duhigg for bringing this
legislation forward I think like
many of us on this call in some
capacity or another have had to
deal with student loans and
having to consolidate student
loans and having to see how much
we are paying for education that
accumulates in interest which
should in some cases I think
doubles what are creating actual
cost of education was so I
appreciate the opportunity that
we have with this legislation to
regulate the industry given that
there are many other states that
are doing so one of the things
that's that's really concerning
for me and this is actually more
of a commentary on this is that
we're going to be seeing more
people taking out student loans
as they turn to community
colleges and universities to
receive job training because of
how they've been affected by the
pandemic there are many local
businesses that have closed or
downsized and have painfully
reduced their workforce and
they're going to be folks we're
going to be going back to school
and many seeking the financial
and assistance of student loans
and so I do appreciate that this
is in a loan forgiveness program
but that this is something that
will protect those folks who are
trying to just get along and get
by but then also those who are
trying to get education the
overwhelming that that that
people get into because they
want to seek an education so
that they can have a career it
should not be what stops people
into not regulate this industry
I think it's something that we
have only to do as a service to
New Mexicans who choose to get
get education and so thank you
Senator Duhigg and thank you Mr
chair I'm I'm I yield now thank
you Senator Kernan.
Thank you very much and have
really just trying to figure out
what this really does and so I'm
I'm looking at section nine
don't know what page it's on.
Sixteen and it talks about the
federal student education loan
agreement so we know students
take out those kinds of loans
correct and and so does this
bill will have any impact on
loans that students at take out
through that program.
Mr chair Senator Kernan I will
try to answer them I'm I'm
probably going to defer to to my
experts because she she probably
knows this better than I do.
But so this loan what is this
bill would not apply to loans
from that department higher at
or or banks or credit unions for
that matter it's really
primarily aimed at these these
private lenders
but I I want to I want to I'm
not sure if that that's entirely
responsive to your question so
miss the trial.
Mr chair representative I'm so
it it does say except as
otherwise provided in federal
law or a federal student loan
education but agreement that
provision is to to clarify to
the extent that this bill
language conflicts with anything
that might be presented by the
higher Education Act for example
the higher Education Act does
provide certain requirements
around help over payments are
applied on on federal student
loans this bill also speaks to
how over payments are piled on
Federal Simmons accent a
borrower providing affirmative
instructions I'm so all that
language does is it just
controls for you know unless
there is something to to preempt
that these are the rules that
that will
control.
Okay thank you Mr chair so so
basically when students attend
you any of our New Mexico state
or any other college in New
Mexico typically that would go
to the federal government loans
is that correct and and so they
probably have pretty tight rules
and
it standards to follow and so
pretty much this bill that I did
that situation that be correct.
Mr chair senator I I I think it
it might also depend on who the
servicers of those loans and
that building so that might be
originated as federal loans but
and and miss the truck please
correct me if I'm wrong if this
if it if those loans are then
say sold to buy a servicer who
would come under this that and
then the protections of this
bill would apply thanks so.
It.
Mr chair representative yeah yes
so I'm all loans that are
originated by the federal
government are serviced by
private third party companies
all every day the third
compartir pretty committees did
bill I'm gonna fall under the
provisions of the bill.
Thank you very much that's
helpful I'm the other part that
I'm not sure about you talk a
little bit about private.
Education private ones which I'm
assuming our private schools
tell me a little bit about that.
Mr chair senator I'll defer to
the agency the travel on that.
Senator I'm so ninety percent of
the market is federal student
loans that are originated by the
federal government but service
by private companies then for
some of the market which is
still hundreds of billions of
dollars on our companies are
loans originated by private
companies on these are
traditionally non bank companies
when you hear names like
Like so I then you have some
banking some non banks you have
companies like Sallie Mae and
companies like so I even
companies like PayPal are making
student loans these days and so
these are loans that are not
these are not from the federal
government but because their
student loans they have a state
regulatory purview at the
federal level and at the state
level because you know everyone
kind of think student loans or
something different and so they
they sort of operate in the
black hole where there's not a
whole lot of rules to follow.
Okay so for that.
Thank you clarify this has
absolutely nothing to do with
private colleges and
universities at at all district
with the private lender that
you're talking about that we're
trying to pull in in writing the
and so this would have been
impacted all along I'm I'm
private schools or colleges in
New Mexico so that I just want
clarification on that because I
I didn't understand so I think
that are here thank you very
much.
Thank you Senator Kernan will go
to a Senator how to meal and
then I have Senator Tolman thank
you so much Mr Chairman center
just Senator Duhigg thank you
for bringing this up I myself
was a victim of a predator loan
and what happened is loans used
to be in the early nineties
based on your social security
number when things change the
vented account numbers and
somehow I got a duplicate
duplicate account with the one
man who wasn't paying her bills
and luckily enough I saved all
my documentation that saved me
and helped me now what I do like
about your bill is they'll be in
on budgets then is that correct
to will help students.
Mr Chairman representative yes
this this would create that
ombudsman and the but then would
be housed in Santa Fe or how
would this work.
Mr chair senator the ombudsman
would be under F. I. D. which is
under RLD
and and it would if.
That that they would be
responsible for responding to
two complaints and and.
Working with the director test
to implement.
This so thank you thank you Mr
chairman thank you Senator
Duhigg that would have helped me
a lot when I tried to get out of
that sticky situation so I
support this bill and it's
something that I have first hand
knowledge within so thank you
for bringing this thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you senator Munoz moving
onto Senator Tallman.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
thank you.
Senator I applaud you for
bringing this bill forward.
because is.
Much needed and I'm long overdue
this bill is much needed and
long overdue is unacceptable how
some of these lenders take
advantage of students.
because there's not proper
oversight that proper
Proper a regulation so.
When the Mr chair when you're
ready
Or do you just motion I'll do
that thank you.
Okay thank you senator Cormann.
We.
I don't believe we have any more
of questions from the committee
so we have a due pass motion by
Senator Tallman second second by
Senator Padilla of lane can you
take role please.
Senator Brandt.
No.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes that that.
Yes.
yes.
There were yes.
Yes yes.
Yes.
One area of nine yes one no and
one excuse so you'll have a due
pass the Senate to do it.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee.
K. of of the thank you of
committee members that concludes
our.
Our committee meeting for
tonight I want to thank all you
guys for your stamina.
Of I know it's a lot of work and
I also think our staff or
committee staff the million in
there so we were role does a.
The.
One fifty three to next to
Thursday.
And then will speak with the
Senator Gallegos on one forty
seven in the.
So with that thank you all you
have a good evening and we'll
see you all tomorrow floor.
Good night the north.
