So we are going to start off
with Senate bill 20. Um, we do
have a couple of items that will
be held and these are bills that
will be considered, considered
for a possible tax package. OK,
those bills are gonna be uh SB
20.
SB 89.
SB 211, 212, 92 and 112.
Yes, and this is through
consultation with legislative
finance services.
And council services is my.
Yes. So, those bills, so just to
let you know, so what will
happen with those bills is we
will have the bills presented.
We will discuss them, we will
hear public testimony, but we
will not move on them. We will
not vote on them. They will be
held to be considered in a tax
package. So just for
clarification for people in the
audience.
So what we do is, uh, in this
committee,
is we will allow 20 minutes for
bill presentation that includes
your experts, and then we will
go to public testimony and then
the bill sponsor will have an
opportunity to respond to that
public testimony, and then we
will go to questions with the
committee.
So that's the order of business
is what we do today.
Um, and so, any questions or
anything from the committee
before we start, or we want, we
ready to get rolling?
Let's roll. All right. Uh,
you'll need to take the roll to
make sure that we have forum.
Senator Figueroa.
Senator had a meal.
Senator O'Malley.
Senator Paul, here.
Send it to Ramos.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator Sheriff?
Senator Worth, Senator Bergman.
Senator Hamblin.
We have 7 present and 3 excused.
All right, so we do have a
quorum.
For one, for one.
All righty.
Um, vice sheriff, if you will,
we, um, we'll go ahead and start
that clock. Senator Hickey, it's
all yours.
And this is as amended. So we
do, do need to move.
Yeah
Why don't you go ahead and
introduce the bill first and
then we'll do the amendment and
then we'll move on the
amendment. Thank you very much,
Madam Chair.
Uh, thank you for, uh, hearing
this bill today.
Um, as you know, I'm a, a
clinician. I'm also during the
interim head of the, uh, uh,
tobacco revenue oversight
committee, and we hear a lot
about what is and isn't being
done. I'm just gonna make it
very brief, um.
Nicotine is the gateway drug to
addiction.
Very simply, when you boil it
all down in terms of the neural
pathways and the effect that
nicotine has in terms of
momentarily destressing, uh, but
overall, leading to more
depression and biochemically
leading to generation of
pathways, uh, some of us have
much stronger than others of
addiction, uh, but nicotine is
the first place and time that
individuals have the opportunity
to probably destress through
some type
of external substance, uh, given
that fact, um, and the huge
uptake of e-cigarettes, uh, and
now, uh, e-cigarettes are not so
much being replaced, we're
seeing that go down, but we're
seeing nicotine pouches go up
substantially all over the
place. I have put on the diets
there that can move around the
methodology that's being used by
uh e-cigarette manufacturers
that are
Star Wars games where the more
uh puffs you take, the bigger,
more rewards you get, and it
just keeps going. It's obviously
targeted at youth, and this bill
is really targeted at the
evidence from multiple states
that the higher the cost, the
less the uptake of nicotine in
any form. Um,
Be it cigarettes, uh, the
e-cigarettes and what have you.
So, uh, this bill was presented
this summer to the uh uh
taxation and revenue Committee
where it did get an endorsement.
However, uh, as we are now
coming to the point of
presentation and trying to
enhance this is the 3rd time
that we brought a similar type
of bill forward but to enhance
the ability for the bill to pass
and really impact the target
population, which is youth.
Um, I am going to be bringing a
sub, uh, to the committee, which
uh makes the following changes,
originally, the tax on
cigarettes went from $2 a pack
to $3 we will be eliminating
that. I'm sorry, Senator, are
you talking about your amendment
right now, or are you talking
about a uh a different
substitute.
Um, I'm talking about a
different substitute.
To, to the current bill. Yes,
that, that will um eliminate in
the bill that I brought forward
to the interim committee. It
will read it.
We will reduce the taxes we had
put in the original to $3 a pack
back down to $2. It will take
down the cigar cigar tax to
where it is currently rather
than the increase and it will
reduce the wholesale price tax
of 65% down to 40%, which is
kind of a little bit more in
line, a little bit higher than
the proportion for cigarettes.
Uh, this bill will also
eliminate the uh appropriation
at the end for the uh Department
of uh regulation and licensing
in terms of enforcement, uh,
will be pursuing that through a
different methodology later on.
So what I would propose, Madam
Chair, is that um
That's the purpose of the bill.
Uh, I would like to bring a
substitute that I am working on
right now, um, with Miss Stokes
and with the uh LFC in terms of
its impact, um, this new bill
will have no impact compared to
the FIR on the general fund that
will be neutral, and it will
take what is essentially a $45
million and bring it down to
something around 10 to 15.
Currently we spend $5 million in
the state on nicotine
prevention, uh, and cessation
through the Department of
Health, the CDC recommends that
we spend about 28 million and
this bill will get us up
somewhere around 15 million to
20 million in total being spent,
so that we have a much more
effective program with youth in
terms of education. And so, uh,
I'm not sure I'm
Exactly following the rigorous
procedure. I, I think I am. I'm
looking for a not, uh,
somewhere, but I would like to
bring back a a very quick bill,
uh, Thursday that has all those
changes made into it. OK, so
pardon me if if I can't senator,
I'm, I'm a little confused
because we've got an amendment
here for this bill, Senate Bill
20.
You are talking about a
committee sub for Senate Bill
20.
Yes.
Do you have any any advice,
ma'am, I think what he's doing
is basically taking the current
Senate Bill 20 and shrinking it
by about 2/3 2/3.
And so again, it doesn't make
any sense for us to hear this
Senate Bill 20 with all these
issues if he's going to shrink
it down, um, and again, I think
the question you've got to
decide is, do you want to hear
the, since, since this bill's
been noticed,
Do you want to hear the
testimony today or does this get
rolled over to Thursday and we
do it on Thursday.
So thank you very much, Majority
floor leader. And, um, and so
I'm wondering, Senator, do you
have people here who are here
willing to testify or are they
willing to come back on
Thursday. They're willing to
come back on Thursday. So I, I'm
also offering you time, uh, the
greatest gift of all. All right,
let's, let's do that committee.
Are you OK if we roll this bill
to Thursday?
Yes,
Madam Chair, are we going to be
getting a uh a copy here soon.
Uh, we, we will, we will
definitely get you a copy. I,
I'm on my way upstairs to uh get
this done. OK, so the committee
rules are 24 hours in advance
and that gives everybody time to
do that. So the sooner you can
get it, the better. Um, and
then, so what we will do,
committee, is we will make this
the first bill on the agenda on
Thursday.
For a second time if we get the
sub in time.
So that will be up to you,
Senator Hickey. All right,
appreciate that. Thank you very
much.
One down.
Are you all secretly counting
down on the agendas. Love it, I
will see you later this
afternoon and may want some time
back. Alright, well, you gotta
pay attention because we this
committee is very efficient.
Thank you. So now we have um
Senate Bill 67. I don't know if
that's Senator Brant, if he is
here.
I
Does not see, but I know Senator
Duha is, so you are up next,
Senator Doig. This is also a
bill that we will hold. Um, for
consideration in a potential tax
package, so we're going to hear
the bill, uh, we will have
public testimony. We will have
committee conversations and then
we will hold it from there.
And, and you heard 20 minutes
where you've been here before,
so you already know, 20 minutes
and you get to respond.
So whenever you're ready. Thank
you very much, Madam Chair. So
this is uh SB 89.
When
we passed the legislation
legalizing uh adult use cannabis
on the house floor, an amendment
was put on that would increase
the excise tax starting this
July, um, by 1% point each year
until 2030.
So it starts out at 12%, which
it has been up until now, and by
2030, it would go up to 18%. Um,
that is in addition to, uh, GRT.
It is also charged. I, given
the, the average GRT around the
state if the step up happens as
it's currently in the statute,
that will result in around a 25%
tax on adult use cannabis, and
Madam Chair, the problem with
this is that we
have a thriving illicit market,
uh, for cannabis, about, I've
heard estimates that at least
1/3 of our market is actually
illicit cannabis.
conversation
And so Madam Chair, um,
So about 1/3, at least 1/3 of
our market is illicit. And so
when we do these step ups in,
uh, in the tax rate, we are
essentially punishing the people
who are following the rules. The
folks who are following the
rules, who are doing everything
that we've asked them to do,
have to absorb this cost. And
then they cannot, uh, it puts
them at a competitive
disadvantage.
With uh this massive thriving
illicit markets, because they,
that market isn't dealing with
any taxes at all, and that
market has very, very cheap
cannabis, much of which is, uh,
coming in from out of state,
that they can sell.
For pennies. Um, whereas the
legitimate entrepreneurs who we
want to be, uh, dominating our
market here, uh,
Can't keep up with those prices.
Um, and then, uh, we've seen a
lot of them go out of business.
And so this would just get rid
of that step up. It would hold
the cannabis excess size tax at
12%, rather than do an increase,
uh, over the next 5 years and uh
the whole goal is to empower our
legal regulated market rather
than our illicit. Do you have an
expert or anything that you
would like to have speaker. I do
not. I think there are some
people from like cannabis.
industry who might have signed
up to speak and support, but
OK. All right. Just by a show of
hands, how many in this room are
in support of Senate Bill 89.
12, OK. Those in opposition?
Seen none. Anybody online one in
favor, in support. All right, so
we're just gonna go ahead and
hear from the two of you here in
the audience and the one online
will give you about 1 minute, 1
minute and a half if you wanna
go ahead and line up behind the
Senate sponsor.
No need to be shy.
And if you will go ahead and and
uh and speak into that
microphone, you don't get to sit
though, Ben.
Yeah, you don't have a cordless,
do we?
Chairwoman committee members, my
name is Ben Lowinger. I'm the
executive director of the New
Mexico Cannabis Chamber of
Commerce. We hear a lot about
the disbursement to the general
fund from the cannabis excise
tax, but if you humor me for
just 15 seconds, uh, since we've
legalized cannabis, Albuquerque
has received a disbursement of
$10.3 million. Las Cruces, 2.2
million, Donana County, 600,000.
Los Luna and Berlin combined 3/4
of a million, Roswell, almost
700,000 Rioso 700.
50 Farmington 1.14 million, and
I bring this up because these
are communities that have new
revenue. This does not include
Uh, the gross receipts tax, and
this is uh new money that has
been very important.
When our state legalized
cannabis.
It's an awkward. Well, actually
you can grab the microphone
behind you so you don't have to
stand and if you'll shut off
that mic, Senator, thank you.
Yeah.
Yeah, exactly. What kind of yoga
pose was that, man? When our
state legalized cannabis and
started looking at it in
earnest, the governor convened a
working group, and that working
group identified that the magic
number is 18 to 19%. And that's
the number that keeps uh
consumers in the regulated
industry where they know they
can purchase safe, high-quality
cannabis. And right now, New
Mexico
about in the middle of the road,
compared with other states that
have legal cannabis. And if we
increase the percentage point
every time we'll be at the very
high end, and the concern is
that'll drive consumers back to
the illicit market. We thank the
sponsor, uh, for bringing this
bill and the cannabis industry
fully supports it. Thank you.
Thank you.
Hello everybody. My name is Will
Brandenburg. I represent First
Crop New Mexico, we're a
manufacturing license holder.
And uh we, we'd like to bring up
the point that they're of 695
total retail licenses, reporting
income in uh December 410 of
those are under the 50k
threshold.
50,000 threshold is really the
understood level at which an
operator can maintain, uh,
payroll and all expenses
included in operating those
retail locations.
I would want to bring attention
to that number and the, the fact
that a lot of those 410 license
holders are Mexicans.
Born and raised, family owned
and operated businesses, a lot
of them. These are not large
companies who have and can
afford the long term gain here
and if we look at strength and
regulation and enforcement over
the next year and keeping the
taxes where they are, I think
they have a really good chance
to stand the test of time in the
industry here.
I want to thank the sponsor and
thank you all for hearing the,
the facts here today. Thank you.
Thank you so much, Matt Online,
um, if you will, please unmute
yourself, you got about 1
minute, 1 minute and a half.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Matt Kennicott. I'm the CEO of
Plug. We are a cannabis industry
group that supports small
cannabis businesses throughout
the state. Also a micro licensee
and Socorro in Mexico at high
maintenance. Uh, we are very
much in support of this
legislation for all the reasons
stated, uh, we, we actually
think that uh that this is a
good start and the tax should be
a little bit lower in the future
as well. Thank you.
All right. Thank you very much.
Uh, last minute, anybody in
opposition of this bill?
To the committee.
Uh, anybody from the committee
would like to make a comment or
ask questions.
Senator share.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, first, I just want to thank
Senator Doig for making all of
the free market arguments on
everything that I always made
and told that I'm wrong.
Because
Lowering the price creates more
activity and that's all good,
and yet.
We seem to be, we, we have a ton
of bills right now, even in this
committee that are making life
more difficult for homegrown New
Mexico businesses.
Everything from
Oil and gas regulations to water
regulations in, in, and we've
got a bills out here to raise
the tax on alcohol because we
need to reduce consumption of at
least the title is increased uh
cigarette and tobacco products
taxes, even though then he came
back and said he was gonna do
something else.
Why is lowering the tax on this
better when raising the tax and
regulation on everything else in
the world, good.
Madam chair, senator, so this
isn't lowering the tax. This is
just preventing an increase in
the tax that that would go into
effect.
So this still holds us at 12%
excise tax.
Well,
I, I only bring that up because
Virtually every other bill that
we're going to hear.
Makes life more difficult for
whatever uh industry we're
touching.
Except this one. So,
Dude.
Thank you, Senator Sher. I hope,
are, are you feeling OK? That
was not up to typical of your,
you're warming up, aren't you?
Nichols, yeah.
Oh, OK. Oh, a gummy bear. I'm,
I'm, I, I, oh.
He's gonna start creating new
ways of saying things in the
Senate that are going to become
part of our lexicon.
Uh, I thank you very much,
Senator Sher. Any anybody else?
Senator O'Malley?
Thank you, Madam Chair.
So, uh you're saying that,
Senator, that the, the house is
the one that put this in this uh
amendment in.
Mount your son, yes, this went
on, on the house floor.
OK, and so I'm not, I'm not sure
what their intent was, but um,
Probably to get some revenue
maybe to
I don't know what kind of
programs we have regarding
Cannabis in terms of like
helping folks who
May have problems or addicted or
have health problems associated
with cannabis. Do we have
anything like that? Madam Chair,
Senator, all of the revenue from
the cannabis tax goes into our
general fund. It's there's
nothing like that. OK.
Uh, I was just wondering why the
getting rid of all of them, I
mean, uh.
Like
There's, it's a 1% every year.
Why not
You know,
I don't have a couple years of
increased taxes and how
difficult it is for this market.
That's how competitive it is
against the
Well, we let that horse out of
the barn a long time ago, so I
guess maybe there's not that
much we can do about it, but
Uh, I think there's also some
other issues probably that you
need to look at and I, what I'm
hearing too is sometimes a
product that is coming from the
book called the black market.
Elicit market is sometimes
superior than what is being
sold.
And so that's also an issue too
that maybe this industry needs
to pay attention.
And Madam Chair, Senator, um,
As far as it's.
I,
I couldn't
comment on that, but I will say
if it's not within our regulated
market. It's not getting the
testing, all the safety
precautions that are regulated
market, uh.
went into place to make sure the
consumers are getting a safe
product, aren't happening with
that black market
that's how it might be I think
um, Madam Chair, and that's a
good thing. That's a good thing,
but it's very highly regulated.
OK, that's the comments I had.
Thank you, Ma.
Senator O'Malley.
Anybody else.
Senator Worth. Thank you, ma'am.
Just a quick question, maybe our
staff from LFC can help with
the, the fiscal impact, so for
26.
I assume the budget, the 26
budget is based on the
assumption that this tax
increase is going to happen, am
I correct in that?
Sure
Are there other questions that
you should probably stand up.
No, I think you can let's, he
can sit right there. And I was
just trying to figure out, it's
an interesting situation where
it's a tax that hasn't gone on.
And I was trying to understand,
you know, what's the
If there's not capacity in the
budget, then we need to find.
looks like $4.1 million to pay
for the lost revenue for 26 is
what it looks like.
Um
But again, it's not money that
we have now, but it's money that
we were expecting, so they built
the whole budget on that. I'm
just trying to make sure I
understood that. That's all I
have.
Thank you, Senator Wirth.
Anything else from the
committee? Uh, we'll do Senator
Bergman's and then Senator
O'Malley for a second time.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Just
quickly, do you know what the
tax rate is in Arizona?
Madam Chair, Senator, I don't
know what it is in Arizona
specifically. I know that as Mr.
Lewinger said, we are, we are
pretty middle of the road right
now, if these increases go into
effect, we will be, we will be
significantly higher.
And
than other places. OK.
OK. Thank you.
OK, Senator O'Malley.
A in a chair, and based on it
was mentioned about the FIR and
the loss of revenue and expected
that the budget was built on it.
I was just wondering if it
The sponsor would be would
consider.
You know, looking at the
following year, uh, that we
would not increase the tax, but
based on the fact that it's our
budget is based on that, that
this would not go into effect.
Man senator, I
I think that would be better
than nothing, but I, but I will
still pose a significant burden,
I think, on the regulated
market, the folks who are
struggling to succeed now and,
and to the extent that we put
more burdens on our regulated
market now, we're going to get a
smaller and smaller regulated
market, which is going to give
us less and less tax revenue. So
the more we can do to keep our
regulated market healthy, um,
and thriving, the more tax
revenue we get overall.
China just blend with the fact
that, you know, when you build a
budget, and now it's like, well,
we anticipated a certain amount,
and now we're gonna have to find
that amount. That was my
concern. Thank you.
Senator on that point, I mean, I
think we should.
We should watch this bill
because I would hate for us to
be trying to put together a
package and then this doesn't
get in. And I guess the question
is, if
If we just delayed it for a
year, so we would lose in FY 27.
$8.9 million. We haven't built a
budget on that.
For the future here, so at least
we could plan for it, so I
think, I mean, it's just
something that.
Pay attention to cause this bill
could go out, it seems like it's
a standalone if, if we change
the effective data center I
suggesting.
Thank you.
Any other comments or questions
from the committee.
OK, at this point, we're holding
this bill.
Um, and we're adding it to the
list of bills to be considered.
Should we have capacity for a
tax package. So thank you. Uh,
you are up next now with Senate
Bill 91. Thank you, Madam Chair.
So Senate Bill 91, uh, was born
of, uh,
A program that is happening in
Albuquerque right now.
Where
They have these automatic speed
cameras that are set up.
And
Uh, if you are going 11 miles
over the speed limit. You get a
ticket in the mail, uh, for $100
fine.
Um
Were you pulled over?
By a police officer for that 11
miles over the speed limit, you
would have a $30 fine.
They're charging $100
100 dollars fine, which is the
maximum under state law, uh,
that, that a municipality can
can charge for traffic
violation.
What's unhappying is if you
don't pay that $100. They are
sending people to private
collections, um,
Which I am not aware of any
other situation in our, in
government, where we send our
residents to private collections
companies in order to enforce
our laws, um, and in a state
dealing with uh lots of poverty
already, um, I think that is
very, very bad policy.
Um
I
Now I've been told by the, the
city clerk of the city of
Albuquerque. Well, that, oh,
well, that, it doesn't get
reported to the credit agencies.
Um, I, the entire basis for that
is that their vendor said so.
I've seen no evidence of that
whatsoever, so I think there's
every reason to believe that
that it is being reported to
credit agencies the same way
collections are reporting to
credit agencies otherwise. Um,
there's not a, a, uh, exception
in Albuquerque's ordinance or in
state law for that. So with this
bill does,
Is
A couple of things.
And uh, and, and so also found
chair.
If you get, if you have 2 unpaid
fines. So 2 times you went 11
miles over the speed limit.
And twice you didn't pay that
$100 fine. They can, they, that
the city of Albuquerque is also
impounding your car.
So, I have a minor traffic
infraction, and now my car's
impounded. Now I can't go to my
job. Now I can't take my kid to
school, and it has this really
significant impact on people's
lives over something that really
is a, a revenue producer, not
more than I think a a safety
issue. And, and, and I will say,
Madam Chair, well, I don't love
automated cameras. I, I have
seen data that, that suggests
that they do increase traffic
safety. Um, so this is not
Trying to get rid of those
cameras. Um, this is just saying
that if you're gonna have a
program like that, uh, one, you
can't charge people more than
what state law.
would allow you to to find them
if they were pulled over by an
officer.
too, you can't send them to a
private collections agency, uh,
3, you can't report them to a
credit to a credit agency, or
allow your vendor to do so.
Um
4, you can't impound their
vehicle just for that.
If there are other things that
have happened that, that you
would be able to impound under.
OK, but just for 2 tickets.
Or slight speeding is not a the
the collateral consequences of
doing so are a lot. Um.
than 5, that you can't pay your
vendor, uh, on a commission
basis. You can't pay them,
yeah, uh, give them that an
incentive to send out more fines
because they get paid more. Now,
Just before this hearing, I was
looking at the contract between
the vendor and the city of
Albuquerque, and it's actually
set up so that, uh, the vendor,
all of the revenue that comes in
first goes to the vendor to pay
all their costs. And then the
net amount that is left
afterwards, half of it goes to
the state, half of it goes to
the city.
Um, but even though it's not a
commission, and I was reading
that I'm thinking, man, I should
have read this before I had this
bill drafted, uh, even though
it's not a commission, it still
includes that same inherent.
Uh, incentive.
to send out more fines because
that's how they get, because
they get first grab at that pot
of money.
Um
Now I
I think the city of Albuquerque
is actually violating state law
already with this program in
other ways they are charging.
They also, you have to pay their
attorney fees. If it goes to
collections, uh, we have state
law that says you can cities,
you can charge $100. That's it.
You can't charge any fees, uh,
no fees or costs shall be
imposed otherwise, um, so that's
for someone listening who feels
like filing a lawsuit, uh, to
pursue, but overall, Madam
Chair, in 202
we passed legislation, um,
getting rid of a lot of fees and
fines and acknowledging the fact
that
Uh, those fees and fines tend to
really, really hurt poor people.
And don't actually
Result in in a public safety
game.
Um
This program
is the opposite of our
intention.
With those kinds of, of, of
policies that we have passed. So
this is putting guardrails on
these programs. Right now, it
would apply to all, all
municipalities. I think if
someone wanted to do an
amendment to have it apply to
Class A in the municipalities
located in Class A counties, um,
that would maybe be a more, uh,
right sized approach, uh,
I don't know that the the
program like this is happening
anywhere else, to be honest.
Uh
That's it, Madam chair.
Hey, do you have any experts
that you'd like to introduce or
I'm, I know there was someone
from the Fines and fees group.
Yes.
Uh welcome to welcome to say a
few words if you'd like and sit
there with Senator Du Hicks.
How about on on Senator Do
Hick's left.
Sit there at the table.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. Uh, my
name is Brie Sillery. I'm an
advocate for the uh finds and
fees Justice Center and um we're
here to support Senate Bill 91,
um, the Albuquerque's automated
traffic enforcement program
while intended to improve road
safety has serious flaws which
this bill aims to address. Um,
Albuquerque's $100 flat fine for
automated speeding tickets or
exceeds state traffic penalties.
Um, a driver going just 10 miles
per hour over the speed limit.
It's the same $100 fine as
someone speeding recklessly at
uh 21 to 25 MPH over the speed
limit.
This disproportionate impact is
ineffective and does not capture
and punish those that are truly
dangerous.
Furthermore, the system is
plagued by issues like
undelivered citations and due
process concerns. For example,
in 2023, a single mother, Shawny
Klein, received a collection
notice from a third party
collection agency for a ticket
that she never received.
When she sought to access public
records, she was denied.
This highlights the series
problem with notification and
access to due process.
Senate Bill 91 offers crucial
guard rails for the automated
traffic enforcement programs in
New Mexico. It aligns automated
fines and existing speeding
penalties, restoring fairness
and proportionality.
Critically, it prevents
excessive penalties in the
cascading financial burden that
can result from unpaid tickets
such as vehicle booting and
impoundment, damage to credit
scores and the added weight of
collections agencies.
These measures are especially
important for low income New
Mexicans, preventing a minor
infraction from spiraling into
financial crisis.
Um, so with this, um, fines and
fees justice center or just the
committee to support uh Senate
Bill 91 as it's a crucial step
to protecting New Mexicans from
the unfair and excessive automa
automated traffic enforcement
practices and ensures that our
traffic safety programs truly
serve the public good.
Alright, thank you very much.
All right, so we're going to the
audience now.
Um, just by a show of hands, if
you don't mind those of you who
are in support of this bill,
please raise your hand.
So we have one lone Denali.
Um, hold on just a second and
just, uh, and we have one online
that is in the opposition by a
show of hands of people here,
uh, those in opposition of this
bill.
34, don't be shy and I'm raising
your hand.
Back from my days of teaching.
689. All right. We have 9 in
opposition and we have one in
the audience, and then one
online. And is there anybody
else online?
Besides, Valerie,
All right.
So what we're gonna do is, um,
I'm gonna go ahead and we're,
we're, we're gonna bring Denali
up first, who is in support of
this bill, and then
We'll go to 6 in the audience,
uh, Denali, you'll have 2
minutes.
And then we'll go 6 in the
audience and then we'll do the 2
online.
Uh, 2 minutes as well.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Denali Wilson. I'm a
staff attorney at the ACLU of
New Mexico and the ACLU.
stands in strong support of SB
91 and thinks the sponsors for
bringing the bell.
Uh, when municipalities rely on
punitive collection practices.
They can turn minor traffic
infractions into significant
financial crises for those least
able to pay. The accumulation of
fines can lead to debt that
spirals out of control,
impacting a person's ability to
secure housing, maintain
employment, or access essential
services. Additionally,
aggressive enforcement of fines
and fees can erode trust between
communities and local
government.
Creating a system where revenue
generation is prioritized over
fairness and public safety. By
practicing, by, sorry, placing
reasonable limits on these
practices SB 91 helps ensure
that municipal policies do not
unduly harm those who are
already economically vulnerable.
Thank you so much.
Thank you, Denali.
All right, now we're going to
bring up 6 folks in the audience
who are in opposition. So if you
will please line up.
And you're going to use the
handheld mic.
If you will, let's keep coming
up. Otherwise, if you don't get
it, we're, we're not gonna hear
your testimony. So for those of
you that raised your hands,
let's go ahead.
Uh, you will be timed. You'll
get 2 minutes. Uh, vice chair,
we'll let you know when you have
30 seconds and then when you
need to stop. And then for those
on Zoom, after we get done with
the 6 here in the room, we will
go to you. So if you will,
please, uh, be aware of when it
will be your time. I will call
your name. So, uh, you're
welcome to go ahead and start.
Madam Chair and senators, my
name is Benito Martinez. I'm the
commander of the Albuquerque
Police Department.
I'm the commander of the great
police department traffic
division.
The Speed camera program is part
of the Vision Zero's effort to
reduce speeding-related
fatalities. As a member of APD's
motor unit, you depend on the
cameras to keep the roadways
safe.
You see what happens when they
aren't safe.
Her first multiplier for us, for
the department.
You don't get a citation unless
you're driving 10 or more miles
an hour over the speed limit.
When you get your first ticket,
you have 30 days to pay it.
You're given another citation or
notice in 30 days, that first
one's not paid. After 60 days,
then you reported to
Elections
It does not affect your credit.
There are payment plans for
opportunities to pay also
community service.
You get these taken care of.
It's just a reminder from the
Election agency for you to pay
your ticket. You're not getting
reported to.
Reddit.
The goal is not to make a
profit. This is not a cash grab.
There's a chance to curb
behavior.
Keep the roadway safe, reduce
fatalities within the city of
Albuquerque related to speeding.
If the legislation were to pass,
it would destroy our program. We
have seen up to 43% reduction in
speeding, and in some places
close to 80% reduction.
You see the change of behaviors.
And we know that it is working
and we have saved people's
lives. Thank you for your time.
Anyone else? But we did see 6
hands or 9 hands raised, so.
OK.
All right, at this point, then
we're going to go ahead and end
up we're gonna go to the two
people online. We've got Frank
and Valerie. Valerie, if you
will please unmute your mic, and
Frank, you will be next. You
have 2 minutes, please.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair.
Members of the committee. My
name is Valerie Hermanson, and I
get to work at the city of
Albuquerque on our automated
speed enforcement program. I'm
here to comment on SB 91 and our
concerns with how, if this is
passed, it could negatively
impact our program. Speed is the
number one cause for a fatal
crash, and we know from
comprehensive data that humans
are less likely to survive high
speed crashes. High-speed
driving increases the frequency
and the severity of cratches,
not only for people inside of an
automobile, but it's especially
um
dangerous for people walking or
biking. For example, if a person
is hit by a driver going 20 MPH,
9 out of 10 pedestrians will
survive versus 40 where only 1
pedestrian out of 10 will
survive. Our program intends to
change driver behavior and save
lives focusing on drivers
exceeding the posted speed limit
by 10+ MPH. We have 20 cameras
focused on our most dangerous
corridors. And in the first two
years, we saw between a 42 to an
89.2% decrease.
When drivers exceeding the
posted speed limit by 10+ MPH.
We also saw between a 0.3 and an
8.3 mile per hour decrease in
average drivers speed, which may
not sound significant, but even
a 1 mile per hour reduction in
speed can result in a 17%
decrease in fatal crashes.
People can pay complete
community service, request a
payment plan or appeal a
violation. Unfortunately, the
version of collections that we
use is the only way we can
enforce the
because it is a civil penalty.
If we don't have an enforcement
mechanism like any other law on
the books. Our program is not
going to be effective in
creating safer streets, as
demonstrated with the data I
shared, this program is an
effective strategy to keep our
streets safer, and without this
program, people, people's
behavior could return to
dangerous levels. Thank you for
your time and attention.
Thank you so much.
Right, at this point, I
Oh yeah, I'm sorry. Thank you,
Frank, if you will, unmute
yourself and you have 2 minutes.
Of the committee. My name is
Frank Chapetti. I'm the city
manager for Gallup, New Mexico.
Um, we are exploring and doing
our own ordinance right now to
put in um the cameras, uh,
speeding camera systems. Um,
we're looking at 5 of them in
our highest area. Um, we have
done the studies and as
Albuquerque showed, um, we have
at one point in a 1-hour study,
we had over 300 cars exceeding
the speed limit by over 20 miles
an hour on, on our roads. Um, so
we've targeted
5 of the, the most critical
areas that we've had high
accidents and the highest speed
levels, and the, the most
numbered. We are working with a
company that is allowing us to
set the fine. It's not an
automatic, they set, they, they
collect, they get, um, we're,
we're setting it at the current
speeding ticket levels.
Um
They wanted to cap it, um, cap
it at 75 tickets, so they're not
looking to collect extra money.
We told them no, it's not fair.
Um, if you're the 1st 75 that
get caught speeding, if your
number is 76, you get to get out
of jail free card. Absolutely
not. Um, the city is allowed
through the ordinance to set the
number of miles over um a leeway
over the speed limit that
they're allowed. But the main
thing that we have, um,
It will be used overseen also
the, the person will have a
choice of mailing in their
ticket or going to a magistrate
court, our municipal court,
excuse me, municipal court can
offer community service, you'll
have the choice of community
service or the fine. So for the
um lower income and they can
choose community service, higher
income can choose community
service also. And again, since
this is a fee, um, we're using
them to collect, mainly because
our jurisdiction issues. Gallup
is 16 miles from.
Arizona, we're gonna have many
people who get these tickets and
they're in Arizona, or on the,
they're on the Navajo Nation or
Zuni reservation, which at a lot
of times don't have a house
number.
Per se, um, it's kind of hard to
send a ticket to 3 miles west of
Highway 491, Blue Blue roof.
That's the way a lot of our
rural addresses are in our area.
And, and with the seconds left.
So we are looking to, to the
system and use an outside source
to collect, mainly due to the
jurisdiction issue and not
overloading our municipal court
where we only have one judge.
Thank you for your time. We do,
we do oppose the bill.
Thank you so much, Frank.
Now up to the committee.
Sen share, and Senator O'Malley.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair.
Disclosure, I am one of those
overregulated, overtaxed small
New Mexico owned and operated
businesses, who is also a debt
collection agent.
Credit reporting
On $100 doesn't exist anymore.
Have to put in a contract,
credit reporting agencies won't
even take a debt under $500
anymore.
So that's almost irrelevant to
put in the law or not.
Now, I guess if you had 10 of
them, it's $1000 could be, but
the contract with whoever.
says, do you want a credit
report or not?
They say no, you don't. I mean,
it's a simple, it's the
automated stuff, every
collection agency in the world
these days, I'm sure.
So you just say no, it doesn't
happen.
Um,
Added fees.
It's against federal law for a
collection agency to add fees
that are not part of the
original debt.
can't do it.
OK, you can be paid on a
commission.
So if it's $100 you can get paid
10%, 30%, 100%, whatever.
Uh, but you can't add an
additional fee to whatever the
fee, whatever the fine is.
Um
So there's no additional fees
here.
Uh
As far as
Being upset that
You would want to pay somebody
to do the job that you asked
them to do, that confuses me.
Um, so, certainly, uh, in, in my
case, I wanna, I wanna collect
as much as possible, because
that's what I'm paid to do.
Uh, unlike
And
You know bureaucracies do
whatever they're doing for the
same price, whatever, but
But businesses do things
because, well, the whole idea is
that you're gonna be successful
and therefore get paid.
Um
But a big part of this, and I,
and I think the commander for
Albuquerque made this point, or
somebody did anyway.
And certainly the
Uh, chair of
Of uh
judiciary makes this point. It's
the certainty.
Of punishment
Not the dollar amount, it's the
certainty. So if they're certain
they're not going to have to pay
the fee.
Then you've completely destroyed
the program.
If
They're certain that they will.
That somebody will at least ask
him for the money.
And now you have a successful
Uh, program to save lives.
The city's not set up to do
this.
Election agencies can because
they'll get a file. I don't do
this, by the way.
Um, but they'll get a file, it's
downloaded to them, it'll be in
their system, a letter will be
sent.
It, it's all automated.
and that's because that's our
job. So that's what we focus on
doing, OK? Uh, we don't focus on
Fixing tires or fixing potholes,
no, we focus on sending letters
to people.
Uh, they never got a notice.
That happens quite a bit because
people move. They they change
addresses.
So one of our jobs then is to
find them.
Send him a notice, so now they
know.
But it's not
It's not any different than
getting it from the city of
Albuquerque and getting it from
my collection agency, it's still
a notice that, hey, this is,
this is what happened.
Big differences on a collection
agency, you can dispute it.
And say, hey, I don't know what
this is about. Prove it.
So then the collection agency
has to go to the city of
Albuquerque and say, we need a,
we need proof.
So
As far as
Bankrupting people or making
life so miserable that they
can't do anything. It's a $100
fee that can be broken up. I
don't know what city of
Albuquerque's policy is, my
guess is that
Uh, it, it's probably 3, you can
pay 1/3, 1/3, 1/3. I'm guessing,
but
Um
So it's $30.33 dollars 33 cents.
Um
That
I don't think that that's a
grotesque financial burden that
it was that it was uh
It was portrayed as there.
But I do think that the real
problem here is that.
This is a city policy, it's not
a collection agency problem. If
you don't like the lights, well,
Do something if if the fee is
inappropriate, we'll talk about
the fee, um.
Collection agencies are just
there to send a letter. That's
what they do.
Um
For $100 most collection
agencies aren't going to do any
more than send a letter.
Um
It's certainly possible as we
get more and better uh
technology, you can make an
automated phone call, you can
send a text.
Um, but there's even limits to
what you can do on those things
by federal law.
So
Uh, and it doesn't matter if I'm
trying to collect $100,000 bill
or a $100 bill, the letter that
I send is gonna say the same
thing because the federal law
requires it.
So
And in, in that it says I
dispute this.
Don't believe this is mine.
So
Anyway, that's, that's that in.
So I, I share all that because
I, as I heard most of the people
that had a problem with this
really had a problem with the,
the fine being.
$100 versus $30.
OK, change that.
I don't know who my competitor
is in this.
I wish them well.
I don't want the business.
I don't want the business cause
I don't see how I could make any
business money collecting $100
at a time.
So
Um, anyway, I think there's two
things.
We want to pick on the
collection agency cause it's
evil to say they're bad guys,
but the real problem is we don't
like the feed that's different
than one of the cops. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Sheriff.
Senator O'Malley.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, I
do, I would have to agree that
that the fees or I should say
the fines should not exceed.
A state finds, um.
And I guess this question of
sending it to a collection
agency if that's true.
Um, obviously,
You know, they would, uh, the,
the person who who is
responsible for this infraction
has to get noticed that in some
way, right, if they haven't paid
the fee. My concern would be
with there would be another fine
on top of that or a late fee or
something like that that would
start to, you know, gain some
like a tumbleweed and just keep
getting bigger and bigger and
then it becomes very difficult
for someone to pay it, that
would be my concern.
Um, but I'm also a little
reluctant to get involved with,
you know, this is local control
issue too. I mean, they've made
that decision to do that as a as
a city, um.
And uh, you know, I, I'm
concerned about the, the one
provision in there that says
that um companies.
You know, the, the way this
company is working is, is
they're, they're getting their
Um, they're getting their money
first, and then what is there
left over, but they need to
recoup their costs.
And they need to make a profit,
right? The city isn't doing
this. This is a private company
that's doing this. So I, I don't
wanna get, I don't want to mess
with that. I mean, if that's the
deal that the city has, and
that's the deal the city has.
So I, I certainly would support
That the fees or the fines would
be in line with state.
Um, and that I would, you know,
if, if it's true that somehow um
Someone gets a fine and then,
and then the collection agency
asked for more money or there's
a fee on top of it. That's very
problematic, especially for
folks who are trying to.
You know, and then this thing,
like I said, just has, you know,
just rolls and it it just
becomes this bigger thing that
someone can't even pay. I would
be concerned about that.
Um
And so, I guess I would say that
Uh, uh, in terms of the
contract, the city has with this
private company, I don't think
that we should get involved with
that or make those kinds of um
You know, um, restrictions on
something like that because it
is a private company, and they
should have the ability to, to
have that agreement.
Thank you, Mr. Thank you,
Senator O'Malley.
Anything anybody else from the
committee, Senator Wirth, thank
you, Madam Chair. So I, uh,
Been around long enough, I think
with Senator Scher and I was
remembering the former majority
leader, uh, who was very
interested in this issue and in
fact passed legislation directly
on this issue of red light
cameras, and I just pulled this
up, this bill from 2007 and I
just want to read from a
different statute and see if you
can address this because it it's
causing me to go.
We may have a conflict here.
Section 3-18-17.
A municipality, including a home
rural municipality that's
adopted a charter pursuant to
Article 10, Section 6 of the
Constitution, may by ordinance a
define a nuisance, a beta
nuisance and impose penalties on
a person who creates or allows a
nuisance to exist, provided that
one, the total amount of
assessed penalties and fines
imposed by an ordinance for
failure to pay a traffic sign or
signal, including a red light
offense or for a speeding
offense or violation shall not
exceed $100.
So can you just address, I mean,
uh,
Are we changing
that provision as well, and I
guess how do these, how do these
line up because again, you're
opening up a section of the
traffic code, it looks like
there's a
Specific again to Senator
O'Malley's point, a local.
Uh, a cap put on these, these
red light.
So, Madam Chair, Senator, yes,
you're absolutely right. There,
there is a a cap overall for how
much municipalities can charge
uh for fines. Um, and it's $100
or for anything traffic related
infraction. So, the effect that
this would have, and we looked
at either doing these
amendments.
In that section, or doing it in
this one, the drafter felt it
was better in this one, so the
effect that this would have
Yes you have
Is basically you would, you
would charge anything from
For up to 10 miles, so.
If you look at uh 66 7 301,
that's where it lays out the
graduated penalties for how much
for how fast you're going. So
you would be able to charge up
to $100.
That would still be the cap, but
if someone was going up to and
including 10 miles over, they
would be capped at 25 under
state law, 11 to 15/30, 16 to
20/65, and then everything over
21 miles over or and over would
be stick at that $100 cap.
And if you, if you look,
Senator, at sub 2 of that same
section you were looking at,
that's where it also says no
fees or costs shall be imposed
pursuant to this section, and
the city of Albuquerque is
imposing attorney fees for
collections on top of their $100
fee. I think a violation of
state law. And based on what
Senator Sheer said, probably
possibly in violation of federal
law.
So, ma'am, and I, I appreciate
that, again, I just remember.
Going through this. So basically
what you're saying is these two
statutes can line up.
Because when we have $100.
threshold in the traffic code.
The local government can use
that $100.
Amount is the fine, but when
it's, when it's a lower
threshold, and again, that part
of this argument certainly makes
sense to me. I, I am pausing
here because of the
Again, I do think
Local government should have.
Especially what home rule cities
be able to, except this one's I,
I, I'm just kind of going back
and forth because I, I, I don't
like the fact that the same
person is getting the same
ticket for grossly.
Different.
Violations, and that doesn't
feel, feel right to me. Feels
like again and
This particular contract, we'll
just set the fee at the highest
level we can possibly set it.
We're going to charge a fine
that we may not, or we're gonna
charge fees that we may not be
able to charge.
At least under that section of
the statute.
It just concerns me that that
doesn't
The intent of that seems to go
against. But again, it's also a
local cult control decision, and
if that's what the city council
decided to do.
Uh, why, why don't we just stay
with the, with the
I mean, they've made this
decision and I guess are we
going to preempt them?
What this bill proposes to do
basically is we're gonna not
modify that 100, but we're gonna
Change the traffic code to make
the thresholds apply, if I'm
understanding correctly.
And Madam Chaunder, I, I mean,
frankly, we already preempt
them.
We are state law, they a city
can't just decide like tacking
on those fees and violation of
state law, that's not a local
control issue. State law
applies. You don't get to just
by virtue of being a home
roaming municipality doesn't
mean you can violate state law
when you want to.
So, so this would require this
would, would preempt them and
that they could not
automatically jump to that
highest penalty of $100. It
would require them to use the
same, the same graduated
approach that would be imposed
on any of us if we got pulled
over by an officer, as opposed
to getting a ticket from, from
the camera. And so, Madam Chair,
is it your position then that
this graduated.
This, this $100 flat fee
basically is contradictory to
the current.
graphic code violations that we
have when you've got a live
officer versus a camera.
So I, I think it, it leads to
unfair and inconsistent
application. I don't, I would
not say.
So if you look at 66 8 130,
which this is is a mandate. I
mean, what it says is that
municipality may by passage of
an ordinance, establish a
municipal penalty assessment
program similar to those
established and uh 66 86 1 16
and 117, which is what this
would happen at. I think the
words similar, I think great
liberties are being taken with
the word similar by the city of
Albuquerque, um.
I also don't know if it has been
challenged in court, so.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Ramos. No.
Senator Figueroa. Thanks, Madam
Chair, and thank you, sponsor. I
think at this point I'm a little
confused, uh, because we're
hearing from my city and I'm
trying to understand the
objections, and I can't tell if
the issue is the graduated
penalty, Madam Chair, or if the
issue is the collection process,
and I don't
So I don't know how to address
this bill, and maybe the sponsor
has some insight, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, Senator, I, I, my
intention was that it was. So
I'll tell you, I got one of
these tickets. I got sent to
collections and well, Senator
shares uh company might not
pursue a $100 debts. I've been
called over 20 times by this
collection agency. Um, I stopped
counting at 20.
So
And, and I, and, and I, I still
haven't paid it cause I wanna
see what else they're gonna do,
frankly, I keep on uh waiting
for it to to show up on my
credit report. um, and I'd like
to see uh how they uh are going
to continue to escalate it, uh,
cause I'm curious to find out,
but I can tell you that it is
definitely, definitely
happening. And, and I'm sure, I,
I can bear a $100 fee, uh,
that's not going to be a, a
major hardship for me. Um,
But I think
Frankly, I, I, it will make, it
can be for a lot of other
people, and then, which is not
to say that there should be no
consequence. If you, if you
violate our laws, there should
be consequence. You do need
certainty and swiftness, um.
This program kind of fails the
swiftness test, if you, if you
speed one day and 3 weeks later
you get something in the mail.
It's not really a swiftness of a
consequence there, um, but, and
they should, they should have a
way to enforce it.
I don't think it's my job to
come up with.
How they enforce it. But I think
that when they are enforcing it
in a way that is out of line
with how we enforce our laws.
Otherwise, in this state, I'm
not aware of any other situation
where we send our citizenry to
private collections to enforce
our laws. That's what raises a
big red flag for me.
But, but, and, and it's the
graduated approach. So it's
both.
It's a really long way of saying
it.
Excuse me. Thank you, Madam
Chair and thank you, sponsor. I
think that, that crux of the
issue was still difficult for me
in that
This speeding needs to be
abated, it needs to be curbed.
That's a bad pun, um.
But if this is a way to affect
safety and speeding, which are
real issues, at least in my area
in Albuquerque. Um, I don't, I
don't want to hog tie it. I
don't want to eliminate the
possibility, so I'm looking for
a way to allow these to continue
in a way that can function maybe
more appropriately. I don't
think Madam Tarot should affect
credit ratings. I don't think
vehicles should be impounded for
nonpayment, but there do have to
be some kind of
consequences, and I don't think.
The Law enforcement of the city
is necessarily great at
collecting these penalties. So
hiring out, contracting out
something is what our state
government does a lot for tasks
that they don't want to take on.
Um, so it needs to be, it needs
to be controlled, it needs to be
appropriate.
But I'm still not sure how to
adjust this bill to make that
happen.
Thanks, Madam Chair, that that
was no help whatsoever, but now
you know.
Can, can I say one thing? So the
effect of this spill would not
be to say you could no longer
have these programs. You could
absolutely still have these
programs. They would just, you
said they should be controlled
and appropriate.
That's what this is is aiming to
do. These, these programs do
make a difference. These
programs.
Yeah, by my constitutional
misgivings about them sometimes,
uh, should continue be if if
they are helping keep our
streets safe, uh.
And this would require
municipalities to come up.
With a, a different approach to
enforcement, that, that, that is
controlled and appropriate.
Senator O'Malley for a 2nd time
and then Senator Bergman's.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, um,
Senator do his uh let's just go
to page, uh, I guess this line
10.
Oh, it's page 4.
And, and
I think one of the frustra, one
of the things that I, that I
mentioned was, you know, sort of
getting in the way or getting in
the middle of a contract between
the city and a private.
Uh, you know, this third party
administrator, um, I don't have
a problem with the rest of the
bill. I think it takes care of
some of the issues that you
brought up in terms that you
can't impound a vehicle, but,
um, this idea of
Uh, you know
Telling the city what kind of,
you know, contract or what kind
of um relationship they can have
with the third party.
Bender, I think is, is something
that uh I think it could, I
think, it could end up hurting
this program. It could end up.
So I was wondering if you'd be
willing to um basically
Um, omit, basically item 5.
Having chair, Senator, yes, uh,
especially after reading this
contract today, I thought, boy,
I'm not accomplishing what I
sought to accomplish at all. A
5, so I would not have a problem
with striking. So Senator
O'Malley, you're suggesting an
amendment? Yes, Madam Chair, I
would strike.
That would be a number 10 to I
guess 13 item 5.
Um, what page, that page 4, page
4 here. Can you repeat that
again? Just, just so that uh
Rebecca can get that. Yes, uh,
Madam Chas be to amendment to
strike.
Uh,
I 10, I mean, item 10, 910,
sorry, line 10 to line 13, which
is item 5 on page 4.
Senators at a a friendly
amendment. I'm sure it is. I
might just suggest you have that
more hanging out there on line
9.
So I would strike everything
from the semicoon on line 9
up until the period on line 13.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Online 6 after the semicolon.
Te Rebecca, read that back just
in case to make sure before we
go ahead and vote on the
amendment.
On page 4, line 6, insert the
word or after agency called
semicon, um, by 9, delete the
word or.
Insert a period?
Line 9, Madam Chair.
Strike the semicolon.
And or
And then strike everything
through the period around 13.
So you keep that period, the
period after device on line 9.
Correct? A period after device.
Remove or
Remove 10 through 13.
Yeah, works.
that
And add an or on page on line 6.
That's correct, Madam Chair, I
have that. That's considered a
friendly amendment
modifications.
So share.
So, Madam Chair,
With that strikes is pay a third
so then you can pay a third
party.
Administrator of municipal
penalty assessment program using
automated cameras or devices or
commission.
Based on the number of penalty
assessments.
But up front, starting on page
3.
It still says you cannot use
election agency or other
private.
Entity to collect unpaid
penalties for violations
detected by this, but you still
can't pay anybody to do it.
So it still don't get done.
Madam Chair, um, that senator,
that's incorrect, because you're
paying them to administer the
program.
So what I was getting at was,
was you can't, you can't pay
them to administer your program
based on, on a commission basis,
giving them an incentive to send
out more fines so they get paid
more, but what, uh, what number
one or number 2, I'm sorry, the
bottom of page 3 is dealing with
is, is saying you can't.
You can't send them to
collections.
So
Or anything else.
Or any private entity.
A collections agency or other
private entity to collect unpaid
penalties for violations. So
So as that's for collection of
penalties, as opposed to payment
for administering.
The program.
Oh, Madam Chair, the part that
she wants to keep is the part
that makes sure that there's
never a penalty on anybody.
Because there's no way to
administer the penalty.
Because it's a collection agency
or any
Or other private entity.
And the city's not gonna do it.
There's a city that's not what
cities do. They fix potholes,
collection agencies collected,
so.
I don't think that, I don't
think that gets to what Senator
O'Malley's concern is, maybe it
does.
But it certainly means that
there's
contract that's still hanging
out there.
We're now going to outlaw.
And the result of that contract.
Were outlawing that contract, is
that
There's no enforcement of the
speeding loss at all.
So
OK.
Just wanted to share that. I
don't think we got where we
wanted to go with.
I
She.
Thank you, Madam Chair. What
No, there, there is, I mean, so.
There are penalties or fines for
violating the speeding.
Um, law, and so you would still
have the cameras, the, the
concern that I had was the uh
The contract with the third
party vendor. You mentioned it
yourself, Senator, that, you
know, we should, that, uh be
able to have a, a contract or
the city should have to be able
to have a contract. They're not
going to do it. They should be
able to have a contract with a
third party vendor who owns the
cameras, maintains everything,
should be able to get um what
they, what they've put into it.
They've got to recoup their
costs, including profit there
for profit company. I, I.
I asked to, to strike that
because I did not think we
should get in the middle of a
contract between municipality
and a third party vendor. They
don't usually do that.
So the other thing though is
Uh, the, uh, the issue of, of
penalties was if you, if you
violate the, the, you still have
that fee, you're still required
to have that fee. You can still
be notified that you have that
fee, uh, that fine, the issue is
though not to add additional
penalties associated with that,
fine, so that you end up with
this.
You know, um, I find that's so
big because of all the um
The, the, the fees associated
with it or late fees or whatever
you want to call them, that it's
not gonna get paid. So that's
really what I was trying to get.
Uh sorry if that's as clear as
mud, but there it is. OK, at
this point, if there's any other
comments or questions, otherwise
I'd like to know what the wishes
of the committee.
Are we on the motion? Yes.
So we do need to have a motion
on the amended.
On the amendment for
a film anyway. Madam Chair, I
move the amendment.
Right? Please take a vote.
This is on the amendment.
Senator Figueroa.
Senator Hail.
U
Senator O'Malley.
Senator Paul.
Senator Ramos.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator Shar.
Senator work? Yes.
Senator Bergmann's.
Senator Hamblin, yes.
We have 9 yeses. 9 yeses for the
amendment.
For the amendment.
Uh
OK, so motion to table. There's
no further debate. If you will
please record the votes.
Uh, a yes vote will be tabling
this bill a no vote will be not
to table this bill, and then uh
we will do another vote on
whether or not it is a due pass.
So we will do first the vote to
table, yes is to table, no is to
not table.
And then we will go from there.
So, Rebecca, if you will take
the vote on the tabling motion.
Senator Figueroa.
Senator Jarameo.
Senator O'Malley.
Senator Paul
Senator Ramos.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator.
Senator Wirth, no.
Senator Bergmann's? No.
Senator Hamblin.
We have
Or yeses and 5, no, so the
tabling motion fails on a 5 to 4
basis, and so now do I have a
motion.
I don't sure. Yes, sir.
I know we keep talking about the
collection agencies adding on
fees.
What fees?
Madam Chair, Senator, what the
city Mountain cookies ordinance
provides for our attorney fees
for the Collections action. And
with the contract provides for
his, uh, credit card.
people pay.
The fines.
I suspect both I don't suspect.
I, as I read our state law that
says you can't add any of these
or, uh, to this $100 fine, I
think that violates state law.
So, Madam Chair, credit card
fees are charged by the state of
New Mexico.
Uh, if you, if you pay the
Secretary of State to
Open up your campaign account,
it costs $50 plus whatever $1.05
1 cents in credit card fees.
So credit card fees are not
illegal.
Madam Chair, Senator, uh, but
there's a specific law that says
municipalities can't charge any
additional fees other than that
$100 other than a maximum $100
fine. So, so you're right,
there's no law that says that
that the state can't do that,
but there is a law in place that
says municipalities
can't charge.
Uh, Madam Chair.
But it, it's 2 bucks or whatever
it is for the fee.
Again, not necessarily putting
people into bankruptcy over 2
bucks, but it's also not the
collection agency that's
charging fee. It's the credit
card processing company that
charges that fee.
The fees is not collected by the
city fees not collected by.
Election agency, the fee is a
convenience fee to use your
credit card charged by the
credit card processing company.
And it's the same with the state
of New Mexico, the Secretary of
State didn't get that extra
$1.51 when you open up your
campaign account.
That's, that goes to the credit
card processing company.
Manager senator, it's not about
who keeps it, it's about who
imposes it. The law says no fees
or costs shall be imposed
pursuant to this subsection.
And so, madam, uh, chair.
Uh, and maybe this is a question
for the Albuquerque.
Commander out there if he's
still out there.
Um
Or the collection agency if
they're out there.
So we certainly offer wanna pay
the with the credit card, we
tell you what the fee is, so you
know.
But if it's a check by phone,
there's no fee.
It's an ACH? There's no fee.
There's ways to not pay the fee,
people pay that fee voluntarily.
The credit card processing
company.
Pure purely voluntary that if
they do that.
Um, now, maybe this.
Company doesn't do that, I would
be surprised if they don't.
Because again, it's a big deal.
Uh, in the industry about that
fee.
So, before anybody pays that
fee, I'm sure all collection
agencies say, hey.
This is also going to show up as
a fee.
From the credit card processing
company.
If you don't want to pay it,
here's other.
So
It's being imposed by the critic
voluntarily.
But by the credit card
processing fee, so it's not a a
credit card processing company,
so it's not a fee imposed by the
city.
Nobody has to use it if there's
another way to pay.
But
You know, these piling on feeds
and piling on fees. I don't see
them. Now you're talking about a
$2 fee.
Piling on
One time. I, I, I just think
that this is
Mischaracterizing.
The entire process.
And mischaracteration.
Misinformation can be boiled
down to not being the truth.
I think that's where I'm upset.
This is not the truth.
That really has me bothered.
Thank you, Senator Sheriff. Any
other comments or questions from
the committee?
We have a motion. I'm sure I
move with due past. We have a
motion for a due passed. Do we
have a second?
Sorry, did I hear somebody else
say second? Senator worth 2.
if he'll take the role.
Senator Figueroa.
Yes
Senator Jaramil, excused Senator
O'Malley. Yes.
Senator Paul.
Senator Ramos.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator Shar.
Senator Wirth.
Senator Bergman's. Yes, Senator
Hamblin.
We have 5 yeses, 4 nos for dopa.
5 to 4 vote, you pass. Good luck
in your next committee. Thank
you.
Very much.
All right, we've got a trifecta
from Senator Padilla.
Pardon?
Thank you, Madam Chair and Madam
vice chair and uh to the ranking
member. OK, Senator, if I, I
want to just remind folks that
Senate Bill 211, Senate Bill
212, and Senate Bill 92, um,
well, we will hold on those, but
we will hear debate, we will
hear public testimony, uh,
committee can ask questions, but
again, these bills will also uh
be put into uh consideration for
a tax package, so Senator
Padilla, uh, it is all yours.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I
would hope, well, when we
get to 92, which is a separate
subject from these first two,
maybe we can have a little bit
of a discussion there.
Um, so as you're not going to be
voting on where you're gonna,
what you're gonna do with these
two on 211 and 212 if it's if
it's permissible by the chair,
I'd like to present them both
together or we can do them
separately, whatever you'd like,
they're essentially on the same
topic, manager.
Uh, is the committee OK with
that, or would you prefer them
separately?
Committee seems to be OK with
presenting both of them at the
same. Thank you, Madam Chair and
thank you committee. So
essentially 211 is a um our in
our goal and our quest, which
I've been working on for quite
some time in this legislature
for the past 13 years.
Uh, to build a quantum economy
here in New Mexico and to be out
in front of that industry, uh,
in a really big way, we need to
do some creative things to bring
that industry to New Mexico and
we have a couple of, of
companies that are on the cusp
of making decisions. So with me
today is our cabinet secretary
designate for Economic
Development, Rob Black. I have
Corbin Tilleman Dick, who is the
founder and CEO of Bell Quantum,
and I also have Dave Hanson, the
assistant vice president for
research for external affairs at
the University of New Mexico.
Essentially, um, the way that
we're approaching this, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee is that 211 is uh a
tax credit to incentivize the
incentivize this massive
industry to come into New
Mexico, the rate of return on
it's going to be enormous, as
you've seen in some of the
analysis on in 212, that's
essentially a gross receipts tax
based on uh qualified receipts.
And so, um,
If we look at 211, this tax
incentive that I spoke of, it's
essentially the key provisions
are that the taxpayer that would
be eligible, uh, they'd be
eligible if they invest at least
$3 million in qualified
expenditures for infrastructure
related to quantum facilities,
those are the facility
investments, uh, the credit
amount, uh, would be up to uh
investments of up to $50 million
per quantum facility. The
aggregate cap would be $75
million unless the unless New
Mexico is selected for a US
National Science Foundation
Regional Innovation Engines
Award, and then that would give
us some additional dollars
because of that grant and that
award, and that would make the
eligibility up to $150 million.
The application process would be
similar to other um credits that
are done within our our tax code
here in New Mexico, the
taxpayers would apply for
preliminary certification from
the economic development
department, and then before they
would incur, um, and they would
turn in there and encourage
expenses. There is a
refundability clause. I know
we've
been concerned about these
credits and deductions and all
that if you don't do what you
say you're going to do, you're
gonna have to give the money
back. And so we want to make
sure that that's in there as
well. We do have some qualified
definitions, um,
So a qualified expenditure is an
expense for land improvement,
buildings or infrastructure
necessary for a quantum
facility, excluding property
owned by municipality
municipality or a county in
connection with an industrial
revenue bond project, um, that
would have to be, um, it, it
would go into effect on January
1st, 2025. So we would be acting
on this very quickly. A quantum
facility is defined in the
legislation as a facility in New
Mexico where research and
development in quantum
technologies is conducted,
excluding facilities operating.
by a taxpayer for the United
States government or any of its
agencies.
Uh, quantum technology is
defined as these would be new,
sort of a new frontier for law
here in New Mexico, the quantum
technology definition is
technology that relies on
quantum.
Innovations that enable uh these
technologies, so that's
essentially the credit on the
GRT side, the gross receipts tax
side, um, the eligible
applicants would be businesses
conducting qualified quantum
testing and evaluation
activities in New Mexico, so tax
credit is to build the facility,
uh, GRT is actually doing the
work here. The credit amount
would be specified, specified
percentage of gross receipts,
uh, derived from eligible
quantum testing and evaluation
uh services uh application.
process similar to what I just
said about the credit, and then
there would be a carry forward
provision if the credit exceeds
the taxpayer's gross receipts,
tax liability, the excess may be
carried forward for a specified
number of years, those would be
set rules by the department. And
so that's essentially the high
level on 211 and 212, again, 11
is a credit, 12 is a gross
receipts tax exemption. Um, or
or or gross receipts tax credit,
excuse me. So I'm gonna ask each
of my experts to just say a
little bit of stuff on what
we're trying to accomplish here
and then we'll take questions.
Corbin Tilleman will speak
first. And just a reminder, we
have these mics are uh super
sensitive and so, um, if you
want, you can also.
Pull your mics off to the side.
So that they're not directly in
your line of path.
That makes sense. Does this
sound good? You sound fine.
Great. Cher members of the
committee, thank you so much for
having me here today. My name is
Corbin Tilliman Dick. I'm the
founder and CEO of Maybelle
Quantum, which is a quantum
computing infrastructure
company. I'm also the board
chair of Elevate Quantum, which
is a nonprofit based in New
Mexico and Colorado, which was
selected by the US Department of
Commerce as America's quantum
tech hub.
I'm here today to speak in
support of Senate bills to 11
and 212, which will help
position New Mexico as the
global leader in quantum
technology, and I want to start
by talking about why quantum
matters so much.
Quantum technologies will be as
important to the next 50 years
as the integrated circuit or the
Internet were to the last 50
years, as an example of that
last December, an experimental
quantum computer spent 5 minutes
on a complex calculation,
completing that same calculation
on the most powerful non-quantum
supercomputer in the world
wouldn't have taken 5 minutes or
even 5 years, it would have
taken
724 trillion times longer than
the universe has existed so far.
While this benchmark doesn't
have immediate commercial value.
The speed with which it was
performed understands,
underscores the world changing
potential of quantum
technologies. Quantum matters in
part because other than people
being mean to other people. Most
of civilization's problems are
likely to be solved by quantum
computers. This is technology
that will end infectious
disease, it will cure cancer. It
will turn back the clock on
climate change. It will generate
trillions of dollars in economic
value, and it will define our
economic
and national security for
generations to come. And New
Mexico has the opportunity to
lead in this technology.
But there's another reason that
quantum matters, and that's
because of the lives that it
will change. The most satisfying
part of building my company,
Maybelle, has been upending
conventional wisdom about who
can participate in the
technological revolution.
Maybelle is one of the nation's
top quantum startups, but our
team isn't holed up in ivory
towers solving complex ma math
equations. In fact, 90% of my
employees didn't study physics,
and they don't have advanced
degrees. Most of us are welders,
machinists, and technicians,
Skilled tradespeople building
the stuff of quantum. And that
is the future that we can build
here in New Mexico through these
bills. At this point, the
question isn't whether quantum
technology will reshape our
world. It's where this
revolution will happen. New
Mexico has long been the
birthplace of generation
defining technologies, but too
often the economic benefits have
flowed elsewhere. We all know
that Microsoft was founded in
Albuquerque, but scaled in
Washington. Fairchild built it
built its first scaled fab in
Shiprock before shipping, uh,
shifting operations outside the
state. The clean room was
invented at Sandia, but the
semiconductor industry and
enabled took root in Silicon
Valley.
In quantum, the world's 1st 2
cubic quantum computer was built
in Los Alamos in 1999. Your
decisions during this
legislative session will decide
whether New New Mexico's quantum
future and quantum story has a
happy ending.
Senate bills 211 and 212 are a
chance for New Mexico to build
100 more companies like
Maybelle. They ensure that this
time the economic benefits of
this technology revolution, stay
in this state.
Thank you. Thank you so much.
I'm going to take this gentleman
with me everywhere I go. 727
billion years. All right, and
now we're also going to hear
from Dave Hanson, the assistant
vice president for research, and
he's gonna be a just a few
comments on why UNM is focused
on this as a research
institution here in New Mexico.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, um,
it's, it's a great honor to be
here to, to support this. Really
what I want to focus on is, you
know, we have some of the best
physicists in the world that
that have uh come up with these
solutions 3 years ago, um, uh,
at the EDA build a better
program, the EDA didn't
understand it. This, this last
year with the, the tech hub,
they got it and they got
understood that that we have the
the wherewithal to do it. We
need the industry here, right?
We've got the physicists, we've
got the experts. We have to have
the industry and
have to it now, and it's being,
it's that urgency, it's like
we're now on that cusp to catch
that wave.
We have the EDA take up to help
bring smaller companies in, we,
with the, with the facilities
that they're going to need to
develop and grow the businesses
here, and we need these big
incentives to bring in uh uh
beer companies to make them also
grow here, and really you and
them, the the big companies want
to come here because they want
the brain power of our
physicists. So it's the first
time I get to say, you know, the
physicists are critical for our
economic development. Thank you.
And uh secretary designate Rob
Black.
Bunch of members of the
committee, I'll keep this brief,
but I, I want to answer one of
the important questions that the
LFC always asks, will this will
these incentives actually move
the needle? Will it make a
difference? And I, I would argue
that it absolutely will and it
must. Um, right now the governor
of Maryland has committed a
billion dollars to ground
quantum in Maryland. Uh, the
governor of Illinois has
committed $500 million
we mentioned that we are in the
final.
rounds of a national Science
Foundation uh quantum grant that
could bring in an additional
$160 million of federal dollars
into New Mexico. Those grants
don't get a, get approved unless
you have a match, and it's
typically a 2 to 1 match to
really get you qualified to get
those federal to win that grant
and New Mexico, frankly, we
haven't done that very often
when we're competing at a
national level around these sort
of science hubs and science
grants. This, these funds will
help ground.
us to do that. And I, I'll, I'll
finish with on Senate Bill 212.
What those funds will do, will
they, they will reimburse
expenses that are spent here in
New Mexico by Sandia National
Lab in Los Alamos National Lab
in support.
Of, uh, the defense Advanced
Research Projects Agency DARPA,
setting up a testing and
resilient and resilient hub here
in in New Mexico.
They're the guys who actually
invented the internet and your
touchscreen.
Uh touch screen on your phone.
They are the research arm of the
Defense Department. If they set
their testing labs up here in
New Mexico in partnership with
our national labs. It grounds us
in a very unique way to be the
leaders going forward. And so I
think I applaud, uh,
Alex Greenberg and the work he's
done from the governor's office,
No Sackett from my team who
leads science, uh, our, our
strategy, science and technology
division, really driving this.
I've talked to a 6 different
companies who are very
interested in setting up quantum
operations here in New Mexico.
They realized that UNM is
already with their PhD science
program, the leader in
workforce, high-end workforce
for quantum. They've had 50 PhD
graduates from UNM.
working in quantum, none of them
working here in New Mexico.
Let's, this legislation will
help us bring them home and keep
them home.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I,
uh, before we go to your next
order. Um, I do want to correct
myself when I said earlier, I
didn't use the term clawback,
but there is no clawback in this
legislation. I said that there
was sort of they don't now, now
the good news is the way that
the legislation is structured,
the only way it gets paid out is
is if they deliver what they
said they're going to, so we
really don't need the clawbacks.
Just want to correct what I said
earlier. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Padilla.
And so, um, I know that we have,
uh, Mr. Greenberg from the
governor's office and so at this
point by a show of hands, um,
we're talking about both bills,
uh, Senate Bill 211 and Senate
Bill 212 by a show of hands, how
many people here in the audience
are in support of this
legislation.
Keep your hands up, please.
12345678.
And
I got 16. What'd you get?
OK.
There's a lot.
Yes, and we also have, we also
have 9 online.
And then, um, by a show of hands
in the audience who is in
opposition of this of Senate
Bill 1211 or Senate Bill 212.
So for the record, none are
showing in the audience as being
in opposition. We do have two
online.
Um, you wanna go ahead and
confirm that Scott and Justin
are in opposition, you don't
mind. So, um, just for giggles.
Let's, uh, we, we've certainly
registered. Um, let's just have
some 55 folks and Mr. Greenberg,
if you want to get up there and
speak on behalf of the
governor's office, do you, if
you feel that's necessary, um,
and so I'll have Mr. Greenberg
and then 5 people, come on up.
Do you want to speak?
OK.
So the secretary Chardon Clark,
uh, demonstrated support of this
bill but is offering it up to
other people to speak. So we've
got Mr. Greenberg from the
governor's office and then an
additional 5. And then we'll go
to 3 online and then we'll go to
the two who are in opposition.
I'm gonna have you remember
that.
All right.
Thank you very much. Go ahead,
Mr. Greenberg of the committee,
thank you for the opportunity to
speak. I'll keep this brief. Uh,
I think New Mexico has the once
in a generation opportunity to
be the anchor and epicenter of a
$3.5 trillion dollar industry.
Uh, for the past year, I've
gotten to sit as finance chair
on the Levate Quantum uh board
and really immerse myself in the
quantum industry, and I think
there's 3 questions that we
could satisfactorily answer in
this I think committee in front
of you will do a great job of
that. Why now? Why New Mexico
and why Quantum. And there's a
very compelling reason that can
not only grow our tax base, and
I think my pitch to the
committee is, if you care about
universal childcare, if you care
about aging and long-term
services, you care about public
safety. This is the industry
that could grow our tax base to
continue to subsidize those call
centers. If you care about
advanced energy, if you care
about bioscience, you care about
aerospace innovations. This is
the technology that will
leverage those innovations and
take them to more.
Thank you.
Thank you so much, Alex. Uh, and
so if we can keep those comments
to about a minute a piece, that
would be great both for online
as well.
Thank you. Good afternoon. Chair
and members of the committee,
I'm Mia Peterson. I'm the
executive director for the New
Mexico Technology Council. We
are the voice for technology in
New Mexico with 147 members,
that's been all tech verticals,
um, and geographically
throughout the state. Um, over
the past year, the Mexico
Technology Council has hosted a
quantum peer group, and this
was, uh, the purpose was to
create a dynamic forum for
collaboration
with industry, academia, um, and
government. Uh, we've also
Created this group to share
knowledge and position New
Mexico as a leader in quantum.
I'm here today in strong support
of SB 11 and SB 12. By passing
this legislation, we send a
clear message. New Mexico is not
just participating in the
quantum revolution, we are
leading it.
I urge you to support these
critical bills and help secure
New Mexico's future as a leader
in quantum technology.
Thank you for your time and
attention.
Good afternoon chair members of
the committee. My name is Alison
Riley, public policy director
for the New Mexico Chamber of
Commerce, New Mexico has a long
history of scientific innovation
and set up Bill 211 and 212 are
a strategic investment in our
economic future. The quantum
technology sector is projected
to generate 3.5 trillion, that's
trillion with a T, and economic
development annually.
We have an opportunity to
position New Mexico as a
national leader in this emerging
industry by incentivizing the
development of cutting edge
facilities and attracting
high-paying jobs to our region.
The bill offers a 30% tax credit
on capital expenditures up to 50
million per per facility,
encouraging businesses to build,
expand and invest right here in
our state. And without this
target of incentive, New Mexico
risks losing these incentives to
other states and missing a once
in a generation opportunity to
be at the forefront of this
revolution.
SB 211 works hand in hand with
SB 212, which secures federal
funding in our national labs
further solidifying New Mexico
as a hub for quantum research
and industry collaboration. For
these reasons, we urge you to
vote yes on both of these bills.
Thank you.
Chair Hamblin, members of the
committee, Marlahos registered
lobbyist with CNM Community
College. We stand in strong
support of this legislation as a
workforce training partner with
Elevate Quantum in the mountain
west, CNM supports Senate Bill
211 and 212, and thanks to
sponsor and the secretary of the
Environment Department for their
leadership on this critical
initiative, quantum technologies
will be transformative to the
next century as semiconductors
were to the last, and New Mexico
is leading the way.
This bill will cement the
mountain West roll in the
quantum economy, creating jobs,
strengthening national security
and driving technological
leadership. We urge its passage
to secure New
central to national.
And our economic security.
Continuum
The world's largest integrated
quantum computing company
recently announced an expansion
to New Mexico.
leverage the local workforce and
unique
$8 that drive economic growth.
These bills in the economic
opportunities they create, will
submit New Mexico as an
epicenter for quantum computing
research development.
ization
Thank you.
Madam Chair, members
Marco, I dare you say 5 times
really fast continuum and then
quantum like.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Yeah.
Couldn't say that 3 times fast.
Michael Rabin, I'm a manager and
physicist from Los Alamos
National Laboratory.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee for the
opportunity to be here today.
Uh, the laboratory is supportive
of the initiatives discussed
today, and many of the broader
initiatives across the region
and the state.
To build the quantum economy,
new economic sector for the
people and state of New Mexico.
We've heard why quantum.
Why New Mexico and why now, I'll
just add the extra bits that we,
we believe that this is
transformative technology.
With impacts across the state,
across many sectors with
tremendous potential.
We also see that there is
competition.
Competition around the world
with national security
implications that we think are
very important to the state.
And to the country.
We can win.
We have the resources, America
can win in any quantum race.
We have the resources we can win
here.
And keep the jobs that we can
make here in this state. Thank
you very much.
Thank you. All right, so we're
going to 3 online, so we're
going to go to the top 3. We've
got Zach, Nate, and Justin,
Zach, you're gonna go up first,
Nate and Justin, if you'll be
prepared to unmute when I call
your name. Zach, you have 2
minutes. If you, uh, I'm sorry,
one minute. Um, you will hear a
thirty-second warning from our
vice chair. So, uh, at that
point, if you'll wrap it up, but
Zach, I'm gonna let you go
first.
Um,
Chair Hamlin and members of the
committee, can you, can you hear
me clearly enough?
Yes, we can.
Fantastic. Um, and, and just in
case for, for the record, I, I
want to call out and think that
we have representatives from
Microsoft, Adam, Quera, Mesa,
Long Path, Vesa, literally
representing over a billion
dollars in value on the call
here to support this very
measure. I'm Zachir Shame, CEO
of LA Quantum, the US Quantum
tech hub, uh, as my co-founder
called out earlier, I'm here in
strong support of these bills,
which will position the state as
a leader in quantum technology.
New Mexico has a historic
opportunity to leverage its
world-class national labs.
Research institutions,
scientific talent to build a
thriving quantum ecosystem. It's
proud to host the nation's
largest cluster and national
security expertise with
household names alongside
research greats like UNM. Now is
the time to ensure this research
excellence becomes a commercial
engine of opportunity for all
New Mexicans. This legislation
makes a giant leap towards.
Um, uh, creates thousands of
high paying jobs across our
state while strengthening
America's national security with
Quantum set to create $3.5
trillion in value. It was called
out earlier. The question isn't
whether quantum will transform
our economy, but where that
transformation will happen with
this legislation and your
support, we can ensure that
transformation happens here in
New Mexico. Um, thank you again,
uh, for, for this consideration
and literally the generations of
work of this legislature and the
folks in the state to making
this happen.
Great, thank you so much. Uh,
Nate, you're next, and then
Justin, you'll be after that and
you'll be, we'll, and then we'll
go to the 2 in opposition, so
Nate, uh, you're up, please.
Thank you, Chair Hamblin,
members of the committee. My
name is Nathan Gealy, and I'm
here on behalf of Query
Computing, which I co-founded in
2019. Today I'm proud to express
my enthusiastic support for SB
211 and SB 212, which will play
a pivotal role in advancing New
Mexico as a leader in the
quantum technology sector.
Quantum technology is offer a
groundbreaking opportunity for
New Mexico to foster economic
growth, diversify our economy
and create high paying jobs by
prioritizing investments in this
emerging field, New Mexico can
attract innovation.
companies like ours strengthen
research initiatives and retain
top talent that might otherwise
leave the state. This is not
only about economic progress,
but also about securing national
interests, maintaining
leadership in quantum technology
is essential for US
competitiveness on the global
stage and for safeguarding
national security. With our
world-class scientific community
national laboratories and
research universities. New
Mexico is uniquely positioned to
take on this challenge. An SB
211 and 212. Well, I'm sure we
fully harnessed those assets.
Moreover, this legislation will
help cultivate a highly skilled
workforce by supporting
educational and training
programs to equip future
scientists, engineers, and
entrepreneurs. Much like it did
with semiconductors, New Mexico
has the chance to build a
reputation as a hub for
innovation and quantum
technology for all those
reasons, I strongly encourage
your sport for SB 211 and 212.
Thank you so much and Justin,
uh, you will be our last in
support, and just because it, it
sounds a little wonky when our
vice chair lets you know about
30 seconds, you'll see the 32nd
warning type up, uh, pop up in
your chat. Um, so you'll see
that pop up on your screen. So
Justin, uh, you've got a minute
to go, sir. It's all yours.
Thank you. Chair Hamblin and
committee members, my name is
Justin Ging and I represent Aom
Computing. We're a startup
company that develops quantum
computing hardware. I'm here
today to express
my strong support for SP 211212,
which will play a crucial role
in positioning New Mexico as a
leader in quantum innovation.
Uh
Uh, I'll put it very quickly is
this legislation will bolster
workforce development
initiatives, preparing the next
generation of scientists,
engineers, and entrepreneurs to
excel in quantum enabled
industries. Mexico has a unique
opportunity to become a national
leader in quantum technology,
and for this, I urge you to
support SB 211 and 212.
Thank you so much.
All right we're going to the two
in opposition that is Scott and
Justin, uh, King, I believe,
Scott Davis, if you will unmute
yourself. You have a minute to
express your opposition to this
bill. Uh, my name is Scott Davis
and I'm actually not in
opposition. I am in support and
so uh I, I apologize if uh I
raised my hand at the wrong
time.
So I, I will speak very quickly.
So Chair Hamblin and members of
the committee, thank you so much
for giving me the time. I'm CEO
and co-founder of Vest in
Technology.
no log ies where quantum
infrastructure company, New
Mexico has two of the three
pillars that's really gonna help
this thing explode. Amazing
national lab assets from
Santilia to Kurtlin to uh Space
Force to Los Alamos and amazing
research universities. The piece
that's missing is the industrial
base. And so as we look at
scaling up our manufacturing and
transitioning some of these,
these technologies and assets
from quantum computing to
operational capabilities and
GPSni environments. uh, Sandia,
by the way, and, and
Kirtland Air Force Base are
world leaders in this, but as
that transitions to a
manufacturing base, where is
that gonna happen? If this bill
passes, New Mexico comes to the,
the top of the list. And as my
company looks to scale up and
build out that manufacturing.
New Mexico is the place we're
gonna want to do it. So, uh,
very, very strong support. Uh,
that's it. Thank you. Alright,
thank you. So for the record,
then, we did not have any in
opposition of that uh bill, so,
uh, at this point.
I go to the committee if there
are any questions from the
committee committee your
comments.
I.
We just figured that out, madam
chair, literally while you were
sitting here. Exactly.
Senator Figueroa.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, sponsor. This is incredibly
exciting stuff.
And Madam Char, I really
appreciate the sunsets built in
and the caps built in, that is
good EDD policy, um.
I have
Three comments, I think. And I'm
sure the sponsor will take into
account and maybe make
adjustments at the next stage.
I'm not sure where that happens
in terms of little technical
language changes, calendar year
to fiscal year and some other
suggestions that seem pertinent,
but my comment is a little
broader. I would like to see
The other piece of a good EDD
bill is the report out piece.
And um I think it's gonna be
really exciting, Madam Chair, to
get the report out from TRD.
That says, uh, how many credits
were claimed by how many
different entities and what time
frame and what amounts. Usually
we have some kind of report back
on that, and I really hope we'll
get it with this because it's
going to be fantastic to watch.
The other comment, Madam Chair,
is I hope our community college,
um, system is looped in on this
because they are flexible, turn
on a dime, and they can build
our licensure certification and
training.
programs to build up that third
wheel, the industrial pillar of
this process. Thanks, Madam
Chair. That's all.
Thank you, Senator Figueroa.
Senator O'Malley.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
I, uh, so I ring the bell at um
well we got both of them
together, but it's about uh
obviously tax credits you
mentioned, land, rent.
Those kinds. I was just curious
about the footprint that
something like this would take.
And then when we talk about we
have the resources, would you
list what those are.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair and
Senator. I'm going to ask Mr.
Tulliman dictate to talk about
the footprint of some of that
facility like this. Yeah, so
Madam Chair, Senator, the
footprint for our quantum
computer is in most instances
significantly smaller than for a
classical computer. So when the
first
Uh, example of that benchmark I
talked about was run, it was in
2019, and they on a system that
was a couple 19 in
a benchmark that took the most
powerful supercomputer in the
world that takes up a couple of
football fields' worth of racks
would have taken that system 2
weeks.
That translates to less
electricity to run that same
calculation. Now as these
technologies scale, the
computers will scale, but the
problems that they
And so we will be able to solve
problems in systems that fit in
something the size of a
basketball quarter, smaller,
that would have taken, you know,
classical computers with more
transistors than there are atoms
in the observable universe to
solve.
So it's, it's something where we
have both the uh electricity
footprint and the physical
footprint to station it here. We
have the cooling water station
here that things that are
necessary are not.
In excess of what you would see
with a fabric traditional
supercomputer, they're actually
typically much less than you
would see with those devices.
OK, uh, Madam Chair, so when you
say, when I'm talking about a
footprint, is we're talking
about one facility are we
talking about several
facilities. I expect that this
bill will attract.
A whole bunch of companies. This
is the sort of legislation that
will bring, you know, Nate was
very humble on the phone, but
this morning they announced that
they raised a quarter of a
billion dollars to move forward
with their next stage of
developed quantum computers.
That's the sort of company that
will be coming here, Microsoft,
Amazon, Intel,
IBM, these are the companies
pursuing this at the industrial
level, and then there are
literally dozens of startups
doing the same thing and this
legislation makes New Mexico one
of the most.
attractive places in the world
to do that and senator, the
secretary designate will also
comment on this.
I'm sure uh Senator, one of the
areas where we're also talking
to a variety of companies or
supply chain companies. Uh, one
of the things about quantum
computing is you need to keep
things very, very, very cold, so
0 °C. Uh, that means you need
piping, you need, but on the
workforce side you need welders,
you need HVAC, so it really does
complement that piece and that's
where CNN has been instrumental,
uh, to your point and the
question around our community
colleges, they will play an
integral role as well our our
our institution.
s of higher learning, but I
think you get the, the parts
pieces as well as the physical
uh aspects of the computers.
Madam chair, you know, we've got
the Facebook, uh, that takes so,
it's a big footprint and it's my
understanding that it takes a
lot of takes a lot of, I guess,
water to cool it down. What are
we talking about here?
Yeah, so it depends on the
modality of the quantum
computer.
Um, for superconducting quantum
computers, which are Google and
IBM and Microsoft and others use
various versions of that, um, a
full scale fault tolerant
quantum computer is again,
something about the size of a
basketball court. Yeah, you're
talking 10, maybe 20,000 square
feet.
my equipment
that they need in order to stand
up their quantum computers were
about 20,000 square feet will be
about 100 employees by the end
of this year, um, 4 years ago we
were, we were both call it a
faculty.
member at MIT to start the
company, right? These are
companies that are growing
quickly that have uh
A path to becoming essential
infrastructure for the next
generation of technology, but
that, you know, as you build out
those facilities, again, my
company, 90% welders,
machinists, technicians, folks
like that who are building this
stuff of quantum.
That answer your question,
ma'am.
Close, she did it. This is
something, this little miracle,
I mean, it's actually a big
miracle. I mean, I don't even
understand it, to be honest with
you, Madam, a chair, I, um,
Let's see where, oh, so in terms
of site selection, is there a,
you know, is that something the
governor's office is gonna do,
working with others. I'm just
curious as to where this Madam
Chair and senator, we have
another bill we'd like you to
consider as well, called site
readiness, and it'll be coming
up here, I'm hoping soon, next
week, and we'll discuss that as
well, but the secretary
designate has some comments, but
that will go hand in hand with
what you've just asked about.
Madam Chair, Senator, um,
absolutely we will work with any
company that wants to come in in
this regard, uh, around site
selection, um, you know, what we
are hearing again is there is an
interest in being close to the
national labs. That is again, a,
a, a unique built-in advantage
that we have, um, we would
indicate the, the scale of both
water usage and electrical usage
is exponentially lower than
traditional.
leaders that were talking about
today or server farms, uh, for
the computation computational
power, so um it is actually
where we see the future of AI
in, in.
It's gonna, you know, probably a
decade or more out, but
It will be able to really reduce
that energy draw on AI as you
get to QAI. And so when you get
there, you're gonna really
reduce those energy costs and
become much more efficient. And
it kind of tell you how it works
and, and I'm not great at this,
but there's smarter people up
here, but under normal
traditional computers, you know,
you program and they work with
bits and it's a 1 or a 0, and
it's the bid is a 1 or a 0.
That's how you program that.
In a quantum environment, it can
be a 10, or both at the same
time.
And so it exponentially speeds
up the process. And then it can
also then connect in a network,
even when they're not next to
each other. So it then it
creates the ability to process
massive amounts of data at the
same time in the calculation,
whereas a traditional is much
more linear, and that's why it's
so much faster.
Uh, Madam Chair, what he said.
Yeah we're all saying that.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Alright, thank you, Senator
Bergmans. Thank you, Madam
Chair, I just have a quick
question, um, what happens if
these don't pass or get wrapped
into a text message package
would drastically decrease New
Mexico's attractiveness.
Yes, but I'll, I'll, I'll ask
our secretary designate to give
you because they they live, eat
and breathe this stuff every day
when they're trying to woo and
trying to get, you know, make
New Mexico look as attractive as
possible, so this legislation
along with the other stuff that
we're talking about this session
is going to be critically
important. I mean, it's just,
it's the next logical step to
our economic development future.
I'm sure Senator
I'll I'll, I'll speak to it in a
couple of ways that we are, we
have one in in partnership with
a state of Colorado.
an initial grant on and being
the quantum hub in the US. We
have a 2nd uh grant we're going
for NSF grant that uh
potentially would bring $160
million of federal dollars to
New Mexico. We really need to
have a 2 to 1 match, uh, in that
environment. And so these funds
will help us make that match. So
we won't be competitive for that
NSF grant, unless we have some
sort of investment like this. So
that's one hour.
aspect of if, if we don't do it,
it, it won't come. Um, the, the
other part that I would say is,
is use a bit of an analogy
because of the Super Bowl just
happened, right? So it's
imagine, and this is what I feel
like New Mexico is in the
situation. Imagine it's 4th
quarter, last play of the game.
We throw a Hail Mary Pass.
UNM catches the ball and is
running to get across the finish
line, and we spiked the ball 5
minutes before 5 yards before we
get over the touchdown.
And that's what would happen if
we don't move forward. We have
the advantage, we have the
opportunity to win.
But if we don't pass these
bills, it's like spiking the
ball before we cross the end
zone. We just will lose that
opportunity.
One of the other my experts
would like to add a couple of
comments.
It's, uh, um, Madam secretary
and, and.
But that
A little closer, OK.
I'll stand a little sit a little
closer. Thank you, Madam
Secretary and members of the
committee and um Senator Berger.
Um, yeah, so I, I've been
talking to, to, to companies
about why they would come here,
they want to come here to work
with our people, right? They
need help, they need financial
help to get it to do it, right?
They aren't going to come here
for free, right? When, when we,
when we're competing against
Chicago, right, and other areas
that that are gonna put up tons
of money and have put up $500
million right? We have to be
ready to compete or they won't
come here even though they
really want to.
Thank you.
That answered my question, thank
you.
Thank you. Anybody else on the
committee?
They're worth. Uh thank you,
man, and I apologize I had.
40 soccer kids that were
desperate to lobby me and so
they're the best lobbyists in
the building, so I had to step
out for that. I, I just want to
say though, again, one of the
Using tax policy in this way, I
know there's some uncertainty
expressed in the FIR, but the
reality is when you look at the
dynamic scoring of what we're
talking about here. I mean, if
we actually get this to come, I
mean, the return on investment
is huge. And so it just, uh, I'm
all in. I think the real
question becomes,
the real question just becomes
how do we
In this environment, we're
trying to figure out how to put
together a tax package that does
not have capacity built into the
budget right now.
So, that's the challenge that
we're facing and how do we line
this up, and, and the hard part
is that we don't do dynamic
scoring. So, unfortunately, all
we see is a big number that
could get much bigger if we win
the, win the award and, and
that's the challenge. So I, I
just, I, I wanted to say that
though, because again, this is
exciting and it's pretty darn
targeted, and so that's
important to me, uh, but the
question becomes how do we
How do we get this and make it
work? So that's, that's, that's,
that, that's on us. You guys
have done, Senator, you've done
your job, and certainly, Mr.
Secretary designate presenting
this. I mean, I'm all in. I, I
think this is a super important
thing.
The real question is how do we,
how do we make this work on our
side. So I just want to make
those comments. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you. Anybody else before I
close it out?
So I, I love the opportunity and
I think, you know, the one thing
that, that I ask that I feel
that we have a right to ask is
to please nurture our local
workforce.
Um, you know, so that they're
spending stays in the state, and
I know the secretary designate
is is very much on the same
board with that. We have
opportunities to create training
programs with not only CNM, UNM
NMSU, any of our community
colleges, any of our local
industry to help meet the needs,
um, you know, and so I, I, I
don't think it's, it's too much
to ask for you to
Think local first.
Um, before we start looking
outside of the state because,
uh, we certainly, um, I think
are excited about this
opportunity, to say the least,
um, but also would love for you
to make sure that that that
investment stays in this state.
And so, um, at this point, if
there are no other comments from
the committee, then this is
these two bills to 11 and 212
are ones that we are holding for
consideration in a possible tax
package, um, but I think, uh.
We're very excited about that
based on that, so you all are
done. Senator Padilla, you get
to stay here
and uh allow me to present both
of them at the same
time, Madam Chair. That was very
kind of you. Absolutely. Well,
you know, the thing that I love
about this committee is that
they're very much about
efficiency and effectiveness,
and so we have Senate Bill 92.
Next, the horse racing and
jockey Insurance Fund. This is
also a bill that will be held.
This is, um,
According to Izzy, it is.
From quantum computing to horse
racing, Madam Chair, a normal
day at the roundhouse. Yes. OK,
and I have a co-sponsor.
So while she is making her way
up.
Uh, we do, we are not going to
for anybody who might have been
interested in the room. We are
not going to hear Senate Bill 67
today.
Um, we still have Senator
Wirth's Senate Bill 112, the
medical psilocybin Act at 219
and then um hopefully Senator
Jaramilla will be back for 123
and then we'll finish off with
Senator Padilla with your last
bill. Today is 126.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and uh I
am here today with the senator.
OK, before you go on though, I
want to go ahead and welcome
Senator Risel because this is
her first time presenting in
this committee. Senator, we do
have where you have 20 minutes
to present, uh, your bill, and
then we will have public input
and then also an opportunity to
respond to that public input,
and then we will go to the
committee. So I just wanted to
share that with you. Mhm. All
right, go ahead, senator.
Uh, thank you very much, Madam
Chair, and I do have uh Izzi
Trejo, who is the executive
director of the um uh racing
commission. And then I also have
uh Fred Heinrich, the general
counsel and compliance officer
for Sunland Park Racetrack and
Casino with me, and today, uh,
and I've represented senator is
Eel with me. And uh when I, I
filed the bill and I went over
and I said, you know, I really
would like Senator, for you to
be a part of this with me, and
she, she just jumped up and down
with joy to to do this with and
so we we put our
our heads together and I
remember that day I saw that it
was quite the day on the Senate
floor. So, um, Madam Chair and
Madam vice chair and ranking
member, a couple of years ago, I
did um um run a one person, you
know, kicking contest to get
this thing done originally, but
it was essentially sort of a
year to year thing that would
have funded this, uh, the jockey
insurance, and then, you know,
all the items that we did that
year. This actually creates the
horse racing integrity and
safety authority jockey, and
exercise riders insurance fund.
Now say that.
10 times fast, uh, but that's
there's, you know, the the uh we
typically call this, um, you
know, the, uh,
There's a whole other set of
names for it. But this fund
would be utilized to offset the
cost associated with jockey and
exercise rider insurance and to
ensure compliance with both
state and federal governing the
horse racing here in New Mexico.
This is just another step
forward in, in making the horse
racing industry safe here in New
Mexico and ensuring that we
protect and take care of these
jockeys and all the other folks
that are a part of the industry,
um, some key provisions are, it
establishes the fund that I
mentioned before, uh, the
funding sources, and that's why
I was not 100%.
sure why this would wind up in
being held, but the funding
sources really are monies
collected by the New Mexico
Racing Commission, that's why
I've asked Mr. Trejo to be here
today to offset insurance costs,
distributions and
appropriations, income from
investments, gifts, grants,
donations, and bequeaths.
Ah, the administration would be
by the New Mexico Racing
Commission. And then, of course,
once again, the pros and why we
should do this is enhanced
safety for the participants in
the industry. Compliance with
legal standards, financial
stability.
And support for the racing
industry as a whole, so we can
keep this very vibrant part of
New Mexico, moving, I would like
my co-sponsor to say a couple of
words, she's had a chance to
review the legislation and all
the documents I've provided to
her.
Thank you, man. Thank you, Madam
Chair, members of the
Uh, panel up here.
We
What a racing industry to be
safe for everybody concerned and
with the
What this bill is providing it
as far as the
Thoroughbred racing industry
falling under the Hessa
guidelines that have been passed
by Congress, which is not
pertinent to the quarter horse
industry. We do have to follow
those guidelines and it does
include the jockey and exercise
riding insurance fund in this
bill.
Uh, we do want our jockeys to
have coverage. They are
independent contractors, and
that's why the uh racing
commission has stepped in and
the, the funding is going to be
coming from those race tracks to
the commission and I'm assuming
that the audit is going to be
done yearly, and that's what
this is about for their
protection. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Madam Chair,
and I will ask uh Mr. Trejo and
Mr. Heinrich just to say a
couple of brief words just to
further introduce.
Thank you, Senator Padilla,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, this is really a
technical fix. SD 336, which
passed two years ago to
establish the fund and SB 336,
um, the racing commission was
giving quote unquote regulatory
oversight over the funds. So
there's no change, no
substantive change in any taxes,
um, or anything in, in that
regard, it's just now setting up
a fund that the uh racing
commission will receive the
funds.
from the race tracks and use
those funds to pay out the
allowable expenses, but there is
no substantive change in
anything, it's really a, a
technical change to set up the
fund and give them expenditure
authority.
Mr. Trejo.
Thank you, Senator Padilla.
Senator,
Madam Chair, buzzy Trejo, the
director of the New Mexico Ra
Commission, just a couple of
brief words that uh Senate Bill
92 will streamline the process
in which expenditures can be
paid and uh made on a monthly
basis and this bill also ensures
a year-round funding source
necessary because the payments
come due throughout the whole
year, a staggered race meets,
so.
The end of the fiscal year.
We want to have money in the
fund going into the new fiscal
year and this uh with it not
being inverted non-reverting,
that would establish that and
that will be huge for us. Thank
you.
OK, great. Thank you, Matthew.
Thank you. All right, by show of
hands, who in the audience is in
favor of this bill.
123456.
All right. Anybody in the
audience in opposition of this
bill?
Records showing none. Anybody
online. Nobody at all. All
right, so you got your 5 folks
here.
So just for brevity's sake,
let's go ahead and have 3 people
come on up and we'll give you a
minute apiece.
Let's use the handheld mic.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
committee members. My name is
Catherine Croatta and I'm a
registered lobbyist with Sunland
Park Racetrack and Casino. Um,
just want to clarify the, the
collection of the funds for the
jockey insurance was established
2 years ago in Senate Bill 336.
Um, thank you, Senator Padilla,
and this bill just simply
clarifies language, um, that's
gotten confused from Senate Bill
336, which established the
regulatory authority for the
racing commission to manage.
the fund. This bill clarifies
that they can actually manage
the fund and collect the fees.
Thank you. Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Marla Schulz
registered lobbyists for all
American Riodoso Downs
racetrack. We also stand in
support of this legislation.
Brent Moore standing there as
well for Zia Park.
Sports legislation and uh again
to uh echo what Miss Crociatta
said. It's just clean up
language that merely clarifies
that the fund works in a manner
of which.
The legislature intended when
they.
Previously
We ask that you don't hold this.
Has no impact on the general
fund and we hope that you'll
pass it.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, Jason Weeks,
on behalf of Albuquerque Downs
racetrack and Casino.
Previous comments kind of
explained it, um, when we passed
the legislation or when the
legislation was passed by this
legislature 2 years ago, we did
not create an individual fund.
We just had the money flow out
of regular person. We didn't
think we needed to do that.
Subsequent to that money, uh,
dumping into the purse fund and
being allocated for his son and
jockey insurance, the racing
commission pointed out that we
needed an independent fund for
the money to go into so that it
wouldn't just revert back into
the general fund.
Because his insurance fees or
HISA and jockey insurance fees
will escalate over time. It will
increase, they'll get more
expensive.
And so not only does the recent
commission want to bank some of
the surpluses that they're
experiencing right now, but as
Izzy explained, they also don't
line up exactly with the fiscal
year. So the fund goes into a
deficit.
Um, the, the commission goes
into a deficit when uh the money
is pulled back and reverts to
the general fund. So this fund
is not, it is a new fund, but
it's not a new mechanism and
it's not pulling any more
dollars out of the general fund
than it used to. It's just
saying, no, instead of reverting
the money.
We will not place it in this new
fund. And so it is a technical
fix, we would hope that the
committee could move this
forward today, obviously stand
the, you know, answer any
further questions relative to
how 2000.
23 mechanism wasn't set up
exactly right.
OK, just for the record, I am
confirming uh whether or not
that bill is this bill is to be
held, so.
Um.
So now I go to the.
Oh, I, I, well, the last thing I
would say is just, you know,
when we did the bill in 23, it
was, it was probably the first
time the tracks, the um the
breeders and the horsemen all
came together. It was a very
difficult thing to get done, so
I appreciate the the committee's
hearing us today, and this, as
you heard, just sort of make
sure that it's all in the right
place and accessible the right
way.
Great, thank you. So do I have
comments or questions from the
committee, Senator Ramos,
Madam Chair, thank you for
bringing this bill in front of
today, but I'm confused also if
this is pretty much a cleanup
bill, why are we?
Trying to put into the text.
I mean if this has already been
approved 2 years ago. Doesn't
make too much sense. That's just
my, my question. Also, since
I've been gone a while, since
when do we, uh, in the, since
when did the race commission
start uh.
Uh, collecting money from
The racetracks for jockey
insurance.
And we do have the executive
director here and he'll respond
to that.
Madam Senator Ramos, good
question, um.
I believe at the last second of
the race was thrown in of this
fund that was there's some
regulatory foundation there.
And uh
We created a fun.
Alpay and the money's uh wired
the race tracks.
On a monthly basis, usually on
the 15th of the month.
And then they submit their
invoices from the federal
organization called HISA, the
horse racing Integrity and
Safety Act.
Uh, that comes out of this fund
and then the track submit.
Prior to the race starting
exercise rider insurance.
And so previous.
That money used to come out of
the purse account.
And the horror quest happened to
be paid.
By
Uh, the first account and the
other half paid by the
racetracks.
And it's really a luxury for
this industry versus other
states.
To have these payments come from
this fund because in other
jurisdictions, the money is
coming out of our stakeholders'
pockets. The pockets
of $400.
Every time they run a horse, but
this is taking a big burden off
the stakeholders.
That uh make this industry go.
So that's why this fund's been
created and the agency's been uh
that way we have.
Rules and policies, procedures
set forth by the DFA did here.
So, Madam Chair, um, senator,
uh, so is there, what, what is
the impact to the general fund?
What is the impact to the
general legislative chair, Madam
Chair and, and Senator Ramos
said the way it's written up,
there is no impact. I can
clarify, so in uh talking with
the majority for leaderor and
also, um, the, the folks in
legislative council services and
finance, um, we can vote on this
bill today, Madam Chair, then I
move with Du.
You
making it easy.
I have a second, the senator
work? Did you want to make any
comments before we take, you
know, the FIR is showing $3.2
million and I think that's the
reversion.
I mean this amount's being
collected.
And it's reverting rather than
being held to be used for what
you want to use it for moving
forward. Is that correct, Madam
Chair and Mr. Leader. So I just
think that's Senator Ramos. This
is one of those that it's, that
they've got the fund that was
put in place to help them, and
yet they through through the way
that they're spending works,
some of it's getting reverted. I
think this is one that finance
should figure out. I mean,
there's questions about it, I'm
gonna tell you, having funds
that don't revert and giving an
agency to appropriate out of the
funds, you can see
that in the FAR.
Finance committee doesn't like
that. But that's something that
you should discuss in the
finance committee, and I don't
see any, we would never, this,
this doesn't make sense to try
and find $3 million here to.
To to reduce this because again,
you're gonna have the expenses
potentially next year going up
and you need to use this money.
So I think it should, it should
move forward. Thank you, Madam
Chair. I'm actually thankfully
on finance. I'll be able to help
with that, but when we did the
bill, the first in 23, I think
there were like seven
substitutes just for everybody
that's sort of how this got a
little lost, so sounds like a
Padilla Bill.
Well, it's, it's a day. It ain't
a Padilla bill if there isn't a
SCT, you know,
yeah.
Yes.
So we ouch, we do have a motion
for passing a second, I believe.
Right? And so if you will,
Rebecca, please take the role.
Senator Figuero, Senator Jaramil
is excused Senator O'Malley.
Senator Paul.
Senator Ramos, Senator Sanchez.
Senator Sho is excused. Senator
Wirth, Senator Bergman's. Yes.
Senator Hamblin. Yes.
We have 8 yeses, 0 noes for a
due pass. Thank you, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
and I will come back later if
you'd like or.
You're now
Madam Chair, thank you very
much.
Thank you, thank you, thank you.
And, and Senator Petit, I, I do
want to try and stay in order,
so if you're OK with coming
back, um.
And so, by the way, Senator
Padilla from,
uh Ismael Torres, Brendan will
follow up with you.
On this, on this horse racing
belt, just in case. All right,
so next we have Senator Wirth
and um if I am correct, that is
one that we hold.
Unless you want to vote on it.
All right.
Do it.
Am I right? Oh yeah.
So man.
Let me just, uh, address the
fiscal issue,
you know, just, just one, just
this one. Anyone else?
There we go. This, this, this,
there we go. This is, this is
better.
So this is an issue dealing
with.
Local property tax, so there's
no impact to the general fund,
which is why I do think this
bill should move forward.
There's nothing you could put in
a tax package that would address
this issue plain and simple, um,
with me today is David David
Campbell.
Uh, who is with Lobo Development
Company and Megan.
Chibanga
Uh, who is with UNM housing and
Dan Garcia.
Who was with and enrollment
management.
So here's the issue, real
simple, and then I'm gonna let
anytime I can have David
Campbell sitting next to me. I'm
not going to spend a whole bunch
of times getting way too in the
weeds, but.
You and I, uh, needed student
housing.
If they built the student
housing themselves.
Clearly, there would be no tax
issue.
What they did is they entered
into a P3.
Public-private partnership.
They continue to own the fee.
Uh, they allow this company to
come in, build a student dorm.
And then over a term, a lease
term, that company is able to
collect the rents for those dorm
rooms.
Um, when this was all done and
Mr. Campbell can address the
exact years.
Uh
There was no property tax.
Uh, assessment made.
Uh, in 2000, the
I'm 2020.
2020, the Bernalo County
assessor.
Interpreted the statute a
different way.
And again, assessed.
Because it was a private company
that built this structure even
though the fee still remained
with the students, even though
this was for student housing, I
started to assess property tax.
And so basically what this bill
would do is provide an
exemption.
Uh, for a very specific
situation, it's student housing.
Uh, has to be residential
housing facilities on page 3 for
the use of students or medical
residents of an exempt
institution, so it gives.
The various
Colleges and universities around
the state of flexibility of
being able to use a public
private partnership to reduce
costs and to help students if we
don't pass this, there's a big
property tax that's going to get
passed on and then we're just
potentially that gets passed on
to the students, which is what
we don't want to do. So with
that, I will yield to Mr.
Campbell and the other experts,
but that's basically what the
bill does. Thank you very much,
Senator, uh, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, I
appreciate the opportunity.
I'm David Campbell, I'm head of
Lobo Development. What Lobo
Development does is build
structures on UNM's vacant lands
and so this company, which is a
university research park, uh,
corporation, uh, is deeply
involved with building, uh, on
UNM's uh vacant lands. As we
know, this, uh, the rising cost
of tuition and the burden of
student debt can be overwhelming
for many young people pursuing
their higher education. For
those
come from financially challenged
backgrounds, the situation can
be even more dire. By exempting
property taxes on student
residences built through P3
initiatives, Senate Bill 112
lays the groundwork for more
affordable housing solutions
that directly benefit students.
Um, affordable housing is not a
mere convenience, as we know, it
is essential, uh, in a
cornerstone to academic success.
Students who are stressed about
where they will sleep at night
or how they will afford rent are
much less likely to focus on the
quantum physics that they're
studying for our new quantum
economy in the state of New
Mexico. So it's essential and a
cornerstone that we bring in our
students and then that they'd be
able.
to live in an affordable, uh, in
affordable residences. Um,
moreover, the whole notion of
public-private partnerships has
shown great potential in uh
promoting housing, uh, or in
addressing the housing crisis on
university campuses here and
elsewhere in the country, by
allowing private companies to
collaborate with public
institutions, we can leverage
additional resources and
innovative finance techniques to
deliver.
more student residences. This
collaboration results in high
quality construction, efficient
management and a faster
turnaround time for housing
availability. In addition to
fostering academic success, it
aligns with the broader public
policy goals of encouraging the
construction of affordable
housing. Um, the availability of
affordable housing on university
campuses can attract more
students, particularly those
from lower income families who
might otherwise be deterred.
by the financial burden of
off-campus living. This in turn
promotes diversity and
inclusivity within our
educational institutions,
creating a richer environment
for all. So the economic
benefits of SB 112 extend beyond
university walls, um, and when
the students have access to
affordable housing, they're more
likely to stay in New Mexico
after graduation, contributing
to our state's workforce, yes,
including quantum physics and
qu ant um mechanics, uh, and
our, our economy, investing in
our students today means
investing in the prosperity of
New Mexico tomorrow.
We have two UNM officials here
who can speak directly to uh the
importance of campus residential
life. I'll introduce uh Vice
President Dan Garcia, who's
director of enrollment
management, who can speak to the
student success and its
relationship to housing, and
also Megan Chibanga, who is head
of UNM residents life who can
speak to the large demand for
on-campus housing and the
important educational and
academic programs that are
offered in residence hall.
Uh, with, with your permission,
uh, Madam Chair, if I can ask,
uh,
I
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, thank you for this
opportunity to speak on behalf
of critical piece of legislation
that will help ensure
affordable housing
Students and promote student
success at the University of New
Mexico, as you can imagine, I am
concerned on a daily basis.
And
Benefits of on-campus housing
cannot be overstated.
Research indicates that students
who live on campus have a 3.3%
point higher probability.
Uh, into their 2nd year, than
those that the significant
increase, one that translates
into more students completing
their degrees and entering the
workforce prepared and ready.
contribute to our state's
economy.
Before too many students at the
University of New Mexico and
other state institutions,
financial insecurity threatens
their ability to benefit from
these advantages.
UNM has one of the highest
percentages of Pell Grant
recipients in the country.
Students who come from low
income backgrounds and often
face significant financial
barriers to higher education.
A recent study in 2021 found
that financially insecure
students at UNM are 1.5 times
more likely to withdraw from
college, and they're more stable
peers.
Um, and in our institution, 43%
of our students are.
Uh, recipients.
Uh, to receive help, you have to
be among the neediest. We have a
sizable portion.
To be able to have affordable
housing is going to be very
important for them. And SB 112
provides a path forward.
By ensuring
Affordable student housing is
available.
We are investing in student
retention, academic success.
And long term economic growth. I
urge you to support SB 112 and
give our students the
opportunity to focus on their
education without the burden of
housing.
Um
And food insecurity.
Thank you very much.
Hi, my name is Megan Shibonga,
and I'm the executive director
for UNM's on-campus housing.
I would ask each of you to
indulge me for just a moment and
think about the moments that you
had an opportunity to visit with
friends late at night on campus,
off campus, or perhaps, for
those of you who didn't take a
traditional path through college
and university, just with those
who changed and shaped you in
your early adulthood.
That is what college and
university resident halls do. We
change and shape students in
that early time frame when they
are most able to become high
quality citizens and give back
to the state of New Mexico.
Here in New Mexico.
43% of our students at the
University of New Mexico live in
a public private partnership
housing.
That means those students
without passage of Senate Bill
112 and the levying of property
tax within these facilities, but
potentially bear an additional
$35 to $40 per month in their
rent. Rents at these facilities
range from $760 to $687 a month,
and students who are already
financially struggling, an
additional $35 to $40 a month
could make rent unaffordable for
them.
Housing affordability in
Albuquerque and New Mexico
generally is already at a crisis
level. One element to resolving
these problems is encouraging
more students to live on campus
in affordable spaces. Over the
next period of time, UNM and the
colleges and universities across
our state would like to increase
the housing capacity to address
the need for students to have
stable housing.
Wow
Attending university.
Maintaining the possibility to
utilize P3 arrangements to
facilitate additional
residential development is an
important and successful tool to
keep in the disposal of our
higher education institutions.
Taxing these arrangements cuts
the additional benefits of the
P3 opportunity and risks
discouraging their use, making
student housing less attainable
and less affordable for our
students.
Thank you.
OK, I think we're ready to go to
public testimony, if that's all
right. Yes, that's um, so, um, I
did confirm and so I, I need to
draw grid lines on an Excel
spreadsheet because I had mixed
up, so this is not a bill to be
held. This is a bill to be voted
on, um, the bill that will be
held is the medical psilocybin
Act. So, committee, we are
voting on this bill today. So at
this point, um, I'd like to see
how many people in the audience
are in support of this
legislation by a show of hands.
You can raise it up high. You
don't have to be shy.
So we have 3. Did I see 3, 2.5?
to
Uh, is there anybody online
who's in support
on either? OK, so why don't we
go ahead and get those two
people up who are in support, if
you will, uh, let's just do a
very quick minute if you'd like
or if you don't, if you feel
that like the senators and he's
got it.
You're good? All right. Any
comments from the board? Any
comments or questions from the
board.
I mean, the committee, I feel
like I'm running a board meeting
and I'm so sorry.
You can tell it's getting
towards the end of the day.
I.
Yeah
For that.
We're all like waiting to beat
Senator Sher to see whether or
not he's joking.
I think he almost had a coronary
there.
Yes, I think we do back here.
Yeah.
All right, so, um, Debbie, you
have a question. Senator
O'Malley.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
So, um, I did speak with um
Senator uh Senator where if I
did speak with.
how I feel about it. Um, so this
is my concern. First of all,
there is no
Uh, let's the description,
example, whatever of what you
mean by affordable housing in
here. I think that's a problem.
Um,
This uh agreement that you have
with the developer is that, of
course, you're gonna get the
university gets a revenue stream
from this, this, uh, agreement.
And uh you, you minimize your
risk. I get that part about
universities doing that,
minimize your risk. Now you have
a third party there responsible
for the improvements, the
maintenance, and everything
else.
Um
But I think the way it's couches
and affordable, uh,
affordability bill. I don't
think that that's very clear. It
hasn't been, I don't think,
proven that it's affordability
bill because whenever you abate
taxes, and I've certainly done
that as a county commissioner.
Whenever you abate taxes, it's
very clear that there's, there's
what that means in terms of
affordability, it's either tied
to HUD guidelines or something,
and, uh, and then there's an
affordability period saying
you're going to keep it.
affordable for a certain period
of time.
Um
And so that's my concern with
this bill. There is nothing in
there that says either of those
things. Um,
And
Uh, and I just wanted, because
since you mentioned your
experience about having, I might
set my daughter to the
university, and she's, she was
there a year, and I, I, for the
same reasons you were talking
about that you want to, you
know, your children to go to
school, really, I mean, so they
can't, there's no excuse.
Um, I can't say the housing was
affordable.
And actually was in very bad
shape. But, you know, we, we did
what we could. I, I think though
that the university really needs
to
Uh, look at
What it needs to do to help
students.
And I was part of a group for
almost a year when this study
was done that showed that there
were real issues with, with
students, uh, access to
affordability, and nothing came
out of it. I think they spent
$100,000 at university to do a
study.
To look at students who are
homeless, and also the issue of
affordability, which of course
they found there was a real
problem.
So I think that that takes some
responsibility from the
university needs to take some
responsibility to really produce
some affordable housing for its
students, and be serious about
it, right? I know with Lobo, uh,
you're, you're really, you're,
um, almost a real estate agent
for, for the university. That's
your job, right, to get a
revenue stream. I get that. But
I'm really disappointed that
nothing came out of this and
that there isn't really a real
effort or a strategy for the
university to create affordable
housing the.
long term for its students.
And so for those, those two
things are, are a problem for
me. One, you haven't defined
affordable housing, what that
means. And second, um, there is
no affordability period that
you're talking about to abate
taxes. And that's what we
usually use when we abate taxes.
So thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator O'Malley.
Anything else from the
committee?
They're so quiet today. I'm just
shocked.
So Senator Bermans, you have a
question. Just a quick question.
Thank you, Madam Chair. The FIR
points out that there might be a
constitutional conflict. I don't
think I necessarily agree with
that, but I just wanted to give
you a chance to address it.
and
Senator Bergman's I heard that.
Yeah, I, I did see that as well,
um.
Again, no, it's an interesting.
I know this analyst.
This is an interesting FIR.
There's some
After some things in here that
definitely jumped out of me. But
if, if Mr. Campbell's got a
specific response, let me yield
to him. I, I don't.
Madam, Madam Chair and Senator
Bergman's, um,
The, uh, the issue that was
raised in the FIR comes out of
Article 8, Section 3 of the New
Mexico Constitution, which is
the black letter law that says,
and I'll, I'll quote what's
relevant to this, the property
of the state.
Uh, and
And all county cities, towns,
and other municipal
corporations, all properties
used for educational or
charitable purpose shall be
exempt from taxation. So that's
the black letter law. There have
been a number of cases that have
defined this, including a case
involving the NRA and what
constitutes education and so on,
but uh our view is, and it's
supported by uh by what we've
heard today from our witnesses
that
it's life has an awful lot to do
with the educational experience
and therefore, it's really not a
question that this residence
hall, uh, should be separate
from any of any notion of
education from the Constitution.
So I'd, I'd like to have a visit
with the analysts who did the
FIR but the reading that we've
done of the Constitution, and I
am a lawyer practicing for 40
years in New Mexico is that this
is um a constitutional.
Uh,
amendment.
Thank you. Thank you. Any other
comments or questions from the
committee?
See, none of what's the will of
the committee?
I move it to pass. We have a Du
Pass from Senator Griffin. Do
you have a second?
OK. 2nd from Senator Jaramilia.
Rebecca, you'll take the role.
Senator Figueroa.
Yes.
Senator had a meal, yes, Senator
O'Malley, no.
Senator Paul.
Senator Ramos.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator Shar.
Senator Wirth.
Senator Bergmann's. Yes.
Senator Hamlin.
We have 6 yeses, 4 nos for a due
pass.
So 6 to 4,
you have a due pass.
All right, next up we do have
Senate Bill 219, the medical
psilocybin Act and looking at
the um, the cost for this, it's
only $87,000 which is obviously
a lot to a lot of working
people, um, but that has been
deemed not, uh, not, not a
requirement to hold it, so we
are going to vote on this bill
today.
Are they gonna kick in the
87,000.
I
I, if they put on a show, I
would pay that much money to go
watch that, especially if it was
air supply. Well, uh, you and I
could do celebrity karaoke and
do air supply.
That's an image. Senators, thank
you so much for being here.
Let's hear about medical
psilocybin.
Madam Chair, colleagues, it is
great to be with you to have
this conversation today, uh,
about the medical psilocybin
Act.
We have advanced legislation to
create a medical psilocybin
mushroom program in New Mexico.
I'm joined by several um
colleagues who were prime
co-sponsors of the bill.
Um, I'd like to give a very
brief summary of the bill, madam
Chair, and um I can run through
that now and then allow them,
but I'm just going to hit the
highlights of, of what the bill
does. OK.
Madam Chair colleagues, you
know, some of the most
therapeutic substances are
plants.
Uh, they're not chemically made,
they're usually, they're drawn
from plants, but psilocybin
mushrooms is a natural substance
that has been found, studied,
um, to be medically efficacious
for a variety of treatments. In
fact, the FDA ruled that medical
psilocybin, psilocybin was in
fact a breakthrough therapy for
treating major depressive
disorder, people who are dealing
with severe depression who um
pharmaceuticals haven't been
effective. Um, and that's just
one.
use. It's also proven to be
effective through research for
PTSD.
Substance abuse and even end of
life anxiety.
So this bill seeks to create a
very thoughtful, very specific
limited medical program.
That would be operated by the
Department of Health. This
legislation was developed every
step along the way with um
consultation and participation
from the Department of Health.
It would be a multi-year
process, a 2.5 year process
where, uh, the department would
uh create a medical psilocybin
advisory committee of experts.
They would create rulemaking
that would define everything
from the dosage.
The uh medical settings, the
approved provider's license
providers, I would add is what
it says in the bill.
Production, so it would be safe
production and of course,
education and training
surrounding.
The administration of it and the
handling of it. I want to point
out from the very beginning,
it's very different from
cannabis. People would not have
cards. It's not a recreation
program. They would not even use
it under this program,
necessarily, unless it was a
hospice situation on their own.
It would be under medical
supervision. But the exact
medical setting because hospice
is one of the um indicated uses
of it from the research that it
could take place in different
settings, and we also allow the
department.
We delegate that to them.
Um, the bill starts with 4
qualified conditions.
And
Those qualified conditions that
you could be prescribed in our
major depressive disorder, PTSD,
end of life care, and substance
abuse disorder. Also, the bill,
Madam Chair, colleagues, gives
the Secretary of Health, as we
did with medical cannabis, the
ability to determine other
qualified conditions as the data
supports that.
Um
finally, it, uh, it creates a
equity fund, because this is not
something that insurance pays
for right now or that even
Medicaid, Medicare, it will be
unfortunately, you know,
When if we pass this, when it
would become law, which would be
by December 31st of 2027.
Um
That there will be people who
need it but can't pay for it,
can't afford it, and so we
create an equity fund so that we
as funds allow, we can help
people who really would benefit
from this, who want to do this,
um, but don't have the
resources. So we create an
equity fund, but we do need to
fund it. And then we create a
research fund. You may not know,
Madam Chair, that UNM does some
of the foremost research in the
country, certainly on medical
psilocybin Doctor Larry Lehman,
who's very renowned, respected
researcher who was also a
part of creating this
legislation.
They're doing research, they're
involved in numerous um research
studies right now, and so that
we want to continue research.
This is an emerging kind of a
field we want to continue to
support that research on what
are the best medical settings.
There's also uh a drug that's
being developed in trials by the
FDA right now, containing
silocin, I guess, which is the
active ingredient.
That's probably several years
away, but this bill exempts FDA
approved products because we're
not
We don't want to be duplicating
and we, we shouldn't be
regulating the things that are
being worked out through
extensive research by the FDA.
However, when those products are
available, we do want to compare
them to what's known as like the
whole mushroom, the natural
mushroom for efficacy,
comparatively, see what works
better. And so we do want to be
able to study it in that sense.
We also, when we have an equity
program,
When that drug is available, be
able to provide that, if that's
a good solution for people to
take it as opposed to a whole
mushroom product. So we kind of
make those two exceptions in the
bill for FDA approved products
when that would happen.
Final thing I'll mention, Madam
Chair, is, um, this, like we had
to do with um cannabis, medical
cannabis.
We, um
Shield, that'll be.
Patients, providers, I'm not
gonna mess with this thing.
OK, there we go. All right. But
it shields the participants of
the program and only those
actively participating in the
program to the letter of the
program from criminalization.
That would be patients,
providers, producers, but it
also says if you are
Saying you're part of the
program, but you're operating
outside the program, you can be
criminalized, and the bill
specifically has that language.
So with that, I think I'll stop
right there, Madam Chair, and
love to allow my co-sponsors to
um speak and also the Department
of Health is here to speak as
well if you have questions from
a regulatory standpoint.
The command chair and maybe I'll
start with Senator Doctor
Hickey. OK. And also to note
that we do have an amendment, so
once you're finished talking
about the bill, then we'll thank
you for reminding me of that.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. I'm
speaking now from a clinical
point of view. Um,
The impact of this drug on PTSD
as um as through some trials in,
in the uh uh VA.
Um
Is
Shorter phenomenal. It's a uh
For mental health.
The
The discovery of the use of this
drug in so many situations is
almost the equivalent of
penicillin, an antibiotics. It
is that incredible in its
impact.
It is sauce that it rewires, so
to speak, pathways in the brain.
And so that people are able to
during the use of the drug,
visit those traumatic
experiences or the depression
and
Essentially,
Rewire the brain and and to a
point where people rather than
becoming very fearful of a
memory.
Of that and and how it can occur
in so many different ways, um,
are able to look at it, accept
it and move beyond it.
Um
For policemen and firemen.
33%.
Experienced PTSD.
You don't, we, we normally think
maybe just people in combat, but
no, these folks do, and the
efficacy that has been found
with these folks, uh, other
states, Oregon, Colorado, and
particularly Johns Hopkins, uh,
which has been at the forefront
of utilizing this drug in a
clinical manner that I'll
describe in a second.
Uh, the results are impressive,
and then it's gone on, as we
said, end of life situation,
unresponsive depression.
I mean
We've, we've been working around
the edges of, of unresponsive
depression for years,
electroshock therapy, other
things that don't tend to hold
this tense to hold.
For the long term. It's, it's,
it's that incredible and you
kind of say, well, gee, you
know, it, it came from nature.
Well, you know, we used to treat
heart disease with digitalis.
That came from nature.
Penicillin came from nature. It
was a mold that blew in on a
petri dish
in a lab, and it was discovered
that way. Nature has a lot to
teach us. It's sometimes
difficult for those of us in
academic medicine to say, well,
we didn't discover it and play
with it and do it through
chemistry. No, this is actually
nature.
That is at work. So the other
piece I really wanted to
Emphasize is that this is used
in a very clinical setting. This
is not in any way, shape, or
form, entertainment or anything
like that. It is not a raid
drug, uh, MDA, uh, that's
another drug that, that people
are looking at for some
situations. Um, but usually the
Hopkins models, which is what we
in medicine call it is.
A, a prescribed amount of uh
mushroom that's
Taken out and uh a gram weight,
um, very often put into a tea.
And um.
can drink it and then in about
45 minutes a journey starts.
There is a guide.
To the journey.
And these guides are only people
who have had
Very significant experience in
dealing with people and trauma,
um, and, and can take people
through whatever it is when
they're experiencing it, if they
do in the situation and it's
usually about 4 or 5 hours and
then the next day, and it's
usually done in a group of 6
people, not altogether, they're,
they're, they're separate, but
the next day they all share
their experiences, and the day
after that, they do another
journey.
And then they come together
again and share the experiences
and it's that sharing of the
experience. It is also extremely
powerful in getting rid of the
depression and other issues that
the individual is dealing with.
So this is a clinical model
using nature.
To really relieve people and I'm
sorry, the, the last really last
point is this state is an
addicted state.
The alcohol use.
Per capita is the highest in the
country. The alcohol related
mortality in this state is
double the national average,
double.
The national average.
We have got to find effective
ways, not just with people who
can maybe go to Jamaica or Peru
or whatever to have these
experiences and these models.
We've got to find a way that
everyone has access and really
that's what this bill is
pioneering, no matter the
socioeconomic background,
whatever the individual. And so
that's, I, I, I
Uh
If, if this bill passes, I, I
will feel that uh I've got I
think Senator Steinborn for
really putting all this together
and I've worked with Doctor
Lehman, but medically, uh, this
and another bill I'll be
bringing on uh.
Heart attacks and how we can
literally get rid of them. Um,
will be very, very impactful,
but this, this discovery of the
use of this, call it a medicine,
um, is phenomenal and the
results are stunning and the
sooner we can use this with
people who have addictions as
well as PTSD or firefighters,
etc. uh, the better off we're
going to be as a state and we
can start hearing some of our
social ills that occur.
Thank you for uh hearing me out
on this, but you have 8 minutes
left, so, um, Senator Brand.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, and
I'm, I'm hoping that Doctor
Hickey did not talk you out of
supporting this bill, um, but at
the risk of doing that, I'm
going to be short, um, the fact
of the matter is, as a patient.
You know, as someone, you know,
who was told that opioids were
very safe.
by the pharmaceutical companies.
I don't really trust the
pharmaceutical companies all
that much anymore.
I was on morphine for over 20
years.
About 3 years ago, I got off of
morphine.
It's quite a process.
This is natural.
This is what
God created
Why aren't we using it?
Why aren't we making sure that
it's safe and using it, yeah,
there's poisonous mushrooms too,
right?
But we also have other things in
nature that we know are good
medically.
This is something that's been
proven. It's something the VA
has actually looked at and
continues to look at, um, it is
something that that hopefully
can help people, um, I have a
very good friend had a traumatic
brain injury, and
We're hopeful that that will be
helpful for him.
Um, and so I, I really do want
to thank.
Senator Steinborn for being the
one that really did the heavy
lifting and putting this
together, and I want to thank
him for letting me be a part of
it.
Thank you. Thank you, Senator
Brat.
All right, so, um, by show of
hands, and I do have a list of
people, but by a show of hands,
how many in the audience are in
support of this legislation?
On 2345.
Then
No, 6.
As a human.
OK, great. Uh thank you. So we
have 6, and how many, um, we,
this list here, we have 7 online
that stayed the same.
OK.
All right. So what we're gonna
do is, Senator Steinborn, you
gave me a list of some people,
um, I would just for brevity's
sake would like to just have 4
people. Are there 4 in
particular, does it matter to
you in terms of who, uh, would
speak.
Madam Chair, I think uh Doctor
Glass would be one Deb Thorn, I
think they're both online and
then I would ask two people here
in the audience, maybe.
Um, Denali back there, Denali, I
know you're here to speak. And
who else really wants to speak
that?
How about
How about, OK, I'm gonna ask
Jeff Jeff Holland to speak. He's
been here for a long time and I
apologize to everyone else,
ma'am, chair, right, I mean,
you're your support is noted,
um, but also we still have two
more bills to to do and and uh I
appreciate the committee staying
this long, so, um, if you will
go ahead and come on up.
And stand behind Senator
Steinbor for Doctor um Doctor
Glass and Deborah Thorn, um, I
apologize if I'm not referring
to you by your correct title.
Um, you'll be up in just a
minute. We're gonna have a one
minute apiece, uh, from folks
here in the, in the, in the
audience and then one minute for
the folks online, um, so Doctor
Glass and Deborah Thorn, uh,
just be ready. We'll be calling
on you in just a minute. Go
ahead, Denali.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Denali
Wilson. I'm a staff attorney at
the ACLU of New Mexico and the
ACLU stands in strong support of
this bill, as the sponsors have
outlined psilocybin has
demonstrated significant
therapeutic potentials for
treating a range of mental
health conditions, including
depression, PTSD and substance
use disorders. Research from
leading institutions have shown
that psilocybin-assisted
treatment.
Can provide long-term relief for
individuals who have not
responded to conventional
treatments, offering hope to
many who struggle with severe
treatment resistant conditions
by creating a structured,
regulated program for psilocybin
treatment. This bill ensures
that patients in New Mexico can
safely and legally access these
miraculous benefits under
medical supervision.
Further, by removing psilocybin
from the state's Schedule One
designation in an approved
controlled regulated medical
center.
SB 219 invites New Mexico to
join a growing number of
jurisdictions that recognize the
need for more compassionate and
evidence-based approaches to
drug policy. We urge the
committee to support the bill
and thank the sponsors for the
leadership on this important
issue.
Hello, Madam Chairperson and
committee. My name is Brenda
Burgard, and I'm a licensed
mental health care provider, and
I'm also licensed in addiction.
I stand before you today to
advocate for the Senate Bill 219
as in New Mexico faces an
ongoing mental health crisis, we
must embrace new treatment
options. I have seen firsthand
how pilocybin helps patients
address the root causes of their
mental health challenges,
facilitating a shift in
perspective.
often hailing to profound
personal insights, and emotional
breakthroughs that conventional
treatments may not provide for
individuals with treatment
resisting conditions, psilocybin
offers hope when all other
options have been exhausted.
Senate Bill 219 recognizes the
regulation and professional
oversight to ensure safety,
education, and efficacy. By
supporting this bill, you have
the opportunity to transform the
lives of countless New Mexicans.
You for your time and your
consideration.
Good evening and thank you for
the time and allowing me to
speak. My name's Jeff Holland.
I'm a licensed clinician in the
state of New Mexico, uh, one of
the owners of New Mexico
Wellness inpatient Treatment
Center in detox. I started in
this field in the mid 90s, uh
doing street outreach, uh, when
it was not looked uh upon very
kindly with North America's
first syringe exchange. I worked
with uh the Bernao County detox,
uh, when people were somewhat
against that in the
neighborhood. Um, I'm also an
addict in recovery with almost
22 years and I've been in this
field in one form or another,
uh, for about 25 years working
over 15 years with psychedelic
medicine. I was a certified what
they call trip sitter before
they had certificates for that
with a multidisciplinary
association of psychedelic
studies, and I can say without a
doubt that we are missing a
tremendous opportunity if we
don't look upon this bill as
something that is uh a gift
bestowed upon us to hurt people
in our state that are suffering
greatly, and I know, uh,
Uh, substance use disorder and
addiction is kind of the flavor
of the month, but we have a lot
of first responders that are
currently dealing with a lot of
the issues that we're talking
about right now and the result
of a lot of those issues, um,
tends to be alcoholism, drug
addiction, and suicide. And if
we want to protect not only uh
our most prized uh people doing
the great work in our state, but
the people that are suffering
the most, um, I would implore
you to look upon this as
something that we can use as a
tool to help with this fight.
Thank you very much. Thank you
so much.
All right. So we have Doctor
David Glass and then Deborah
Thorn, um,
Both of you, there will be a,
uh, 32nd typed up in the chat,
so you'll see that pop up when
you're speaking. But Doctor
Glass, if you will go ahead and
unmute yourself, uh, Deborah,
you'll be next. Go ahead, Doctor
Glass.
Good evening. My name is David
Glass. I'm a medical doctor. I
completed my residency at UNM. I
practiced medicine here, and I
live here with my family. I'm
also a special operations combat
veteran. I completed 4 combat
tours to Afghanistan and Iraq.
I've worn the uniform for over a
quarter of a century. Like many
of my generation, 9/11 changed
everything. It shaped our path
and our purpose. Now, as we
reflect on middle age, we think
about the friends we've lost to
combat and the suicide,
depression and addiction. Over
2.7 million US service members
deployed at the last 20
More than 500,000 veterans of
these wars were returned with
PTSD and depression. We're now
retiring from the DOD carrying
these invisible wounds. Every 90
minutes, another veteran takes
their own life. And for combat
veterans, PTSD and depression
often hit hardest when the
uniform comes off for good.
Veterans are turning to
psilocybin retreats in Mexico
through nonprofits because they
can't get what they need here.
This crisis was highlighted in
the February 2nd, 60 minute
segment with Anderson Cooper. We
must get SB 219 right and ensure
it's structured responsibly with
proper oversight to protect its
integrity. Number one, strict
medical diagnosis and supervised
treatment. This is medicine, not
recreation. Patients need
in-person, clin clinician led
therapy, not broad access to
dispensaries or head shops.
Number 2, veteran represent
ation on the advisory board.
Veterans must have a voice in
shaping this program. I urge an
amendment to ensure that one of
the 9 advisory board members is
a veteran, preferably with
experience in mental health,
veterans advocacy, or a combat
veteran with a service connected
rating. New Mexico has over
150,000 veterans. This bill
isn't just about veterans. It's
about every New Mexican
struggling with chronic
disabling mental health. New
Mexico has a chance to lead.
This is an opportunity for us to
lead the nation by doing this
the right way. Let's do this.
Thank you very much for your
time.
Thank you so much, Deborah
Thorn, if you don't mind
unmuting yourself, please.
Madam Chair, committee members,
and sponsors of this bill. My
name is Deborah Thorn, and I'm a
licensed medical provider here
in New Mexico as both a primary
care and mental health
specialists, more than 80% of
the patients I see suffer with
extremely debilitating
depression, anxiety and end of
life distress. Many of them
cannot hold a job or have
meaningful relationships or even
get out of bed in the morning.
The current medical standard of
care and talk therapy alone are
failing our patients.
As medical providers, we need
more tools to help them. I've
witnessed firsthand how lives
are transformed through medical
psilocybin programs in other
states and countries. Thousands
of suffering New Mexicans need
access through the medical
psilocybin Act as proposed by SB
219. I strongly support
acceptance of the passing of
this bill. Thank you.
Thank you so much. Thank you.
At this point, uh, any comments
or questions from the committee?
Yes, thank you very much for the
reminder. We do have to move on
the amendment. First, if you
want to go ahead and explain the
amendment, and then we'll go to
the Madam Chair, so the
amendment is some language that
was in the bill that um
Basically says that it has to
align with with an act that
would criminalize
Criminalize it at the same time,
we're decriminalizing
participants in the program. And
so this was caught after the
bill was introduced and we're,
we need to remove that so that
we're not, we don't have that
conflict in the bill.
And the amendment speaks to that
man. All right, can I have a
movement, a motion on the move.
Thank you. We have a second.
Can you go ahead and take
Um, said a share.
Mhm.
Is there any opposition to the
amendment?
See no, let's just go ahead and.
Take that is unanimous.
Since there's no opposition to
the amendment, OK.
All righty. So we have uh this
bill as amended and so Senator
Ramos, did you want to go ahead
and ask your question, sir? Yes,
madam, and uh Senator, thank you
very much for bringing this
bill. I really do appreciate it.
I've got lots of combat veteran
friends and uh first responders
that have had PTSD, but I hope
we go one step further. I also
have a mother-in-law that has
had a Alzheimer's for many years
and uh we're going on 15 years
of taking care of her.
And hopefully, you know, you're
talking about the stimulation of
the brain and hopefully there's
something that would come up for
even that, um, so I just want to
thank you for bringing this in
front of us and hopefully this
will be a great successful
program and we're talking about
the success here in the near
future. Thank you so much.
As manager.
Everybody else.
Senator O'Malley.
I'm very encouraged about um,
you know, the
Some of the research and uh and
the uh results.
of this, um,
um,
What do you call it? Um, it's
mushroom derivative.
Um, I had a, my father suffered
from PTSD. He was uh 17 when he
was in the Battle of Iwo Jima
and then occupation of Japan and
um it didn't really hit him
until after he retired. The only
thing they could offer was a
drug that just made him act like
a zombie. I mean, he just, that
was pretty much it. I don't
recall the name of the drug. But
this is, this is very
encouraging, and I, and I
support it. Thank you.
All right, Senator Sanchez.
We have a due pass from Senator
Sanchez. Do we have a second
from Senator Ramos. Rebecca, if
you will, please take the role.
Senator Figueroa.
Yes.
Senator had a meal.
Senator O'Malley.
Senator Paul.
Senator Ramos.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator Shar.
Senator Wirth. Yes.
Senator Bergman's Senator
Hamblin.
Yes, you have a unanimous 10 to
0 pass. Congratulations. Thank
you very much. We appreciate
your call.
Thank you.
Next, we have Senate Bill 123
with Senator Adam.
And then we will finish up with
Centel 126 from Senator Padilla.
I.
Oh, whenever you're ready, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
thank you so much for hearing
this bill today. This bill has
been brought forth to this
committee once before and passed
with bipartisanship. And so
today we bring back Senate Bill
123, which is the regional
transit district law
enforcement. Now the North
Central Regional Transit
District, the NCRTD or as we
call it in northern New Mexico,
the blue bus.
Are my constituents that have
requested an amendment to the
Regional Transit Act to
authorize law enforcement
officers for its buses. This
amendment will allow RTDs with
bus services to provide the same
law enforcement as are currently
permitted on trains like the
rail runner. The blue bus covers
over 10,000 square miles, and it
serves approximately 70
communities in the Taos, Rio
Riva, Los Alamos, and Santa Fe
counties, including the eight
northern Indian puebloss and the
hicari.
Apache nation. Additional
service is provided to
Farmington and Mora County.
The district travels
approximately 1.4 million miles
per year. Now the RTD
transverses through the
jurisdictions of over 20 law
enforcement agencies, including
cities, towns, counties, tribal
and state law enforcement.
However, those agencies are not
always available to provide
prompt services to buses,
drivers and passengers
transitioning through their
jurisdictions. This bill will
allow all of the 4 existing RTDs
to create their own
transit and law enforcement
agency, if needed. Now it's
important to let you know that
what will happen is it will this
bill would require officers to
take basic police officer
training and obtained
certification within one year of
employment. So it's not just
putting somebody with the
security uniform on these buses,
they will be trained. So for
people to have confidence in
public transit, they need to
know that the use of public
transit will be safe, and they
need to use prompt action to
curb violence, drug use, or
other inappropriate and unlawful
behavior.
behavior. This bill would
provide our citizens that
security by authorizing law
enforcement, that is focused
specifically on the needs of
transit passengers.
With me today is my expert
witness, Tony Monterallo, the
director of the Blue Bus RTD,
uh, Tony, do you want to say any
words?
Um, thank you for, uh, having me
here, uh, this afternoon and uh
we're hearing this bill, um,
Senator Armijo covered
everything I would have said, so
I really don't have much to to
add uh to uh.
to this testimony today.
Thank you, Senator. Um, just to
give everyone who might be here,
um, a chance to speak. Is there
anyone in the room in support of
this bill?
Is there anyone in opposition?
Is there anyone online?
OK. Is there a motion the
committee would like to make? I
do.
Is there a second, is there any
Is there any opposition?
Sorry, yes, if you would like to
say something.
Ah, thank you, madam here. I
just wanna to Tony, thank you
publicly. I know you're.
Transitioning and you've just
done an amazing job with the
blue bus and we appreciate that.
I want to do that as number one,
and I did just want to ask what
happened to last year's spill.
We ran out of time, Madam
Chairwoman and senator. So Madam
Chair did it it passed the
Senate. It did.
OK, great. And again, thank you,
Tony. I appreciate. State
appreciates everything you did
to.
Lift this thing off the ground,
and I mean, it's been amazing to
see what it's done.
Thank you.
Are there any other senator
Figueroa.
Just one brief question, Madam
Chay, about the analysis that
says
There's no definition of
district in here, and I'm not
sure it's really needed, but
explore that as you move
forward. Thanks, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for that.
Anyone else.
Do you want to call?
Senator Figueroa.
Senator had a meal. Yes.
Senator O'Malley, yes, Senator
Paul.
Senator Ramos excused Senator
Sanchez.
Senator Shar.
Senator Wirth.
Senator Bergmann's.
Yes.
Senator Hamblin is excused. We
have 8 yeses for to pass.
Thank you, Senator. You have a
I just would like to recognize
the committee. Thank you all for
being so, uh, committed to this.
I, I'm very, very grateful and
we're just getting around about
the tax business and
transportation committee.
Just, there's a, a shirt that
shirt theme that I cannot say
while we're being recorded, that
we all should have.
At the end of session, getting
stuff done.
Getting stuff done.
Yes.
That
OK, Senator PD is on his way,
and we will finish that up. I
was just really not expecting
Boy Senator Jamio, you must have
rocked that build defense, Madam
Che I was on fire today.
And Fuego.
So anybody done any online
shopping lately for like
Adult onesies or anything like
that?
I, I promise I'll stop after
this one,
Senator share. I'm, I'm waiting
for a package of Depends though.
I have to say, I knew that's
where you were going with it. I
know I know.
Yes.
Senator Padilla is on his way.
So we'll hold in place until
Senator Padilla gets here.
OK, so thank you, Madam Chair
and members of the committee. So
essentially what you have before
here is Senate Bill 126.
Um, for those of you, trying to
remember, I know Senator Sher
was here. I know I think Senator
Ramos was here and um in 2017,
we passed three massive uh
telecommunications reform
measures. They were all geared
toward expanding the broadband
movement that we've been that
I've been personally working on
and that we've all been working
on for quite some time.
And essentially what the 3 bills
did is we put broadband in the
local infrastructure Act. We
rewrote the entire New Mexico
Telecommunications Act, and then
the rural universal Service Fund
was, was allowed to grow to
about 18 or so million dollars a
year with the uh Universal
rural, the universal Service
fund fee. Um, and it was geared
toward old technologies. So fast
forward from 2017 to, um, um,
so, so what we did that year is
we took the fund and said all
the dollars coming out of that
fund have to be focused on new
technologies or.
Um, broadband, i.e broadband, we
allowed the fund to go from 17
or $18 million to $30 million.12
$12 million increase is great
and everything, but we believe
that we have the ability to
collect uh from uh from 30 now
to $40 million based on, you
know, what could come in based
on on the way the fees are
collected in the real universal
service fund.
So we want that fund to be
allowed to grow from $30 million
to $40 million and we want to
make it explicitly, once again,
um, eligible to ETFs or ATCs,
excuse me, and those are
primarily the rural carriers in
the state. We want to leave it
locked that way so that these
dollars are committed to the
rural carriers so they can
continue to build out the
broadband networks that we've
already started, and, and they,
this would be monies that they
could use to um to match with
other dollars and other funds,
federal dollars, you name it.
That's essentially what the
legislation does.
And one word broadband.
Senator Padilla, do you have
anybody else that you would like
to speak on behalf of this?
I have uh some folks here that
would like to, yeah, they would
like to do public testimony or
are your experts
support
they can uh public testimony.
All right, let's go ahead and
we'll do that.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Jasonian registered
lobbyist for the New Mexico
Exchange carrier Group, a group
of 10 rural broadband, uh,
telecommunication and broadband
providers, uh, with me is, uh,
The executive director of the of
the enemyCG is take Saniannis.
Uh, this, this bill is the um
It just modifies the the state
rural universal service fund,
which is a uh uh implemented and
maintained by the uh public
regulation commission.
Uh, this goes to eligible
telecommunications carriers.
Uh, which is all the rural
carriers as determined by the uh
uh.
You see, uh, this telecom
broadband providers ISPs and and
wireless ISPs, uh, so, so this
is a very good bill that that uh
increases the fund by, by
10 million and um.
It is the fund is is financed by
a surcharge on all phone.
phone charges, all phone bills,
so it's not a state, not state
money, it's, it's actually uh
surcharge on your phone bill.
Uh, and we strongly encourage,
um,
Support of this bill, to thank
Senator Padilla for bringing it
forward, and we ask committee
for.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Kim
Lagant. I'm a registered
lobbyist for Smith Bagley Smith
Bagley uh serves McKinley, San
Juan and specifically the Navajo
Nation.
I want to thank the sponsor for
bringing this forward.
Senate Bill 126 proposes an
increase to the state universal
fund from 30 million to 40
million, thereby enhancing the
support for rural
telecommunications
infrastructure?
Particularly broadband
expansion. This initiative is
critical for bridging the
digital divide in New Mexico's
rural communities, ensuring
residents.
I have the equitable access to
essential services such as
broadband for education, health
care, and economic development
opportunities by bolstering this
fund, it aims to improve
connectivity.
At higher speeds,
Uh, an enhanced quality in the
rural areas. Thank you so much.
Thank you. Do we have anybody
online, man? Nobody online. All
right, is there anybody in
opposition of this bill? All
right, see, none. I now go to
the committee.
Anybody have any questions?
Comments, motion.
I mean I
We now know that whenever you
say I move I do pass it, it's,
it's code for I wanna go to
dinner. We haven't Du
second from Senator Jaramilo.
Rebecca, if you will please take
the roll. Senator Figueroa.
Yes.
Zoning out Senator had a meal.
Senator O'Malley, yes, Senator
Paul, Senator Ramos, Senator
Sanchez.
S
Yes, he's so funny.
Senator Sharp.
Senator W is excused, Senator
Bergmans.
Senator Hamblin, yes, we have 9
yeses. Oh, you want to go back
to Sanchez?
Oh, you did say yes, OK. I just
like to see his face. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
9 to 0. Congratulations. All
right, thank you everybody for
sticking around. Thank you
committee for, uh, being so
efficient and effective and
wonderful and uh we are
adjourned, we will meet on
Thursday.
