been a long day of so will try
to be as many as we can feel six
PM so we'll go ahead and start
with Senate bill seventy two
Senator Neville.
We believe we have a.
Amendment so anyway go ahead
yeah we have a small amendment
is technical of thank you Mr
chairman Senate bill seventy two
deals with industrial revenue
bonds and just to give everybody
a brief overview higher be sure
provision in state law that
allows a county or municipality
to essentially offer a tool for
A company or an industry to come
into the come into the county
and the city in that if you're
K..
And the effect is essentially to
waive the various taxes
predominantly property tax.
They can negotiate with the in
the organization to provide some
payment in lieu of taxes and
that's what we're talking about
in this case we alter the
statute last year of things last
year to allow for transmission
lines and that's what
essentially what this bill deals
with is trying to.
Make the situation more
equitable and County.
You don't necessarily have much
control over work transmission
line needs to go it can cross
tries to get from point a to
point me in the most efficient
manner possible and it isn't
always necessary where the
county would prefer the tax base
to go so if they're negotiating
a payment in lieu of tax most
counties might choose to to
director that payment to the
schools and in the case of for
example Torrance County which is
where I went to high school with
Moriarity.
They have but I believe four
fives for school districts right
there's a are I maybe there's of
Bonn and thank Corona there's.
Moriarity's censure not more all
participate in the county with
the county is interested in
doing of the tire bees in that
particular situation the
transmission line and they would
like to negotiate a payment in
lieu of tax but I'd like it to
be proportion out to the school
districts that are but it cannot
be as opposed to just where the
transmission line across this is
something that would affect a
lot of counties around the state
it's nothing nefarious or
anything like that is just
trying to make sure that to sum
up dollar windfall that comes
into the county actually can
benefit all of the schools in
that district one or the
religion for image based on
ability right if you look at the
bill might seem complicated and
basically it's taken the
proportion of knowledge of the
school district and taking the
payment that would go.
The single shade and spreading
it amongst the school districts
that are within that county.
I try to make it more equitable
I have three experts today hi I
have a former senator John Ryan
Warner former representative of
Robert both and county
commissioner Kevin McCall and I
don't know who wants to start
first John do you have a have a
preference Jon Ryan.
no no Senator to validate Mr
Chairman I'm I don't think we
have a.
A set schedule ascent pattern of
who goes next but but let me
just say as as one of your
experts that
you know that I that I work for
the Santa Fe transmission
project and that's who I'm
representing transmission and
generation in New Mexico it is
start date look really
attractive to multi billion
dollar projects that want to
come to our state and primarily
they want located in rural
areas.
so I will I will be here in in a
in essence to answer questions
relative to the industry and
that would include transmission
generation
you know there Senator you you
did a very nice job describing
the issue and and right now
counties are willing to do IRB's
for wind projects in New Mexico
under the current law that we
passed last year we thought we
are getting it right we had an
amendment on the house floor
that that changed the bill and
and just put a particular
problem in place for the
counties and without you know
issuing Arby's the industry
doesn't continue to flourish and
and and grow these projects are
extremely expensive they take a
long time and little things like
this can really affect a project
from coming to New Mexico or not
and so
it's a technical fix and we've
got Texas technical people on on
this call Robert Bo is a on a
financial analyst for for a lot
of the county and I think you
would be the appropriate one to
go to some of the specifics
thank you Mr chairman and thank
senator Neville.
Mr Chairman are Senators thank
you for listening going real
quick we're not getting to know
the real we the statute right
now that was as John reference
few minutes ago mineral for the
house last year basically says
of the school districts should
get a hundred percent of what
they would normally get in
property taxes regardless of
whether I R. V. is the.
And that just makes them a
project financially unstable and
let me just give you two very
very quick example
Torrance County did a
transaction that we closed last
year before this bill went into
effect in the bill wanted to
affect ordered that the that the
the Iranian and put into place
after July first.
Torrance County would give one
of a hundred percent of the
entire B. bill payments which is
a like a million six hundred
thousand per year.
To to school districts are not
located in the county.
Property line for the county but
school district other County in
addition to that Torrance County
would have think another right
now half million dollars out of
their general fund over the
first eleven years and
supplemental payments to the to
the school district it would
then take another eleven years
for them to recoup that first
eleven year out local lessons.
Torrance County with only net
income for the last seven years
of a thirty year transaction I
don't see it Torrance County in
elementary Commission call
McCall addresses but.
Figure out a whole lot of
services to cut to their current
constituents in order to make
those payments in the school
district the other one is for
example Sandoval County they
didn't small transactions over
for about a year and a half ago
with PNM and that particular
transaction the county would
never ever break even at the end
of twenty five years they would
be six hundred and fifty four
thousand three hundred seventy
dollars in the hole.
Taking a hundred percent of what
include taxes were plus another
hundred sixty from fifty four
thousand dollars from the
general fund again I don't see
them doing that to the detriment
of their mothers a taxpayers so
what we do when we work with
school you will not parties on
this is we try to figure out
what would be a a logical way of
allocating.
Money to the school and to the
local government and we look at
for example population using the
the the student role we do that
that heavy use the money to the
larger school district to for
example Rio Rancho ordered
closed school districts or and
and things like that and that's
not the intent of a lot of
people on a lot what legislators
we talked to want to try to
benefit the rules.
So we said okay that that
doesn't work we look property
tax allocation that doesn't work
either back to that that really
much trouble.
Follows with the student loan
issue so we said let's look at
the New Mexico taxation revenue
department certificate that
property tax certificates.
We said let's figure out how
much money the schools would
normally get from this month so
we look at their operating mill
there debtservice mill and their
capital outlay built in and of
those together
senator bill will have a an
amendment
to add the state dept.
Bills to that count calculation
reason we do that it's a way to
bump up how much the school will
get and how much less will do
the the the local government.
and so that's what this bill is
I know it sounds complex
apologize that's really what it
does and then it says that all
school districts for example
Torrance County you would have
senator bill mention Moriarty
would get money thank you get
money not never get money
bonding Corona will also get
money even though there's no
student in door county to go
because will district but that's
where the term that we look at
so it's not even being up the FY
are on page five and six is a
very good summary of the
transaction and the with that
the
Mr Chairman representative died
the site.
I think we have commissioner
called George so some given sure
sure
As we are you know looking
forward on fixing this bill I
guess I'd like to discount a
look back what
The I. R. B. process in the bill
payments have have kind of meant
to Torrance County
prior to last July
we're fortunate in Torrance
County to to close to quite
large wind when the projects in
the.
So I just kind of want to go
over a few things what it's been
able to do for us here at
Torrance as property taxes are
our primary sources of revenue
but like like our deputies we've
taken them from a level four
para up to a level two and if
things go like like the planned
next year we're looking at
taking them all the way to a
level one
and that's important for us here
Torrance as we've got other
large counties municipalities
around us that to we are you
know strategically Rick
Keeping retaining and then also
and just keep in our our police
force our shares Department
We're also looking at given a
full hunter raised to the our
entire road Department as a as a
department wide and then for the
first time in Torrance County
where the looking at adding
career EMS reached first
responders to our to our
volunteer department that's
something I'm really proud of
after all the things I've given
you we of a this past year we've
been able to go to our from our
mandated three twelfths
reserves.
Mentors economic we said you
know what we're going bump that
up because of bill payments
coming in and things look good
we're gonna go to five twelfths
and so we've we've increased our
reserves
to to those five twelve so
that's important and I guess I'd
like to say here Torrance County
the wind and the sun is like our
oil and gas and
this is this is what we need in
and it's very important so those
of us so Torrance County in and
I am a farmer and I guess some
kind of practical guy and I I
appreciate Senator Neville as a
can entrance there that does
this is just another tool.
For our toolbox and so I I ask
interj that that maybe we six
the small technical.
Deal that got kinda maybe
amended or maybe intended to be
different than what it was but
and I all one last point I
wanted to say that you know this
I. R. B. process can be used on
in on all energy generation.
so but here in twenty County we
would take advantage of it on
transmission solar and wind so
with that I just kind of hope I
painted a of you know of a
pitcher of with a broad brush of
of what to desire be process is
a process means to rural
counties.
Thank you.
Thank you that's our experts Mr
chairman we do have an amendment
it's a technical fix we left out
reference to say to the millage
and the.
It's it's just two places on
page three in page seven it adds
that in the if there's any
questions on the amendment to we
can try to answer those as well
it's it's a technical in
correction formula that we would
use to program of the of the
money for the schools.
Okay if I can have a motion to
move the amendment.
Some emotion to move the
amendment.
Second.
K. secretary of motion by
Hamblen and second by Padilla.
I think the senator I've already
explained the the amendment of
the any of the questions on
further questions on the
amendment.
Also the any opposition to the
amendment.
J. hearing none you have an
amended bill Senator so we're
I know we already uh introduced
a bill.
any further of COVID senator
Neville no I think that's it
we're just trying to be fair and
and when we have a windfall for
a situation like this we want to
distributed fairly amongst the
school districts in the county
so certainly want to take care
of the the areas that are most
populated within their counties
if the school districts.
Properly compensated that's what
we're trying to do Mr chairman
okay thank thank you senator now
we'll go to a public comment.
And we will.
Hello this.
Happy's openness of so what
with a position if we have
anybody in opposition of this
bill are killer.
At this time Senator I don't
have anyone from public comment
who wish to speak in opposition
if they are members of the
public core in our meeting at
this time who wish to speak in
opposition please raise your
hand using reaction button at
the bottom here's to the screen.
One more second for members of
the public who wish to speak in
opposition to Senate bill
seventy two.
So we'll move on to our
supporters first I have Deborah
conduit Deborah are you hearing
available.
Yes ma'am.
Okay go ahead and get okay good
afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee my name
is Deborah Condit Representative
Interwest Energy Alliance we are
trade association representing
thirty of the largest renewable
energy development and
manufacturing Matt manufacturing
companies in the nation.
We're headquartered right here
in New Mexico and also work in
six states across the
surrounding region Interwest is
here today to support Senate
bill seventy two as it will
restore critical functionality
to the industrial revenue
funding in the state when we
talk about the renewable and
transmission projects coming
into the state we're opting
thinking about the energy
transition act and the
requirements for utilities to
bring on more resources but as
states across the west meet with
New Mexico in passing goal clean
energy policies all of their
utilities are looking to buy
renewable generation as well
that means New Mexico projects
are competing with projects in
Colorado Nevada Oregon and all
across West when these
competitive solicitations recent
studies show that in order to
meet the laws on the books today
we'll need to build nine
gigawatts of renewable energy
per year for the next twenty
years New Mexico projects can be
part of this picture this bill
helps us make sure that
renewable projects needed in the
western developed here in New
Mexico and that are counties and
school district the school
districts receive those benefits
we ask for your vote yes on
Senate bill seventy two thank
you.
Thank you Mr Khandu and now we
will hear from Brian Moore Mr
Moore.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I would really
want to thank the sponsor
senator bill is been so patient
on this piece of legislation
he's worked so hard with the
counties what are we legislation
of other types.
You mean you have to understand
working with monetary salvation
he is Senate bill but a great
job you really what Senate bill
seventy two will do is allow
local governments to partner up
with wind generation when
transmission.
Sore of course we're talking
about wind here today with
Torrance County but it just
helps us all to work together to
create these kind of projects
that really provide renewable
energy not only for New Mexico
around the west and and with
that Mr chairman members the
committee New Mexico sentenced
stand strongly behind Senate
bill seventy two thank you.
Thank you very much Mister Moore
we will now hear from Ashley
Wagner actually are you
available.
Yes thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I'm
Ashley Wagner director of public
policy for the New Mexico
chamber of commerce we support
this bill because it ensures
local financial support for
schools well ensuring were able
to continue to build our
renewable energy infrastructure
thank you for allowing me to
speak to you today.
Thank you Mr Wagner we will now
hear from Larry Hogan.
Larry are you available.
My apologies.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee Larry heard and
registered lobbyists for
Sandoval County
sent Sandoval County been
working on this through the the
efforts of Mr Burke does a
really good job of explaining
the issue that we're dealing
with and the fix we need this we
think this bill goes a long way
to to thanks for what happened
in a previous session and that
kind of stop these are the eight
the IRB's what is done in such a
fair way to treat school
districts very so it but it also
allows the county to bring in
these regions these projects
were IRB's primarily renewables
and and make opens the door back
up to brings good projects and
doesn't cost accounting money
and it starts to the kind of a
win win for everyone so we
appreciate the work that's been
done on this and and the Sanchez
Mr purple and we stand in
support of that legislation in
the county commission did pass a
resolution in support thank you
Mr chairman.
Thank you Mr.
Are there any other members of
the public who wish to speak.
Are in support of Senate bill
seventy two again this is an
opportunity for those who wish
to speak and support.
Marco Gonzales.
Go ahead.
Good afternoon
Mr chairman and members of the
committee my name is Marco
Gonzalez and I'm the registered
lobbyists for pattern energy my
colleague Jeremy was going to be
speaking but I get there you
just having some technical
difficulties so pattern energy
is developing almost four
thousand megawatts of renewables
in New Mexico which represents
about eight billion dollar
investment here this is a
critical piece to help take the
ETA to the next level which is
expanding the impact in the
communities where the generation
does not only produce but where
there are transmission lines it
was a good point that these
expert maybe that this could be
available for for all kinds of
the Energy not just renewables
but with that I just want to
thank the sponsors so much for
bringing this car a technical
correction forward it's really
important and we appreciate his
hard work and and thank you
members of the committee.
Thank you Mr Gonzalez will now
hear from Janice Senator Janice.
Thank you Kevin Shendo senator
bill committee members my name
is Jess bro I am the Torrance
County manager.
Where is Senate bill seventy two
as amended previously service
Torrance County treasurer I
worked closely with Mr bobo to
provide a calculation there the
tax distribution in towards
County we collect tax payments
based on the levy school
districts received thirty five
percent of the tax distribution
this calculation accomplishes
that goal.
Statute if it's not change to
the through this process.
I need to be fiscally
responsible we must know the
valuation of the finished energy
generation projects before we
enter into negotiations for the
R. B. that can cause a
significant delay as it has yet
to be determined certifies that
valuation or any valuation
protest process to.
That'll.
Mr call is stated our county has
issued several R. B. one five
school districts informs Kelly
has never received any public
bodies from these projects yes
ma'am more public schools and
they are the only school
district
and COVID pandemic is threatened
with having to lay off staff due
to lack of funding.
Respectfully ask for this
committee to Senate bill seventy
two as amended the second thank
you.
Thank you Mr Browde are there
any other members of the public
who which to speak in support of
Senate bill seventy two Mr Wayne
Johnson are you raising your
hand.
Yes I am okay go ahead thank you
I'm going Johnson I am the
Torrance County or excuse me was
the Torrance County manager now
I'm the Sandoval county manager
C. commissioner call call
smiling there we stand in
support of the of the the Senate
bill seventy two as amended this
is something I I assume that
everybody is understands it
right now renewable energy
projects in the state of New
Mexico are at a halt that's
something we need to change
their HB fifty is passed last
year all attempted to protect
the schools actually harmed all
the counties and we believe that
this is one of the things that
rural communities such as the
communities in Torrance really
really can benefit from an do
benefit from my time in Torrance
County we we did six of these
deals forum with pattern that's
something that would not happen
today in Torrance County it
would not happen in Sandoval
county so I urge your support
Senate bill seventy two as
amended I want to thank senator
Neville from great for bringing
that forward and helping us to
actually benefit our schools
benefit are counties benefit our
rural communities and also to
promote renewable energy in New
Mexico thank you.
Thank you Mr Johnson are there
any other members of the public
who wish to give statement and
support.
Please raise your hand.
Thank you that concludes public
statements for Senate bill
seventy two.
Okay thank you are Micaela will
go to the committee for any
questions we have Senator
Kernan.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator Neville I'm I do have a
couple questions with regard to
the IRP process and I'm familiar
with that because of the project
that was really significant
project in Lee County a number
of years ago and that was when
you're Ranko.
Decided to build their plant in
Eunice and so they they do gosh
I did that are being the county
and the beneficiaries in that
particular case it was sighted
near Younis of the units public
schools at the special district
hospital and the New Mexico
junior college were all
included.
In as recipients of of that
funding so with your bill help
me understand why you would just
say all school districts in the
county would would be a
beneficiary because I know as
since projects in many of are
going up in my area I will just
tell you we've got most of our
in the northern part that the
county
that but they're all going out
why would why would we need to
share that with all districts
when they're not impacted or
would date most likely even
receive a property tax benefit
if it's not even in their school
a district.
The point is a of senators that
we have say a power line
crossing through a county and
there's nobody lives out in the
southeast corner of Torrance
County.
In the power line might be going
through there and it would
benefit whatever school
districts are I think that's
Bond and there's not any
students there there's not gonna
be any activities are going to
be students whatever the county
would like to see the or have
the ability to negotiate with
the transmission company.
They and include that they could
then program a based on the
millage rate within the county
they were program of the dollars
to the the other school
districts with within that
county so that they would
benefit from a more proportional
basis that benefit the students
that actually live in the county
us the commissioners want to
benefit most students well I and
I understand that senator but Mr
chair but if it with the county
have the opportunity save your
in Lee County it's going through
the taken area rather than jail
why would the county not have
the ability to make that go she
ation that this is an you know
this is Tatum property tax money
basically why would they have
the ability to determine which
school districts are hospital
district or a New Mexico junior
college all beneficiaries of the
mail so why why all I guess
that's my concern because in my
County we're so stretched from
south to north these things are
going in in the north part of
the county that's just I don't
know that's concerning the
county have the option to to
make a determination thank chose
to include New Mexico junior
college.
That's that's an issue they can
include the junior college or
the cannot include junior
college again they can give and
I are being not taking any
property tax for that matter
they but exactly are I. R. B.
proper process allows for
payment in the in the paper I
look in be.
Norm it's for whatever typically
it's for whatever.
Entities are aware that
facilities built a transmission
line crosses a large area as
opposed to say a factory or a
like the the nuclear thing and
and and I units that's a that's
a single point so that single
point item affects that
particular of media area these
power lines they go across a
large swath of the county they
may or may not affect they tend
to stay away from populated
areas due to right wise and so
forth so there's a benefit then
would not necessarily be going
to where the most needed and
that's what this bill it seeks
to address it allows the county
then two of.
Build a formula that would allow
them to program of the dollar
the dollars and to the very
school districts it is
hard to disagree with what I'm
saying I'm I'm acting like I'm
the expert would like Mr Burke
for somebody else to jump in if
I'm misstating the section.
Just for clarification Mr chair
and senator that would have the
county would have the option to
do that because she action
according to help they feel it
should be distributed correct
that's correct I think hi there
they're not tied to distributing
it to every school district in
that particular county please Mr
Burke can you answer that.
Mr Chairman representative bill
and under current the way it the
languages now is it will be
distributed evenly to all the
school that are within the
jurisdiction of for example the
county in the problem that that
all of this issue that we deal
with is because all your local
governments are subject to the
the school boundary lines are
driven by the Public Education
Department we have no control of
that so for example it does give
you all the two example of of
transaction we're we have an
issue let's take Torrance County
needed to transactions here
recently the very southeast
corner of their account.
Public Education Department had
parts of the grocery District
and part of the Bantul district
involved in network but we're
determined to be located there's
not a single student from
Torrance County that goes on
school district or the growth of
the.
What we do have happening is
people are moving in temporarily
into Moriarty in the state The
then they commute over to the
river the work site construction
site every day and they come
back and get thank you gets no
money Moriarty gets no money.
Then there gets no money and
they have the they have they
have other issues as well as a
school inure to counties and get
no to school districts that have
no students impacted by this and
I'm not even located in Torrance
County get money so we're you're
out a way to balance balances
that now and.
And so what we did instead as we
said okay.
There's been representatives and
senators on both sides we've got
some say the rules you'll get
too much money and the big
screen with more with us say
that the rules will don't get
enough we got to get them more
we're trying to do this
balancing act by the bouncing
and say we can't share the money
he point now what can happen
I'll give an example this just
happened recently up in the Rio
Arriba County.
Where the school districts that
we don't need all the money
right now but we got a real big
project right now so what we did
is we split up we said the one
districts that will will let
you.
Thank all of take our money and
your money up front you have a
real need for it and then what
will happen is we'll take our
money you know in in the second
half transaction or certain six
or seven your so this still out
the school to work with them to
help to share figure out the
sharing of what they don't want
to work with themselves that may
be the case.
Whether the legislation is
written every school district
within the county that this
county county Neal will share
equally in the revenue if I get
that.
Ality that issues the I. R. E..
We always have a whole lot more.
Will move.
So for example they could do to
separate higher rate.
Yes if if if if let's say
entertaining rate of those The
Irish and you have a team school
districts and loved in school
districts thank thank you and I
are we proportion that's on the
table will district to do an IRA
the proportion that's in the
London school districts in each
one of them get their pro rated
share that perfectly.
Transaction.
Okay thank you very much Mr
chairman and senator and and
thank you for that let me ask
you another question if if the
project is not just for an RRP
and we have that situation in
Lake County I think it's a so
that came through there and.
So they did with that and are to
be so what would be the property
tax that would be paid on that
project there would be an I. R.
P. so with that pay property tax
on that they would pay at the
standard mill rate based on the
valuation the state establishes
and how would that be Mr chair
be distributed with regard to
the county there would be
nothing to the schools grant I
believe the millage rate the
county would go to the county
the millage rate for the college
and go to the college and the
college for whatever's else is
there we go to a proper
proportionate to whatever of
whatever.
District or whatever they cross
they would exactly so hello if
there's no I. R. B. Mr chair and
senator it would be a strict
property tax and it would go to
that individual school district
I'm assuming so one last
question with regard to.
Payment in lieu of taxes
typically.
Which is higher if you did a
straight property tax or if you
did hello what would be the
higher benefit to the to the
school district.
It's all negotiated.
Well I just wrote it's all
negotiated Mr Chairman
representative it's a the pills
would typically be much less
that not much less would be less
than the the property tax
typically what happens is a
county wage their portion and
then but they want to keep the
school portion replace exactly
okay well thank you that helped
a lot in and I I think at my
final comment Mr chair would be
I think someone mentioned that
it could be used for all energy
projects and and and probably I
would not like this formula and
with regard to oil and gas I
think.
You know I don't know that they
need they don't need RB stepped
Uranga did that I I just think
we better leave well enough
alone late at with electrical
this transmission project that
you have been labor if that that
thank you that's all.
This just as a COVID this does
not affect standard diabetes is
just specific exactly thank you.
Thank you Senator Kernan I have
senator Wirth and I Senator
Griggs.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator Neville
I have similar questions a
Senator Kernan trying to
navigate through a most
extraordinary FIR gotta give a
shout out to layer Graeser for
the work that went into this one
half I are because boy it is
it's very detailed and he called
it actually this issue of if the
districts can agree it gets
divided amongst all the
districts he called it quote
unquote rough justice which I
thought was a very interesting
way to describe it.
My question is simple obviously
we had some House member trying
to re write did rewrite your
bill on the floor of the house
and created this problem
it has an agreement been reached
so that this this plan that
you've come I see Representative
Burpo shaking his head up there.
So I'm just you know are we will
what direction are we going and
we've come up with something
here are we gonna end up back on
the other side with another
attempt to re write this or is
this the first step in the
journey to get there well we
hope it's a final step Senator
but you never know or I've been
around long enough to you never
know what we re write bills
every year so but the the hope
is that we come up with a
formula that is workable in its
proportional based on their
their tax bases essentially
that's what we're trying to do
Mr Burke do you have any comment
on that.
Mr Chairman.
Senator Wirth Senator a bill
we've been trying to work with
the other side I think the
This language was crafted in
started for any energy the
energy production project so
whether it was a natural gas
fired plant in in the Luna
County or or San Juan County
that's where the genesis of this
was in renewable energy just
came forward.
Some people are not necessarily
enamored with renewable energy
and I just leave it at that.
Well I appreciate that response
and again I certainly going to
support this because of the work
that's gone into it and I mean I
think this is a really critical
tool and it's just unfortunate I
thought we had this fixed up and
feels like we're on the first
step of the the next journey so
I just think let's all
Communicates I think we have a
good chance to move this through
the Senate but let's all just
make sure to let us know let me
know what's going on when it
gets over the other side because
we just need to get this we need
to get this done I mean I think
it does that as you mentioned it
sends a terrible signal you know
when we're trying to have the
level of investment that's being
that's coming in and yet we we
pass a law that doesn't work
that's that's no good so we got
to get this fixed this time so
that's just my thoughts thank
you Mr chair thank you.
Thanks.
Senator Griggs.
Thank you for sharing my
questions have been covered show
I have
if you don't have any questions
on that two passed motion.
Mr chairman I raised my hand
very late but I do have one
question.
Senator Padilla.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator Richard patients are
almost my questions were
answered also I just want to
make sure that you know I try to
read the FIR as is humanly
quickly as possible as I can
including mine the chill ten
minutes before I'm gonna present
a bill
So thank you for all the work
that you guys have done with
this thing and Center renewable
I I I I just your your names on
it and I feel very good about
things when you're working on
things but but by doing this in
this region of the state are we
sure that we're not.
hammering some other part of the
state and hammering some other
you know piece of what's already
working for some other folks can
can you address that no.
And we can't hear you.
Senator Neville can be you
yourself I get are you.
I don't think it affects its
county by county I don't think
it's a problem.
As far as something happening in
Torrance affecting San Juan or
anything like that I don't see
that as a as an issue it's just
something that has to be
negotiated within each county
boundaries for municipalities as
we mentioned taken or whatever
we could be a small it could be
within an agency municipality
but in the case of transmission
lines we won't see a big
transmission line likely going
through towns if they can afford
it.
I appreciate that Mr chairman
and senator Neville I yeah I I
soon one of my colleagues before
me would have asked that
question if it were an issue but
I just want to hear from you
thank you.
Okay I don't see any more hands
up when we do have a motion for
do passed by Senator Griggs who
have a second second by Senator
how to meal by Senator Hermio
lane can you add to grow please.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Griggs.
Yes.
Senator Hamblen yes.
Senator Hickey.
Yes Senator Hotmail yes.
Senator Kernan.
Yes senator Sanchez.
Yes.
Senator common yes yes Senator
Wirth.
Yes Senator Padilla.
Yes Senator Shendo.
At ten one excuse.
You do have a past.
On.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee appreciate.
Thank you.
Now we'll go to the Senate bill
seventy three percent of our
meal thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee thank
you for listening to Senate bill
seventy three this afternoon
Senate bill seventy three was
revenue to direct all revenue
remitted to the state from fees
imposed by the federal United
carrier registration act to the
motor transportation fees fund
which is there after distributed
to the state road fund now SB
seventy three is strictly a
statutory cleanup bill with no
fiscal or administrative impact
but it does is it eliminates the
PRC from being the middle man to
ensure that money goes straight
to the New Mexico department of
transportation now to give you
some background when the
statutes were updated in two
thousand six to bring the state
into compliance with the new
unified carrier registration act
of two thousand five and in
twenty thirteen to eliminate the
all testing will say
registration fee for interstate
commercial motor carriers the
provision directing the fee
revenue to the motor
transportation few fund was
eliminated now what happened is
that replacement language fails
to include any revenue
distribution language the bill
remedies that oversight.
Practice has been to distribute
your seat revenue to the state
road fund which is approximately
three point two million per year
and has been the practice under
the prior law.
This bill seeks to specify that
revenue distribution in statute
that with me today are two
expert witnesses including Mrs
Mallory once and not just the
HSD director for the New Mexico
department of transportation and
Mister Jerry Valdez the
executive director of the N. M.
D. O. T. so Mr chairman with all
due respect I'd like to Mrs
months or not just to speak on
behalf of Senate bill seventy
three Mrs Clinton honest.
Senator members of the committee
Melanie once and I just this
bill is strictly Center Terry
cleanup the department
transportation is already
receiving three point two
million dollars into the state
road fund and we are using that
money for maintenance and
construction activities and
Senator MM for questions or if
Jerry if you want to say
anything.
Mr Chairman representative I'm
yellow members of the committee
thank you and as reiterated by
Senator how DO in this month's
not is this technical correction
to this statutory language
ensures a sustainable portion of
the state road fund is not in
any type of statutory dilemma it
insures the supplementation of
these fees to the state road
funds so we respectfully ask for
do pass.
On this statutory cleanups.
You Mr chairman with that we'll
take any comments from the
public before we take any
questions from the committee.
thank you senator Harding so now
we'll go to public comment our
Micaela.
At this time I don't have any
members of the public who wish
to speak in opposition Senate
bill seventy three are there any
members of the public currently
within our meeting who wish to
speak in opposition now is your
time to raise your hand.
And it doesn't look like we have
anyone working one more second.
Okay we will move on to public
statements of support for Senate
bill seventy three I don't have
anyone who signed up early on my
list are there any members of
the public who wish to speak in
support.
Okay and that concludes all the
public statements for Senate
bill seventy three thank you.
Thank you mark hello so now
we'll go to Committee.
Any questions from committee
members.
Are you.
There's not Mr chairman over the
past.
I don't see any other hand so we
do have a motion for do passed
by a Senator but did and I have
a second by Senator of Sanchez.
Okay the guy so.
What was it a question Senator
centers or you raise a hand to
second the motion yeah.
I had a question real quick my
computer keeps shutting off the
coming out of this real quick to
get better wire Senator haha
what's that better get better
wifi.
I'm in my office in which.
What.
Mr Chairman have a bill for
that.
I
think we can put up some of your
individual procreation for
specific line of fiber to your
office or something yes Sir.
Senator Sanchez just need to
give the chair all as capital
outlay in the chair will take
care of them.
Real quick Mr chair.
Senator heart of New Mexico this
tax school posts page three this
is off the motor carrier tax.
Mr chairman and senator yes this
in about what status is this
isn't anything on a registration
fee so these are motor carriers
that come in either through the
state or companies that can do
more motor caring throughout the
state of New Mexico within New
Mexico and defy filled
translating thing correctly have
missed once about is to help me
out but it's not a registration
fee it's a motor carrier
registration fee.
Chair Mister Hartley thank you
answer my question thank you.
And also against the motion our
agency.
Kernan whichever.
Thank you.
Okay thank you have a a new path
motion by Senator Padilla and a
second by Representative.
Right zero.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Griggs.
Yes Senator happen yes Senator
Hickey yes Senator Hotmail yes.
Senator Kernan yes senator
Sanchez.
There is that a yes.
Senator Tallman.
Yes Senator Wirth yes Senator
Padilla.
Yes Senator Shendo yes ten one
one.
When excuse okay thank you.
You have in the past Senator how
to meal thank you Mr chairman
thank you members of the
committee and thank you to my
expert witnesses.
Okay thank you and will now move
on to a Senate bill thirty five
Senator Steinborn minimum wage
for secondary school students
indeed thank you Mr chairman and
committee great to be with you
all and I'm really excited to
put on this bill Senate bill
thirty five.
Removes a loophole that we put
in our law that allows high
school employ high school
students to be paid a lower
minimum wage and everybody else
for the same work.
And as we know most New Mexicans
who.
Get paid the minimum wage just
got a raise to ten fifty an hour
and unfortunately one group of
people who who didn't get that
raise two unless we change the
law never well we're will
perpetually be able to be hired
at a lower rate our our
secondary school students.
And I want to just say
colleagues I feel like this is a
very important bill because
whether we recognize it or not
high school students number one
do a good job many of them I
mean they work hard they produce
right there next to their peers
number too many of them provide
for their families.
And they're counted on to do
that number three they're trying
to get ahead in life they're
trying to save money for college
and it's just as a matter of
simple fairness we should pay
them the same minimum wage as
everybody else and up and so
this this doesn't raise the
overall HHS plugs again what
I've use is a as a loophole and
we have the opportunity today to
to help fill that recognize the
value of their work and with
that Mr chair committee I will
stand for questions.
Thank you Senator Steinborn you
don't have any expert witnesses.
I sure do not Mr although we
have some experts I know that
are on the line to speak in
support okay thank you so at
this time okay I will go to the
public comment opposite the
first.
This time we hear from the bank
of our so we think are you
available.
Yes I'm I'm not in opposition.
Sure.
Are there any other members of
the public who wish to speak in
opposition.
To the Senate bill Senate bill
thirty five only hearing from
opposition at this time.
Okay then we will move on to
support we'll be back to Mr
fully bank of our.
Thank you Mr chair committee
members my name is Philip to
give out a and I'm an attorney
at the workers right sorry and
I'm workers rights attorney at
the New Mexico Center on Law and
Poverty all workers regardless
of age deserve New Mexico's
minimum wage of ten fifty per
hour currently New Mexico law
allows employers to pay
secondary student workers eight
fifty per hour in our second
manage of this loophole arm
families with low incomes in
twenty twenty and in COPD the
small survey with the secondary
student workers in Albuquerque
regarding widgets of the
participants an overwhelming
ninety seven point seven percent
stated that they worked in part
to help provide for the for
their families additionally
sixty percent of the
participants stated that they
made under the twenty twenty
minimum wage which was nine
dollars per hour well many moons
exist regarding secondary
student workers it is not a
rational basis to pay someone
below the minimum wage simply
because they are so secondary
student work for the more the
student workers do the same
quality workers every other
worker and this deserve the same
pay by passing this bill New
Mexico limits the sub minimum
wage prior to this although
which workers regardless of age
we strongly support this bill
and we encourage the committee
to pass thank you.
Thank you.
We will now hear from miss Erika
Garcia Erica are you with us.
Excuse me did you mean Erica
gray ghosts.
I have Garcia written down but
my apologies I'm I'm just I'm
standing in for Erica okay goes
that's why I was checking my
apologies okay did you want to
speak in support of this
particular Senate bill yes okay
go ahead I'm since it looks like
Mr Garcia is not here okay so at
Mr chair members of committee my
name is Andreas on on the
executive director of a lady we
have countless members whose you
know who and who are made up of
different families and many of
those families young people are
actually helping to support
those families and their
contributing to the family
Is the family survival with
their wages and so you know I
think
the M. there's an idea that
young people actually you know
or just working a job to to earn
some some pocket change or to
you know earn some money in the
summer when in reality we know
that young people are actually
supporting their families across
the state year round and so you
know again we also stand in
favor of Senate bill thirty five
because it is a racial equity
issue poverty disproportionately
affects black indigenous and
people of color and so you know
in order as we as we move to a
Medicaid poverty in our state as
we move to improve the lives of
young people in our state.
Hold you know raising up our
young people to the same minimum
wage as the rest of of the
workers is really important to
that to that goal of eradicating
poverty and so with that we do
stand in support of Senate bill
thirty five and thank the
sponsor for bringing this
important bill forward.
Thank you Mr Anil are there any
other members of the public who
wishes to be in support I don't
have any other members on my
list earlier you Bills or Mr
trying.
Thank you and good afternoon Mr
chair members of the committee
Bill Jordan with New Mexico
voices for children I don't want
to thank Senator Steinborn for
bringing this bill I think we
all know how much our families
are struggling right now but we
also know that New Mexico is a
lot of kids in high school
working part time and
contributing to the family's
income their work has value not
just to the family that they're
hoping support but his real
value to their employer and that
employers should not be able to
take unfair advantage of them by
paying a lower wage.
Their work has value their work
is not worthless and their work
is not worth less.
We urge the committee to pass
this legislation thank you.
Thank you Mr Jordan anyone else.
Okay and that concludes all of
our public statements percent of
thirty five thank you.
Okay the the thank you mark tell
us so Senator of.
We'll go to.
The committee Senator Kernan.
Thank you Mr chairman
Senator Steinborn so I wonder if
you could tell me are typically
where.
These younger adults are
employed for the most part.
Madam chair Senator Kernan Mr
chairman excuse me there we go
there's a role reversal earlier
today
Mr chairman Senator Kernan I
believe probably most of them
work in the service sector that
would be my guest but but I mean
certainly could be other sectors
to.
So Mr chairman and senator I I
just jotted down a couple of
areas that I'm I'm pretty sure I
think a lot of work in that the
fast food restaurant business
probably in retail I know we
have some small retail stores
and and our employees are
generally at between that age
range and that's probably not
the place and then probably our
movie theaters I I know that
that's another area where young
people can work and be part time
so as I look at those three
areas in particular and what
those businesses are in during
right now with regard to you
know retail basically it's been
shut down or reduced to twenty
five percent restaurants when
you think about restaurants not
that Diné in because many of
those young people probably are
are tipped and I don't know how
this affects employee waiters
and waitresses if that would
also apply to them at then of
course there kept on top of that
and then our maybe dealership
publisher so my my concern and
and not that you know we
certainly want to make sure
people aren't what they deserve
but I I really don't know if
this is your to to do this to
our small retail restaurants and
movie theaters and and other
places where the chair work
because basically Mr chair and
senator it would be from it
would jump from eight fifty an
hour to ten fifty an hour
separate.
Mr chair senator that is correct
it would be paid the same
minimum wage as everyone else
okay so Mr chair and senator
tell me why when the.
The the minimum wage bill passed
a couple years ago why do we
exclude the younger people at
that point.
Well Mr chair senator there was
a Senate bill in there was a
house bill you might remember
and the House Bill from my
standpoint is better than the
Senate bill and this was a
provision that was in the Senate
bill and those bills.
Got merged in there was an
agreement and I I still you may
remember introduced an amendment
on the Senate floor to try to
get rid of this but but I
respect people you know
following these agreements
sometimes I just personally had
a problem with that and so so
that's what happened was a
product of the time and I think
it's someone Salazar before
today we have a different
Senate.
And I think a different
opportunity to fix what I view
is.
Not the best policy.
So thank you Mr chairman I guess
money my responsibilities would
be we also have a different time
right now and certainly this
year has been a tragic year for
many of these businesses that
are probably just hanging on and
hopefully keeping some of these
young people employed at all and
so I don't I don't know that
that we can guarantee that
they'll continue to be employed
if in fact we we are going to
pay them two dollars an hour
extra and across the board so I
think that was that that can do
and those that are in a
situation where you can't find
employees I know there was a
time a couple years ago when.
You could get an employee at
McDonald's and hops for ten
fifty an hour and but that's
changed now so you know things
change and and we put ourselves
in a situation in the box that
sometimes.
Create more problems but I
appreciate you bringing the bill
and thank you for your
explanation thank you very much.
Senator Griggs.
Thank you Mr chairman I I
appreciate that Senator current
questions and answers Steinborn
response because the way I
recall issues like that I I
don't recall this band and.
You know.
I thought this was exactly part
of the process.
We were concerned about
primarily at the time.
Learning how to work Senator
Griggs a your audio it it's it's
crackling so under oath.
Let me do that is that a better
much much better.
Okay.
You know I'm in my office too
which is you know it's great
deal but well here I am but you
will be billed for the
legislative chair.
Thanks for you guys I know
Senator Shendo Mr chair you like
this way better but that.
The deal is I remember this is
being part of the negotiation I
don't I don't remember this day
in New York a loophole that was
accidental I remember this was
being
part of the discussions we did
it because a lot of the students
are just learning to work and we
were trying to a at to allow
employers to hire them train
them and as you know hopefully
the employer would pay a boards
they've assembled up but.
That was that was part of the
deal as we were looking at the
way and so
I thank you what do you think
are today it makes it far more
tougher to you know the one way
minimum wage up.
Specially in businesses that are
at the center Kernan talked
about having have an issue even
staying open.
So I just I can't I can't
support this site I don't know
why we did it I believe and it
was inadvertent or accidental
show caption thank you Mr
chairman thank you senator
Steinborn bring the bill.
I don't believe I have any more
of.
Questions from I'm sorry the.
Senator Hickey.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Senator Steinborn for bringing
this bill forward
I am a little bit concerned in
this time of COVID in terms of
some of the small restaurants.
is there any potential to like
have this going to affect.
maybe next September when you
know we're we're we should be
adequate no guarantees
or delayed a little bit that
particular while these places
are getting back on that the.
Yeah Mr Mr chairman Senator
Hickey so if you work at a
restaurant you're attempting for
weeks then that's the wage that
applies to you not this eight
fifty an hour so the law the law
order treats restaurant workers
differently and I just what I
and I would just submit to you
Mr Mr chair and senator that you
know most of most of the
students are actually not
working for.
Small companies I mean they're
working for chain restaurants
are working for pretty
profitable endeavors
and and I think now during the
pandemic just you know we're
talking essential workers that
that people are actually putting
their life on the line and today
we were yesterday we passed a
stimulus bill to help those
workers were making under
fifteen our time out workers
making eight fifty an hour and
condemned to make that forever
and with our poverty rate people
always pay it and so I
appreciate the question
yeah but hopefully that the
million range you're concerned.
Thank you for the updating me on
the information appreciate it.
Senator Tallman.
Thank you thank sorry for the
late thank you at Mr chair.
And thank you miss Senators time
or for bringing this bill
forward
Two quick things one.
Senator Griggs recollection of
what happened two years ago when
we debated the minimum wage bill
is correct I was on the
corporations the committee at
the time.
Actually my second question that
has already been asked by
Senator Hickey I was willing.
To offer an amendment to maybe
have this going to affect the
later this year.
Yes
yes Senator Hickey wants to make
that motion I'll second that.
So
this may be unacceptable to the
to sponsor.
I'm always.
The great believer in
compromise.
And I think this might be up.
Viable a compromise set to.
Will a.
Help get this.
This bill enacted so be
interested in hearing center
sideboards reaction.
Well.
Mr chair Senator I mean the bill
already does go into effect
later this year and again I just
think what's right is right and
the right thing to do is to pay
these workers the same as
everybody else and I do not
believe it's going to be an
undue harm if anything what I'm
starting to see some starting to
see older workers be replaced by
these high school workers this
is a source of cheap labor and I
think our current policy is
frankly anti anti family anti
single mom paying to put food on
their family's table and and
that's a reality also about New
Mexico's minimum wage is that
they're not young people they're
not training which is these are
kind of anyway miss numbers in a
way a lot of lot of minimum wage
workers are are older people
over the age of forty with kids
and so anyway I think this is we
we really this is a fair thing
to do it just equalizes and with
everyone else and and it also
takes away that disincentive to
frankly fire older workers that
now have an incentive because
the minimum wage just went up to
ten fifty an hour.
Thank you.
Mr chair thank you Senator
Steinborn for that to I I don't
disagree with you about the
fairness issue I'm just trying
to get to Senator Kernan to vote
yes on one of our bills.
You Mr chair.
Go ahead Senator Kernan I don't
I I hate you have your hand race
and then I have Senator Hickey
after that.
Thank you Mr I was just gonna
let you know Senator Brandt was
trying to get on but he's on
thank you okay all right.
Senator thank you for the second
time.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Steinborn
I continue to learn more as we
grow other things up so Meghan
college eyes for that the is
there to learn about it I would
make a point that younger people
are less exposed to potential
comment that of the people but
if you really think that older
people are being displaced that
is
it and and you think that's a
real fact that is somewhat
disturbing to me because I'm an
older people and
So then my last question is when
does this take a fact.
Well typically Senator these
when we pass our laws they take
a fact.
I want to say.
Ninety days after the end of the
session or the beginning of the
next fiscal year so.
Summertime.
thank you Senator Steinborn
given that time frame in the and
actually the great progress that
New Mexico is doing and
You know maybe it doesn't feel
like it but we are doing
relatively well the vaccination
so hi and and thank you senator
Clemente for suggesting that I'm
making amendment I think I'm not
going to at this point.
Thank you.
Senator Tolman for a second
time.
Thank you Mr chair I have.
I agree with that what Senator
Hickey just said well.
Going to affect my until July
and at which time we should have
the pandemic of under control
thank you.
Okay I don't believe I have any
more questions from the
committee members I don't see
any.
And one up so with that what is
the pleasure of the committee.
Mr Chairman.
I'm going to pass.
The press by Senator Padilla a
second by Senator Hickey of lane
can you take role please.
No more.
Senator.
Now Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Hickey yes the senator had a
meal that.
Senator Kernan.
Yes I like to explain about
that.
I know I know I'm sorry.
The.
Just
capital Mister chairman.
No.
Senator.
Yes.
Senator Wirth yes Senator
Padilla yes Senator Shendo.
Seven and three nine four knows.
Your.
For most
Thank you Mr chairman I'm sorry
Senator Steinborn up at that
surprise you first but you get
it right over there get all or I
just I just wanted to madam I I
don't think the pandemic is
going to be over by July and I
do certainly don't think that
our retail stores in our
restaurants and movie theaters
are going to be out of the woods
at that time so I'm really
concerned going forward with
this but I certainly appreciate
Senator for bringing it thank
you.
Thank you Senator Kernan so of.
Senator.
We're done we're moving on to
the Senate Bill.
Forty nine.
Mr Chairman that would cheer.
are you.
A great deal for you today Sir.
I've got a bill it's right in
tune with your what your subject
matter is and that retain.
And how many retail businesses
we've lost during this period of
time.
And what I propose my video is
thank from what local.
Mr the money that we are the
money.
And help attract retail either
through it thank you.
Or or directly into our town
four five thousand or more.
We already do this I'm pretty
sure and town smaller than
thirty five thousand but this is
to help the bigger towns and
sure I have with me to great
witnesses.
Mr Mark Moores the more of
Clovis Mr John Ryan that knows
all about all.
Mr Chairman if I'm not that much
more stop.
Go ahead.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee members and senator
was thank you for bringing this
bill it is my pleasure to to
address you this evening and ask
for your support of Senate bill
forty nine.
As senator woods said this bill
would expand the allowable uses
of local economic development
funding to include at retail
projects and our current statute
allows that for smaller towns
and for
cities falling into the
population range of fifteen
thousand up to thirty five
thousand they can do it with
some limitation but cities about
thirty five thousand cannot.
Support retail as economic
development this bill which
would allow that it's a.
It's a new section on and that
that would have a sunset and
I as a more I I can tell you
that that I thought that this
would be important as we all
know retail is changing and part
of that is because of COVID but
I think it is already changing
pre COVID it and and I just
really feel like that New Mexico
would be in a better position at
the local municipalities have
the opportunity to to exercise
latitude in the use of of of
Leda funds and support our our
local economies by by
incentivizing expansion and
recruitment of a retail I think
it keep more money in our cities
and our state and it would I
improve quality of life as the
retail offering a community.
Yes
Is affected or affects quality
of life that the citizens enjoy
and so I I appreciate your
support on this and with that.
Stand for any questions after
Senator John Ryan speaks because
as senator Wirth said he he's
all knowing.
Yes which Mr chairman and not I
I am
It won't take too much time I I
just want to say that you know
that this issue is is
Arisen and and was recognized in
the city a club estimate they
took it to the municipally and
the interim committee to rural
and economic development
committees where where they got
unanimous support in fact
expanded the the the options
from you know smaller
communities to medium sized to
now all communities could
benefit and it still keeps in
some of the protections of make
sure that that any state funding
is not utilized in these
projects that would help retail
I won't belabor and in going to
any more detail I think the more
and senator woods in senators to
phonics the better experts to.
to describe the bill and I'm I'm
just here for
the the particulars if if
there's any questions thank you
Mr and Mr chairman us Senator
Stewart drugs that saw her pop
up on the screen here and she
may want to say something she's
not co sponsor on this
thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator woods
I do that I was part of the
economic a rural development
interim committee I did offer to
co sponsor this Representative
Matthew McQueen and I have been
working on how we could assist
retail in small communities and
municipalities for a few years
so this bill would be one step
towards our goal so I think
it's it's something to be
considered and thank you for
having us today.
And with that Mr chair of we're
left to go to the audience I'm
sure there's a lot of people
supported this.
Senator so at this time we will
go to the.
I believe we have a list of over
a hundred people opposing so I'm
gonna give this.
Fortunately no we do not have
any opposers for CENIC forty
nine if there any members of the
public that are in the room that
wish to speak in opposition that
were not provided the
opportunity previously please at
this time raise your hand and I
will call on you.
All right his hand up.
Okay I don't think we have any
real opposers.
As far as support goes we do
have Jason Espinoza Mr Espinoza
co had.
I think chairman members of the
committee Jason Espinoza
registered lobbyists with New
Mexico idea which is the
statewide association of
economic development
professionals here in New Mexico
we stand in strong support of
this legislation.
As the speakers noted you know
many cities throughout New
Mexico experienced a negative
economic impact of the COVID
nineteen pandemic which is
significantly impacted retail
and hospitality we do believe
that providing greater latitude
in the expenditure of local
leaders funds to allow you
municipalities the ability to
self determine how to expand
their locally to dollars I will
better reflect the economic
development needs of their own
communities so we standards
transport thank you.
Thank you Mr Espinoza we will
now hear from miss Linda
methodical.
Hi can you hear me yes good I'm
gonna go and I am the registered
lobbyist for Economic Forum and
especially what is going on now
we're we are truly truly digging
out of the economic crisis we
understand that we have to have
a broader more diverse vision on
how to use funds throughout the
state and so we support this
bill and we're very glad to see
that we are
getting a more inclusive vision
and one that we think will
provide help.
As soon as possible thank you.
Thank you Mr gone gone is there
anyone else from the public who
wishes to speak in support of
Senate bill forty nine.
One more time public comment for
support.
It looks like that's all we have
thank you so much that concludes
Senate bill forty nine public
comment.
Thank you mark hello okay I'll
go to committee I have senator
Wirth and I have Senator
Padilla.
Yeah I think Center videos up
for cellular Senator Padilla
okay thank you thank you Mr
chairman flexible I'll just be
quick so I did a couple years
ago Mr Chairman get my toe into
the some angle of this topic and
that and and and literally fell
over into the swimming pool it
was very painful and it was the
middle of winter and the thank
yous to willow and Jon Ryan
called me out it was really kind
of exciting and and then he fell
and so I guess here is but to
chairman and senator would
channel he's talking about what
an expert John right as I'm
asking if you really want to
pass this bill or not
So.
Okay so one of the questions so
what what with this what would
be permitted Mr chairman in
these in these retail operations
what what would be a committed
in those Senator sites.
To that the.
Senator Padilla I'd like
Michael Moore said more Clovis
to tell me his concept because
he's going to be part of the
group that actually try to track
these people.
Of course thank you Mr chairman
and senator I appreciate your
question I think I understand it
and I'll try to answer it with
we would just like to be able to
use would like to be a make the
decision at the local level to
support retail projects in the
same way we do other economic
development projects so land
building infrastructure that
that type of support for for an
expansion project for a
recruitment project.
So what would Mr chairman then
just one quick question I have
them on that topic is is what
health care facilities be
allowed for this type of of.
Benefit to that community.
Again Mr chairman Mr Morse.
And Senator thanks for the
question I'm and not actually
hesitate to answer that because
we have a in in in working on
this we haven't talked about
health care specifically I have
I want to say that the answer
would be yes but also I would
want to make sure perhaps second
check Jon Ryan on that Mr
chairman I I I I want to make
sure that I know how to both
your because I'm very concerned
about that I'm a in my area I've
been working just over time to
bring health care to more we've
been able to bring two or three
very nice facilities but zero
benefit of any kind like this to
make that happen Mr chairman I
think we have our analyst who's
you know has some good info in
with with your permission we
just miss o'donnell COVID.
Go ahead Kelly.
Mr chair us Senator Padilla I
didn't want.
Health care is not within the
definition of retail in this
bill retail is to provide very
very narrowly for purposes of
the local economic development
act
and so it would not qualify for
Lee to funds under this the
provisions of this bill as
written.
And so Mr chairman again I I
don't want to keep going to to
to away from Senator Woods
experts with so so can you tell
me so what the dentist office
building.
permitted with a.
Blood lab.
Mmhm retail collection site be
permitted would you know what
would be allowed Mr speaker
cutting places coffee shops
dry cleaners.
Mr chairman and senator I'll
tell you my vision.
My vision is is the coffee shops
the the restaurants the cloak of
stores the small the small we
had a excellent example of a a
western wear store that came
into Clovis
you know the those small home
businesses that this made little
help started you know we had a
bill that came through on the
Senate floor the other day about
the trying to get businesses a
leg up.
And loaning money and this is a
whole lot of the same kind of
deal you don't have much leg up
what they need I don't know but
we want to use some of our local
G. R. T. funds to help bring in
retail you know it may be
entertainment some type of
entertainment hopefully one
comment is over with we've got a
we've got a the air bearing
Clovis it's been shut down you
know you know how long they've
been shut down down here year
you know they made a little
money to crank back up and get
started what we want to re
energize our town.
Use on our economic that we use
in our G. R. T. to reenergize
our retail stores that's that's
the thought behind this Mr chair
and senator the.
So thank you Mr chairman that it
put your permission I think
that's what I want to comment as
well go ahead Kelly Mr chair
members of the committee again
retail is defined in the local
Economic Development Act refer
specifically to goods and
commodities so it's not written
to cover services in the local
Economic Development Act has
some strange language in it and
it is not political services
within the definition of retail
what you want to extend lead at
to health care or to other
services that we have to do that
specifically.
So so my question Mr chairman if
I might ask this question have
out of the.
Is service and not a and not a
commodity it I'm sorry I'm sorry
may have misunderstood your
question it is a.
It's.
It's is.
That's a good question and and
let me look it up I'm you want
me to redo the exact language.
it is that I'm I'm sorry Mr
Chairman maybe get to form the
weeds here Senator Padilla maybe
get two four eight I apologize
your turn to ask questions I I
it's not my job so thank you
thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator what's coming into the
Senate the same year you and I I
love when you ask questions and
I love this debate discussion
and I feel very good about it
whenever you ask a question I
know I'm learned something that
day god made a farmer or so I
look at the I looked at the FIR
Mr chairman and so I'm just
gonna try to keep again I try to
read these things as quickly as
humanly possible humanly quickly
possible or whatever you want to
say it and I see NFI on the
fiscal impact is this because
there's only to find that
already exist so we're not have
so what what what what we are.
Why would that why with the we
have an FIR that doesn't it
sounds like there's a lot of
financial impact here okay
Mister chairman
what we're talking about is the
local grocery state taxes
already collected okay and so it
has no impact on state
whatsoever.
We're talking about the local
part of the gross receipts tax.
So it's no state impact
whatsoever Mr.
Okay.
I think I'm getting it but I'm
still very concerned that these
centers are not going to have.
Service is what I'm gonna call
you badly needed services so if
I were to be able to apply for
one of these get one of these
outside of say the city limits
in Albuquerque I don't know
Senator Woods if you know this
problem my district it's.
World just like yours and the
other half is very densely
populated and in the rural areas
where I really need health care
services I need other services
and so if this were to work for
that and that's how it will work
better but of course I'm also up
against the whole thing run
within ten miles or whatever the
other requirement is of a
majority of the metropolitan
areas so I'm listening I'm not
exactly sold but I'm interested
to see what others have to say
thank you Mr chairman this one
last statement Senator Padilla
these are our.
Leda funds and I was Kelly says
there's very strict usage of
bills so there's this you know
we have to find some of the
funds to to for health care
something else we just can't use
the phone for yet chair Senator
if if I could add to Mr Chairman
representative and.
Senator Padilla the statewide
Leda funds are a lot more
flexible than the than local
funds and so there there there
are a few other bills dealing
with Lita and senator Munoz has
has one that's pretty extensive
with regard to some expansions
on the on the state side as well
so that that that kind of
dovetails with with what the
local communities want to do for
for retail locally.
Thank you Mr chairman that's all
I know.
Okay thank you senator Padilla I
have senator Wirth
representative Greg Senat
Senator Tallman.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator woods
So some of the.
Questions that I had about the
scope of this I think we're kind
of narrowing in on its I will
say right out of the gate you're
going to have real trouble with
your caucus chair on your side
because you're using not
withstanding language to
basically avoid an existing law
so I just want to be clear that
right now I think it was
mentioned
you know for for this the
current law is for
municipalities that are fifteen
thousand our last and there's no
strings and then for fifteen
thousand to thirty five thousand
so they Clovis just misses out
under the current law but then
there's some additional strings
I want to talk to you about
because there are different than
what's in in this and as I
understand this let me just ask
Miss so this will apply this
will now apply to Santa Fe and
Albuquerque correct Los crucis
yes yes Mister chairman okay up
so one of the.
One of the interesting strings
that's not in your bill that's
in the in the bracket from
fifteen thousand to thirty five
thousand in the law and it's and
I'm looking at this I got the
statute book here but I'm also
it's in the F. I. R. so it says
for that Hey the economic
development project is not
funded or financed with state
government government revenues
so that's consistent you've
carried out over.
But then this is the interesting
one I'm curious for the more
Clovis because I think this this
could be one that affects your
community and Senator Woods this
could basically be the
limitation for fifteen to thirty
five thousand the business
created a project will not
directly compete with an
existing business that is in the
municipality and engage in the
sale of the same or similar
goods or commodities at retail
so you know if I'm a local
business person.
In Clovis.
You know I think you're just
over thirty five thousand is
more more how many and what's
population of course center was
and more with a population of
Clovis the the more relaxed
thank you Mr.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator Wirth yes I'm I believe
our population is is with twenty
twenty cents is going to be
something like thirty eight just
just about thirty eight thousand
and you.
So it's pretty darn close to
this little criteria but
I understand that if you're
under if you're thirty five
thousand are under.
You can't use lead a funds at
the local level if it's gonna
compete against one of your
existing businesses.
And so I just think another some
discretion I get this I mean
you're gonna have a governing
body of me my wife is a city
councillor in Santa Fe and the
governing body's gonna look at
that.
But I do think I mean I as I
think about this in a in a
smaller.
City like yours more you know
you guys gonna have to factor
that because you could bring in
retail that directly is
competing with existing
businesses and you're allowed to
do that under this bill because
you'd be over thirty five
thousand but if you're in this
window you're not allowed to do
that so I just want to flag that
as I and and Kelly I am I
getting that right.
Get a thumbs up.
If I may Mr chairman and senator
Wirth
With the
with the committee the first
committee that we visited we we
introduce that a substitute bill
and I'm.
But but but I do want to point
out that that that what we're
asking for is to be able to use
local economic development funds
for retail for communities of
any size so then so then that
there wouldn't be that different
the difference in that in that
middle section that you're
talking about okay so that's
good yeah yeah we're we're we're
asking to be able to use this
with I will intermediaries of
any size and you know and I
appreciate in your I I I
appreciate your question I've
wrestled with it when you talk
about you know recruiting a
competing business
I know you.
In my in my community we're
we're at a place now where we
can reach you at to the state of
Texas it's too easy to drive to
love it from from our city and
then of course you know Amazon
and all those things and so I'm
I'm convinced that at this point
we're as good as we're ever
going to be and what we have in
our retail offering unless we do
something different than we have
before and and I just think that
it's it's so important we do and
you know how we go about that
local you Miss you mentioned
that your wife is a city
councilor State probably know
where I'm going with this but
obviously the decision be made
locally but we would base our
decisions on opportunity gap
analysis of the market so that
we would be able to to say that
you know we've identified for
example there is a gap in
general merchandise we're
emerging funds from our young
their consumer spending is going
out of our community because we
don't have enough in the way of
general merchandise offering for
example and then we would
basically student support
project on on that.
Well Mister chairman I
appreciate that I think this is
this helps me I mean this is I
just will tell you and and it's
interesting because the existing
statute does not have that
limitation if you're under
fifteen thousand I don't
understand why is the same
argument even stronger if you're
in a small city less than
fifteen thousand you know you're
the existing for the existing
retail store selling goods or
commodities and all of a sudden
you know there's a little more
feet on the city council to go
bring a competitor and take you
out you can do that but you
can't in this middle range but
now as I understand it we're
we're we're a limiting that
completely so I want to make
sure that everyone understands
that that does mean that and
smaller cities now that that
there can be competition against
existing local businesses
So is I just want to point that
out again that helps me the
other thing that's causing me
some some heartburn
though the second requirement at
the bottom of the sub.
It's on it's on page two
and it starts.
What let's see provided no
funding should be provided to an
exit is on the bottom page one
line twenty five starts there
provided no funding shall be
provided to an existing retail
business to re click locate from
another location in New Mexico
if the business does not remain
in its previous location in New
Mexico so so more here's my
question I've got a business
with forty employees in Clovis
and and my good friends in Santa
Fe what together held a package
and a lower thirty nine and they
I I I sent thirty nine of my
employees over to Santa Fe and I
leave one employee in Clovis for
six months does that satisfy
that requirement.
Mr chairman and senator Wirth as
in previous question that the
discussion is is is great and
and and does challenge we have
here we we talked about putting
a time period on there that the
business we need to remain in
place and in the the original
city however I'm.
Ultimately we we did not include
that in and what we have here
just because we you know we we
talked about situations where
you know it well so let's say
you know closer to home for me
Clovis import talus you know we
we put together an incentive
package and we recruit out of a
business from our house for
example or protest is this
season opportunity to kind of
maybe came the system and go get
some some funds from us and we
would say well you need to keep
the original location or.
Or you can't do this and we
can't we can't support chat Act
with this I'm in you would need
to keep it for yeah we talked
about.
Two years we talked about five
years at one point and and and
really work.
Where to land on that so we
didn't put a time period in
their.
I guess I guess my question Mr
chair is.
You know there's no requirement
now.
In Lida if you're in the range
of if you're under fifteen
thousand or fifteen thousand
thirty five thousand.
You know we don't have this
requirement so.
I guess.
I'm just concerned again putting
on my lawyer hat here client
comes to me and you know
unfortunately this language.
I can stay in business for a
month.
Get all my money move thirty
nine employees from Clovis to
Santa Fe and then move my final
play in a month later and I
don't think that's what you're
trying to do here and I don't
think that's what we want to do
but I guess the question is
whether we need this.
You know language at all since
we don't have this language in
the original statute seems
cleaner to me to just take it
out because I think that the way
it's worded it just creates some
and I know you're trying to
avoid you're trying to avoid
exactly your city Santa Fe use
and lead a funds to go Paul
business out of some some other
part of the state I get that I
get that but
And and maybe that's the risk
that and I'm just thinking out
loud here maybe that is the risk
that comes when you open this
thing up.
The larger.
You know the larger
municipalities now because now
you're competing at you you're
not able to compete quite
frankly I mean it is so let me
just make sure I understand that
part of it to them just so so if
the city of Los crucis and let's
use Los crucis I mean they're
going to be able to use twenty
five percent of their G. R. T.
is that correct for retail under
this nail that's not correct
what's the personal Mr Chairman.
It's a hundred percent.
They can use a hundred percent
of their local leader for
retail.
Yes.
Mr chair if I might interject
just a second.
The way I understand there's
Senator Woods is that the city
Clovis first of all has to have
the local economic development
path.
The city of Los crucis has to
have that tax.
That's the tax that is being
used not other other sources of
revenue there are only about
seven I believe that
municipalities in New Mexico
that have actually passed the
local economic development act
where the van were able to
impose up to a quarter percent.
Order one percent economic
development tax Clovis I believe
one of them Alamogordo is one of
them I thank our teachers one of
one of those communities have
that tax available so it's it's
a little different than what
than what we're talking about
senator Wirth.
Good that helps me but I think
it's fair to say Senator Griggs
that you know for Santa Fe which
does have a local.
Our.
Development tax we've imposed it
and we use it aggressively for
projects we're gonna have a a
lot bigger pot of money to lower
in retail and Santa Fe and
Albuquerque and some of the
smaller.
Areas is I mean that's a fair
assumption is it not.
I just.
Yet to various I I I just I want
to make sure there's not a
really bad unintended
consequences of this bill they
were gonna end up with with
larger cities using their lead
up there big bucket of lead a
money.
You know actually heard
potentially pull away and I
maybe I'm just being yelp
getting into the into the into
the weeds are into hypotheticals
but I just I'm just trying to
and and maybe that's what you
were trying to get here with
this languages to prevent that
from happening yeah Mr chairman
and and and Majority Leader if
if I could that that's exactly
right I mean that's what that
language was intended to do for
that you know pilfering from one
community at forecast versus
Clovis you know that in close
proximity and so if there is a
time frame that appears to be
infinitum I I think some lawyers
maybe like yourself could look
at that language and say that
that existing location has to
stay in the in business in
perpetuity and and and that has
been raised we weren't sure
exactly what what the right
resolution what would be would
be done out two years three
years and and I and I think
there's there's some area
between one and five years that
you can
still have the protection of of
pilfering from a different
community but also not have it
in the line item because that
there's lots of things that have
changed the least.
The economic situation in one
community may change drastically
and and and make sense for them
to move so you know that that is
an area I think that that's up
for debate thanks for bringing
that issue on the other issue of
of of limiting the non compete
clause you know that a lawyer
for looking at this and and San
you know if you're talking about
retail there isn't a retail
establishment that you can
recruit or that that you might
expand that some other retail
operator within your community I
could pick out whether it be you
know any kind of product
for it from convenience store
right that there would be the
claim that that just about
anything you brought and that is
defined as retail will have some
kind of competing
product in in another retail
establishments so we thought
best to eliminate Mr chair I I
agree with that I think that
makes total sense
I I just think you need to come
up with some time frame on this
provision and.
You know my my sense is that
giving this is a business giving
local governments more tools so
this is giving the city city
Santa Fe more tools and it's
going to be there you know
council it's got a and their
economic development department
is going to have to work through
this so I I'm happy to support
the bill
you know what I just think you
should think through.
That issue of the time frame
there because the way it's
drafted there right now I don't
think you know you're right you
that this is this is if the
lawyer relief act.
You know over what that means
that is in perpetuity or can it
be I can it be six months and I
just I I do think you should put
in some and I like the zero zero
five year window maybe two years
just some some time period there
so that that it just clarifies
that so that's all I have I
appreciate it thank you Mr chair
thank you center what's.
It.
Thank you senator Wirth
just folks I I know it's after
six I did indicate that we would
not try to stop it six I have
Senator Griggs and have Senator
tall and I know it's been a long
day and some folks haven't had
lunch yet so.
Senator Griggs.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Tallman was for sure ahead of me
show
senator Cormann go ahead.
Thank you Mr chairman and.
Thank you Sir for bringing this
bill forward.
Question for the the more.
he said earlier that to.
Retail is changing.
Briefly how's it changing and
how will this bill help to
changing.
Retail
Picture.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator Tom thank you for your
question.
Retail is changing in.
Well it's manifesting itself in.
Townsend my size are are having
a hard time hanging on to their
retail establishments and that
was already and it was true pre
COVID it's especially true now
and I think that with everything
that the retail sector's gone
through there's a.
There's a lot of changes that
are happening and and we're not
sure what retail is gonna quite
look like in the in the future
it could take several years for
that to settle but when I say
it's changing I'm you have your
your downtown businesses that
are that are now having to learn
how to.
To compete in the online space
so that so that they're able to
have a shot at business and you
know you're you see the the
bigger retailers offering you
know you you buy online and and
pick up at the curb and there's
there's just a there's a lot of
movement and a lot of changing a
lot of acting it's taking place
in the retail sector and I just
think that it would be helpful
for us is the local community to
have some tools available to to
encourage investment in retail
in our in our community so that
that adaptation is happening in
our community and and that money
is being spent in our city
versus going out of town you
know my proximity to the Texas
border it I think makes worse
the situation for for a talent
money where you know you can use
up the cargo got a lot of very
easily as so we're competing
with that as well as the the the
online shopping habits that
consumers of taking on and so to
young to say that it's changing
it's true to say exactly how it
how it's changing or or rather
how it ends up I don't think any
of us know I just know that it I
it's my instinct to be wise for
the local municipalities to have
the ability to to adapt
encourage growth in the region
retail sectors in our in our
communities the very good for
us.
Okay thank you very thank you Mr
chair also of when I was city
manager we were trying to
generate jobs we're very very
hesitant about subsidizing
giving grants the retail why is
that.
Because the retail kind of the
bottom of the.
Economic food chain you know you
bring in manufacturing as a or
the Indian educationist for
service industry expands.
Retail follows that are
automatically without giving
them them giving them any
subsidies so how is the okay
analysts to chime in on this
what is your reaction to what I
just said should we be.
Subsidizing and giving grants to
retail because of the bottom of
the economic food chain.
Mr chairman senator Cormann
I'm not I'm not gonna make a
value judgment as to whether
economic development incentives
should subsidize retail or not
I'll tell you that from an
economist's perspective the most
desirable form of economic
development is that which brings
new revenue into the local
economy because that's what
actually generates a larger
volume of Commerce and tax
revenue and you know all the
good things jobs that come from
economic development I think
that when we start talking about
small communities in rural New
Mexico however we also have to
be thinking about basic
infrastructure you can't attract
an Intel if you don't have a
grocery store so I think that
the rules are different at that
apply to smaller communities
when it comes to economic
development.
Thank you.
thank you Kelly for that answer
that's all I have Mr chairman
the thanks again well Mr Senator
Woods for.
For bringing this forward I'm
trying to find excuse to help
you out here thank you.
Thank you Senator Griggs.
Thank you Mr chairman I you know
I've got a bill that comes
pretty close after the Senate
bill ninety one which is dealing
with almost the same subject a
little bit of a different a
different way but one of the
trouble one of the things is
troubling all which when you
deal with retail is it you're
gonna be talkin right across the
dieters with people that just
don't want you to do it because
you're saying that it competes
with them I mean it's a.
But at the same time if Clovis
is taken and gone to the effort
to pass the tax to utilize it
for their community.
It should be up to the community
Clovis to figure that out
instead of having the state of
New Mexico Tellem they can't use
theirs for that and I think what
my bill with this bill I'm all
trying to do is give the city a
call wish the city of Alamogordo
the opportunity to use the money
they have in more ways that they
feel like will better help their
community
you know there's part of this it
talks about the leaders leaders
are confused statute and I you
know I I if you could say it any
easier you could but it's you
know talks about retail and more
than one place and it has
different inferences in you know
I can't Kelly brought up awhile
ago the retail business that is
primarily engaged in the sale of
goods or commodities but on the
page of the law right before
that you know you can also
usually to funds for a business
including a restaurant or
lodging establishment which all
in part of the activities
business and I involves
supplying Services services to
the general public so which is
it but you come through there
and I believe that these guys
are putting together a bill that
age is is workable.
I have a I have a little more
profanity toward money but I
think that you know maybe once
you guys hear money if it passes
addition pastors then maybe we
can consider.
Trying to time together in that
in the next committee or sell
and and see what we can
accomplish but money hasn't been
heard I just want you to know
that I just I I like what
they're trying to do because
Clovis Alamogordo leave these
places need the opportunity to
consider using their money for
retail development even half we
had had believed in the past
that retail was not something
you should use lead to money for
but.
You know I don't live in close.
Senator Hermio than living
close.
Show for us to be trying to
actually tell Clovis what's the
best way to spend their money I
think we need to step back for a
minute and look at what we can
do to best help call which
generate more jobs more
businesses and if this is what
Clovis believe within I think we
need to help folks do that show
Mr chair that that's all I have
and look forward to a moving
this bill forward.
Thank you senator Greg Senator
Brandt Mr chairman I moved to
pass.
Second that okay we have a
motion for the past by Senator
Brandt second by Senator Kernan.
Share yes before you call the
roll can I make a suggestion
okay just feels to me like
there's still a loose and in
this bill and it goes to Senate
finance and they're not going to
fix it there and I guess I guess
my suggestion is this I mean
given Senator Griggs has such a
low Bill number I would seem
like that's gonna be up getting
close I was soon that could be
heard on Tuesday
I just wonder whether it makes
sense to try and get this time
period I mean I guess I kind of
like to hear Senator Griggs bill
and see if there's a solution
here versus passing different
versions I mean I guess that's
that that's the challenge I'm
having with taking a vote on
this walk why not here I mean
Senator Griggs thanks his he
prefers is a little better maybe
we should hear his and then or
maybe it's a substitute that
does the best of both but it
just feels like we're we're
rushing this if we just pass it
forward so I just would suggest
perhaps that we hear that jail
and bigger out and get this
language fixed here because if
we don't that it's going to be
on the floor and we're gonna be
doing floor amendments and I
don't think that's a good good
idea so if we can get it fixed
here so expect I would second
that.
You Mr chairman the leader took
the words right out of my mouth
I was going to suggest that also
okay Senator Senator Woods you
are the.
Bonser.
M. R. yeah.
I'm at your discretion is the
lack of will get voted down the
but though so hopefully I'll go
with you.
Chair.
Okay so so we will hold this
over I know we had Senator
Griggs a bill also schedule of.
So Mr Mr Chairman just to make a
claim I withdraw my motion okay
I was just going to test so that
because you have a motion on the
floor so we need to get that off
of the floor before you can move
on so I will withdraw my motion.
Okay thank you Senator Brandt
the the past motion it was the.
By Brent in the second by Kernan
has been withdrawn since your I
just want to be clear I might I
support I really think this
makes sense and again and and is
what senator Greg sat let the
local governments make that the
center but let's get it right
the let's get the language right
that was the reason it's not
it's not an effort to kill the
bill on a vote against the bill
I want to get rights and I think
that's why I was suggesting.
Senator Wirth has got not one.
One bad bone in his body is
looking after me everyday of the
week I believe that with all my
heart.
Thank you senator will.
A whole this over until we hear
a Senator Griggs bill alone
Tuesday and we will try to take
action because I think we really
need to help the you know the
communities that are out there
heard and and certainly I think
what we want to do justice to to
to to communities out there just
Mr Chairman can I make a
suggestion that that would
consider rigs get together and
not and and and try and mail
them together so that they're
all on the same page and and and
make the good parts of Mr
grace's built and Mr which is
bill are combined together and
and we solve the problem that
Senator Wirth brought up I think
we can do next no I I think that
you guys a few days to do that
so if that can be done that
be great needs up to two Sanchez
and that there are green and and
certainly.
Okay.
With that we can pull them into
my office and with them in the
shape on this right.
The grant appreciate that so
with that we are going to
Pandora's box Mr chairman.
On some of
those thank you committee
members it's been a long day
it's the fifth twenty after and
so the rest of the bills we
gonna roll over till Tuesday and
thank you all for.
great discussion and so forth
and so you all have a wonderful
weekend and we'll see all you on
Tuesday.
Thank you as well.
Thank you.
We are thank you
Mr chairman right we are to
stand in here which is that
Senator Rodriguez yes Senator
Rodriguez I promise that we will
have a hard stop at six but we
wanted to certainly concluded
this bill that was was on on the
committees table for the moment
but we will all of the bill will
Tuesday.
Okay thank you what are the
first on the agenda is you're
going to follow the agenda yes
I'm trying to follow gender so
you'll be on first all right
thank you Mr chairman thank you.
Thank you all.
Thank you thank you very.
