Thank you senator Sanchez there.
Senator Tallman here.
Senator Wirth yes.
Everybody's here except for
Senator Brandt Senator Shendo
okay go a good we'll go here.
While you're here Senator
Brandt.
I'm sorry I know you're here I
saw you I'm sorry I didn't tell
you I saw you that's it.
Mr chairman.
Question.
It seems that are we allowing
supporters and opponents in the
meeting today.
Of.
You know I didn't make the
announcement but the they are
coming on Senator I think
they're coming on I know we have
some expert witnesses are
already on.
Do we have.
Maybe Senator Hemphill would
know if we have folks who are
going to be either in support or
opposition of the bill.
I have not heard Mr chairman
Senator.
It looks like the keys yeah if I
could jump in here we do have
supporters wanting to know which
how to log in yes we have quite
a few.
And then the link that we've
been using chairman or is it a
separate line hold on a second
let me ask Miss or or where
person are you there.
Yes it is the same link.
Sweeping you can forward that to
them they'll be great.
And Mr chair Senator Wirth.
Go ahead yeah do we have is
there cell for people that are
watching that want to testify
either in support or opposition
aren't the ones that again the
secretary has brought with there
is there an email address that
they can send to get the link I
know that that was announced on
percentage Judiciary Committee
on the Senate floor I'm just not
sure it feels to me like we
should give everyone an email
that they can send and if they
do want to testify if we if
that's available yeah I I wasn't
provided anything before the
announcement came so hold on let
me see if we.
Mr chair in mind if if you can
find that I do know that my
colleagues at The New Mexico
chamber of commerce certainly
like to support this as well
and.
may be able to log on if we have
a an email R. as in link that
they're able to to use.
I'm waiting to hear from Trevor
I have the of the zoom link and
I'm just telling people that
called me that I send them those
doing and when they go in and
then they get they get straight
to Trevor so do you want me to
send that to you Senator Hamblen
if it's the same link that was
sent to me by Trevor I can go
ahead and provided to Mexico
chamber yes I know we're going
forward that.
We'll do that thank you okay.
Your hand Senator Hamblen I just
sent it to actually.
But I don't have John black's.
Email.
If he's trying to get on to.
I'll send it Joan.
And Mr chair if if.
If there is a phone number that
could be announced the not not a
cell number but miss ram pros
number here in the building that
people could call and just for
people that don't have a link to
one of us I just think so the
general public has a chance to
also get the link I think that
would be great if your office
number could be released people
call thanks.
I don't even know my office
number the lady can you announce
what number you have for your
office so that people can call
yes it is nine eight six.
Four two six five.
It's Eriko five oh five right
right five oh five nine eight
six four two six five.
Yes the link Senator Hamblen to
rob so he has it now I just sent
it to go to the.
And yes it senator Pete you Mr
chair thanks.
Sure maybe we should send
senator Wirth cell number
the yeah that that's only one
out there just got blasted out
here.
Folks know that for other thing.
It's it's on a Billboard at low
behind the ill I just saw.
I thought it was a Billboard in
the interest Alamogordo.
It's not beautiful there Mr
leader to give you a hand out of
Senator Griggs contact info.
Ron Griggs told those yeah I
think it's running for more
Alamogordo select them.
Just so you guys know it pays
better.
Yeah.
Long service more Senator Griggs
I just two and a half years but
I would just as on that city
commission for twelve and a
half.
During the whole city upside
down here so boy was in great
shape when I left.
Let your space.
Already I think the.
The folks call in so C. sending
stuff out so hopefully
People are gone so will stand
for a couple more minutes and
we'll get started here.
So we have Senator a Hemphill
and the.
Rick so you will both you
presenting.
Mr chair all start and then the
Senator Hemphill will follow on
and then we'll go to our experts
okay all right.
This.
For the last that.
Yeah I know taxes are beyond.
I have many years of service.
You're sure you're in the.
All righty.
We'll go ahead and get started
now are members of the committee
so
Senate bill one.
For it over to us Senator Griggs
and then Senator Hemphill and
then the your experts so Senator
Griggs.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
and all the members of this
illustrious committee.
I'm I'm happy to be here today
to give you this bill Senate
bill one which I mentioned
earlier was the first time I
think I've ever had a bill in
the single digits but the you
know this bills about using
gross receipts tax to assist
with large economic development
projects this additional tool
will make our state competitive
for big job creators the
recapture of G. R. T. is limited
to the construction phase of
these large projects over three
hundred and fifty million
dollars so it's pretty limited
in scope and projects like this
I don't come along very often in
New Mexico but they bring long
term gains to the community when
they do.
This bill would create a great
new asset for the state to work
with businesses to create jobs
and with that I'll turn it over
to co sponsor Senator Hemphill.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I am
thrilled to have this
opportunity to introduce Senate
bill one this afternoon with
Senator Griggs I really enjoyed
working with him on this and
this bill like he stated will
provide gross receipts sharing
for economic development
projects and it's a bipartisan
bill with sponsors from both
parties and both chambers it has
the exact same language from
that house taxation and revenue
committee substitute for house
bill three oh eight and the
regular session that passed out
of the committee with a twelve
zero vote so this incorporates
feedback from senators and
Senate staff and so I hope that
you'll support the proposal and
give us a chance to compete for
thousands of great jobs at a
time when we have so many New
Mexicans who need them and with
that Mr chairman I'd like to
turn it over to our expert
witness secretary keys from the
economic development departments
thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator of madam secretary thank
you so much Mr chairman members
of the committee and just a big
thank you to both senators for
supporting this bipartisan bill
it's really been fantastic to
work with both of you and speak
to both of you about it I'm so
this bill allows us to decide
together economic development
department the county and the
municipalities so if we need to
use this mechanism to attract
these deals that we couldn't
land otherwise all three of
those entities have to agree or
there is no deal the bill
provides as a critical tool like
both Senator said in order to
get companies like big
manufacturing companies whether
they be pharmaceutical or
automotive to come to New
Mexico.
By providing a fifty percent
share of state and local G. R.
T. revenues during the
construction phase as approved
by EDD and the selected county
or municipality so this could be
a huge game changer why do we
need this bill now for some
reason and we don't know if it's
because of COVID and people are
more interested in getting
outside of the big cities or if
it's because we have energy here
in New Mexico but we have never
seen the deals that we are
seeing now and we would really
like to land them in addition to
as was just published recently
on Friday we lost seventy nine
thousand jobs in New Mexico we
need to get some of those back
and we need to get those back
with budget and we need to get
it back where they're paying our
New Mexicans well and that's
what we like to do and economic
development so once again thank
you for allowing us to present
and a big thank you to Senator
Griggs and also at Senator.
I'm gonna throw it over to John
Clark R. W..
Thank you secretary keys and
thank you Mr chair committee
members of this bill creates
equal local and state here to
sharing a fifty percent it takes
half of the new state and local
G. R. T. revenues to be
generated through construction
allows them to flow back to the
projects through the normal
legal process although this bill
also strengthens the existing
reporting club act requirements
no they're still allows half of
the revenues generated the flow
to the state's general fund.
In to local governments so this
is a win in terms of jobs and
investment but it's also when in
terms of revenues.
this is for very occasional
really big projects that we
can't land otherwise in I think
the key point here is that if we
keep doing what we've been doing
we'll keep getting similar
results we need to think big and
enable the state to respond to
business time frames if we
really want to chance to propel
the state forward and encourage
the lives and livelihoods of New
Mexicans they're huge projects
as the secretary said looking at
New Mexico right now and we need
to prove that we are the
business friendly location that
we always claim to be this bill
gets is there for these large
deals and gets isn't chance to
compete for the jobs that we so
desperately need thank you Mr
chair and I'm happy to answer
any questions.
Right.
madam secretary is anybody else.
I'm Mr chair members of the
committee we also have more
program who is our division
director if we have any specific
questions okay or it but I just
saw him okay great okay with
that
Server will we'll go to the
public comment of first will go
with the folks that are in
opposition of this bill you have
anybody.
I'm not seeing anyone.
In the room.
We don't have anybody to sign up
but if there is anybody in
opposition raise your hand.
No opposition I don't see.
Hello.
Okay.
Now of those that are for the.
I'm not once no one signed up
again for that but if there's
anyone in the room hello
Mr chairman.
Mr chairman it's Terry Cole can
you hear me yes we can go ahead
thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Terry Cole I am the president
CEO for the greater Albuquerque
chamber of commerce we stand in
support of this bill today you
know to recruit companies to New
Mexico we need a large arsenal
of tools at our disposal grant
especially large projects
sometimes a lead outlay alone
won't be enough to close and
economic development deal having
the option to commit a portion
of the future local state G. R.
T. to the project makes good
sense it's an incentive for
economic activity that would not
otherwise occur we support the
bill and urge your support today
thank you very much.
Thank you we have a war.
Mr Chairman.
They're my name called I believe
it will warrant warrant on
secretary was called thank you.
The more Instagram the director
of economic development for the
city of Farmington New Mexico.
Chair committee members of I am
in support of this.
Program and and tool that we can
put our tool belt I worked in
other states throughout the
nation that have robust economic
development incentive programs
in order us for us to be
competitive on a national scale
we need to have more tools like
this this is what I like to call
in if not for type of.
Incentive in that these are
revenues that we would not have
otherwise unless we were able to
meet them where they're at to
attract mode to our community so
that we can have zero of of no
revenues would have half of
something huge that could be
coming to our community and so I
am in very much in support of
this and look forward to
utilizing this tool in the
future.
Next we have Ashley Wagner.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I'm
Ashley Wagner director of public
policy for the New Mexico
chamber of commerce we are in
strong support of this bill
throughout the regular session
we stress the need for economic
diversity and expanding our
workforce this bill does that by
giving New Mexico one more tool
to bring large capital projects
into the state this bill invest
in the future and will allow the
state to operate on a time
frames they'll make us
competitive with other states we
also appreciate the clawback
provisions and how it still
allows for local control thank
you so much.
Thank you.
Next we have Eric Montgomery
group.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name's Eric
Montgomery I'm from the C. a
valley economic development
alliance in doing in the county.
In over a decade of work in
economic development within New
Mexico I've had the pleasure of
working with foreign companies
like certain class from Germany
seeing wire from Turkey and our
recent time when these
announcements I've also had the
pleasure of working with one of
the largest job creators in
private job creators in New
Mexico in a stampede me and I'll
tell you with every single
project we competed with taxes
Texas does not tax construction
and this is a major issue for a
number of economic development
projects in New Mexico this
legislation helps us to address
them that.
Impediments and we strongly ask
for do you pass on this
legislation thank you.
Next we have Mr Currier.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
and members of the committee my
name is misty Currier and I sat
on the New Mexico partnership
board of directors we
respectfully ask you to support
Senate bill one we echo the
support of others who have
testified today because economic
development and diversification
are the cornerstone of progress
and growth for rural and urban
communities throughout all of
New Mexico allowing New Mexico
to compete with neighboring
states for capital intensive
projects with economic based and
stable jobs creates continued
business attraction and improve
quality of life for all New
Mexicans thank you for the
opportunity to testify and thank
you for your support.
Next the adjacent.
Chairman members the committee
Jason Espinoza registered
lobbyists with the mechanical
contract.
Can you hear me.
Yes we can okay chairman I'd
just as soon as a registered
lobbyist with the mechanical
contractors association Mexico
the sheet metal contractors
association of New Mexico and
the associated general
contractors in New Mexico and
all three organizations stand in
strong support of the
legislation and really think the
department as well as the
sponsors for bringing forth
innovative and creative economic
development tool for communities
in the state to use to really
incentivize large capital
investment in the state Stannis
transport thank you.
And lastly we have Denmark.
Thank you Mr chairman this is
Dennis are representing Intel
corporation in levels health
systems who both strongly
support this legislation I echo
the comments you've heard
earlier but would add by way of
comparison yet unlike New Mexico
Colorado Oklahoma Texas and Utah
do not tax construction labor
for construction services an
Arizona provides a partial or
limited tax break for nations
are even more generous we think
this is a critical tool to give
New Mexico and attracting these
large investments thank you.
Thank you David
Is there anyone else in support
of the bill I know that there
was a few folks that had called
in and they thought this was the
and bill so.
Mr Chairman I want to Mr chair
Mister Moore would like to speak
also the branch is gone.
I am here Mister chairman if I
could okay what well yes thank
you Sir Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Brent
war I'm a registered lobbyist
for Albuquerque economic
development and the board talked
about this bill just this
morning and they were very
excited about the potential that
this bill would pass realize
this bill is focused on the
large projects the big fish so
to speak but it can't be
understated what it what a big
impact a large entity would have
if that type of economic
development were to come to New
Mexico and it's another tool in
the toolbox to try to recruit
those those very large projects
to the Mexico in AD stands in
strong support of this
legislation thank you very much.
Thank you.
Mr Chairman.
I I show my gash to read to from
Rossell I don't know if Mike is
still on or not.
He still on Michael you Mr
Chairman can you hear me this is
Mike history to I guess we can
go ahead good afternoon or good
morning Mr chairman members of
the committee at thank you for
give me a few moments I don't
have the option to raise my hand
or I would have
to
again I my guess preaching on
the present and of the Russell
Chavis county economic
development corporation and.
Wonderful Roswell New Mexico we
are deeply grateful for Senators
creeks and have no for
introducing this bill Mr
chairman not only will this bill
provide.
New Mexico to be a strongly
competitive state with our
partners for large projects I
would like to remind everyone
Mister chairman how large
projects and also create smaller
projects it doesn't only affect
our large communities in the
state it I believe that this
bill will help affected impact
the smaller communities like
Ross will Chavis County.
We are deeply grateful for your
consideration and request you
and your committee.
Recommendation two four two
passed to help this bill creates
opportunity for all New Mexicans
not only for today but for many
years to come thank you Mr
chairman and members of the
committee.
Thank you.
Are there others if you guys can
raise your hands.
If not we'll of go to of the
committee I have Senator
Padilla.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you to the Sanchez and thank you
madam secretary I think you know
we've had a conversation about
this just prior to this meeting
also and I have to say this is
the right move at the right time
we have some very effective
economic development tools here
in the state and this just
demonstrates for companies are
wanting to come here that we're
agile image that we're that
we're flexible on that we're
gonna make things happen to win
their business
so I'm very excited by this I
get a little little little itty
bitty you know concern when I
think we're going to have these
folks be able to get the lead to
fund as well as these other
things which is fantastic but
what I just wanna make sure that
we're not gonna have a couple of
really large deals just but in
knockout punch to the entire
fund all at one time and I've
asked this question before and
it might be interesting for the
committee and those doing to to
hear that so Mr chairman and and
Sanchez and madam secretary
measures that address that.
Mr chair members of the
committee that we do have a
pipeline of leader projects that
we typically carry currently is
at is roughly one million one
hundred million dollars now
obviously we're not going to get
all of those projects that we do
monitor it quite closely we also
announced all of our deals on
our website the LFC is aware of
all of our yield their reported
quarterly so we do manage that
quite closely and I really don't
foresee this this mechanism will
allow us to do these bigger
deals without dipping into that
leader funds so that Leda funds
can still be used for.
Expansions of local New Mexico
companies smaller deals that we
want to do so we don't have any
concern right now and I don't
foresee any concern in the
future.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Sanchez and madam secretary I'm
really glad you said that
because I know there's a lot of
stuff to lead already does it
has done a wonderful job of
helping some of these you know
businesses to to do work here in
New Mexico so that that's
fantastic
is there any
in the legislation I was reading
through it there when I was
brought to the office I look
through the through the FIR
those brought your little while
go to is there any restriction
on type of business but this
type of with this move that
we're gonna be making.
Mr chair members of the
committee it will be exactly
what is allowed in statute with
Lida and so I I look I'm gonna
choose mark to answer this
question because he has a quite
a poetic answer to it more do
you want to tell us what we to
converse.
What about public.
You too.
Senator Padilla.
As a secretary mentioned it
would be restricted to the
qualifying entities under the
statute of both the local
economic development act.
We need it real quick nutshell
says those businesses that
engage in manufacturing or those
to generate over fifty percent
of the revenue from outside the
borders of the state in New
Mexico on retail service of
Environment.
I appreciate that and I I I'm
glad to hear that to want to
make sure we're not making any
changes there because it's
something that works for us I
don't want to you know fiddle
around with things are already
working I want to expand it is
is you're doing here and then
the last question I have Mr
chairman and into the Sanchez is
and I think one of the folks
that spoke in favor mention this
and I I completely agree with
the secondary tertiary things
businesses that are going to
come online as a result of some
of these ideally large players
that are gonna come in the state
with the secondary and the
tertiary types of businesses
with bait become eligible also
for the regular the to as well
or or it but because the larger
project happened within a gonna
be excluded some of these
because a lot of the secondary
and tertiary businesses that are
going to come online are going
to be New Mexico businesses are
going to be you know and New
Mexico operations that that
sprung up to help support that
business just want to make sure
we're not gonna do anything
that's going to harm that
mechanism.
Mr chair members of the
committee now we aren't and I'm
gonna go ahead and read a little
bit of this because I think it's
a great explanation of what we
can do with lead and how we can
help these companies in New
Mexico we can't help you cut the
trees but we can make the lumber
we can help you make the lumber
furniture we won't help you pick
the chili but we will help you
make the souls that we won't
help you milk the cows but we
will help you make the cheese we
won't help you raise your lanes
but we will help you make the
stakes we won't help you drill
for gas but we we help you turn
it on into hydrogen we won't
help you drove or L. but we will
help you turn it into plastic
which.
I think that's complete and and
after this session we will make
brownies will give you the
supplies to.
The fund session everybody's
okay hang on and get ready I
that's all I have Mister
chairman thank you okay thank
you thank you so that the work
is outstanding by the way so I
just want to make that note
thank you.
Thank you senator no go to
Senator Kernan.
Mr chair I think there were a
number of people ahead of me at.
Your Hamblen
Tom and and thank you we're
obligating make.
I'd go ahead ham I I'm just
going left to right.
Mr chair you can call me Hamblen
however you want I've grown up
with thank you senator Senator
hamster going to that thing in
the background right Senator
hamster effect there thanks to
my five year old neighbor thank
you Mr chair thank you Secretary
keys but you know it's it's
really lovely you know that this
bill has come forward to thank
you Senator Griggs and senator
Crapo you know I I think the
work you know I have a wonderful
benefit of working with many of
the different business
organizations in southern New
Mexico including Mister
Montgomery my friend from the C.
about economic development
authority and you know what the
greater chamber of Los crucis in
the Hispanic chamber and the
small business development
center you know all of our
organizations economic
representative here but also in
our different communities I
think we all have some things in
common and one of those is so
that our business communities
can thrive and I always say that
you know we have the same
destination but the roads that
we take to get there are
different and in my capacity as
the CEO of the green chamber of
Los crucis and we focused
specifically on local businesses
but I also recognize that we
need to have that balances the
gentleman said earlier about how
these big things can bring
smaller things and you know I I
I always talk about the triple
bottom line of people planet and
profit New Hope that we try to
encourage that as much as
possible but I think what the
big challenge is in mine is just
really a comment if you haven't
noticed by now because I
certainly didn't ask a question
but I think you know the big
challenges for Secretary keys in
the department is to consolidate
all the information that has
come out of this legislative
session and you know and and
conversation last week with my
colleagues and and southern New
Mexico is you know there are a
lot of resources there's there's
legislation of this come out of
this out of the the regular
session is going to come out of
this session and the the big
pile on your plate is how to get
all of that information to
businesses and so I think I can
safely speak for many of the
organizations that are similar
to the green chambers.
Is that you know we would be
willing to help you kind of
consolidate that information
that's really appropriate
because you really do have a lot
of your plate with what is being
offered and how we can help get
that information out so that our
businesses can take advantage of
Leda funds in our businesses can
take advantage of a pandemic
relief that they can take care
of and that they can prepare for
paid sick leave all of this
stuff are things that we want to
do to help our businesses thrive
in this community and so I
appreciate your leadership and I
appreciate the Sanchez for
bringing this bill and I'm
looking very forward to
supporting the so thank you
Secretary thank you Senator
Griggs and senator Graham tell
you Mr chair thank you Senator
Hamblen all know will go to
Senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr chair and senator
screenings in Hamlin and madam
secretary and your team
you know I also wanna thank the
governor for putting this bill
on the call you know there's
been all this discussion about
fifty thousand dollars a day for
us to be here and this bill is
kind of exhibit a of something
that we didn't get done during
the session we simply literally
have so many bills moving right
at the end we ran out of time
but I think having this tool if
we land one of these deals I
mean this is a terrific benefit
for New Mexico so I wanted to
say that up front a couple of
questions I want to understand
the local government piece of
this so let's just use Santa Fe
so we have a project in Santa Fe
that that meets this test would
not come and this is being used
the state likes the idea up are
the city and county are they
required to be part of this and
what happens if one of them
decides they don't like they
don't want to move forward and
give up their G. G. R. T. and
the other says we do I mean does
it still move forward to all the
state city and county all have
to agree for a project and full.
Mr chair and speaker worth yes
all of the entities have to
agree are we are we will not
move forward on the project.
Okay and I and I appreciate that
I think that's a very important
component here because I think
when when these project using
Facebook when you get that
collaboration that's critical to
making it happen but I just want
to make sure all of our local
governments are listening out
there that we're not in any way
finding them we're giving them
the option to be part of the
team so that's important the
second thing I want to just our
focus on that jumped out at me I
was trying to figure out kind of
what this really means in terms
of G. R. T. that wouldn't go to
the state and in the FIR alleges
read that the two sentences that
jumped out at me assuming one
third of the construction costs
would be taxable the state would
give up at least two point five
million dollars in tax revenue
each year for a single
qualifying project with three
hundred and fifty million and
construction costs and local
governments would give up at
least one point five million
alternatively the state could
give up over seven million on a
project I assume that means
seven million a year on a
project that's one billion in
construction industry
infrastructure cross costs.
And so I I that jumped out at me
because I was trying to figure
out you know we hear three
hundred fifty million dollars
we're giving up you know out in
in some prior meetings or as
Representative hundreds of
millions of dollars in taxes
that are potentially being given
up can you just comment on kind
of the nuts and bolts on a ten
year three hundred fifty million
dollar project R. if you agree
with that estimate in the FIR I
just think some thoughts about
that would be helpful Mr chair
speaker worth members of the
committee I'm actually gonna
pass it over to mark because he
did the Facebook deal in Los
Lunas thank you walk us through
some more specifics mark.
Thank you Secretary gaze Mr
chair Senator Wirth members of
the committee.
The first point I would like to
make on your on your comment
from the F. I. R. is that the
your previous comment on the
boat for but for not this this
company would not come here and
that's why all three entities
have to agree.
For not this the state would
have zero dollars to work out
whether or not they were going
to get because this project
wouldn't be here there would be
no construction and it would be
zero dollars so while the FIR
may be accurate in its
assessment of how much of the G.
R. T. they may be for going up
that is going back to the
company through this mechanism I
would argue that the fifty
percent that is going into the
is fifty percent greater than
what happened without the
agreement so the one the the
nearly two million dollars a
year that is student FIR is
accurate.
But only because this project is
here without that project that
number would be zero so I yeah
so I'm not arguing the numbers
I'm just saying I think the but
for Clause strongly states that
but they're not this those
dollars wouldn't be there.
Yeah I really appreciate that
and I also think it's helpful to
understand we we don't do a good
job of looking at dynamic
scoring and when you think about
what's happened in Los Lunas and
maybe you can share with us what
for those local governments I
mean they gave up and there was
concern they were giving up a
big share when they put that
deal together where are they now
in terms of the benefits come to
local governments in that area
based on Facebook.
Mr chair is senator Wirth
excellent question the Facebook
project was to pro we gave ten
million dollars and and stateLee
to but the village of Los lotus
gave up seventy five percent of
the gross receipts tax on the
initial construction phase.
Despite that the village of
those lotus has now seen in
excess of twenty million dollars
in additional revenues and
happened over about the
preceding years prior to
Facebook the state of New Mexico
has seen thirty five million
dollars an additional G. R. T.
because of the Facebook project
so we more than accomplish our
pay back from the state and the
village has to even though they
gave up a larger percentage and
we would be asking for this
legislation so excellent
question excellent or yes all
just and with that I think
that's that's the perfect reason
that this makes sense and again
and we've got enough.
Kind of bumpers on this to
safeguards to make sure that the
local governments really adopted
by and and I just you know
Senator Hemphill I think I
Representative Hamlin is
sponsored Senator Hemphill of
course for you and Senator
Griggs
again I think this this is one
that you know as long as that
but for is really being applied
and we're not using this for an
existing project that's already
here in coming here anyway I'm
all and so Preciado chance to
and ask questions and have them
answered thank you.
Thank you senator now will go to
a Senator Kernan.
Thank you very much Mr chair and
you know I'm I'm sensing there's
a great deal of support for this
bill and I've been reading
through it that I have some
questions and so the secretary
could help me answer some of the
questions
I'm just I guess one of my
concerns is.
There's there's not a sense and
I guess that's kind of hard to
do I'm looking at page three
subsection a where you talk
about the ten year period
just help me understand so so
you have a qualifying you have a
project it's qualify and they
decide they want to to come into
New Mexico and construct a major
facility so tell me how that
fits into a ten year time frame
image once the construction is
complete.
What what happens then with
regard to you know the G. R. T.
has already been collected it's
been re distributed to the
different either the community
to the state or back to the
qualifying unity what what
happens why the ten year I don't
understand that part.
Mr chair members of the
committee Senator Kernan the
deals that we do in the PPA is
that we do our ten years
typically mark if you could add
anything else you want with
regards to the construction and
why the ten years but we like
the
those companies to commit to
being here and with regards to a
sunset we really see this as a
tool that is going to continue
and continue and continue to
give back to New Mexico when
these companies come because
it's not something that we want
to use for one year or two years
it's something that we want to
have a tool in our toolbox for
these the io's that are
testifying today so that we can
use this in the future so I know
that there has been some talk
about
Creating those federal funds to
the tune of a hundred million
dollars to Lita as opposed to
passing this bill but really
that doesn't give us the pool
the economic development tool
and I think that's the most
important thing in addition to
those funds I just wanted to add
that really those funds the
treasury has not
could any kind of statement out
so we don't know if we could
legally use those funds for
these types of projects but mark
did you want to speak a little
bit more to the at two to ten
years.
Sure Secretary Mr chairman of
Senator Kernan.
As a secretary mention tradition
for project of this size we
would enter into a ten year
project participation that would
outline.
What the company is expected to
perform and how we and how we
would invest in their project
meeting jobs to be created
clawbacks all of.
So that that's the ten year this
legislation intends that the
restriction on the G. R. T.
share is wholly and solely on
the construction of the project
if there's any future G. R. T.
to be generated by the business
that would not be subject to
that sure it's only the
construction portion so there
would there is the there is a.
Didn't sunset in the fact that
we would have a ten year project
participation agreement the
contract with the qualifying
entity but the real sunset is
one constructions over G. R. T.
sure Ms one thank you and that's
where I Mr chairman and madam
secretary mark that helps me
understand so the G. R. T.
parties just during construction
but it's the follow up the rest
of the the time frame where
they're being held accountable
to the agreement that that you
have made just a department with
them so that that helps me
understand that so on the Quebec
currently would lead to projects
if those agreements are not
fulfilled in other words if that
the entity does not do what they
have promised today who's
responsible for the call back
it's at the department currently
for all the to projects.
Madam chair and Mr chairman
madam secretary.
Mr chair and members of the
committee yes it is the economic
development department and we
monitor those quite closely in
addition to we when we came into
this administration we started
instead of trying to claw back
money not giving the money out
until they have reached those
job numbers and their cap ex
commitment to us so we really
don't want to put a company in a
situation where recline back
money from them so we try to do
anything and everything we can
to work with that company
especially during comment right
now on that but we do hold them
accountable to those job numbers
and those numbers thank you Mr
chairman thank you madam
secretary and so
it with this new program as the
money is cut collected in other
words it's a contractor he paced
the G. R. T. is that correct.
Yes Mr president madam chair.
So so the contractor is the one
who pays the G. R. T. but you
have an agreement with the with
the project with the entity the
qualifying entity so how does
how is that going to work with
the department of tax and
Representative.
With with the contractor I'm
basically pays it but then what
kind of agreement will Texan
Representative have with.
The qualifying unity and the
contractor to get the money
where it needs to be.
Mr chair Senator Kernan that's a
great question mark do you want
to go ahead and walk through the
process.
Sure that's a really really good
question Senator Kernan Mr chair
and so there's it's it's a two
pronged approach of and and all
address the front end of it I
and then I'll turn it over to W.
secretary Clark to talk about
that the details that and the
conversations he's had with the
with the secretary and taxation
revenue but again under the PPA
project participation agreement
the contract between the fiscal
agent in the qualifying energy
we will outline and hold the
qualifying Energy responsible to
get us the information from
their contractors so the way we
did just to fall back on how we
did with Facebook it was part of
the agreement that said each
month when the contractors
submitted their C. R. S. one to
New Jersey state New Mexico tax
revenue department they were to
make photocopies and provide to
the village of those lotus as
well as proof that they wrote
the check for maybe the
electronic transfer however they
paid that paid the bill then the
village would look at that make
sure that there was the correct
code in there for the for the
correct taxing entity make sure
the money was going to come to
them.
And then they would know sixty
days down the road when they got
the disbursement from taxed ram
that this portion of it was
coming from the Facebook project
we would have a similar
mechanism in place under this
agreement where we would ask for
that information we would do
those checks to make sure they
have the right code in there we
would verify that and then we're
we're anticipating actually a
quarterly report back to tax and
and read of in in which then
they would make a journal entry
in the transfer over the lease
of frontier and I'll I'll be
quiet there because now I'm
above my level of expertise and
all it over to W. secretary
court.
Thank you thank you very much.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator is
so yes mark was exactly correct
on how that process is going to
work and at that point yeah when
we turn over that documentation
to the taxation and revenue
department EDD and both local
governments have already
reviewed this information and
signed off on it is being
correct then it's a two year
these responsibility to just
double check the tax filings
that were made in verify that
this is this looks correct on
their end as well and that there
wasn't an error in calculations
however the bills and also
provides tier do some
flexibility it essentially says
Tierney if you're able to figure
out how to implement a new tax
tied into your system so that
those contractors can report the
work that they do for that
business location as a different
tax rate then they can do that
and that way you can be an
automated process security and
we can abandon all of the the
manual checks on our end and it
could just be a quick computer
algorithm on tier descend and
they can send over that the
money to the to fund thank you
very much Mr chairman and thank
you Mr Clark it get to me that
makes more sense and so you
already have something in place
that you may be able to.
Listen to the needs and better
at the opportunity to do a
quicker so that that makes sense
I have a question with regard to
the money so we talk about the
fund we talk about the fifty
percent that will the state's
portion which is what I want to
I so so half of that would go
into the fund.
And the same with you
municipality and with the county
half of theirs would go where
would that go into the fund also
to be re distributed that just
for that project or would money
in that fund potentially be used
for other projects in other
parts of the state or state
dedicated just for that
particular project at fifty
percent both the state part and
the municipality in the county.
Mr chair
all three questions the state
portion the county portion of
the municipality portion our
dedicated exclusively for that
project the bill does not give
any flexibility in that regard
the money cannot be kept EDD it
must only be used for that
particular project.
Perfect okay well thank you very
much so you know in our area we
we did a pretty significant RRP
to bring your Ranko into the
state that was sent to the
Richardson administration and
and that has turned out to be a
phenomenal projects for Lee
County I'm.
It that would have happened
without governor Richardson and
green you know the county they
certainly were supportive the
community was supported it was
an industry that was probably a
little bit unique to to New
Mexico not particularly to Lake
County because we have
Representative in that
particular county thank you
Frank turned out to be just a
phenomenal investment and we did
that to the IRB process so
what's the difference I mean
we're we're that was one of
those.
But not for in other words they
would not have come without the
RP.
I don't know they were looking
for a place to come how do you
know for instance if there is a
project out there that that you
have heard about it's been
talked about not sure they're
going to do it but we think
they're going to do it where do
you draw the line to say well
you're not eligible because you
probably were going to come here
otherwise.
You make that determination
because I know they're projects
in my area that potentially
could be eligible for this but
they've been talked about I mean
we know maybe they're going to
do it so are those projects
going to be eligible or even
across the state other other
ideas that are out there.
Do we have how do you draw that
line Mr chair and madam
secretary because I want to make
sure that we're not
disqualifying a particular
project because it's already
been talked about and maybe
they're going to do it anyway
maybe they're not I don't know.
Mr chair members of the
committee Senator Kernan that's
a fantastic question and I've
had at the pleasure of meeting
with your Ranko with the
governor quite a few times and
they are a fantastic company and
we're really lucky to have them
in New Mexico and sometimes
there is that really.
Fine line between are they gonna
come here are they not our
priority right now is to get New
Mexicans working and to get them
high paid jobs with benefits and
so because it's been mentions
that often times people don't
know that we've already been in
contact with these companies
that we already have NDAs with
this these companies so just
because it's in the press
doesn't necessarily mean that
they haven't been in touch with
us already but we do stress and
also would like to stress to
legislators you know if you have
a company that is thinking about
relocating to your community or
expanding and community please
have them talk to us as soon as
possible it so that any of this
kind of discrepancy between who
talk to when you know what
company where you know we always
know that we touch base with
them mark did you have something
to add.
Secretary the gentleman Senator
Kernan members of the committee
that's a that's a really good
question on the ballot for
clause and what it really comes
down to just a just like in our
B. the I. R. B. mechanism is you
know bond in the name makes you
think it's a financing mechanism
it's really a tax abatement
mechanism is really what it is
it is a strong but for clause to
save up for not this the company
would not come here we're
looking at the same thing here
but just because a company has
discussed
is something or project in an
area doesn't mean it's not a
competitive situation where they
can go to your neighbors to the
east or or neighbors to the west
or something like that so what
we're really looking for about
four is is this a competitive
situation is this a a project
that couldn't happen if it were
not for this so really prior
discussions has very little to
do with it really comes down to
is this the thing that's going
to take it over the finish line.
Thank you thank you very much Mr
chairman thank you madam
secretary and and mark that
that's helpful to know when I
was looking at the definition of
a qualified immunity and I have
a pretty long definition are I
have a copy of that it covers
just about everything except for
I'm.
Not including any enterprise for
selling goods commodities are
have retail our public have
let's see electricity gas water
telephone and other services so
there are some exceptions but
basically everything else is
covered I mean it's it's a
pretty broad definition for what
can come into the state and
qualify for for late at and so
we're using the same definition
for this new new project new
what I did to get money into the
into the hands of the people who
are qualifying so no changes
there correct it's all the same
all right and and I guess my
final thought I am a little
concerned about the LFC
analysis.
And I know that it may not hit
all the marks with regard to to
what their policies are so I do
worry a little bit about that
but I think I think overall the
interest that you've given me
today kind of helps me just kind
of want to make sure you know we
have some industry here that
that did receive quite a bit of
benefit already from the state I
want to want to make sure that
you know they were careful and
we've really tried to expand and
get some more industry and in
can help them help them.
Make this their home as well so
I'm I think my questions have
been answered and I.
Appreciate very much the
opportunity to us thank you so
much.
Thank you Senator now have a
Senator Tallman.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
senator help though and Senator
Griggs for bringing this bill
forward I strongly support this
bill up surprise to to we have
been offered this opportunity
up.
Yes to implement such a program.
this this.
Okay.
This tax
financing to if T. I. of very
familiar with this abuse was the
city manager and I'll
Pennsylvania we use this.
technique this tool look
differently though with the we
took the property tax generated
by the development and so
putting in the general fund we
put into a special fund to be
used for structure street
sidewalks roads sewers and so
forth this is a to be is a
separate different program I
think it's a wonderful idea.
I.
Senator Wirth just a question
that's going to ask you what
percentage of construction costs
would be eligible.
How much money are we talking
about well so billion dollars so
like a lot.
Billion dollar project is less
than it's about two thirds to
one percent.
So we're not talking about.
Money when you look at the big
picture.
So.
Just one question what type of
businesses that are.
Would be very correct thank
third of a billion dollar bills
Sudarshan about warehousing auto
parts manufacturing plant that
affection what kind of business
would be.
Directing a third of a billion
dollar building discourteous
thank you Mr.
Mr chair members of the
committee senator Tom and it's a
great question unfortunately we
can't disclose the three
companies that we're currently
in talks with right now but they
are in manufacturing
area and they as you can imagine
there for their foot prints are
quite extensive the amount of
people that they employ quite
extensive but it is in that kind
of manufacturing space and
whether that be in as you
alluded to car manufacturing or
potentially pharmaceutical
manufacturing and those are the
kind of companies that we're
looking at this is not something
that's going to be a film deal
you know the Netflix deal that
wouldn't even be applicable to
this so it is major major
manufacturers thank you Mr
chairman thank you senator for
the answer just testing your
ability to keep a secret thank.
Earlier okay Senator Tallman all
right.
Moving on to Senator Hickey that
I've Senator Brandt.
The latter practice here thank
you Mr chairman Mr chairman and
staff senators him going great
thank you so much for bringing
this forward of course Secretary
keys for
all the work that you're doing
and
I heard senator Tom and wants to
talk about of Bill where we
would have the LFC be able to do
dynamic scoring and I think that
that we're missing so much and
that pay back on this I mean it
was you know the city's gonna
lose fifty percent of their G.
R. T. R. but otherwise there are
choices nothing and versus fifty
percent as a Senator Wirth
pointed out and so that that's
one of the start but the the
domino effect well dynamic
scoring of this is phenomenal
and I and I just want to go
through a few of those
and and tell me if I'm right or
wrong is to look at it within
your office and then I'm going
to go into a little bit of
oversight from that so from that
dynamic scoring number one the
employees would come in new
houses would be built under G.
R. T. and all those building
materials that wouldn't have
existed.
The employees are gonna get
income we we we mainly get our.
Out of our tax base from income
taxes so that's going to grow
and then the employees are going
to spend the gonna laugh
go out buy clothes do every
other thing the and they're so
there's more G. R. T. it's going
to go off of that the
if the company if they're making
something they've got to
distribute.
And just distribution is going
to build some sort of.
Ranch industries they're also
going to spend money in which is
going to be G. R. T. I even if
it's you know using more gas for
the time that we're doing that
so we have electric vehicles and
so one of the things that I'm
hoping that comes out of this.
that is.
Basically what what I would call
of course in in financial
accounting for all of us in the
Senate
you know my so I'm I'm a
physician so I took my master's
in business for physicians
course I didn't know the
difference between finance and
accounting and that was all the
same and when I go through the
IFRC it's all kind of static and
it doesn't really represent what
the impacts are going to be but
having become a businessman you
know I we have to look at if you
invest here where does that come
out later on where do you get
that return and you also get the
that know that every investment
is a risk.
No matter what I mean pandemics
happen either they're also think
that learning to live with the
rest is something I think that
we is the state could do because
those who take risks and invest.
Generate the generate the
incumbent MP you know that the
cliche is if you get one in ten
of your ships to come in make it
so big that one the money a lost
on the other line just yells and
garrison so I'm I'm hoping that
we in the Senate through
whatever mechanism or and or the
house during the interim are
going to be able to establish
some sort of I call it oversight
and and I really mean it more as
education.
As well as an as well as holding
people accountable
for for the office I and and
then beginning to learn that
sometimes you know what happens
and it gets in the way in a
milestone is not met having done
several requests for the federal
government everything is by a
project management mile stone
any money that comes in and and
sometimes you miss and and why
do in this and how does it keep
going so I'm I I know that you
are providing.
Madam secretary the oversight in
your department but I would hope
and this is not the bills and I
hope next time we come back we
will look at a bill that
establishes provided oversight
of these activities and part of
it is so that we begin to.
Really understand what other
states are understanding well
we're kind of you know how we
divide up the straps on the
table rather than how do we how
do we put the whole goes down
the table and figure out what
we're gonna do is translator on
because there's so much to beat
out
The example I was going back to
the fifteen year waiting lists
and developmental disabilities
is next to worst thing in the
world but if we grew the pipe
back to the instead of four.
Would be able to take care of
all that and we have more more
and and we can even begin maybe
to look at it tax cuts that it's
all going to come through this
business and the ripple effect
that you get with the dominoes
of some things that I mentioned
and so I am hoping that once
this yes yes close that would be
might be in the office get done
that I and I don't know what the
committee is that leadership
whether it's.
Interim committee taxes
Fine I'm not sure what it is
but.
We should be looking at not only
is how the money's being spent
that but what are they one of
the revenue prospects for this
and in years all out I recall
senator Tom and when times and
you have a bill for us to I
guess by the software as well as
staff to do all the dynamics
Laurie what the list I mention
is just the first to domino's
and there's a hundred.
And that's all each domino
generates more revenue for the
state for us to address now are
difficult.
so I'm I'm wondering secretary
do you have a recommendation and
how we might be able to become
involved in the oversight
knowing that yes is we as a
as appropriators should be
involved but we also should
learn how investment generates
return and be putting more
pressure on for more investment
in and more actions to grow that
type of activity and get us out
of our our culture of scarcity
and into a culture of like
Boston I hear that Silicon
Valley is moving to Austin.
In Austin is exploding
and so you know we we've got
better weather than Austin
and it's pretty here
and and once you start to grow
this.
It tracks a lot of talent and
and am I correct in lots of
other if we get a night is here
of talent.
About mid upper level management
as well as great paying jobs
than other companies in the come
to take that talent all.
And it in it just feeds on
itself and grow so
so given those observations I'm
trying to make where where's the
best place for us is the
legislature to have that kind of
oversight and learn.
To that.
To that point Senator this is
Thomas.
Go ahead Senator on that point.
Yeah I talked to the.
The governor yesterday she gonna
have a rocket docket next year
and then the put my bill on it
because it went through the.
Two committees in the Senate
this year with no negative votes
to that perfect for negative
votes that went to but one
committee at the house we don't
I get votes and that is sent out
the house for urgent the for two
days and I didn't get to but so
because it.
As she feels it's important it
received no votes to put out of
pocket docket the next year
which would be plenty of time
because if we do successful in
getting a.
The project can excess of three
hundred million dollars we would
be analyzing anything it's
certainly for probably a couple
of years so.
you know you don't act on that
bill this year I firmly believe
if we if it's impacted the and
twenty twenty two the that be
plenty of time in order to use
it to analyze.
That we're getting our money's
worth these big projects thank
thank you Mr chair thank you.
So thank you senator Tom and and
that I as my question again just
it and and if you don't feel
good making opinion I'll throw
some things out but secretary
keys do you have any thoughts
about how we may become involved
with you to do the oversight
learn the finance with the bill
that senator Tom is going to be
doing and then maybe Senator
Wirth that Mr leader those of us
who do will deal with financial
issues need to go take a three
day course in finance one a one
and one of to us so that we can
learn to think that way rather
than just sticking with our
accounting FIR.
Mr chair members of the
committee Senator Hickey thank
you for the question it's it was
packed so I'm gonna try to
unpack a little bit of it I'm
good news brings good news and
that whenever we announce a deal
here especially when it's with a
brand name company we always get
extra attention not only from
that sector of the economy but
from all sectors so when we did
the Netflix deal just the fact
that the number one
entertainment company in the
world was coming to New Mexico
at and setting up their
production have here that got
other deals rolling I'm and we
do have I believe we are at the
precipice of change I believe
that there's a lot of energy in
New Mexico I believe there's
even extra energy in the silver
lining from COVID is that people
do want to get out of the bigger
cities we are going to be seeing
quite a bit of come at quite a
few companies wanting to move
out of New York LA San Francisco
in addition to I think we could
potentially see some federal
stimulus for big manufacturing
companies that are thinking of
on shoring or reshoring from
Asia we've already done three
deals in Santa Theresa with
Taiwanese companies I do foresee
us doing more deals especially
out of Asia so there is a
movement for those big
pharmaceutical companies big you
know name brands to come back to
the United States so we have an
opportunity right now I'm and
this administration is all about
transparency and so I love that
senator Tom and brought up his
meeting with the governor we are
committed to working with you
all and a lot of you reach out
to us all the time we were not
in session and we love it we
have great relationships with
you so we have ria contests that
are on staff and we would be
more than happy to sit down with
you you know between now and
September to really think
you're.
Do this that's what are we
missing you know our department
has been cut more than any other
department in terms of staff and
financing so you're right
Senator he we don't have the
software with the left and John
can speak a little bit more to
that because he has are numero
uno economist
and you know we we need
resources and we need people and
the thing that I love about our
staff PED is we are really
devoted and we all work like
sixteen hours a day I'm so we're
more than happy to work with you
all John did you have anything
else to add to that.
Chair thank you Secretary thank
you Mr chair and senator yeah
just add to that as the
secretary said we don't have the
software to do dynamic scoring
and neither does tier do neither
does LFC so that's that's really
the first key is that if you
just legislators make the
decision you want dynamic
scoring for bills like this
which again if implemented would
show a significant positive
impact instead of a potential
cost then the first used to get
us that software in its it's not
she
the national cost would be
anywhere from two hundred
thousand dollars to upwards of
four hundred thousand dollars
depending on exactly what
software we went with and then
there would be ongoing
maintenance fees of maybe fifty
to ninety thousand dollars per
agency but again beyond that we
would need additional staffing
will probably need another full
time economist LFC would need of
another full time contest and I
don't want to speak for tier do
but I mentioned they would need
additional staffing for their
economist team as well I don't
believe that the tiered
economist team is even fully
staffed up at the moment
with the appropriate software
and staffing that's absolutely
something that we can all work
on together and as the secretary
said you would be happy to talk
with you about that during the
interim about how we can best
try to implement that.
Thank you Mr Clark and and
secretary he's the
definitely want to implement
your you're right I from the
healthcare field and you know
what's happening in health care
all that money we spend on
marketing we're now moving it
over to data analytics those in
health care who have the data
with
get you know it is somewhat of a
competitive business being able
to do the data analytics with
the talent that's there and so
getting you the talent to be
able to run the software and
then I I'm serious about those
of us who are in some sort of
oversight role learning the
vocabulary the language of
thanking it goes on in dynamic
scoring and how instead of just
focusing again on the scraps we
get to focus on how many roast
can be bring to the table and
and and learn are you in enticed
even more to be able to come I
think it's just as a newbie my
observation we we kind of just
look at well can be scrape by
versus not experience great by
we can build the kingdom out of
what we have here in New Mexico
so I and I hope the LFC does
that next year in their training
courses for the new folks and
and also has some training for
us I want to touch on one other
point that I think holds us back
and I for I heard one of the
reasons that we lost the
spaceport was our results and
education are or the space the
the one that went to Alabama
whatever that the space space
force the space force okay thank
you yeah there is because the
education just wasn't up to what
other people so that you can't
fix overnight I'm not asking how
you're trying to get around that
question we've just got to go
back at it.
That part of it is we've going
to have to what's more tax
revenue into it to improve that
maybe it's more charter schools
or whatever we've got to deal
with that component as well so
right those are the the main
points that I want to make and I
will work with you over the
summer I do private equity
consulting in health care I know
how to I know a great deal about
how how that works and how you
look at all the potential rebels
and also the barriers the rebels
and how you you build a plan
around your that you your ad in
the ten risks as well as and
opportunities that are
necessarily part of the central
project that could happen and
then you look at and then you
take a long range plan if we do
this
this will lead to other
opportunities and I think that
again if we can attract talent
to the state we're just gonna
keep track the more more more
just like Austin this is doing
at the moment so obviously that
is a comment about education
going to have to work on that as
well but you know this could be
the colonel the grows into you
know a a twenty hundred thousand
eight record.
and so please that year that
you're bringing it but I do want
the legislature to have a role
in in oversight because I think
if they're engaged they're going
to be more support.
Thank you very much our
Secretary keys and
Mr chairman
thank you senator we have both
Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman and I will
try to be brief so would a
project like full to qualify for
this.
Mr chairman members of the
committee the issue of whole
tech is that it also needs to
Complies with the environmental
Department and and the
regulations that they have so I
would defer to secretary Kenny
and the government and the
governor on that but mark wood
the whole tech actually
qualify as a manufacturing
entity.
Secretary Mr chair Senator
Brandt.
No they they are just they would
be a storage facility just like
whip doesn't qualify for leader
Holtec would be no different.
What about something like the
Amazon
fulfillment center that's going
in Albuquerque that would be
more of a storage or or
distribution centers well right
Mister chairman Senator Brandt
so with the Amazon deal they
were going to come here anyway
and they have a distribution
facility and we knew that it was
coming into Albuquerque so no
they would not be where they
would not qualify for a leader
to start with but in addition to
that is a company that had
already said that they were
going to be here they have to
have the distribution center
where it is so that's not
something that we would
incentivize them with Facebook
kind of the data centers kind of
same thing they're not a
manufacturing and manufacturing
anything they're just storing
data so that's that wouldn't
apply if they wanted to expand
correct.
that Mr chair members of the
committee no it would not want
to make sure because you know
your my concerns as I'm trying
to figure out what Project this
is being done for just to be
with you so what what's the big
project because we're having
this in an emergency session.
so apparently this is critical
that we do it right now.
Wasn't done during this the
regular session for some reason
it didn't get through
and so what is the project that
we're gonna lose this year if
this isn't done and is and is
waited on until the next regular
session which would be the
normal process I'm so Mister
chair members of the committee
Senator Brandt but we're not
actually allowed to disclose
which projects we currently are
under NDAs on and senator Tom
and tried to test just before
and I think we passed but we are
looking at three projects
currently that we could utilize
this type of tool and so that's
kind of that's what I want
everybody to understand is we're
creating a tool for economic
development we're not just
incentivizing one project right
now in the short term because I
do feel that the more energy and
the and the bigger companies we
get in New Mexico you know the
others will follow so this I
wouldn't necessarily think up
just as for one project think of
it as a tool for economic
development the one thing that
was brought up in the F. I. R.
and and I I hope that's correct
madam secretary I'm not down
here were I in up here long
enough to see bills be brought
that are for one particular
project and then yeah sure they
can be used for other things but
it's a particular path project
that someone wants one thing
brought up in the FIR is Netflix
Netflix expansion and I know for
that company since they're
already here Rehm intended to be
here but what about a company
like Netflix with that we can
would making a film be qualified
as manufacturing really the.
funding and with the than
someone like them or if they
decided to expand even more what
they call.
So Mister chair members of the
committee Senator Brandt yes
film and television in the
manufacturing of that is quite
does qualify for Lita and that's
why we did the need the lead at
deal on the Netflix deal and
also on NBC universal however
and with his big is the Netflix
deal is and with the phase two
of the Netflix deal and they
will be adding an additional ten
stages three back lots I mean
office buildings the whole thing
on that mesa del sol that still
would not apply for this with as
much money as they're putting
into that it would not qualify
for this type of deal so there
are no film projects that are in
the pipeline
for the G. R. T. share I can
guarantee you because they're
not spending enough money to get
that so you can just in your
mind imagine it is not Netflix
it's going to be something
bigger than that flicks and
there's not just one of them
there's three of them so that's
kind of the change in the
landscape that we've had and I
do really think a lot of it has
to do with.
The United States it's just
we're finally seeing that we
have all of our manufacturing
elsewhere and throughout the
years and it might be time to
bring it back and I think that
we are going to benefit from
that as a state we are right
next to Mexico there is a lot of
interesting deals that are going
on that are going to be by
national in Mexico and if we can
institute some legislation
potentially with New Mexico so
that's really one of the one of
the reasons why this is an
emergency session because we've
got an opportunity to capture
these companies but it's not
gonna last for that many years.
Is to go elsewhere.
Thank you Mr chair and I
appreciate that thank you I was
just trying to figure out why
we're needing to do this right
now
you know I would say I've been
here nine years not as long as
some longer than others and I
have found that when we need to
pass something it only takes a
few days into regular session to
do so and I'm just trying to
figure out why ten days after
the last session ended all the
sudden we need to do this but we
didn't need to do it ten days
ago
and you know we we didn't have a
special session for three months
when it came to comment.
That was an actual emergency but
now we're having a special
session for smoking weed and we
threw this on their.
Ten days so barely cannabis and
we that are more important than
COVID so I would just leave it
at that thank you for you don't
need to respond to that I want
to get yourself in trouble I got
myself in a thank you.
Thank you.
Senator I think it's Senator
Kernan for the second time.
Well just a quick question I'm
just looking Mr chair of the
definition for qualifying
internet it says a commercial
enterprise for storing
warehousing distributing or
selling drugs of agriculture
mining or industry so I I don't
know what it means industry if
if we could clarify that because
I do think okay I'm not that
it's going to be approved but
that that this is a thing that
we need to get out on the table
I mean we we have a project
that's been in the pipeline for
many many years
This site has been qualified at
the university's doing their job
and yet this is an example of
where New Mexico doesn't take
advantage of opportunity and so
why would it not is it not an
industry I mean I it's a storage
the state would be storage and
so I don't know why it would not
qualify.
Thank you Secretary could
explain.
Madam secretary.
Particular for dinner.
What happens when you but but I
was talking away I'm I'm gonna
actually eight mark Roper who's
been with the Division for eight
years going to the details on
this one.
Thank you Secretary Mr chair
Senator Kernan
The warehousing and distribution
is it is eligible.
There's another key component to
that in that fifty percent of
the revenue needs to come from
outside New Mexico so far your
warehousing is its parts and
things a similar to what Amazon
is doing only for distribution
within New Mexico it would not
qualify additionally we have we
have a restriction on the fact
that.
If you're a sole source is the
federal government it is the
federal government and any
entity you would not qualify for
any of the incentives on the New
Mexico books.
That explains it but it's okay
thank you very much just just
all up there I mean we we do
have opportunities that
sometimes we just closed the
door on and and and I understand
that but at the it's it's
frustrating from my perspective
that that we're we're asking for
diversification we're doing all
of these things to get companies
to come here and for.
Jobs high paying jobs to come
here and yet we we shut the door
on on some of those
opportunities thank you very
much Mr.
Thank you Senator Kernan Arbor
Sierra for a second time.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chair I up.
You're ready up do pass.
Okay I have Senator Padilla for
the fourth time I'm just
kidding.
Actually it's second I was going
to move the do passed but I'm
going to defer to my colleague
all second his motion that he's
called out today echo and I'll
second.
Okay all right I don't believe I
A. C. anymore hands to.
So we'll have a Senator call
then.
The motion.
Do what.
Two passed okay all right motion
for due process thank you second
by Senator Padilla lane can you
all please take grow.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Griggs yes.
Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Hickey yes Senator how to meal
yes Senator Kernan yes Senator
sentence.
Yes senator Clemente.
Yes Senator Wirth yes Senator
Brandt.
Senator Padilla yes Senator
Shendo yes ten
And one excused Senator Brandt
sorry yes okay.
Eleven and No excused.
Okay great you have a do pass
Senator Griggs is Senator
Hemphill.
Thank you for sure maybe baby
Senator Hemphill like say if you
think and then I'll close up if
we could already I'll just say
thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee and of
course to secretary keys are all
of her work on this legislation
and I look forward to moving
forward on it.
Mr chairman and and members of
the committee I think you know
sometimes in one of the big
challenges that we all feel with
economic development is we we
would like to know more about
what's happening sometimes
that's just not possible because
you can't disclose as a as a
secretary mention certain things
about businesses or companies
looking at yet you're part of
the world or they might just
just not show up at all.
We can't do those.
And that is in you know that's
frustrating sometimes and.
I think one of the things on
this bill one thing we need to
think about and you know there
was a focus on some of the staff
and and when senator Wirth
brought up the fact that the F.
I. R. talks about what it cost
the FIR misses the point and it
could talk about what you get
because you know you still get
gross receipts tax you just
don't get a hundred percent of
that that might be chargeable to
that project and so there's a
positive thing in the in the
generation of tax then there's
the positive thing about the
generation of jobs and the and
what the company ultimately
brings to your community so what
I'm I want to tell the committee
and I'm not gonna tell these on
the floor maybe.
But I told the story about
leader in Alamogordo when we
were debating Senator Woods bill
Senate bill forty nine.
And.
Alamogordo we're going to lose a
grocery store opportunity
because we didn't we could use
leader for retail.
What Alamogordo debt is
Alamogordo passed an ordinance
re baiting that.
The gross receipts paid on
construction for that grocery
store and for other businesses
that came in to to our community
or expanded in our community
just meeting a certain dollar
amount.
That grocery store came a
grocery store still there in the
grocery stores doing a lot of
business in our community so the
but for stuff the but fors
absolutely true but for this
type of program that store
wouldn't be in Alamogordo and I
hopefully but for this program
is going to be a lot of
companies come to to our state
so thank you Mr chair thank you
members of the committee for
your vote and we look forward to
discussions on for.
Okay great thank you the
Senators and thank you members
of the committee so I think
we're done with the R. O. one
bill this afternoon so we'll see
you down on the floor.
symphony forage Mr majority
floor leader.
Yeah that's correct we're just
waiting for the house to pass
the feed bill and then we'll
come read that in and and take a
break and we'll hear this
struggle I don't Mr leader they
just tabled in the house our
goals are not given they just
table the feed bill in the house
well
will be they got we will have
some hungry senators on this
side of this building on the
floor and so I need I go.
Already okay so the state to
thank you members of the
committee.
Thank you.
Thank you.
