The.
You're.
This is good thank you just just
for the audience.
We are now to the point of
putting or or tax package
together the house have heard
the bills the senates have heard
the bills we've had testimony
and all of it last week last
saturday I believe we had a
joint meeting of the house
attacks a revenue and this
committee to have any questions
and so forth we're not going to
be taking any public comment at
this time it's just the
review in what's in it at this
point if there's any questions
from the committee we will do
that but there will be no public
common at this point
that has already been done
twice already so were with that
we're going to go ahead and turn
it over to our last year good
morning.
Presenting the house
it is.
Yes good morning mr chair
members of the committee i'm
here today to present the house
tax and rev committee sub for
house build two hundred and
fifty two and as you've shared
mister chair we're grateful that
the session with all sorts of
communication and dialugue we've
had a fairly transparent process
about how this
tax package came together i'll
just say again outloud mr chair
as they did on the house floor
we went through a process to
hear the overwhelming majority
of these bills with them
collaboration from both sides of
the isle and iranian members we
prioritised a word what a tax
package would look like for
members and at the center of
this package this year mister
chair is our personal income tax
reform so at a cost of a hundred
and seventy six million we move
our personal income tax tax
brackets from five to six so we
add a bracket but this was
designed to increase
progressivity for working
families and and those tax cuts
are targeted for working
families it's also important for
me to note mister chair thinks
to compromise that happened in
the house last year and with
your committee that there are no
increased taxes across any tax
racket so there are tax cuts
their focus at the bottom of
those brackets to the new
mexicans that have
the list but there is not any
tax increases at any bracket
level.
Beyond the reform mr chair we
have several initiatives that
have been well veteran including
energy storage tax credit angel
investment credit so shout out
to our former colleague
representative how draw for
leading that effort for many
years real health care
practitioner credit that's
representative garcia whose
tirelessly with a lot of
persistence and commitment
wanted to make sure we have
added more provider tapes to
that credit available we have
capital games deduction we have
I recovery tax credit we have
corporate income tax rate making
that a flat reader five point
nine
we did have mister chair single
sales which will get to know an
amendment I believe you're
believing we then had medicaid
renovation for medicare eligible
people working to make home
improvements towards their
safety and well being in party
of life and finally mister chair
we have a deduction after the
sale of child care a grt
deduction.
Which i'd move the amendment to
senate tax amendment at this
point for discussion it's point
two to eight two four six point
three k.
The.
You get the region
Thank you very sure for
presentation of the house what I
like to do now is present you
amendments to.
House bill two fifty two.
Proposed a moment recently the
committee.
Um.
The.
We have in that uh will start.
With the.
The armed forces retirement.
Uh.
Eliminates a sense that on the
existing credit in in and at
spouses we we heard this last
year as well this is a century
berks bill.
As well.
The special needs adoption this
one.
The.
Provides a credit for adoption
of a child with special needs.
Senator day goes and on the
house I heard and this else and
and others.
The uh the teacher supplied
deduction creator personally
income tax deduction for school
supplies purchased by teachers.
The central branch they're also
in a bill one seventy one.
Uh.
We have the job through energy
generation.
Income tax credits were
installation of your three
minutes generation.
Uh it's taking good changes
requested by.
Senator tc pino.
Uh senator luhan.
And others and involve the gilt
or more heap pump in contact
credits for installation of your
thermos he pumps.
Senator soles.
And then we also have a
deduction.
A did you so create side diesel
fuel grt credit.
Uh rips and are shown as senator
barcoses in a bill one eighteen.
Well the solar market tax credit
expense existing solar market
tax credits.
The extect the good changes
requested by trd.
The foreign corporate income.
Uh brings foreign a cit back
into the base.
The central worth in the
representative container.
The.
The the caf can you legal
services to your tea credits
back stage on legal services for
compensation uh center or meal.
At the five million dollar cap.
And then we have the.
Senate bill.
Although I already discussed
that.
Said built three fifteen which
is a creating a clean car out
tax credit
senator call man changes to the
base credit.
New even set
three thousand used every twenty
five hundred new plug in the
twenty five hundred dollars used
plug in at two thousand and
delete repeal to generally
twenty thirty one
ability three fifteen.
The senate bill to be sixteen.
Which is my bill is advanced
energy equipment credit at
twenty five million annual cap
for pit and corporate income tax
mixed technical changes
requested by trd
and then.
If I recovery.
Tax credit.
Senate amendment adds
manufacturers home.
That's.
Speaker martinez borrega.
The.
Senate bill sixty four severance
tax exemption for certain
projects.
Senator briggs adds a bill to
senate package makes ticket
changes to fire.
And attacks and rev.
This is a
uh allows the strip wells to
recoup investment speed to wells
for complaints purposes.
The.
And then.
You final.
On a house bill.
We okay hospital to sixteen flat
corporate and come tax rate
represent harper delete we
delete the single sales.
And then on hospital ninety
three medicaid home
modifications your tea
representative gates technical
changes requested by the.
It's also on the house spend me
on the senate side of senator
morris senabel thirty six.
So I believe I covered
everything.
So it's quite a bit.
So at this point if there is any
questions when the committee
for.
Package will entertain them now.
The.
I'll move adoption amendment.
Senator smith.
The.
Yes senator hambling yes senator
shanda yes.
We have six yes.
No matter chairman when I
appreciate the amount of time
and effort that was put into
this amendment and i'm thankful
that my bill got in there which
was the grt credit to call
cabinet
fire victims who were going to
be getting a grt credit now and
you look at page three the all
time that I put this bill
forward there was an agreement
that I would keep local grten
place and that the tax credit
would have been for the victims
to claim state grt but because
of technical issues that it
would have caused and it
wouldn't have been as easy as
just holding back the local grt
the only way this credit would
have worked as to take the full
grt credit
I did have conversations with
local governments so somebody go
county moderate county
empties at the counties that
thought that taking the local
grt from them.
Would be hurting those
communities so because of that
madam chair i'm not going to be
able to.
Vote in favour of the.
The addition that you brack
senator and so that's.
You.
Yeah.
What is the will of the
committee
send it a brand with as amended
senator br.
Yes.
No.
So.
The.
The.
Send it your cent.
Senator tomorrow
so that you're worth yes and
explain my vo.
Senator hambling yes.
Senator shandow yes and I will
not.
Six yes and one.
The.
Congratulations in the past they
do before we have our explaining
the but I do want to think the
house we've had multiple
conversations we know that this
is
very complex conversations that
we've had in the fact that we
came together i'm very grateful
for that I can come behalf of
the committee we're very excited
about moving the sport having
the folks have.
So and just similar battle chair
I just wanted to give a shot out
to reply to container for.
Setting up a process where we
had a joint committee that's a
first and I just think rather
than doing it that's at the last
minute when we don't really know
what's in and what's out we were
able to have that discussion
together and I think that's why
you see kind of the support here
also want to.
Give a shot out to senator
gregs.
You know and certainly the the
minority we we work with among
this and and there's things in
here we like and things we don't
like and that got crossed the
board and I just that's kind of
you know I like to say my
mediation practice for when
everyone's of a little bit
unhappy I probably done a good
job so again we we've got a bill
here were moving for but I just
wanted to extend the same
appreciation to the house for
the work that was done thank you
madame chair.
Thank you everybody we're moving
on to house still seven a the
health care affordability fund
distribution with
representatives hansky and
senator correct.
Right.
She started let me finish it
right hb seven a the health care
affordability fund distribution
representatives keep thank you I
mean over senator cray him hell
thank you very much
it is all yours
good morning madam chair members
of the committee and we are here
with household seven which
addresses the health care
affordability fund
the health care affordability
find has an issue with the
distribution to the find and
that it is scheduled to be
significantly reduced currently
fifty five percent of the health
insurance premiums are tax is
distributed to the affordability
find at fifty five percent
this are coming fiscal year it
is scheduled to drop to thirty
percent this fine has enabled
the state to create incredibly
successful programs to reduce
consumer costs on the state's
health insurance marketplace.
Tens of thousands of new
mexicans are receiving
discounted and no cost premiums
that increase purchasing power
on the exchange and help small
businesses across the state so
the programs that have been put
in place our working
and could be expanded to serve
more new mexicans one of the
biggest programs is this small
business assistance which is
currently serving six thousand
small businesses across the
state and forty one thousand
employees of the small
businesses
I we did adopt an amendment in
house appropriations in finance
that ensures that this bill does
not impact the upcoming fiscal
years budget so with the change
that was adopted and appropriate
house appropriations this would
hit on fy twenty six and that
way the their reason for that
amendment madam chair members
was to ensure that lfc
the interim rustip committee can
factor all of this in as we move
forward for the next budget
planning cycle
and are i'll pass there and i'm
sure senator would like to add
thinking madam chair members
of the committee that it's just
an important program to continue
to support because it eadese
small businesses employees and
lower income new mexicans who
don't qualify for medicare but
need to be insured to access
affordable health care so that's
the reason the spell is
important just to continue to
provide rabbit resources for
this proportion program.
Thank you madame chair and we
stand for questions would you
like my experience to make an a
madam chair I have we have with
us colin bio friend office of
the superintendent of insurance.
Mister chairman members of the
committee he called by with the
opposite superintendent of
insurance I don't think I have
anything to add beyond what the
senator and representative have
presented osa
has been honored to
have implemented some of these
programs and looks forward to
continue the important work that
that these funds enable.
I think you we do have questions
from the committee but we'll go
to the audience first to find
senator gregs who here is in
favor of this bill by show him.
All right let's have four.
Come up and if you'll just.
The secretaries like n.
Let's have three come up if you
will.
The.
Right we'll go through the
audience first.
Following the second learn is
that my god
that way to take that better
i'll start again
larry horand registered
lobbyists for presentation
health plan and press return
healthcare services when the
star tax was first added on top
of premium tax taxes I think in
twenty twenty one is when we did
it the idea was to help improve
access and provide insurance for
more new mexicans and so we
think keeping the distribution
as it is I think it's a fifty
five percent but keeping it
there going forward as good it's
it's it's part of a package to
bills were seen the session that
we all need to come together and
start working more for access
for healthcare and better health
care for new mexicans as we
think this is a step in the
right direction we appreciate
the sponsors the officers who
continue and also of the junior
deposit the governor's office
for pushing this as a priority
buildings legislation and we
urge your adoption thank you.
Thank you very much anybody else
in support we had a just for the
record we had about five hands
raise here in th.
What we'll do is will go online
and then we'll go to the.
The.
We have a jone.
The.
All right john if you've under
yourself please.
The.
Thank you good morning john the
money in san ford executive
director of the new mexico
religious coalition for
reproductive choice
these are affordability funds
have made it possible for me as
an employer to provide
affordable health care
insurance.
Or our staff.
And saved us quite a bit of
money which as a man profit is
very important.
Also very important to make sure
that we can attract and hire the
best
the best in the work force and
this enables us to do that by
providing really excellent
benefits so we're in full
support of keeping this thank
you very much.
Thank you so much john.
Anybody in the audience in
opposition of this bill.
Anybody online in opposite.
Thank you non online as well so
now I go to the committee
senator gregs
thank you madame chair and thank
you representative in center i'm
trying to to understand what
happened to this bill and in the
house.
Because I have.
I see the the billers we've got
it right now I see the fifty
five percent is in their and
that ongoing.
I get and what we stricken in
the back would have dropped it
to to thirty percent.
The vote on the house for.
Looked me like it was party line
vote.
And it was a gash it was
because.
A.
There's on the back.
But I don't I haven't been able
to chase that down and and
understand that madame chairman
and representative center if you
you guys keep kinda under a me
explain what went on because it.
I mean that's what it looked
like in it if that's not right
i'd i'd should appreciate no.
I think you madam chair and
senator gregs the the.
Do you start at the end the
house were vote was not party
line there was quite a bit by
partisan support I think the
final voters.
Fifty one fourteen something
like that
so when we start the the bill is
introduced.
Would have changed the
scheduled reduction in the
distribution that was scheduled
on july one of this year to go
down to thirty percent.
It it took that away and so.
By striking that we would have
just been keeping it at fifty
five percent of this funding
going to the health care
affordability find in perpetuity
however that would have
obviously had a big impact on
the budget it was not accounted
for when lfc was doing its
planning last year it was not
accounted for even at the
beginning of session because of
course this legislation needs to
be enacted in order for that to
happen so it
in order to
preserve the budget and also
because the office of the
superintendent of insurance has
enough funding to continue the
programs as is for the next
fiscal year we decided to delay
the implementation of the fifty
five percent so basically.
What in summary what would
happen is where were currently
at a fifty five percent
distribution for this coming
fiscal year it'll go down to
thirty percent and then with the
amendment that was adopted it
would go back up to fifty five
percent and remain at that level
starting in afly twenty six.
The.
Any other questions comments
from the committee senator worth
just one question and this this
is going to send it finance and
so
we've got the one year.
Delay.
So I guess basically though
you're just trying to maintain
status quo correct.
I'm terrin and center worth yes
and so I think that's important
because.
You know our friends in the
finance committee.
Again to the extent that this
i'm curious.
When when they built the budget
where they planning on this fund
going down to thirty.
Percent when they built the
budget for this year i'm seeing
a lot of heads shaking yes.
So.
Again.
Yeah i'm just logging so this
just will maintain it
moving forward at that.
Fifty five percent so i'm just
trying to figure out how that
all plays in and I get why we
need the one year.
Delay and I think you'll have
the discussion about.
Next year's budget and what the
impact is in the next committee
but I just want to make sure I
understood that we did build
this I mean the phase and I
agree with center gregs when you
look at what's being struck out
on the back here the way we did
this phase.
Just seems.
Interest interesting to me and I
do remember this was one of
those last minute late night
things that the scott stuck in
the phase back so again i'm just
i'm kind of speaking out loud
cause i'm also trying to figure
out exactly what.
What happened here and it's
going to be a finance it's this
is going to be a fiscal question
and there's no impact on the
budget so that's the key thing
for this year
and again i'd certainly think
this is a a program that makes a
tanner sands and it's huge
benefit so that's going to be
the policy discussion as we move
forward and that's all happened
up to you thank you senator
worth sending a brand.
Thank you manager and
okay so.
I don't remember a whole.
The the sir tax.
What is taxed.
Um madam chair and senator brand
it is attacks on all of the
health insurance premiums.
But on all the health insurance
premiums fifty five percent of
that goes into this fund.
Insurance ended a break yes
where is the rest of that to the
general fund.
The.
So we're wanting to in that
fifty five percent was to help
the fray the.
Guessing on the sliding scale
based on.
Madam chair and senator brant
the
yes and the biggest program
under the health care
affordability fund is the small
business assistance program so
that is.
Um businesses under twenty five
employees can receive a ten
percent discount.
That has led to incredible
savings under that program and
it is the biggest progr.
Thank you.
Any other questions are com.
If there's no further questions
we do pass we have.
The.
Yes
senator sanchez is excused
senator meetings is excused
senator tomorrow.
Senator worth yes senator
hamburg yes senator shandow
yes.
We have six yes and
I know right on the six to vote
you have a test thank
you
thank you
i'm not sure if this may be a
less maybe not you know we got a
whole five days less than we
just don't know so but thank you
for waking up early sunday
morning and being here at this
taking care of so we can forward
and then we'll will keep you
posted as to the any bills that
come out thank you think you
staff for all the here.
The.
