try to go through, um, and it
looks like
Later on down the line is the
first time in the committee. So
we're gonna go ahead and go
through, uh, Senate Bill 481.
We'll start that first, Senator
Stewart, uh, before you do, we
do have to take roll. And so if
you will, Rebecca.
Senator Figueroa.
Here.
had a meal.
Senator O'Malley is excused
Senator Paul.
Senator Ramos, Senator Sanchez,
Senator share.
Send it to work.
Senator Bergman, Senator
Hamblin. We have 9 presents and
1 scoops.
All right, so, um, before we
start, so there is a new FIR for
this bill for 481, that is the
old one.
I know my mic is
All right, so my apologies,
Senator Stewart. Um, so if you,
uh, want to go ahead and we have
a committee service, so if I can
have, um, the magic that you say
on a committee sub.
Thank you, Madam Chair. We do
not pass on Senate Bill 41 and I
do pass in the committee
substitute for Senate Bill 481
for discussion purposes. Thank
you so much.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, I'm
gonna have some opening remarks,
trying to tell you why this is
happening, how it started, what
we wanna do. I have my expert
here, Justin Horwitz from the
Rody Law firm he's counseled to
our General Services Department
and on Zoom.
Uh, we have Kelly O'Donnell, an
economist who has been working
with us, so.
Um, and, uh, eventually, we have
a few minor amendments to your
committee sub, which should just
get subsumed, so thank you so
much for hearing this today. I
was very pleased to be part of
the original announcement uh
about let's look at our state
fair, uh, let's look at it with
the lens of economic development
and helping these neighborhoods.
So I joined the governor, the
speaker, uh, the current county
commissioner state rep.
Uh, Chanel onionornu, um, all at
a press conference you talked
about and begin the work on what
to do. So, this bill uh provides
an opportunity for the state to
undertake a marshall plan to
reinvigorate and save the
neighborhood surround the state
on an operated fair grounds.
That area is really the state
epicenter for violent crime,
drugs, prostitution, cartels.
trafficking, it's in my
district. I drive through it at
least once a week. In
conjunction with this
initiative, the General Services
Department has released a
$500,000 RFP for a master plan
to develop alternative plans for
the 236 acres that we now call
the state fair.
The master plan funded by us
last year will provide for an
economic analysis, and months of
community engagement to change
the trajectory of this very
challenging area of Albuquerque,
Master plan is meaningless
without a financial vehicle, and
that's what this bill would do.
It's, it's like it is, but it's
not exactly like a tit, and we
will talk about that. So,
A tear the tax increment
development District is a
vehicle to capture gross
receipts from a specific
geographic area and keep them in
that area. Uh, they've been done
at the local level, all over the
state, but never at the state
level. This is the first time,
and that's why this legislation
is important.
Um, they would create a state
fairgrounds district over the
existing state fairgrounds.
Property owned by the state.
Governed by a body of elected
official or their designees, as
well as a member of the impacted
community. Gross receives
generated within the district
stand in the district to finance
infrastructure development.
boundaries of the district could
be expanded solely to include
contiguous land that may be
acquired by that, uh, the
district.
Unlike the New Mexico State Fair
Commission, this district would
not have the power to acquire
land through eminent domain. No
eminent domain.
Um, but beyond those geographic
boundaries that Ted would have
the ability to assist public
schools in the area.
Uh, this is important because
right now, our students walking
to school are often stepping
across people passed out,
fentanyl addicts, hypodermic
needles, we don't want to allow
that to continue. I want to
applaud the the the the state
police Burnley County Sheriff's
Department in Albuquerque Police
Department, they are working
together to coordinated effort
along east central in that area,
but it's all it needs.
was law enforcement, we wouldn't
be here today with this. Um, so
we believe that devoting the
maturity of the 236 acres of the
fair to a mixed use mixed
income, walkable, green
space-filled neighborhood would
be transformative. It's
certainly what my constituents
want. Grocery stores and
pharmacies will return. They've
abandoned the area, adjoining
property owners will see their
homes and businesses.
Real estate increase in value
and justify reinvestment. So
they're similar to the types of
projects the legislature has
already previously authorized
public improvement districts,
pits, tax increment development
district kids, the district
would have a variety of powers
necessary to implement projects,
uh, including the power to
contract, spend money, manage
its property, and
Also have necessary powers to
advance community benefits in
compliance with state law, and
we were careful to put that into
this substitute, which has, I
think, 0.9, just tells you how
much we've worked on it the last
two weeks. Uh, bonding capacity
in the bill is up to $1 billion.
And will require advanced
approval, both New Mexico Board
of Finance and New Mexico
Finance Authority.
The district could utilize tax
revenues generated from the
state fair site itself on the
projects and the operation of
the district and captured gross
receives generated by the
Rosino, which is about $12
million a year.
Unlike the local government ed,
the district would receive 100%
of those tax revenues generated
at the site to fund projects.
It's just a little different
than a normal tit we've done
because it's all state land. So
this provides the district an
opportunity to immediately
commence work on projects, the
debt would be secured solely by
the cash flow of the district,
not the general application of
the state, the county, or the
city.
In compliance with federal law,
unlike all kids in New Mexico,
the district would have the
power to impose taxes within its
boundaries. So, uh, protections
for the state, bonds have to be
improved by the state board of
Finance and the Finance
Authority. I said that already,
tax distributions could commence
immediately, but the bill
provides that revenues would
terminate in all funds remaining
would revert to the state in the
event that district does not
issue bonds by June 3rd.
2029.
So, uh, text distribution from
the state ultimately terminate
following the payment in full of
all the bonds issued by the
district. Uh, the effects of
these provisions.
Bonds would have a term expiring
no later than 25 years after the
first series, uh, the effect of
these provisions that the state
funding would terminate no later
than June 30th, 2054. So
language has been included to
ensure that the legislature may
continue to to modify any and
all taxes, and we have a couple
of amendments that goes to that.
So, are we moving to state fair
or not? And if so, where? We
don't know. Uh, no decision.
Has been made ahead of time,
it's part of the RSP and it will
become part of the master plan,
but Governor's pretty empatic
that it stays in central New
Mexico, um, so, you know, it was
once the 3rd largest fair in the
country, but now operates as an
enterprise entity and struggle
to keep pace. Uh, so those are
my opening comments. It's just,
we've had a lot of community
input, um.
Uh, the community needs to be
more engaged and certainly if
this goes forward, that will be
a huge, uh, a job of this board
and me personally. So if I can
turn it over to Justin Horowitz
for a few comments.
Thank you, Senator. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Senators, uh, and
Justin Horowitz with the Roy
firm Weir uh council of GSD and
I'm happy to be here today as
the senator's expert.
You heard the senator comment on
How the district looks a bit
like it did and has some of
those uh important elements, but
I, I wanted just to note that my
opening remarks that um
something that makes it very
unique that the senator hit on,
uh, which is that the district
here is formed by the state to
improve and undertake projects
on state-owned land.
Uh, and to use state resources
that are generated from that
site, uh, not implicated general
funds, not making, uh, in a
statewide obligation, and most
importantly, without
participation or benefit, uh, to
private developers that might
otherwise own land.
Uh, in a, um,
Sort of traditional tax
increment development district.
I note that there were a number
of important improvements made
between the original bill and
it's uh substitute in front of
you, um, including, um,
A step down in the distribution
from 100% to 75%, um, in the, in
the distributions coming from
the uh state to the the proposed
district.
Um
As we, as we've mentioned some
additional uh safety features in
um, allowing the district to
issue bonds, including the
development of a uh uh a project
plan, a district plan, um, that
needs to lay out a number of key
features, uh, with respect to
the, the proposed project, uh,
that would have to be reviewed
by the Board of Finance, um,
Along with the, the ultimate
bond issue. So I, I think we've
put together a nice um piece of
legislation for you to consider.
I'm happy to answer any
questions of the committee.
I'm not sure. I don't know if
you want to do the supplements,
yes, yes, if we can.
So, um, page 5, line 12.
We want to make sure that the uh
committee you have the amendment
in your book. So that is what
Senator Stewart is going over
right now.
And that was Natalie you wanna
go ahead and move the amendment
for discussion. Move for
discussion, 231837.2. Thank you,
Senator Figueroa. It's a little
hard sometimes when we're used
to saying first names.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator Figueroa. So,
page 5, line 12.
Oh
let me just say that all of
these amendments uh came from
previous FIRs.
On page 6.
Like for this is where you
strike, in which the district
lies.
It's the definition is, uh, in
different place, age 12, line
21.
Right. And
On page 12, line 24.
period.
And insert
In lieu thereof, and
It was just technical. On page
12, between slides 24 and 25,
you insert a number 5,
legislative approval of the
proposed issuance of the bonds.
OK, any discussion on the
amendment?
Senator Worth.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. Can
you just walk us through. I
mean, I noticed something in the
FR about concern over their not
being legislative approval,
you're putting that back and
just explain kind of what the
issue that was raised and how
this, when this approval process
will work under this amendment.
I just I'll make sure I
understand it.
Yeah, Madam Chair, Senator, I,
I, I, the concern that was
raised was that the, the similar
looking district, the district
had essentially a requirement to
to return essentially appear
before the legislature to
receive authorization, uh, both
for the issuance and for the
size of the bonds. I think that
the this bill had a general
approval for the issuance of
bonds.
In it in the earlier section,
um, and it, so I think it went
to timing, uh, of that approval.
So now the project plan will
have to be developed.
by the district, the RFP process
will have been completed. Um,
there will be information on the
economics of the viability of a
bond issue, the size of the
bond, and then the district will
return to the legislature after
having uh visited with the Board
of Finance and the Finance
Authority. So ma'am, so
basically,
We're gonna need to be in
session then to do this
approval, or is it something
that it sounds like board of
finance.
Wouldn't be able to do it. I
mean, I just want to understand
how that would work.
Yeah,
Madam Chair, Senator, my, my
understanding is that it would
be an action by by the by the
legislature in session and by
law.
OK, great. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
I'm sorry, Senator what you
said? OK. Other questions from
the committee.
Right. Do I have a motion to
move the implement.
Is there any objections to the
amendment?
then.
All right, you will show all
those.
In attendance in support of the
amendment.
So at this point, we're gonna go
ahead and go to um public
testimony and uh just for those
of you who might be new to this
committee, we do, uh, time
public testimony, and you will
have one minute apiece. And so
what I'm gonna do is I'm gonna
ask uh for the folks that are on
Zoom, please know that we are
discussing Senate Bill 481
committee substitute as amended.
Uh, this is your opportunity to,
uh, the Zoom masters will let
you know. I do wanna make sure
you get registered for comments,
uh, sometimes in the past,
people have been a little
low on, on doing that. So if you
will communicate with people
through the chat that you are
looking for support in
opposition, but in the room,
just by a show of hands, how
many are in support of Senate
Bill 481.
We have 3.
All right, in the room, how many
are in opposition of Senate Bill
481.
I've seen none, and after we get
to the room, then I'll ask you
so you can get those names down.
So those 3 that are in support,
if you don't mind coming on up.
You will have one minute a piece
to speak, um, Senator Stewart,
then you will, uh, have an
opportunity to respond to public
comment if you so choose, you'll
have 5 minutes to do that. Go
ahead and you'll be timed at one
minute.
Thank you, uh, chair and members
of the committee, uh, for the
opportunity to speak. My name is
Roger Valdez with the Center for
Housing Economics, and we thank
Senator Stewart for working with
us and others to present this
very powerful um opportunity for
the community to not only see
redevelopment and and increased
use of the fairgrounds, but to
channel back some of that, a lot
of that community benefit into
ongoing efforts around housing
and improving um
neighborhood, the community
benefits language is important
as well as the district plan,
which um will reflect some of
the process that goes on over
the next year, looking at the
master planning process. So this
is a tremendous tool and
opportunity to uh to begin to
improve the neighborhood, uh,
increase affordable housing
access and do a lot of the
things that the community has
had been hoping to do for
several years. Thank you.
Marcos
here.
Marcos Gonzalez, uh executive
development officer for
Bertollio County and the
counties in support of the
redevelopment of this area and
seeing it being uh a
revitalized, and we appreciate
the sponsor working with us to
being able to making it, so it's
just the state GRT that's going
into the other district, so
thank you.
Thank you. Anybody else in the
audience and support?
All right, now, we're, uh,
anybody in opposition? Last
call.
See none. All right, so we are
gonna go online. There's Kelly
O'Donnell who is the expert
witness. So, but we also have
Terry Cole who is in support. So
Terry, you know the deal. You've
got 1 minute, you'll see a 32nd
warning in your chat. Go ahead,
Terry. You've got one minute.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. I'm
Terry Cole, president CEO of the
Greater Albuquerque Chamber of
Commerce, appearing in support
of SB 481. If you will, travel
back in time with me to 1938,
the year the current fairgrounds
was first year.
utilized. It was outside the
city limits. There were only
horse stables on the corner of
San Pedro and Central. Even UNM
was considered out of town.
Almost 90 years later, the city
has grown up around the
fairgrounds, and it's way past
time that we move forward to
study whether we want a new home
for the fair or not. I don't
know exactly where that is or
where we might move it, but SB
481 is
giving a platform to look at all
the choices. Make a decision and
then move forward. I served on
the commission with Governor
Richardson to look at this issue
many years ago, and this
particular approach by creating
a state fairgrounds district is
a perfect way to dive back into
this issue and hopefully get the
job done. So we commend the
sponsor for carrying the bill,
Madam Chair and members of the
committee.
We urge your support. Thank you
so much.
Thank you. Um, we are still
keeping, um, uh, Kelly on there
just in case she is needed for
any comments or questions from
the committee. You do have 55
minutes if you'd like to respond
to any of the personal
testimony, or we can go ahead
and go to committee.
Uh my chair, I'm, I'm thrilled
for the support. I have nothing
to say.
All righty. Um, so let's go
ahead and go to the committee if
there are any questions or
comments from the committee.
I'm looking at my 2.
Guilty partners here that I'm
always expecting.
Um, do you guys want to rock
paper scissors over who goes
first?
How about if I let Senator Sher
go first. All right, Senator
Figaro.
I know.
That
The move she goes first next
time.
So, uh, Madam Chair, Madam
Prote, uh, is, is, is we're
looking through this.
One of the things that jumped
out at us was the board is
exempt from the procurement
code.
Is that true?
Understanding that right.
Not in chair senator that, that
is correct.
So,
Madam Chair, that I find that
troubling. Why would we do that?
Especially when we're gonna have
a billion dollars in revenue
bonds.
billion dollars that can go
anywhere.
Madam chair Senator, uh, that,
that language, um was um
included, and it's similar to
language you would find in the
tax incomement development
District Act, um, providing for
that that exemption,
essentially, it, it offers some
administrative efficiencies here
where the government is
undertaking its own project.
Or
For the redevelopment
told Madam Sheriff, we're
looking for fraud, waste, and
abuse.
This is where I would start
looking.
Um, just because it's, it's
exempt.
Um
for almost everything.
And
Well like
Obviously you're gonna do
something with the fairgrounds.
The fact that there doesn't
appear to be any oversight on
that portion of it.
Um
That
I don't know, but you say that's
common in our law in other
parts.
Senator, that, that language
does exist in the world of
special districts. It's it.
Uh
Other, other district acts.
kind of exam. Well, Madam Chair,
and, uh, medical temp. I know
that, that in, in the whole TI
world.
What is
Yesterday,
huh?
that's what I think.
Yes.
I'm.
OK, I don't know where I am now.
My apologies, Senator Sheriff,
we have this, we have this
report where that happens on a
regular basis. I apologies.
So, uh, anyway, so let, let me
see if I can get back where I
was.
So I know the kids get a, a
A lot of power over what they're
doing so that they can get on
with the program there, and, and
I understand this as well. Um,
This one seems like it's, it's,
uh, the district has more powers
to do more things with less
oversight.
That's what I was seeing in
here, and that's what just
concerned me as I was going
through the whole thing,
although I have to admit that.
The new FIR that says draft all
over it.
difficult for me to read,
especially since I just got it,
but
Um
So I, I
That's a number, that's a big
concern.
Straight up.
But the fairgrounds, today's
fairgrounds, they're owned by
the state, right? What, what are
the plans for that particular
piece of land that's it gonna
be?
Continue to be owned by the
state, it's gonna be.
parceled off and sold to
developers and what's the what's
the plan?
Madam Chair, Senator, um,
That currently the uh
The redevelopment plan is
subject to the RFP that's
outstanding. The, the land is,
is held in entitled by uh my
client, the General Services
department. No plans that I'm
aware of to dispose of.
So
At least in my mind, there were
two parts of this. One, move off
the old ground and do something
new with it and move to a new
ground and make it a new,
better cooler fairground.
the new better cooler for.
Fairgrounds, I understand.
Uh, with all of that excepted
maybe it's
No
Maybe there's not enough
oversight.
Um, but the old part,
So we're, we've not even talked
about what we're gonna do with
that, cause I know we've talked
about some affordable housing,
we've talked about some other
things, but there's nothing.
Nothing out there for that.
of chair center, that's the
purpose of the RSP that's out
now.
So, that RSP is tasked with
having a master plan of how we
uh develop that area.
Uh, we want housing, we want
affordable housing, we want
We want a livable community we
want green spaces, we want
walking paths, bicycle paths,
but we want good housing.
Albuquerque's down about 55,000.
Houses.
Uh, we have new development
coming into Kirkland Air Force
Base. We have a new, uh, we have
new orders and we don't have any
place to put those new people
that would come in.
And if you've driven down
Central lately in the eastern
part.
You'll see in encampments
everywhere.
So it's the area that needs to
be redeveloped, but certainly
that's what, that's what I want
out of the 236 acres, um, you
know, we'll just, we'll have to
wait and see what that RSP
shows.
So
I, I think I found what I was
looking for earlier here in the
RFP.
So, let me just read some of its
deviation from standard
Development District practices.
Um
And so, uh, the safeguards
ensure project viability.
But in this particular one,
Uh, it does not conform to the
New Mexico TI Act, the financing
mechanism, uh, proposed in the,
in this bill.
Um
doesn't
Conform with with the tit act
and and yet a minute ago we
said, well,
And it did. So,
What am I
I'll give you my answer and then
he'll give you the better
answer, I'm sure, so nobody has
ever done this. We've never done
a 236 acre chunk that's owned by
the state and redevelop it and
moved the state fairs somewhere
else, so we started with the
Ted. We abandoned going every
through the tit. We've really
essentially created our own
state districtted. So we use a
lot of the mechanisms. We don't
use every
one of them, because it's
state-owned property and
So, uh, right, I'm hunting to
Justin.
Madam Chair, Senator, I
I, I think the, the
The tit in this, um,
This proposed district are are
very similar in terms of their
um financing.
Abilities there.
You know, as we said earlier,
they're not, they won't cause
any general obligation of the
state or any general obligation
for the government, there're
rely on, uh, you know, a special
fund funded by these grocery
receipts tax and essentially
portions of gro receipts and
gaming taxes in the states, um.
You read it and you know those,
um, unlike a did excludes
property tax, um, it
excludes the the local options
of those governments, so it's a,
it's a narrower um revenue
stream, but ultimately, you
know, funding a special fund
that can um
You know, support that service
on bonds and potentially, uh,
you know, pay directly contracts
or other things that
Um, the district would have
powers to support.
So, Madam Chair, I'm not gonna
go down the same way. It does
seem to me, can you, is there
something you can tell us that
gives us uh a warm fuzzy feeling
that there is oversight in, in,
in millions of dollars isn't
gonna just
deep out into the ether
somewhere. Yes, Madam Chair,
Senator, what I would tell you
is, um, that, that those
protections are, are baked then
first, um, the dedication that's
made under the bill of those
revenues will expire in 4 years
if the
bonds are not issued.
In order to issue bonds.
The district will have to
develop a detailed plan.
Um, that that response to each
of the criteria in section.
10, I believe, of the bill, um,
that, um,
That describes the um district
plan, um, that, that must be
presented to the board of
Finance, the Board of Finance
has to approve the plan.
Um, the, um, ultimate bond
issue, uh, it confirmed that the
uh debt would be used for um
Projects consistent with the
statute and with the plan.
Um,
Then
Um, finance Authority would have
to approve the primary uh
bonding document, the master
indenture and approve the, the
financing for the, the district,
and then after that occurs, um,
the legislature would ultimately
have to approve the bond issue,
in the absence of all those
steps, uh, along the way.
The district will lose its.
tax essentially it's revenue
stream and any money in its
possession will then revert to
the state.
There's a number of steps along
the way.
sure things are are operating.
In a good way, initially, the,
the state, um, through the board
of Finance will receive annual
reports from the district
regarding its spending and a
number of other criteria
described in the.
And of course,
Um, you'll have government
representatives sitting on the
board, like the treasurer of the
district is the director of the
local government division, uh,
at DFA, um, and a number of
other, um,
Like the officials along the way
and their designees serving on
the board.
So, madam, um, Madam Chair.
So this creates a new board.
And
So it consisting of the
Governor, lieutenant Governor, a
state senator representing the
area Vertlio County commissioner
and the mayor of Albuquerque, is
that still accurate in this
substitute.
So many shared the
The state center in the
district as it designee the
state representative, currently
Chanel and in has it designate,
so neither she nor I would sit
on it. We would have designee.
So it's the governor, the
lieutenant governor, the mayor.
The county commissioner from the
district.
Uh, uh
Designate from the state senate,
designee from state rep.
And
And a community member.
Yes, community member. Yeah,
that's.
We, we just, I think the only
change in the substitute is that
the state senator and state rep
have to have designees
apparently we can't serve on the
same board as the governor.
So, we, we will have needs.
I like
But then this, this board then
is the board that's gonna
oversee.
Make sure that millions of
dollars don't vanish.
That's the first step, they made
you heard every everybody else
that is part of that sort of.
authority.
OK.
All right, Madam Chair, thank
you.
Thank you, Senator Sher, Senator
Figueroa.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, sponsor, and thank you for
the whole team that has been
working on this. You can see the
massive difference between the
first bill and the committee
sub, and it is so much better. I
would like to spend a little
time talking about guardrails,
madam chair, because I see them
in here and um I am reassured.
By the many places in which they
are there.
And one of them is that district
plan, that's part of our TI
process, Madam Chair, that was
skipped over in the first draft
and is added back in in the 2nd
draft. Um, so when you look at
section 10.
And it outlines all of the
things that have to be in this
plan, it's extensive.
The estimated cost of the
project, the maps, the time
needed, the type of bonds, will
it be gaming bonds, GRT bonds,
property tax bonds, the
estimated revenue, the land
uses, the number and type of
jobs that expect to be created,
the amount and type of housing
that's expected. Um, the
planning techniques that are,
that are gonna be used and
explored the amount and type of
private investment.
This, this is a detailed plan.
And that's in section 10.
Strangely, it's in an earlier
section, section 7, where it
says the board of Finance will
review that plan and approve
that plan. So there's a hard
guardrail right there if that
plan isn't approved, has to be
redone, or there will be no
bonding. So I appreciate that
aspect of the card rail, both
the plan.
And the approval required by an
entity.
Um, section 12 has the annual
report.
Which is great, but I actually
think you did better in section
4.
Page 8, somewhere around there.
Where it talks about these board
meetings are all going to be
open. So open board meetings
with published minutes,
published resolutions and
decisions of the meeting, the
actual account and expenditures
and the budget are also all
going to be opened.
That's a lot of public oversight
and public involvement should
they choose choose to be
involved. So I appreciate all of
those pieces, and best of all is
the 2029 reversion.
It's
You can't get a master plan
approved if it's not working,
there's no bonding and the money
comes back to the general fund.
So thank you, Madam Chair. I
really appreciate the addition
of guardrails there and the
addition of community
involvement.
Um
I'm gonna ask for one more
guardrail.
And that, going back to Madam
Chair, what scented her share
brought up as the procurement
code exception. So if you look
at page 9.
I think it'd be easy to add back
in something.
Um, I can see why some
efficiency around the
procurement code are needed.
But there are 9 provisions of
the procurement code that don't
affect proficiency, right?
There's the anti-bribery
section.
There's the anti-kickback
section, there's the unlawful
employee participation.
These are in the procurement
code, but their sections 13-1,
1990.
To 13-1, 1999.
And I really think we need to
put those back in.
Um, and I don't have the
language, madam chair, off the
top of my head. I am not ready
to do that now, but I'm gonna
tell you I need to see that
before I can vote for it on the
floor. We need those pieces and
Senator Figueroa and committee,
just to let you know, the next
destination for this bill is
Senate Finance, so there is that
opportunity, uh, if there was,
uh, an agreement for the
amendment if you wanted to find
that language and then talk with
the sponsor.
And madam chair uh Figuro is not
the only one who is identified
this as we need to look at this,
so I, I, I assure you we will do
that.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, the
other
Question is on page 9, line 8.
So the board makeup has changed
a little bit.
Um, but this
talks about at the end of the
initial and subsequent six-year
terms, the board may hold an
election. I think that needs to
be holed an election.
And at a suggestion, Madam
Chair, not from me, but actually
from the Secretary of State's
office. I was asking her
questions about in this kind of
case, who are the qualified
electors who's making this
decision, um, and her suggestion
would be to look at Madam Chair
and sponsor staggering the
boards of times, so the whole
board isn't replaced at the same
time, and there's some tid
language you could just transfer
over.
To cover that.
But those, madam chair, my
remaining concerns about this
bill as it stands right now. And
let me tell you with the
original bill, there were a lot
more, so I appreciate the work
very much and I look forward to
seeing it get even better.
This has the potential.
To really change a section of
our city very close to my
district that has been troubled
for a long time.
Thanks, Madam Chair. Thank you,
Senator Figueroa. Senator
Bergmans, you had a question.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I was
just wondering if your expert,
Kelly O'Donnell could weigh in a
little bit, maybe even on the
whole plan of this, or if you or
if she could elaborate more on
the community benefit.
Definition.
And what page that is on page 2,
17.
So Kelly, are you available to
speak?
So Kelly, did you hear the
question that Senator Bergman's
asked? If so, if you can go
ahead and respond.
I, I did indeed, uh, thank you,
thank you, Madam Chair, Senator
Bregman, um, the community
benefits section in the bill,
which I believe has has 4
sections that pertains to job
creation, to um housing creation
and uh and and a and I don't
have it in front of me and I
apologize. Um, but it, in
general, the objective here is
to uh have a measurable benefit
on the surrounding community.
The whole point of
this district is to hopefully
revitalize East Central, and
it's absolutely critical that
the residents of the communities
surrounding the site in, in
addition to the people who will
hopefully occupy housing on the
site, uh, benefit from that. Uh,
community benefit is, is a big
piece of this because the entire
objective is to benefit the
community, uh, and to my mind,
uh, the most critical benefits
will again be around.
creating jobs, uh, both for,
yeah, for community residents
and building some of that, that
additional housing that is so
desperately needed, I think that
by um bringing in healthcare as
well and um and other uh benefit
uh community center, open space,
the sorts of amenities that make
a community desirable and
livable, we will potentially
create a real, a real oasis
that will impact the entire
surrounding community drawing,
you know, a broad spectrum of
new residents, uh, mixed, you
know, mixed income from the low
income people to fairly middle
and upper income people and uh
and some light commercial as
well. So I, I think that the
concept of community benefit
inserted into this bill in
particular is really critical to
its uh to the to the objectives
of, of the TI, more so, I think,
than some of the more
traditional kids that we've seen
because um
They, they are generally not in
communities or areas that are
quite as blighted as East
Central is. Um, please let me
know if that answers your
question or if I can further
elaborate.
That answered my question. Thank
you very much. That's all. Any
other questions from the
committee, Senator Paul.
Thanks, Madam chair. I just had
a quick question, um, so I know
in the past, I believe that that
there was leaseholders on, on
the grounds at the fair grounds.
Is that correct? And are there
still currently, and if so, what
happens to those folks at this
moves forward.
So I don't know the answer to
that, neither does this expert,
Kelly. Do you know the answer to
that?
Sorry, I was on mute. Um, but
I'm I'm not anymore. Uh, yeah,
there, well, there's one
leaseholder on the fairgrounds,
and that is the racetrack, uh,
and that lease is going to be in
existence for quite a while, as
I understand it. Um, the, uh,
the development plan will have
to, I think, work around that
existing lease, and I think
that's conceivable. I mean,
there's roughly 200 and
What, 2020 acres, I believe.
That are not, but yeah, well,
yeah, that are not occupied by
the racetrack. So there's plenty
of, uh, there's plenty of space
to operate in, but I think
working around that is going to
be one of the challenges of the
development plan.
And Madam chair, I will also say
that there is conversation about
having the racetrack move.
You know, we have all those
horses and stables and all of
that, right in the middle of
Albuquerque, so we are talking
about that, and I think that's
part of the master plan. At the
casino is what has a 25 year
lease, um, the, the, the
racetrack is a little bit
different than that. So there
there is talk of moving that.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator. I appreciate
that answer. Thank you, Senator
Paul. Any other questions,
Senator Wirth? Thank you, Madam
Chair. I just want to go back to
this procurement code issue. I
just have real trouble doing and
notwithstanding the procurement
code.
And I just, why, why don't we?
want to, I mean, what's the
problem? And again, I just
Well, what my expert is saying
is that this is pretty standard
language and other kids. I don't
know if that's right, but we're
certainly gonna look at it and
think about redoing it with more
adequate language or taking it
out. I heard it loud and clear
I'm just debating whether I take
it out right here and then come
back with an amendment that puts
in pieces of it if that's what
you're going to do. I, I just,
that causes me huge concern. And
again, this is a, this is a
mass, I'm all in with this
project. I love it. I think it's
a
a great idea.
But I just, you know, we don't
do notwithstanding, to begin
with, and then when it's
notwithstanding a whole section
of law.
I just have trouble with it, so,
your committee up, do what you
want, and if we need to redo it
with language that Senator
Figueroa suggested we can do
that in the next committee if
this moves on. You can do
whatever you want. Yeah, no, I,
I appreciate that and so I am
going to make a motion on page 7
to strike um section C, with the
understanding that we're just
gonna start doesn't mean it's
not gonna get tweaked and
shaped, but I just feel more
comfortable. This bill does not
go to the judiciary.
And so I kind of feel like I
need to put on my lawyer hat,
and that one, you know, Sanrio's
raising issues for you too, but
it just, it, so I'm gonna, I'll
make that, that amendment. So if
you will, Senator Wirth, repeat
just to make sure, page 7 strike
section C lines 19 through 24.
That is a friendly.
Is there any other discussion on
the amendment.
anybody in opposed to that
suggestion, given that it was
deemed a friendly amendment.
So you know, let's go ahead and
show that all in attendances are
in support of the amendment.
So
Right.
Great.
Easy piece.
Does that mean you have another
question, Senator Figuero? Go
for it. Um, sorry, Madam Chair,
I don't think I've ever done it
twice.
Uh, but I wanted to ask Madam
Chair about balance, because if
this is a tit and we're bonding,
we have to generate GRT to pay
back the bond. So we're talking
about community benefit and
that's important housing, that
doesn't create GRT Open space
doesn't create GRT either.
How are you gonna manage the
balance of the retail
commercial, industrial
development piece with these
other community benefits that we
really want and still pay back
the bonds. So I'll start and
then
give it over to Justin, so, uh,
we are, we have uh 12 million a
year, uh GRT coming from the
casino.
But we have about another 1
million right now coming from
what's there now.
And the rest.
Yeah, Madam Chair, um, senator,
that that was going to be the
primary point I mean that we
come out of the gate swinging
with revenues that are
available, sort of unlike the
kid that you have to grow from
the base, but we'll have an
opportunity here with that
initial funding to to develop
and grow and obviously you'll
have um
You know, the master plan's
gonna include some retail
pieces, some commercial other
pieces that will generate more
robust gross receipts tax than
say Amazon deliveries and gas
bills at at the residents.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I just
don't want us to be Pollyannaish
about this endeavor. It's gonna
be a trick if we can pull it up.
Thank you, Senator Figueroa. Any
other questions from the
committee?
Um, before we go to a motion,
um, I certainly recognize that
this is a
Big hairy deal. Uh, you know, we
have areas in Las Cruces that
have been deemed considering
experiencing blight, um, but
certainly recognizing that the
fairgrounds is that times 1000
and, uh, you know, the, the
concerns that I've heard from
are just people who live around
if there might be displacement,
um, you know, the folks who are,
are dependent and who can't
afford to move anywhere else.
And so, um, you know, given your
presentation, I, I, I feel
comforted knowing that those
voices are going to be part of
that.
that conversation. Um, I do hope
that, uh, if it is deemed that
it's a hardship for those folks
to move, um, that that is
considered and that they don't
get kicked out of their homes,
and I know that that's, those
are those conversations that,
that will be had. So I do
appreciate that, uh, because we
don't want people to lose their
homes. That's not the point of
this at all. Uh, the point of
this is to try and create more
housing and more vibrant
community. Um, so I do
appreciate that. So on that
note, is there, uh, the will of
the Senator Sheriff, did you
have a question? So I was gonna
emotions, um, but, uh, because
there's still things out there,
I would move a, a no
recommendation. So it gets to go
to finance and we send a message
that there's still work to be
done.
So
That is the motion of a no
wreck. Is there a second of that
No Rick?
There is a 2nd, so you're gonna
take a vote on a do pass with no
recommendation, a vote yes. Am I
correct on that, Senator word? A
vote yes means that you support
the no wreck. They vote no means
that you do not support the no
wreck and then we will go to a
second ocean, if that does not
pass. So, if you will, Rebecca.
Senator Figaro.
No.
Senator had a meal? No.
Senator O'Malley is excused
Senator Paul.
Senator Ramos.
Sanchez.
Senator.
Senor? No.
Senator Bergman's.
Senator Hamlin. No.
Or yeses.
Right.
So the no re uh did not pass on
a 4 to 5. Uh, so is there a
second motion, and I'm sure. I'd
like to move a do not pass on
Senate Bill 481, and a due pass
on Senate tax business and
Transportation Committee
substitutes with the two
amendments rolled in to a 10
version as we do and judiciary,
so it comes out of here. I, I
don't think you can amend a sub
technically, so it needs to come
out as a clean sub, so that'd be
the substutemo very different
motion. Do we have a second.
In stereo.
Um, so we can, whatever name is
easiest for you to write, Hamio
or Figueroa.
Thank you.
So the three of you, well, then
you all can fight for it if it's
3 of you. Uh, if you will, go
ahead and please take the vote.
Senator Figueroa.
Yes.
Senator had a meal. Senator
O'Malley.
I excused, Senator Paul.
Senator.
Senator Sanchez.
Oh
Senator your share.
Send it to work.
Senator Bergman.
Senator Hamblin, we have 6 yeses
and 3 no.
So you received a due pass from
6 to 7.
No, we've got Senator Ramos' yes
vote. So it is 6 to 3, so you
have a do pass.
Congratulations. Thank you so
much, we will continue to work
on this.
Thank you. Now we have Senate
Bill 401. Senator Padilla,
and then uh just to give you,
Senator Pedia, you also have
Senate Bill 277, so you'll,
these bills go on to Senate
Finance and then Senate
Judiciary, then, uh, Senator
Gonzalez is here, we will go to,
he has 2 bills, then we'll pop
uh Senator Munoz right after
Senator Gonzalez, all depending
on who gets here first. So
Senator Padilla, you have Senate
Bill 401. OK, thank you, Madam
Chair, and, uh, Madam Vice Chair
and ranking.
member and members of the
committee. I'm Senator Michael
Padilla. I'm here with uh the
acting director of the Office of
Broadband Access and expansion,
um, Madam Chair, I just have one
word for you.
Right.
Here we are again.
One more time. Thank you so much
for hearing us. Essentially what
we're trying to do here is to
continue the work that this
legislature has so admirably
done, uh, when we created the
Office of Broadband Access and
expansion. I was happy to carry
that and get it through, and we
just continue to see it
flourish, uh, the aim and the
goal of that office was to
really streamline things, bring
them into a an efficient and um
an area that that sits in 11
concept and the throughput is
there to make sure that we're
being efficient with our.
dollars, this is another move in
that direction, uh, Madam Chair.
So essentially it aims to
enhance educational technology
infrastructure across the state.
The bill seeks to achieve this
by amending the severance tax
bonding Act to provide funding
for education technology
projects, which I know we all
know is extremely important.
Those dollars actually come
together and they help us to
leverage E-rate dollars, any
number of other things out of
the federal government, um, and
then it also creates the
education technology
infrastructure fund and
transfers oversight
responsibility to the Office of
Broadband access and expansion.
Some of the key provisions are
that we amend the severance tax
bonding Act as I mentioned, uh,
the bill proposes changes to
changes to the severance tax
bonding Act to allow the
issuance of supplemental
severance tax bonds,
specifically for education
technology to make sure that our
schools are where they need to
be. This suggests adjustment
aims to secure dedicated funding
for enhanced uh educational
technology statewide for all of
our communities. The second key
provision is it creates the
education technology
infrastructure fund, um, it
establishes the education
technology infrastructure.
fun, which will uh receive
proceeds from the newly
authorized bonds.
Third is uh transfers, uh, it
transfers the oversight and
responsibilities of those of
those dollars to the Office of
Broadband Access and expansion,
as it was our goal to continue
to streamline this dovetail it,
bring it all together as we've
been doing. Why would we want to
do this? The reason we want to
do this is enhanced educational
access across the state
regardless of where you live, I
improved learning outcomes. Uh,
it will create a, to some
degree, uh economic development
for our state, investing in
broadband as we know
infrastructure, not only
it's education, but also
simultaneous uh simultaneously
it stimulates economic growth by
attracting businesses and
creating opportunities in the
technology sector, and when we
bring adequate broadband to a
particular area where it wasn't
before. All boats rise together,
and I think that really helps in
a, in a big way. And then the
fourth reason we want to do this
is it streamlines the
administration, which is what we
wanted to do with broadband.
So those are all the reasons I
brought this to you today. I do
have, uh, the acting director of
the Office of Broadband Access
and Expansion, and I'd like him
to say a few words as an opening
statement, and then we'll go
where you want to go, Madam
Chair.
Thank you so much. Go ahead,
Drew.
Madam Chair, thank you for the
opportunity to be here and uh
talking about Senate Bill 401.
This is a really
Longbill, but it does something
very simply. It moves the
authority and the funding from
the Senate, the public schools
Facility Authority for the state
Education Network from the
public schools Facility
Authority over the opposite
broadband. This is something we
are already doing through a
memory and of understanding or
am I agreement between the two
agencies, but it's complex and
moving the money across, uh, you
know, dealing with personnel,
which we actually were able to
transfer last year, uh, has been
helpful to getting the
education, the state education
network launched.
Uh, which was July 1st of this
last year. So these are very
important tools, and we have the
expertise in house, uh, we have
the contractors between uh
network engineers. We have uh
the 7 different node locations
around the state that we've
contracted with universities and
we're expanding those on an
ongoing basis to make sure that
we can actually serve all of the
schools that wish to join the
network. And so there's uh
support from the public schools
Facility Authority to make this
transfer happen to help with
governmental efficiency and
making sure that we don't have
to.
Continue the administrative
burden of two different agencies
touching this. It also helps
with risks in that the Office of
Broadband has been paying for
assets like the State Education
Network nodes around the state,
uh, while the at least
infrastructure for the network
itself has been paid for by, uh,
the public schools Facility
Authority funds. So bringing
those two things in to
streamline is incredibly
important as we move forward as
you know, future
administrations, future
directors may or may not want to
continue these things. It could
strand assets on either side of
the fence, and so we
I want to make sure that that's
a really important thing to have
in one place.
Thank you, sure.
Great. Thank you so much. Um,
and so what we're gonna do is
just looking at the time and the
amount of bills that we have,
um, we are going to just buy a
show of hands. How many people
in the audience are in support
of this legislation?
OK, if you will keep your hands
up. Thank you. 123. All right,
we have one person online, uh,
is OK, you can go ahead and put
your hands down by a show of
hands, how many in the audience
are in opposition of this
legislation. We have 2. OK, so
for time purposes, we're
recording that there are 2 in
opposition, that there are 3 in
support.
For support. Thanks for making
sure. Bye y'all gonna just start
raising.
And so, um, at this point, yeah,
last time we had somebody
raising two hands, and I was
like, that doesn't count, that's
cheating. Um, so now we're gonna
go ahead and go to the
committee, uh, do the, does the
committee have any, uh, any
questions, comments, concerns?
If there are no questions or
comments or concerns, Senator
Wirth. Madam Chair, I do in our
analysis, it does say that
typically the
PSCOC approves the projects, but
recently determined some of the
expenditures proposed by OBAE
were not allowable uses of the
fund.
Can you give us an update of
what, what were those, what
happened?
It's a very good reason. It's an
extremely good reason.
Uh, Madam Chair and, uh, leader,
uh, this is because 2 years ago
we had the constitutional
amendment passed, and so the
Office of Broadband, you know,
believes that state funds
appropriated for broadband, uh,
can be used directly for
services and so there's some
disagreement about, about that
between the two entities, uh,
but given that the, the council,
uh, you know, has the authority
that sided with them.
Madam Chair, I think that was
your bill in judiciary last
night.
was kind of doing that last
mile. Uh, any issue, there's
some flag, any problem with the
Zuni lawsuit doing this? Can you
just address that?
I'll take that one. So Madam
Chair, and Majority Leader,
yeah, I think this is actually
gonna help in that area in a
really big way. I mean, we've
seen deployment on um Indian and
tribal lands in, in a big way as
a result of the efforts of this
office and the dollars that have
come in, and I think this is
going to bring some educational
opportunities and people from
To contribute to those
communities that they've never
had access to before. So I think
this is actually going to help
with the Zuni lawsuit.
And have we had this bill
before?
Seem to do I remember this or
no? I, I, I'll ask the director,
but we
So we have a
38er with you right now, I think
we were, it was something like
170 pages last year that we
didn't get it all done, so.
OK, so this, so I seem to
remember.
I remember the joint powers
agreement and, and, and the gist
of this is you're already doing
it just under the umbrella of
PSCOC and this will move it
over, streamline it, streamlines
it, and, and just one final
question, what type of
oversight? I mean, who on is it,
are you as a director making the
decision of the allocation or
just to help me out I'm moving
high speed here, so.
Uh, Madam Chair, leader, it's a
great question. So we have
oversight in multiple
capacities, uh, both with DFA,
right? Uh, as well as we have,
uh, you know, oversight and
looking at those projects with
the state broadband plan, so we
have to submit that every year
to the legislature and to the
governor's office and the state
education network is one of
those that we've been placing in
our broadband plan on a yearly
basis, um, and certainly we're,
we're open to feedback and
conversations if there's
concerns about any of the
projects we're doing.
Um,
not.
Thank you, ma'am, Chair.
Thank you, Senator Figueroa, and
then do I see Senator Ramos? OK.
Thank you, Madam Chair. The um
FIR also brought up that moving
it over might change the
requirements for local match,
and you talk about that a little
bit.
Madam Chair, Senator, uh,
There's gonna be no change in
the program. We've been running
this since uh 23, and we
actually got the network
launched, uh, last year, E-rate,
uh, is part of that program, and
the state match is still going
to be eligible for those, for
those schools.
OK, madam chair and sponsor,
talk about capacity. You're
already doing the work, it's
cumbersome, but this is
expanding in the state education
network, hopefully is expanding.
How are you going to manage this
work.
Uh, Madam Chair, uh, Senator, so
we've been increasing our staff,
uh, over the last couple of
years, and we've been hiring
experts in the fields, uh,
including having to hire
engineers, uh, we've been hiring
uh folks to manage the network
operation center as well as the
uh the cybersecurity operations
uh for it and as we expand the
network, uh, we're going to have
to, you know, increase the size
of those. We've gone and
connected 8 entities right now.
Uh, we're going to see more and
more, uh, entities join, so
whether it's a school district
or a charter school, uh, and so
it's again, optional for schools
to opt in, but we want to make
sure that we can provide those
appropriate services for them.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Last
point is at the top of page 4 of
our of our fiscal impact report.
The final two schools in New
Mexico without fiber.
are expected to be connected by
June 30th, 2025. I don't think
we stop.
And recognize the work that has
been done. Think about where we
were in 2019, and the fact that
we have 2 schools left.
That do not have fiber, and they
will be connected this year is
an amazing accomplishment for
New Mexico. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Senator Figueroa.
Senator Ramos, and then Senator
Jaramillo. Madam Chair, on the
uh Ma centers on the uh.
If I are, it says that there's
no recurring appropriation, but
yet we have recurring loss from
the public school capital.
Olay fund. Can you explain that?
Madam Chair, uh, senator, so
the, the $10 million is in
severance tax bond authority to
be able to operate the network
in an ongoing basis, and that's
uh been existing statute for
many years at this point, and up
to now the the largest
expenditure that we've, uh,
we've requested from the PSCOC
is 9.8 million. Uh, last year we
did 6.4 million. Uh, so on a
given year, we have to manage
the appropriate expenses as we
build and and.
maintain the network and we'll,
of course, you know, do this,
this going forward, so we don't
need the full 10, we won't go
for the full 10. We'll need to
be able to maintain the system
though. Madam Chair and Senator
Ramos, excellent question.
They've also been hit by all of
these massive cost escalations
as well. So I think that that's
a good sweet spot where to put
that.
I'm sure that's all I got. Thank
you. Thank you so much, Senator
if you go, I'm sorry, Senator
had a meal. It's not like you
two would like yeah,
Madam Chair, if memory serves me
correctly, is there a way that
this bill would help us build a
public schools, and I know you
help every school, but for some
reason, I'm thinking Chimayo
Elementary, and I'm not sure if,
if my memory is right right now.
I'm a little tired with the time
change, but is there a way this
would help us know public
schools specifically Chimayo
Elementary.
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator, it's,
it's an excellent question. This
is where the efficiency really
comes in. We have grant funds in
other places and having the
state education network, we've
actually been able to leverage
that network to do a couple of
really big projects. We just
have announced 10 projects now,
uh, for different school
districts around the state,
including for Espanola public
schools and for Chimayo, and we
are connecting students directly
in the home through the network
for 3 years for free internet,
and that gets to addressing
those those students in need.
And Madam Chair and Senator Jara
me another excellent question. I
will say that all of Gallup
schools now, and I'm hoping that
we will get this for everybody,
um, are completely have
redundant services now, so
these, these, these weird things
that have happened to Gallup
over the years, they're suddenly
poo poof, they're gone because
of the work done by, by this
group, and that's positively
affecting all of those schools.
And Madam Chair, Senator, so
thank you. I did remember
something about Chimayo and the
reason why, because we have a
large population of grandparents
raising grandkids in Chimayo who
weren't.
connected to the internet. And
by having this come in with
those 3 years is gonna make a
major impact in the community
that needs it. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
All right. Thank you. Any other
questions?
What is the will of the
committee?
I love you.
I think we have a new pass from
Senator Hadamio. We have a 2nd.
2nd from Senator Figaro.
Is there anybody in that
position with the do pass.
Right, please take the roll.
Senator Figueroa.
Yes,
signature had a meal.
Senator O'Malley is excused
Senator Paul.
Senator Ramos.
Sanchez,
Senator share.
It.
Senator work, yes. Did you say?
Yes.
And
yes.
Senator Hamblin. Yes, yes, yes.
6 yeses and 3 no's, you have to
pass.
OK. If you will, yes.
OK
11
have the time.
So
you already presented one.
but.
Yeah, thank you, uh.
Uh, chair and vice chair and
ranking member and members of
the committee. I'm Senator
Michael Patilia. I do have uh
Elizabeth Johnson, associate
general counsel for the Office
of the Superintendent of
Insurance and Alma Tapia,
financial analyst, uh, analysis
supervisor for the Office of the
Superintendent of Insurance, and
essentially uh we're here for
Senate Bill 277.
We've uh sort of all picked up
an OSI bill this here and I
think this has been a fun
experience for all of us. And
so essentially what we're doing
here is um we're proposing to
amend, to make amendments to the
state's insurance holding
company law. The bill aims to
enhance regulatory oversight and
enhance the financial stability
of insurance holding company
systems operating within New
Mexico, um, you know,
essentially the key provisions
are that um how we kept uh how
group capital calculation
requirements will will be
outlined in the law. Uh, there
are some exemptions, uh.
Uh, in the legislation, some of
those are systems with a single
user uh systems already subject
to group capital calculations,
systems supervised by a non-US
group, um, and the other
provision is a liquidity test to
ensure that they are protecting
all the assets that they're
responsible for. Again, why
would we want to do this? It
enhances financial oversight,
alignment with national
standards to make sure that we
are competitive and insurance
companies operating in New
Mexico are completely
competitive with, with the rest
of the country, uh, targeted
regulatory focus and uh
policyholder.
protection, but the bottom line
is, and why we really need this,
is to make sure that we maintain
our NA NAIC compliance and
certification. I'm gonna ask,
um, Ms. Johnson and Ms. Tay to
say a couple of words, and then
Madam Chair, we'll go over
wherever you want to.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, I only
really have one thing to say,
and it's that, um, again, like
Senator Patilia said, this is a
requirement for us to maintain
our national association of
Insurance Commissioners
accreditation, um, they gave us
a deadline of the end of this
year, so that's why we brought
the bill now versus um next
session and um I will stand, oh.
We also have an amendment.
From us.
Madam Chair, I move 0.231614.1
amendment for discussion
purposes, we do have that
amendment and we'll give you an
explanation, uh, if someone, oh,
we did get a move, OK, whenever
you're ready, ma'am, sure.
Go ahead.
Madam Chair and uh rep as
senators, um, this amendment was
brought to our attention by some
um
Some folks from the industry and
um it's very simple. The primary
thing that it does is it, it
actually defines uh what a large
life insurer is, um, a large
life insurer subject to the
stress, the liquidity stress
test, but that was not defined
in the bill, so now we define it
as um an entity with assets that
exceed a threshold of $1 billion
in value and that issues of
policy to guarantee payment to
one or more named beneficiaries.
When an insured person dies, so
that's, that was just a
clarification point.
And I think that's all for now.
There's a couple of other things
on the amendment, but as you can
see, it was dated a few days
ago, so I can't exactly remember
what all it does.
Is there a discussion on the
amendment?
Um, Madam Chair and senators, I
remembered, um, 0.3 and points 4
on the amendment, um, ensure
that
All this information is subject
to the confidentiality
provisions and statutes, so
that's also very critical. Thank
you.
Senator figure, did you still
have a question?
I did a question on the
amendment, 0.2 on the amendment,
with assets that exceed $1
billion in value, is that a
standard definition of a large
life insurance company, or are
we doing something unusual
there, madam chair.
So, Madam Chair and senator,
Believe it or not, large life
insurer is actually a term of
art, so we didn't even
necessarily have to include this
threshold, but that is standard
threshold.
OK, that's all for me.
Thank you. And can you just say
again what this section we're
citing in the um
Amendment is the 59A.
Yes, um, Madam Chair, that 59A
3724 is a confidentiality
statute that requires the OSI to
keep certain financial and
proprietary information
confidential, and we felt it was
important to go ahead and
reference it in this.
As well.
Thank you. Is there any other
discussion on the amendment?
Is there any
Is there any objection to that
motion?
Seeing none.
Amendment is adopted.
Would you like to continue? Is
there anything more?
I think we're good, Madam Chair.
We're ready for you.
OK, we'll go to the audience. Is
there anyone here in support of
this bill?
One
And is there anyone in
opposition saying that we only
have one in from direction from
the chair. We're going to just
register support.
Is there anyone online?
In support or opposition?
No.
So are there any questions?
There's a motion for a due pass
as amended.
Any discussion.
Any objection?
See none, you have a due pass.
Unanimously thank you and thank
you.
All right, Senator Gonzalez is
here. So Senator Gonzalez, we're
going to have you do both of
your bills.
If you want to go ahead and do
the UNM School of Medicine
first. That is a bill that we
will hold committee because that
is in consideration for the tax
package.
Should we get some final reports
on that.
So this bill we will just hear
and then we will hold.
And then we'll jump to Cenel
320, uh, right after that.
Senator Gonzalez, it's all
yours.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair,
members of the committee held
with the House Bill 464 and uh
Uh, this is, um, building you
mean send a bill, correct? Yes,
thank you.
For rebuilding UNM School of
Medicine.
And uh this bill does is 3 major
things.
Number one, it creates a fund in
statute intended to.
To be used to provide funding.
For the rebuilding of the UNM
School of Medicine Building at
the Health Science Center at
UNM.
The second part it um.
It utilizes the revenue
currently paid.
By E and M Hospital through
government gross receipts, tax
provided approximately 32
million annually to the School
of Medicine building fund.
And the third thing that he does
it, it also requires.
A 4 million annual contribution
to the building fund.
From the school of medicine
self-generated revenues, and the
4th part of what the bill does
is uh.
There are times of limitations
on the duration of this fund and
sunset dates on the revenue
stream that feeds into it.
Um, Madam Chair, remember, so I
have my expert witness here,
Doctor Richard from UNM.
And I will yield to him for some
month.
Further comments to the
legislation.
So Madam Chair and committee
members, thank you very much for
the opportunity to speak on
behalf of this bill. I'm Michael
Richards, uh, executive vice
president of the UN Health
Sciences Center and CEO of our
health system and is Senator
Gonzalez has talked about this
bill actually creates a funding
mechanism for us to replace the
UNM school of medicine building,
but I'd really like to just say
that this is actually not as
much about a building as it is
about building the workforce for
healthcare for the state of New
Mexico, as we know, the
required really to have a, a
significant amount of time for
healthcare providers to be in a
clinical delivery system to be
able to, to achieve their
degrees and um and so we've been
really plateaued recently over
the last 10 or 15 years, with
growing our educational programs
because our clinical delivery
system has not grown. However,
we're on the eve of some major
changes in our clinical delivery
system with the opening of our
critical care tower, and that
really creates a very unique
opportunity for the state of New
Mexico.
So as our clinical delivery
system is growing, we now have
the capacity to, to then put
learners in that delivery system
and be able to grow our
educational programs. In fact,
Madam Chair, we've set a goal to
double the size of all of our
health profession programs
associated with the School of
Medicine over the next 10 years.
That includes undergraduate
medical education or MDs. It
includes the biomedical
scientists, those are the
masters and PhD level
scientists, but it also includes
all of our health.
profession programs outside of
nursing and pharmacy. So that's
PTOT EMS of physician
assistants. And so those really
represent about 700 students a
year in the school of medicine.
So that you can unique
opportunity for us is that we
can now grow those programs, but
we need a new physical plan for
the School of Medicine. The
current physical plant was built
in 1967 and is at the end of its
life. We've done some
significant work to, to
determine that the only real
option for us is to replace this
building, um, and so as part of
that, uh, work we did a um
significant programming of what
it would take to get into the
right sized building for a
school of medicine. We've put
together a business.
plan which we've advanced, and
we've also benchmarked this, so
that when we advance this, what
is a what is a very significant
project. We do know that this is
the size building that we need
because it has been benchmarked
against other academic medical
centers and other schools of
medicine. And so with that,
Madam Chair, I'll stand for
questions.
All right. Thank you very much,
Senator Gonzalez. Any other
follow up before we go to
community support or public
testimony.
All right, so by a show of hands
in the audience, how many are in
support of this legislation?
seeing don't be shy if you want
to.
OK, see none.
Everybody in the audience in
opposition of this legislation.
See none. There is one person
online.
Um, so just for brevity's sake,
Senator, we're gonna go ahead
and just mark her support, um,
but not hear public testimony.
So we're gonna go straight to
the committee if that's all
right for you?
I'm sure that's fine. Great. Uh,
all right. So do we have
questions, comments, concerns
from the committee?
Senator, uh, thank you, Madam
Chair. I, uh, I'm all in on
this, I think this clearly does
fit into the whole discussion
we're having.
About health care shortage. This
is kind of the long term
solution. We've got to get the
thing built in order to get the
students in and make it happen.
So just a couple of things. I
understand there's discussion of
upfront money that's already
part of the budget. Did that
come over from House Bill 2,
kind of the startup money for
this, and you may not have the
answer to that. I just heard
that there was some, again,
we're looking at lots of
different funding sources, um,
is what I understand, so I'm not
sure if you can help with that.
Hisso, Madam Chair and Senator
Wirth, yes, in the capital, um,
appropriation for this year
where uh anticipating a $30
million for the design of this
facility. So we've, um, already
spent the money for the
programming and planning work
that is already occurred and and
the associated business plan,
but we're hoping that that there
will be a $30 million dollar
design appropriation this year.
One of the important pieces of
this bill, um, is that, is that
it would then create a a funding
stream which would allow
us to then do the site
preparation and enabling
projects that will be required
for us to start construction on
a project such as this in about
November of 2026. It's also
important to note that there is
another potential funding
mechanism that has been
contemplated, and that is the
House Bill 449, which is the
higher education major projects
fund. So as you'll see in the uh
this particular bill, this, this
covers about half of the cost of
that capital project, it is
contemplated.
That, uh, that the higher
education major funds project
would would potentially be the
source for the other half of
this project.
And Madam Chair, the total cost
is how much?
So, Madam Chair and, and Senator
worth the total cost of this
project is about $600 million.
OK. So,
Just asking, I mean, if, and I
guess my next question, is it,
is it 32 million or 38 million,
the FIR originally was 32
million, and I'm looking at a
new FIR that says 38 million, so
I'm curious, did that a new
estimate?
So,
so, Madam Chair and, and Senator
Werth, what I'm referring to is
the appropriation that would be
for the design. So what you're,
what you may be referring to is
the FIR that was provided by the
legislative Finance Committee.
And so what that may be showing
is that the GGRT that is
specifically from UNM Hospital,
which is what we're advocating,
um, allocating to this project,
that is $32 million
approximately $32 million a
year, and with an additional
$4 million contribution from
clinical revenues from the
School of Medicine.
So on Madam Chair, and this may
be a question for Mr. Torres. I
mean, it says here that it's 38
million, um, and so maybe I can
yield to Izzy for an update on.
The additional 6 million in the
last week.
Mr. Chair, uh or Madam Chair,
um, Senator, thank you. The
difference is that the GGRT
being earmarked is entire GGRT
that hospitals pay in the entire
state. So we are identifying
that there are some GGRT
revenues outside of what UNM
pays. So UNM may pay about 32
million, but there are some
other revenues out there, in
addition to that 32 million
identified by also the Tax and
Revenue Department. And so the
full pot, I think it's closer to
30.
And I'm sure, why do we want, if
this is for you and I'm, I mean
we need feels to me like that's,
we're gonna have a whole bunch
of unhappy.
folks, if they're GGRT is
getting allocated for UNM
Hospital. I mean, so I assume
I'm hearing there might be an
amendment to narrow that down,
which gets the UNM portion is
32, though that's consistent is
what I'm hearing.
Yes so Madam Chair and Senator
Wirth, yes, that was identified
through the FIR through the
legislative Finance Committee.
The intent was really to only
allocate the GGRT associated
with UNM Hospital and the
specific language that we would
advocate for the amendment would
be, um, instead of saying you
and hospitals, we would use the,
the reference to a state
educational institution
established under Article 7,
Section 2 of the New Mexico
Constitution that leases and
operates a county-owned
hospital.
within limit it to those funds
only associated with UNM
Hospital. Great. So, ma'am, I
think that, again, as we
consider trying to figure out
how we're gonna do this, that's
certainly something we want to
do and and chairs at a 7 year
proposed.
Distributions so it'd be a
sunset at the end of 7 years.
So, Madam Chair and Senator
Wirth at this moment, that's
what we're recommending that we
would do a seven-year. Again,
one of the things that we would
contemplate on this is that
depending upon the um the
progress of the higher education
major projects fund, um, which
is being advanced this year,
which would potentially have an
appropriation in the next
session. That is contemplated as
one of the other sources. It
could be that, that in the next
legislative session a
decision may be made that, um,
that that fund would be, um, a
more appropriate source and for
more than 50%, at which time
then this amendment for for this
particular GGRT could be
shortened to match and
complement the funding that
would be available through the
higher education Major Projects
Fund and just madam chair, I
assume that the extent that the
capacity for a tax package is
shrinking, and we can't do the
full amount of this, I assume.
That just means we're gonna be
looking at the different pots to
try and fill in the gaps. So
Madam Chair and Senator Worth,
that is correct. And one of the
things that makes this
particular bill again attractive
for at least the very first
phases of this project is that
it does allow us to stay on the
timeline that would, that would
have us graduating the first
cohort in, in 2034.
Great. Thank you, Madam Chair.
That's all I have.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Figueroa.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Senator
Wirth got to two of my
questions, sunset needs to be
added and narrowing it down to
just the one hospital, but Madam
Chair, maybe you remember,
didn't we last year passed the
bill.
To reinstate the tax on the
hospitals so that we could use
the money to get a 3 to 1
federal match in Medicaid, and
is this that money? Are we gonna
be losing not just 32 million,
but the 3 to 1 federal match
with it. I don't remember if
that's the GGERT or not. So,
Madam Chair and, and Senator
Figueroa, so thank you. So no,
the, this particular GGRT is not
associated with that healthcare,
um, access.
Act that was passed last year.
That is an assessment that is to
other hospitals, not UNMH. UNM,
UNM generally pays for um our
portion of the state chair for
almost all of our enhanced
Medicaid payments through an
intergovernmental transfer. And
so we, we transfer approximately
165 to $170 million through a
very different mechanism to
cover our enhanced Medicaid
payments.
Thank you Madam chair, that's my
only question. Thank you so
much, Senator Figuero. Anybody
else?
Pregnant.
I'm sure my questions have been
answered as well. I'm just
wondering.
Whoever wants to answer this,
honestly, since this is a bill
will hold and we need these
amendments, how, how we do that.
Do we need to have the sponsor
bring them to us.
So I just think, Madam Chair, as
we discussed the mechanics of
the tax package to the extent we
do it the way we've done it
before. It's a Senate
amendments, it's gonna happen
here. We just need to make sure
that the proposed amendments are
built into that so that we can
all see them and then they just,
it'll be a substitute for a
whole string of different bills
potentially, and it can include
these and we can have a chance
to discuss it at that point.
OK, so can we ask the sponsor to
bring us a copy of a bill with
those amendments also.
Yeah, we just need to, we, we're
gonna need the specific
amendments for sure.
Senator Gonzalez, if you want to
work in Senator Burton's, I
don't know if you're able to
work with Senator Gonzalez just
to make sure. I think they have,
they know what they need to,
they proposed the amendments as
well, so we just need a copy of
a piece of paper that says it.
Thank you. That would be
helpful. And, you know, as, as
I've shared with, with the
committee that we're still kind
of in flux and it's changing on
whether or not we're going to
have a tax package or what the
amount is. Hopefully we'll know
something soon, um, and so that
would be great if you can go
ahead and get those as soon as
possible, Senator Gonzal.
well,
thank you. Are there any other
questions or comments from the
committee, because this is a
bill that we hold.
Uh, see you then. All right.
Thank you very much. You can, we
can move on from Centel 464. We
are moving on to Senate Bill
320. Thank you.
I will take it. Um, so we are
going on to mobile home
replacement initiatives.
Turn off my mic so you don't
hear me eat.
You ready?
Gonzalez, go ahead and start
whenever you want. Thank you
all, Madam Chair, with um on a
Senate Bill 320 and uh this is
with a non-metro area Agency of
agent NM AAA, which operates
under the umbrella of the North
Central New Mexico economic
development district currently
runs senior homes repair
programs funded by the New
Mexico Mortgage Finance
Authority, the program assists
low-income seniors who are home.
owners withering pairs up to
25,000 per home. Uh, Madam
Chair, um,
Uh, members, so there's quite a
few counties that are involved
with this, the number of homes
that have been assisted, but I
do have two expert witnesses and
no, I will yield to them for a
few comments.
And we have this Monica Beta,
director of um North Central
Economic Development.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. I'm
Monica Beta, executive director
of the North Central New Mexico
Economic Development District.
Go ahead, Sara.
Madam Chains, my name is Sandra
Sosa, Healing coordinator.
Thank you very much. Um, this,
uh, a senior home repair program
that we've been operating under
the non-metro AAA for about a
year now, with the program we
have repaired 22 homes in um
and, and let me explain first,
the non-metro AAA covers the
entire state except for
Bernalillo County. So this is
nearly a statewide program. We
do have the Metro AAA in
Bernalillo County that covers
that area. So we are assisting
32 counties. Um, in one year of
this program, we've repaired 22
homes.
In Santa Fe San Miguel Rio Riba
Socorro and Union Counties, we
have 123 homes on the waitlist,
48 of those have been
pre-approved our pipeline is in
Sandovalt House Quay, Catrin Lin
Lincoln Grant Donana, Otero,
Eddie, and Lee Counties. Our
biggest obstacle though has been
contractors, and I bring this up
because you talked about
procurement earlier, earlier,
um, we do have about 4
pre-approved contractors, they
have to go through a full
procurement.
process with us before we hire
them. We have to check their
bonding, their license, if we're
doing mobile home replacement,
they have to be certified for
that or have a license for that,
and we are about to bring on
Sandra was telling me, I believe
6 new contractors in the
southern part of the state,
which will really allow us to
eat through this wait list that
we have right now.
But in running the program, we
right away ran into a problem,
which I think many of you from
the rural areas and even the
urban areas will recognize we
ran into dilapidated mobile
homes immediately and situations
where if we were to not, or if
we were to require the $25,000
limit on these homes, we would
have had to displace the
individual in the home. They
would have been homeless. So,
um, thankfully MFA was a great
partner with us and allowed us
to replace these.
mobile homes, but they are
extremely common. We are finding
them more and more. And so
fortunately, um, we have had
legislators who have recognized
this need and have said let's
put more money specifically into
mobile home replacement. We are
doing this for about
approximately $100,000 per
mobile home and let me explain
why, even if we buy the mobile
home less than $100,000 we have
to haul off and dispose of the
old mobile home we often, we
have to reconnect the utilities,
and we often have to.
use, uh, do site work sometimes
these mobile homes don't have
proper plumbing that will meet
code. We have had um seniors
living in deplorable conditions
without indoor plumbing, um,
using buckets in the restroom.
We've had roofs falling in. This
work is just extremely,
extremely important in our
state. I can't emphasize um some
of the problems we've been able
to address through Sandra's
program and, and the work of her
contractors. And so this is a
request for an additional $2
million.
To do 18 to 20 mobile home
replacements statewide to
respond to some of the comments
in the fur. This is not intended
to be a recurring appropriation.
This was intended to be a
non-recurring. I don't know why
the fur states that it's
recurring, it is in House Bill 2
currently, however, the House
Bill 2 language doesn't say who
it goes to. It just says it goes
to DFA. We have an operating
successful program. Um, we don't
need to set it up. There's
already criteria. There's
contractors, we would like it to
go to our program so we can
serve the state and that was my
final comment. The first says
that DFA says there's, there's
need for more planning and
administration. We have a
program that's ready to go.
We're ready to repair more
homes. We just need more funds
and more contractors on the
ground. Thank you for your
support and your consideration.
All right, thank you so much.
Uh, at this point, we're gonna
go ahead and go to audience
responses or anybody in the
audience who is in support of
this bill by show of hands.
to
3. All right. Anybody in the
audience in that position.
See that? Is there anybody
online? All right, I'm gonna go
ahead and let the 3 of you come
up. You're gonna get a minute
apiece.
Go ahead and come on up.
Uh, you will get a 32nd warning.
OK. Thank you, um, Madam Chair,
and uh members of the committee.
My name is Robin Powell. I'm the
director of policy and planning
at mortgage Finance Authority,
and we work in partnership with
North Central on this program,
um, as Monica explained, there's
many seniors who are living in
substandard and unsafe
conditions, and we are proud to
partner and provide the fiscal
oversight for this program
should it get funded. Thank you
so much.
So you'll notice Dan might pull
the microphone down. The reason
why is just because it comes
distorted out over the zoom
recording, so we're just trying
to make sure that people's ears
don't get blown out.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Winter
Torres, and I am the founder and
CEO of New Mexico Eviction
Prevention and diversion. Once I
looked into this bill, I was
very excited because we had
proposed a grant um for aging in
place, specifically for northern
New Mexico folks, um, and we
didn't win it from a national
organization, but for exactly
this type of work, and it is
very necessary and I can say
that I had to bring my parents
in Silver City out of a
dilapidated mobile home.
With holes in the floor and they
used to heat it by just opening
the oven door, so all of the all
of the knobs had melted off and
this is not an uncommon
situation in New Mexico. I think
it is very common, um, and
all of our other mobile home
legislation is probably not
going to make it this year, and
really beg you to um to fund
this. Thank you.
Thank you so much, Senator
Gonzalez, you're, you have an
opportunity to respond or if you
want, we can just go ahead and
go to the committee.
Sure, we're ready for questions.
All right, are there any
questions or comments from the
committee?
moved to pass. We have Du Pass
is our opposition to the DuPass.
We have a second from Senator
Ramos. I feel like an
auctioneer. Is anybody in
opposition of the do pass
motion.
See, the thing is I can't speak
fast. I just know people, so
seeing no opposition, you have a
due pass, uh, 9 to 0.
Mount sure members, thank you. I
wanted to turn off the mic
though because that's gonna blow
everybody's ears. So thank you
very much for the work that
you're doing.
All right, we have a Senate Bill
138.
By the way, Senator Munoz, thank
you for the creamsicles and for
those of you that might be like,
why are they eating popsicles?
Just know that it's 11 days left
to go and Senator Sher got to
deliver the creamsicles on
behalf of Senator Munoz. Every
bit of sugar helps right now.
Uh, several people on this
committee were in judiciary last
night. They were very tired, so
just know that we're not being
laissez-faire about this. It's
just we're looking for calories
everywhere we can. I mean, I got
the wrong.
it's like everybody got an ice
cream is voting yes for my bill.
Oh, I, I don't know where you're
getting at, but you're good for
you for trying.
Yes, all right, Senator Munoz,
you know, every time I do this
and so 10 years ago popped up on
my phone and, and I, we have a
bunch of group of young kids. My
goal is how do we train kids for
the legislature, right?
How do we keep them interested
in this because there's not a
lot of, a lot of young people
move into this, so.
10 years ago, Isaac
I'll think of his name. He's
deputy secretary of Economic
Develop Romero.
is now the Deputy Secretary of
Economic Development.
And so he worked for me, his
legislative staff job worked for
me. Uh.
Danny, who's the governor's
chief of staff, his first job
out of college was working for
me.
And they still wanted to do it
afterwards, and he led to
Adrian who there's a group of
young kids that we're bringing
up and so we're gonna let
Niko, start off with his first
presentation of his building the
see how he's gonna come up in
the legislature. No.
And my son can work for you?
The pay is not that good. An ice
cream bar and a pizza every once
in a while.
Also, do the, uh, so senator, as
your, as your mentoring, um,
there is an uh amendment on this
bill. So if you want to go ahead
and discuss the bill first, and
then we'll move on the
amendment.
Just read this right.
We'll be, we'll be very kind,
you know, and I apologize. I'm
not entirely uh the best at
addressing the chair, um, you
can always just say Madam Chair,
Madam queen,
um, just, you know, any anything
that will pass the
bill
Thank you, Your Majesty,
Your Honor.
So the amendment itself, we,
we're talking about the bill
first.
So what you'll do is you'll
discuss the bill 1st 138 removes
the distributions from the oil
and gas proceeds as and has
passed through entity to the
magistrate fund.
And it passes through the
judicial fund, and those
currently those distributions
are 100,000 a month or 1.2
million in total for the year.
The legislative, Madam Chair,
the legislative fund, uh,
distribution is set to resume in
July 2025. Um, in 2020, the
legislative distribution was
paused, and the MRA and JRA
distributions began.
That will stand for questions.
All right, so, uh, we do have a,
you do have an amendment, so if
you wanna go ahead, can we move
the amendment for discussion?
Madam Chair, I moved 0 230239.1
for discussion purposes
opposition to that?
All right, see then, go ahead.
Thank you, madam Chair, on page
3 item C line 1, it strikes that
entire section. That's what the
amendment does.
Any discussion on the amendment.
OK. Everybody's finding the
page. Senator Ms.
So Madam Chair, send it there
just to clarify, it's it's
reinstating subsection C. OK.
Everybody's looking, so.
We're good. OK. We're making it
go sweat a little bit.
For those who are already there,
is there any questions on the
amendment?
I'll wait to see these two.
Does anybody want to take bets
on what we'll finish tonight.
I know.
I'll, I'll pull the fire alarm
and not right after you, that's
for sure.
Senator, what does the amendment
do? Walk us through. The
amendment puts back in, in, in
the bill we had struck in regard
to distribution of legislative
retirement in December 2024,
each year that employees and
tire association shall assist
Legislative council determined
the amount of retirement
benefits for the ceding year.
This is something that they need
to do every year.
The monthly average receives the
$75,000 mark association so I'm
notified the Department of the
average number, just a
notification of how much they're
gonna transfer.
And so I'm after, that's just
With respect to the legislative
part of the underlying bill. So
you took, you took it out, but
now it's going back in. Got it.
Thank you.
Any other questions on the
amendment?
Can I get a motion on the
amendment?
Is there any opposition to adopt
this amendment?
Be done. All right, you can
continue if you'd like, or we
can go to public comment. You go
to public, right, is there
anybody in the audience who is
in support of this legislation
by a show of hands?
Registering none. Is there
anybody in the audience in
opposition of this bill, by a
show of hands.
We have 2, if you will, go ahead
and come on up, and then we'll
go online, not online.
All right. So you'll get one
minute apiece. Dan will take
care of the microphone. Just
remember you wanna have the
microphone a little bit away
from you, so it doesn't distort.
Go ahead and say your name for
the record and you have one
minute. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Great Trujillo, executive
director of PERA, a little
history on this bill, uh, when
the legislation was passed, the
legislative fund was overfunded
at approximately about 144%, uh,
because of that overfunding, uh,
the legislature agreed to divert
the 2.4 million that they were
putting into that fund.
to the judicial Magistrate
funds, which were in the 50%
funded ratio. Uh, they still
remain there today, uh, when the
legislative, um, contribution
was set to resume. Um, it was
also the intent of the original
legislation to allow those
distributions to continue um up
until those funds are 100%
solvent, a judicial and
magistrate is very small
compared to the overall para
fund, um, so any money that's
either given or taken away does
have a big impact. Uh, so taking
this away, um, without a
additional funding coming in
would put these two plans on us,
uh, path to insolvency.
I'm happily answer any
questions.
Thank you so much.
Madam Chair Karl Resse, uh,
director of the administrative
Office of the courts, we
certainly have no problem with
legislative, um, solvency here,
but unfortunately, the effect on
the JRA and MRA, um, is really
devastating and so uh we, we
have to stay in opposition to
that.
I thank you, Senator Munoz. You
have 5 minutes to respond if
you'd like, or we can go to the
committee. You know, Madam
Chair, there's no doubt that
when we did pension reform
several years ago that we had to
fix a lot of pension funds. This
was one of them that did not get
fixed. Uh, I think I have ran a
bill for a couple years to
include them in the PRA, uh, we
currently have only 197
magistrates and judges that are
in this fund. This is a small
fund. It's never gonna become
solvent.
Uh, the number that's gonna
trigger up this year is going to
go from 1.2 to $3 million
annually into the JRA, uh, the
courts do have some bills out
there, increase their uh
employee employer costs, but it
also increases the benefit.
And that's the biggest cost to
the fund is the benefit.
When you only have 197 people
paying into retirement fund.
There's no way to continue
solvency. I'm not 197, but 100
retire, 197 retirees drawing out
of the fund, and you don't have
enough, it's a pyramid scheme.
How do we
return of money quickly and how
do we get there? When we did
pension reform and we had to do
our financial statements on the
front of our our um
Fiscal statements. That's what
made pension reform have to
happen.
Um, we can be in the 72 to to
solvency and above, but this one
is always gonna be there unless
we increase the cost to the
magistrates and reduced
benefits. And that's the only
way the sun's gonna be solvent
other than than combining them
and meshing them in a terraform
in one of the uh
Couple of funds that we had a
couple of funds that we have
over there in order to make this
fun solved.
This is a conversation that's
that's gonna have to happen at
some point.
And we're gonna have to fix this
fund, uh, if we want to continue
to have retirement out of the
magistrate.
that will stand for question.
All right. Thank you. Now we go
to the committee. Other
questions, comments, concerns
from the committee.
All right, send her to figure
out,
Madam Chair and sponsor the
intent is to force some action
and some conversation to fix
this fund.
Um, why not do a delayed
implementation, like in 2 years
to give them 2 years to make a
decision on which path they're
gonna take, join with an
existing fund or decreased
benefits or make a decision, um
why not do the delayed
implementation.
Madam Chair and senator, you
know, the, the implementation is
gonna, is gonna take up this
shirt of $3 million.
Uh, the legislative pension
pension fund is insolvency, but
we, we've done this a couple
times in the courts has fought
us on moving the, the MRA.
Into a pair of fun.
Um, they come with a bill to
increase.
But they've also increased the
benefits. You cannot have both.
You can increase
The costs and save the fund, but
you can't increase the benefit
at the same time.
And so, if we were to move this
fund into solvency, they'd
increase the benefit, which
would put the fun back to where
it is today.
And that's the balancing act in
pension funds.
Did you doubt that?
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, sponsor. I
Realize that
Either the
Employer and employee rates have
to go up or benefits have to
come down or both to reach
solvency, but with that tiny of
a group.
Like you said, Miss Madam Chair
and sponsor, I'm not sure it's
ever gonna be possible, uh, but
this seems like something that
needs to be fixed in the interim
IPOC committee.
Um
So, may I ask why this bill
wasn't pushed through there.
Madamer.
I, I did not have the time to
introduce this bill through
IPocket, and it's just something
that's been out there that needs
to have a a a tough love
conversation, right? If you
really want to fix something and
you really want a retirement,
then you need to go on the path
to fix it correctly.
And, and so we can't continue to
keep you solvent in the
legislative fund cause we're
drawing down from one fund to to
another fund that that's never
gonna get fixed.
We're gonna draw down and fix
the fun, that would be fine, but
we're never gonna do that until
the, the
Judicial branch decides that
they need to
Trim
And increased costs.
Madame T and sponsor.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Figueroa.
Other questions or comments from
the committee.
And it worked.
Uh, thank you, Madam Pierce. I
just want to understand.
And I remember this, first of
all, a little history, Senator
Ingle found this funding source
for this legislative retirement
plan. It's separate from PERA
and there's lots of noise out
there that somehow, you know,
legislative retirement is mixed
into that PRA fund, but it's got
its own separate dedicated
revenue stream, that's correct,
is it not?
That is correct, Mr. Chairman
Senator. And so, Madam Chair, on
the, on page 2 line 4,
originally this bill had the two
earmarks for the two judicial
funds and I remember when Sen
Senator Engle was the one who
kind of came up with this, if I
remember correctly, but then it
says, and it's struck on or
after July 1st, 2025. So
something was gonna trigger this
year anyway.
Correct, and I just don't
understand what what was gonna
trigger and you're just taking
out that date and making it go
now and getting rid of the other
two earmarks if I'm reading this
right, correct, Mr. Chairman,
Senator, so that it would
trigger the 3 million this year
from the 1.2 annually.
So it would trigger up.
And so that would begin to look
at the legislative policy, but
this is how, how do we really
fix the fun, but that's what the
trigger is from one point.
Yeah, I'm I guess I'm having
trouble seeing. I mean, this
says it will insurance it won't
show that Greg is right here, so
Greg.
It'd be helpful cause I mean,
this just said to the master of
retirement funds in the amount
of $100,000 judicial retirement
fund.
100. I just wanna make sure I
understand because we've got
different numbers. Yeah, Madam
Chair, and, uh.
And worth. so the 1.2 million,
you know, that's what
legislators are putting in 2.4
million each year at that point
in time.
You all stop that to divert it
equally to each.
Each font.
Um, the original legislation
called for restoration of the
legislative portion of the fund
because we knew at some point
we're gonna need money to keep
the legislative fund solvent.
So that is going to be a $3.3
million appropriation into the
legislative fund that would
occur uh in current law with the
with the resumption, the 1.2 for
each other fund would continue
as well until those funds were
100% funded.
So it's 3.3 million into
legislative starting this fiscal
year with a 1.2 diversion for
each fund's continuum.
And so, if, if we don't pass
this bill, the, the 3.3 you're
saying is, is gonna start.
Again this year, correct?
And the difference is we're just
taking out the two other
earmarks.
The way this bill is drafted
and, and what's the
I, I guess the
Just trying to understand the
solvency of the legislative
plan. Does it no longer have the
room to be able to make these
earmarks?
Metal chair in the Senor, uh,
when you guys diverted the
funding, you were 144% funded um
without additional contributions
coming in for that period of
time, you're now at 94%. So, so
restoring the funding keeps this
fund solving going forward.
Yeah, Mr. Cherry, definitely.
You know,
Uh, I can remember the session
with Senator Ingle. He was
really the leader in figuring
this out. I mean, the intent was
never to make all three funds
and solve it. It was to do
diversions up until the point
when
We reached that point, it sounds
like we've reached that point,
so I appreciate thinking about
you. Thank you, Senator Wirth.
Any other questions or comments
from the committee? What is the
will of the committee?
I'm sure I'll move to pass. We
have to pass from Senator Werth
we're all looking at each other.
No, you do it, no, you do it. To
have 2,
Senator Sanchez, we have as a
seconds.
Is there anybody in opposition
of the Dupas motion?
Seeing none, if you will, please
record all in attendance and
support. You have a
9 to 0 dupe.
The expert witness is really
what sold at Senator Mundos, so
you just didn't do anything for
it. I heard he bows at 300
right, thank you very much,
Senator Munoz. All right. Next,
we have Senator Stephanics. We
have 2 from Senators Hispanics.
I saw you.
Then we
We will then move to Senate Bill
323 after Senator Stephanic's
two bills. That bill is a tax
bill that will be held, so we
will hear it, and then we will
move on to the house bills. Sir
Stephanics, you're welcome to go
ahead and start on Senate Bill
122 as amended Thank you, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
This bill came from the interim
legislative Health and Human
Services Inimit, it is a bill to
um set up a process to receive
more.
donated prescription drugs to
give to people who are deemed
worthy. So I'll read a little
synopsis, um, in the Senate, uh,
Health and Public Affairs, we
put on an amendment that the
board of Finance wanted that
deleted healthcare facilities,
which is too bad because health
care facilities have a lot of
leftover pharmaceuticals. And
then the uh 2nd Amendment adds
language stating that the board
may conduct inspections.
Of eligible recipients to ensure
compliance, but the overall
bill,
madam chair and committee is to
update the prescription drug
donation section. This was put
into law back in the
Mid 90s.
The statute currently allows
licensed providers and clinics
to receive prescription drugs
previously dispensed to their
patients before distributing the
donated drugs, a license
provider examines and certifies
the drug has been properly
stored and is suitable for
redistribution, recipients of
the donated prescription drug
accepts all risks and receive
their prescribed drug free of
charge or at reduced rate.
rates. And there are 2
national groups who actually
wrote to me and indicated that
they are distributors of these
prescription drugs. They collect
and then they distribute based
upon the needs of people who
apply, and one was, oh, that's
the wrong bill.
Let's see here.
It was Maddie circle.
And
Serum, S I R U M.
Uh, they actually are national
organizations that are licensed
in many states, including our
own, and they may receive the
pharmaceuticals as well as our
licensed pharmacies around the
state, and there is a process
for an applicant uh to go
through to receive these free
drugs.
So I would stand for questions.
It's a
Bill that would assist people
who can't always afford
expensive, complicated
medications. They have to be
unexpired. They have to be
examined by the pharmacist and
deemed acceptable.
All right, thank you so much
Spanics. Uh, we now go to the
audience, uh, by a show of hands
for the audience is in support
of this bill?
Records showing none. Anybody in
the audience in opposition of
this bill.
Showing none. Anybody online?
OK, so we do have two people who
are in support, but just for
time's sake, we're gonna go
ahead and uh and record those
two and support and now go to
the committee if there are any
questions or comments from the
committee.
We have, we have, you have a
question first? So we have one
question and then we'll go to
the do pass from you, Senator
Bergmans. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Just a quick question,
you seemed, um, not thrilled
about the Sach amendment.
Well, the response to the FIR
it's interesting because um in
reading from these outside
entities, it was determined that
quite a few unused, unexpired uh
pharmaceuticals are at health
care facilities, but the Board
of Pharmacy.
Um, Melissa Salazar was in the
audience. We put that amendment
on for the board of Pharmacy,
which is under RLD and so that
everybody would be happy with
it.
OK, that answers my question.
Thank you.
So Senators to Panic, my mother
was a nurse in a family practice
clinic in El Paso for many, many
years, and those donated uh meds
really helped a lot of people,
um, and this was back in the
80s, and so I'm, I'm glad that
there are still this
opportunity, so I, I appreciate
you bringing this forward. If
there are no other questions or
comments.
We have a do pass on Senate Bill
122 is amended from Senator
Scherer. We have a second from
Senator Sanchez.
Is there anybody in opposition
of this DuPass motion.
See none if you will, please
record all in attendance. You
have a 9 to 0 on uh do pass on
that.
And now we're gonna rip through
set up 80. OK, Cetaphil 80, um,
for those of you who are not in
a group retirement plan, and
some of you aren't retired yet.
But if you are 65 and older, you
either are in a group like ER um
ERB or PERA and you have access
uh to a supplemental or an
advantage plan to put onto your
Medicare. But for people who do
not, if they're not in a group,
they usually
of with Meig Gap.
And Medi Gap is locked, you are
locked in when you take Medi
Gap, which is comparable to a
supplemental but not a full rich
benefits plan. So, in this
country, there are 16 states
that have established open
enrollment periods.
For people to move out of Mediap
into a different plan, and then
there are 4 states that have
open enrollment all year long.
So I uh have a constituent torn
up.
Who brought this to me to um
bring forward she actually moved
to New Mexico from California
and uh you don't have to tell
your story. I'm gonna just sit
down, um, basically, what's
happening is if somebody comes
to move to our state, sometimes
at high altitude starts giving
them symptoms, and they go, oh,
I might need a better health
care plan because if I go to my
healthcare provider, it's gonna
cost
or they might not do the right
procedure.
Right now when you leave one
plan and go to another, you have
to have some medical
underwriting, and of course, Mr.
Ramos has lots of experience
with insurance and we'll know
about this, but this, uh, by
opening up the Mediap
enrollment, people would not
have to go through medical
underwriting. They would not
have to go through a health
exam.
You know, put out on the table
any pre-existing conditions they
have to be able to move into a
plan. Now, some people in the
last committee thought we were
just moving laterally, but it
might be that some people want
to move up.
Let's say that I think I have
cancer or a heart problem. And
my family has decided that they
will pay. Help me pay for a
better plan. I'm not allowed to
leave Mediga to do that. So the
purpose here is it the next plan
could cost a lot more, and
insurance companies can charge
me that. We're not asking for
anything free. We're asking for
2 months, a year, it's called a
birthday rule at your birthday,
you have 2 months in which to
change.
to a plan.
One analysis said it would help
the wrist pools of these
different plans. Another
analysis said it would hurt.
The um wrist pools. So I know
that um I don't know if Brent
Moore's in the audience. He um
opposed this in the last one and
he might have a
Suggested amendment. But I
really believe there are 70
close to 70,000 seniors in our
state that are locked in to this
medi gap.
And not all 70,000 people are
gonna change, believe me, it is
so complicated to change
insurances when you are older,
and lots of times you pick one,
you stick with it until you die.
But um for those people who
would like that option, I would
like to have, give them the 2
month open period.
All right, thank you, Senator
Stephanics. So, uh, by a show of
hands, how many in the audience
are in support of this
legislation.
We have 123. Thank you. How many
in the audience are in
opposition of this legislation.
How come I knew that was gonna
happen?
All right, so why don't we go
ahead and give just briefly,
those of you in support, come on
up, we'll give you one minute
apiece.
And are there, is there anybody
online? Oh yeah, you gave them
to me. So we have 2 people
online that are in support, so
we're gonna have the two of you,
uh, the, the two folks who are
in support, please come on up.
You will have one minute to
speak if you will let, we will
register the folks who are
online, but we're gonna go ahead
and just stick to testimony here
in the room, but they're,
they're support has been
recorded, and then Brent will
have you speak uh in opposition.
So if you will, uh, he's gonna
give you a microphone.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
senators. My name is Susan
Ellenbogan. I'm one of the
70,000 people in New Mexico who
are on original Medicare with a
Mediap plan.
So, uh, a concern was raised in
the last committee that
Well, I just wanted to say there
was a study by KFF which is
Kaiser Foundation.
And it said that
Allowing seniors to switch
metigap plans.
is only one of 7 or 8 factors.
That
Might raise meta gap rates.
The primary reason for the raise
in Mediap rates has to do with
demographics and the health care
that's available in the state.
And I just want to say that
I personally have not been able
to address my
Healthcare issues, because I'm
afraid that if I did, I would be
deemed to have a pre-existing
condition.
And I would not be able to ever
switch Mediap plans, I would be
stuck with what I have.
Despite the rates and premiums
every year for the rest of my
life.
This bill would allow me to
switch plants. Thank you.
Hello, my name is Erica
Anderson, and I work as an
optometrist and this bill could
help our patients be more
eligible for treatments for
things like macular degeneration
or diabetic retinopathy.
Currently, we're facing a little
bit of a crisis where a previous
program called Good Eyes was
paying uh co-pays for people who
couldn't afford better
medications for their eyes. And
this opportunity would allow
them to get insurances that
would help cover them, their
healthcare needs.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Jason Thompson. I'm here
representing Presenius Medical
Care at uh, a global dialysis
provider that operates around 27
dialysis outpatient facilities
in the state and serve around uh
2000 patients that have
end-stage renal disease and then
their analysis of this bill, um,
they feel that it's a really
supportive piece policy that
could just provide um good
opportunity for these types of
patients to get into these
different plans and just to
continue this.
coverage, especially for these
types of um uh conditions that
they have going forward, so we
really appreciate the sponsor's
work and stand and support of
the bill.
Thank you.
Yeah
Madam Chair, members of the
committee.
Sorry. Uh, my name is Ren Moore,
registered lobbyist for
America's Health insurance
plans, and we stand in
opposition to the bill. We stand
in opposition to the bill
because what the committee has
to understand is that Mettaap
policies are very different than
regular, uh, major medical
insurance. Uh, these products
are guaranteed renewable,
they're built so that you sign
up for them when you're
initially signed up for
Medicare, and you continue on
with that lettered policy as you
move forward. They're not really
designed.
For people to move around, and
the issue for America's health
insurance plans or our members
is the idea of adverse
selection. If you don't sign up
when you're 65 and you sign up
when you're 70, you're not
really participating in the
product as it's moving along,
and the issue for us is we have
to offer that product, say, you
sign up when you're 70, we have
to offer it to you at the rate
we would initially, so at the 65
year old rate. And so the, the,
the discussion that we've had
with the sponsor is this
question
of how do we make up that
difference, because as you're
moving along from 65 to 70,
there's a gap, premium has not
come in, and so we respectfully
oppose this bill in states where
they have the birthday rule, as
it's called, uh, the premiums
are higher. Thank you very much,
Madam Chair.
All right, thank you so much to
Senator Stephanics, you have an
opportunity to respond to that,
or if you'd like, we can go
ahead and go to the committee.
Oh. Thank you, Madam Chair. So
we are not asking for a handout
here, uh, individual would pay a
higher premium if they move to a
plan with a higher premium. The
League of Women Voters AUW
didn't come forward in our other
committee to support this, AERP
did not, and the reason is that
AARP has a relationship with
United Healthcare. So, um, we
just left that alone.
Um, this is an insurance
industry.
Debate, but 16 states have the
birthday rule for 2 months and 4
states have an open enrollment
all year round for Mediap.
And I stand for questions or
comments. All right. Thank you
very much, Senator Stephanni.
Are there questions or comments
from the committee that I see
Senator Hu, you know, I'm also
looking at Senator Ramos, but am
I right on set Ramos?
You're good, OK.
Are there any questions,
comments from the committee?
What is the will of the
committee?
Madam Chair, move you pass. We
have a pass from Senator
Bergman's. Do we have a second?
We have a second from Senator
Sanchez.
Is there anybody in opposition
of the DuPass.
So if you will, please take the
role.
Senator Figueroa.
Yes.
Senator had a meal.
Senator O'Malley is excused
Senator Paul.
In to.
Senator Sanchez.
And the sheriff
Senor? Yes.
Senator Bergman.
Senator Hamlin, yes.
And.
Yes.
So you you pass, you have a do
pass, uh, with 6 to 3.
Thank you very much chair
members of the committee. Thank
you very much. All right, now
we've got Senator Risel, so just
a reminder, Senator Azel, this
is Senate Bill 323. This is
potential tax bill, so we are
going to hear it, but we are not
going to vote on it.
Yeah.
So it was a reminder, Senator,
we're gonna give you 10 minutes
to go ahead and present and also
with your expert.
Then we will go to public
comment, then you will have 5
minutes to respond and then we
will go to the committee.
Madam Queen and royal members of
the committee, thank you very
much.
She's been listening all day.
Thank you, Senator yourself.
Madam chair.
I love racing in New Mexico, I
love my performance horses.
After
Depending on what happens here
today, I might not be able to
race ever again in the state of
New Mexico with my horses. Madam
chair, what I'm proposing here
today with.
Senate Bill 323, the changes I
will point out they're very easy
changes on page 2, line 17.
We added weeks we struck.
on days.
The next change is on I'm sorry,
Senator is out, do you have an
amendment? We don't have it
listed as something that is.
Oh, you're just introducing. OK,
my apologies. I'm showing you
where the changes are, Madam
Chair. Thank you
Madam.
I hope that spreads around
throughout the
Madam Queen on page 6 we did add
in pursuant to the Federal
Interstate Horseracing Act of
1978, then in Mexico Horseman's
Association, which was
established in 1966.
is designated as the horseman's
required by that act, and that
is a federal act. Madam chair,
the next.
Oh, change is on page 9.
Lines 7 and 8.
We changed.
Shall be audited by the state
auditor.
We struck commission that state
auditor there.
Madam cheered the last change is
on page 11.
Again, we are designating weeks
instead of days.
And simulcasting New Mexico
horse race meets.
Madame Cheers
Madam cheered the reason we
changed some of this.
The original language in the
racing A, said racing days.
Class B track races 3 days a
week of class 8 track races 4
days a week.
Not all at the same time
usually. There are some
instances where there's a little
bit of a
roll over.
If they race only on those days,
that means those casinos can
only be opened 3 days or 4 days
during the live race meet
wherever it is in the state of
New Mexico.
That's why the change was made
there.
Madam Chair, I mean, Madam
Queen, excuse me, I did it
again. I'll owe you a cookie
instead of the president.
Madam Queen with me today is my
expert witness, Mister Blair
Dunn, and I'd like to have him
say a few words.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Senator,
um.
Probably loud enough without
that certainly long winded
enough without it, but I'll,
I'll use the microphone anyways.
Um, I, I'd like to move through
this fairly quickly and, in
deference to the committee's
time, um, specifically
addressing three things within
the bill, the bill does. The
first is
Uh, I just alluded to the
discussion of weeks and tracks
and resolving some inconsistency
in the statute, uh, to get that
to a a more fair place, and I'll
explain why. And then to deal
with uh change to uh that
affects the interstate horse
racing act and changing the name
or officially recognizing the
New Mexico Horseman as the group
that is recognized under federal
law.
And then finally dealing with
the audit, um, component, but to
begin with, I'd uh appoint the
committee to page 11 of the
bill, which is the Gaming
Control Act portion of the bill,
um, and that's the, the big
addition there in addition to
the days and weeks, which we
think is, is fair to the tracks
and ultimately giving them more
days where they can operate to
get the the machines is that
there's this inconsistency that
you'll see on in paragraph E at
the bottom of page 11, where it
says simulcasting horse race
meets. We've added New Mexico to
that.
If you then turn to page 2 of
the bill and E, which is parent
mutual wagering on simulcast
races, uh, also E in that one,
That deals with, and you will
see at, at the bottom of which
we're not changing on weeks when
they racetrack licensee is
importing a racemeat from
another New Mexico licensed
horse track.
And uh just for information for
the committee there's a, there
is a tension always when it
comes to gaming in New Mexico
between what we do with gaming
compacts for the tribes and the
pueblos versus what we do in
That we were supposed to have
racetracks that had gaming
machines, not casinos that had a
racetrack.
And that, that intent comes
through when you look at E on
page 2, which is out of the
Horseracing Act versus the
gaming Control Act, and it
creates ultimately a loophole,
um, in the intent of the
legislature to have, to not have
New Mexico be where the signal
is coming from in order to
operate those machines. So
really all this does is it makes
the gaming Control Act
consistent with the intent of
the Horseracing Act, which is
that if you're going to operate
a machine, I 11 of these Rainos.
There needs to be live racing
going on in New Mexico, not for
instance in Dubai or some other
place internationally or
nationally, um, because what
we're really trying to do is to
promote horse racing in New
Mexico, not gambling on
machines.
Uh, that, that's what that
really gets down to, so.
OK, um, and to that end, I'll
switch to my third point, which
is the audit, and I have a, a
document that I was, uh, I
received before we started. It's
a letter from then state
auditor, uh Tim Keller to
Danick, the interim executive
director, and it discusses, and
I just want to read this very
quickly for the committee. It's
a letter discussing the
commission's annual audit. Um,
the commission stated that it is
making oh sorry, wrong sentence.
As a result, the state have may
have received artificially lower
amounts of tax revenue.
I'm sure that's a concern for
this committee, especially to to
address this lack of oversight,
the independent audit
recommended that the
commission's policies and
procedures be strengthened. We
think that putting, ultimately
putting some of the onus on the
state auditor for these audits
and to review these audits is
probably in the best interest of
the state to make sure that the
full amount of the tax is being
collected from gaming, and
there's more to this letter I'm
sure that we can get copies of
that to, to provide to the
committee. Finally moving to the
other component which is
probably the more controversial,
uh, dealing with
the Interstate Horse Racing Act,
there's been an argument that
you will have seen in, in the
analysis that this is in
conflict with the interstate
Horse Racing Act. The proposal
to name the Horseman, uh, is, is
in conflict with that act. And I
just want to very quickly read
uh through that, that section of
the Federal Act.
Portions group means with
reference to the applicable
Horse racing Association, the
group which represents the
majority of owners and trainers
racing there for the races
subject to the Interstate
off-track wager on any racing
day.
The New Mexico Horseman's track
committees are entirely
consistent with that.
Part of the federal statute and
naming them in the statute would
not be inconsistent with that
federal law. In fact, it would,
it would dovetail with that
federal law. It would just
designate which force groups,
horsemen's group is the one that
will be recognized and resolving
a conflict between the tracks.
Very, very briefly, the, the
purpose of the Interstate
Horseracing Act is essentially
to set up collective bargaining
between horse horse trainers and
horse owners and the tracks.
It's essentially a labor
arrangement. And what is going
on is that the tracks have taken
to picking who they want to be
on the committee that they're
negotiating with. So it's
essentially the employers
picking who the who the union
boss is, that will then
negotiate on behalf of everybody
else, and a fairer way to do
that is what, what we're
discussing, which is to
the elections that the horsemen
do and have the horsemen's
Association, which has been
around since 1966. I do want to
remind you've got about 2
minutes left.
I'm wrap it up, uh, picking
who's actually going to be
representing the owners and
trainers rather than having the
tracks pick their own people
that they want to negotiate
with, and that's, that's what
that does.
Thank you so much, Senator Zel,
do you want to go ahead and
finish it all?
I do want to thank Mr. Dunn for
Madam.
Oh, I'm sorry, Madam Queen I
want to hear you
say madam, Madam Queen, royal
members. I do want to thank Mr.
Dunn for being here today. Uh,
We just want
To be able to race our horses,
we want it to follow statute,
and that's been a big problem.
These aren't suggestions that we
come up with and put them in our
books. These are statues that do
need to be followed.
They
I'll stop right there, ma'am.
All right. Thank you so much.
So, now we're going to audience
testimony by a show of hands.
How many in the audience are in
support of this legislation?
We have one person, all right?
2,
didn't see somebody's arm. Oh,
OK.
Um, just behind that, that tall
fellow there, so I'm sure that
that happens all the time. Um,
so we have 2 in the audience in
support. How many in the
audience in opposition.
123456. All right, we have 67 in
opposition, and we have one
online in opposition. So what
we're going to do, we have two
online in support. What we're
gonna do is we're gonna do 4,
in support and for an
opposition.
Uh, so if I can have first and
foremost, uh, the person who is
in support set serve, you wanna
go ahead and come on up.
And then we're gonna go to the
two people online who are
supporting. So you will let them
know to, those of you who are
online, we have Sadie and Susie,
uh, if you will, uh, be prepared
to unmute your mic. I'll call
your name first, but we're gonna
go ahead and go with the
audience first if you will go
ahead and say your name. You
have one minute. Good afternoon,
Madam Chair and Committee. My
name is Gary Roybaum.
In May of 2021.
The New Mexico racing commission
excluded the New Mexico
Horsemen's Association.
That
It's not do very positive
business.
They have been on business
representing Horsemen since
1966.
They're recognized by the PRC.
And the Secretary of State as
representatives of the Mexico
Horseman in New Mexico.
Should
This committee or if this bill
doesn't work or it does work in
favor, it'll, it'll really, what
it'll do, it'll take.
Samulcasting away from New
Mexico forever.
The
Throughout the country, the
Horsemen have strong uh
associations and then solidarity
right now and they have said, if
we do not have a New Mexico
Horseman's Association.
They will not be simulcast.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Roberto Ramirez with
the Mexico Horsemen's
Association. um, here's the
support of Centerville 323. This
bill aims to restore racing
their numbers to pre-COVID
levels, revitalizing the
industry and assurance ability
for a horse race.
Horseman racetracks and the
communities that depend on it.
This also supports the local
horse racing industry by
allowing interstate common pool
rara.
strengthens the financial
viability of New Mexico
racetracks.
It also increases oversight and
accountability by empowering the
state auditor.
The other racetracks, ensuring
transparity.
bro.
All right. Thank you so much.
Um, so, uh, we're gonna do, uh,
as I mentioned, 4 in the room
that are in opposition, and then
we'll go to the 2 online, um,
Sandra McKenna will register
your opposition, but we'll just
stick to Sadie and Susie online.
Uh, so if we can get the 4 folks
from the audience to speak, uh,
those of you who are in
opposition.
You've got one minute, you can
hold the mic. You don't have to
have our, our guys hold it,
yeah. Good afternoon, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
Izzy Trejo on behalf of the New
Mexico Racing Commission
opposing this bill for a couple
of reasons. One, we feel that it
strongly conflicts with the
federal interstate Horseracing
Act, and it also conflicts with
the recent decision by uh
Federal judge as recent as last
Wednesday, that indicates that
any Horseman's group can be
representative of the Horseman
in New Mexico. It, it's not
exclusive to one group and
Florida, for example, has
different racetracks, and each
racetrack has their own
horseman's group that uh
consents to approving the export
signals to be simulcast
throughout the country. Thank
you.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair.
And committee members, um,
Stacey Satton Kirby, Chief
Government Affairs at Animal
Protection voters.
Um
We have serious concerns about
Senate Bill 323, the New Mexico
Horse racing industry has been
plagued with continued doping
con controversies, which often
result in gruesome injuries and
deaths for untold number of
racehorses and has been widely
covered in the national media,
additionally as high highlighted
by the state racing Commission
and stated in the FIR given the
decades-long nationwide decline
in racehorse breeding,
additional race dayss will
further strain the decreasing
number of.
resources and negatively impact
their health. Fewer horses to
run on in more races is a recipe
for cruelty and disaster. Thank
you.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, Jason
Weeks, registered lobbyist for
Albuquerque Downs Racetrack and
Casino. I'm gonna focus most of
my remarks on the economic
impact this would have on the
state.
So if we were to be required to
only be able to um run our
casinos when we're simulcasting
from a New Mexico racetrack, we
probably would have to reduce
the number of days that our
casinos will be open.
Um, the reality is to the bill
to us in our reading, and I
think that points it out. Weak
is not really super clearly
defined. Doesn't mean we have to
run 5 days, 7 days, um, so
we're, we're a little bit
unclear on that, but what we do
feel confident about is that
this would require us to
actually close the casinos on
such certain days when we don't
have races that are running in
another track in the state. And
that would have an impact on the
state's budget as well.
Um, the reality too is that if
we are going to run more races,
we have to have more horses and
breeding numbers have been going
down. If we are not running our
casinos, ironically, the purse
is also declined. So really
we're running for fewer dollar
values. We're having an economic
impact to the state, and the
afire says that could be
anywhere between 2 million, 2.3
million to 33 million. So I
think we should be really
careful about how we change this
provision. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Catherine Crociatta. I'm a
registered lobbyist for Sunland
Basetrack and Casino. We stand
in opposition to Senate Bill
323, we echo the the comments
that have already been made
additionally, 323 seeks to
legislate and issue defined by
federal law that has already
been challenged in court. The
New Mexico uh Horsemen's
Association brought a lawsuit
against the racing commission
and the racetracks, claiming
they represent.
majority of the horsemen, and in
October 2024, a judge ruled in
favor of the tracts against the
New Mexico Horsemen's
Association, stating that the
NMHA admitted that it has not
received membership dues since
2020.
So therefore they can't claim
that they represent most of the
horsemen in the state. Thank you
very much.
Right, we're gonna go to the 2
online, Sadie Jenkins, you are
in support of this bill and then
Susie, you are also in support,
Sandra, we have registered your
opposition, but we're just gonna
go ahead and stick with Sadie
and Susie. Sadie, if you will,
please unmute yourself. You'll
see a 32nd warning in the chat,
uh, and if you go over one
minute, we will cut your mic. So
if you're welcome to go ahead
and say, go ahead and start.
Please unmute yourself.
we are not able to hear you if
you are speaking.
Yeah
All right. Why don't we go ahead
and if we can move to Susie,
Susie, if you will, please
unmute yourself. You have one
minute, you'll get a 32nd
warning in your chat. Go ahead.
Can you hear me now?
Yes, we can
Adam Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Susie
Prather, and I serve on the
board of directors of the New
Mexico Horsemen's Association.
This bill simply would define
who we are and require the
racetracks to do a yearly audit
by the state auditor. As you
know, we are already in statute.
We received distributions from
each racetrack in New Mexico and
are simply trying to state who
those distributions are going to
be definition.
Or going to by definition. We
are not asking for any other job
duties, we are not asking for
any other distributions. We are
not asking for permission to
sign contracts. We are simply
defining who these distributions
and statute go to. We are a
nonprofit 501c4 association and
our only duty today is
benevolence. We take the money
that we get from the race tracks
every week from their
simulcasting, and we use that
money to reimburse our horsemen
for their medical expenses. That
is it.
That is it.
That is all we do. These changes
are simply definitions. Thank
you for your help.
Thank you so much. We're gonna
go ahead and move on. Senator,
you do have 5 minutes, a hard 5
minutes, uh, to respond to
public testimony, and then we'll
go to the committee. Yes, ma'am,
I do want to point out to Madam
Queen and her royal court, that
one of the statements that was
made that whenever the in 2021
when the New Mexico Horseman's
Association was unrecognized.
That's whenever the new racing
commission took over.
And the commission is appointed
by our governor, and that's
whenever the chair of that
commission decided to
unrecognize the horseman's
Association, the New Mexico
Horsemen's Association was put
into effect, and it is in
The game of, I can't remember
what it was in the horse racing
game as being established in
1966, it stakes, Horseman's
group means with reference to
the applicable host racing
Association, the group which
represents the majority of
owners and trainers racing gear,
where the race is subject to the
interstate of off track wager on
any race day, Madam cheered
these.
People that are so called
representing the Horseman's
group are handpicked by the
racetrack managers and owners
themselves.
Madam Chair, it is also in
statute, like I said, uh,
there's some problems right now
because these are not
suggestions that we have in our
log books right now. If there is
a 7 day break between any race
meat.
Those machines and all those
casinos of the race tracks.
by statute have to be shut down.
So whenever we are trying to fix
what has been broken through the
violation of statutes. I would
also like to point out on the
handout, I think all y'all
received.
It also shows the number of race
days whenever in 1994, there
were 347 race days.
Currently, in 2024, there's a
187. I heard a comment that the
racing, the horse racing
industry doesn't have that many
horses.
Madam Queen and members.
If these trainers are not being
allowed to race their horses at
the tracks, they're going to
move elsewhere and a lot of them
do. They move out of state. We
have trainers in Oklahoma,
Texas, Louisiana, Arizona,
Colorado, California, all over
the United States and every
other racing jurisdiction that
loved to come to New Mexico, but
if the opportunity is not there
for them to run their horses to.
Be able to at least get out and
exercise their horses, there's a
problem, madam chair.
I don't know if my expert
witness would not like that 2
minutes.
Uh, just very quickly, I, I
think that the discussion over
Judge Garcia's decision that was
referenced by director Trejo,
probably better addressed in the
judiciary, which is where this
bill would need to go next, as I
understand the assignments. Um,
I don't agree that it's
inconsistent with his opinion,
but I'll save that for uh the
appropriate committee, um, to,
to the point about the horseman
being recognized elsewhere in
statute, 60-18-14-17-19 and 21,
all in some form or fashion,
either explicitly or by, by
inference recognize the horse.
New Mexico Horsemen's
Association in statute
currently. This isn't uh adding
it in for the first time, it's
already there in the law.
Right. I do want to confirm uh
with Izzy, um, this bill is a
hold, am I correct?
Madam Chair, um.
The, the fiscal impact is a
negative, and so the practice of
the committee is for those
negative revenue losses they
need to be paid for in some some
respect and so it would be need
to be held or paired with some
sort of revenue gain.
Madam Chair, I guess I'm not
understanding what he is saying.
There would be no way, there is
no.
Discontinuance of those machines
being shut down. We are, we are
making sure that those casinos
are able to stay open during the
entire week, not just on the
race days if it's a 3 day a week
meet or if it's a Class A track
that runs 4 days a week. We want
those casinos to stay open the
entire length of it. So if there
are race on Sunday, Monday,
Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday,
Friday, and Saturday that
constitutes a week, not just
those 3 days or the 4 days.
Madam Chair, I just wanted to
make that clear.
Me to her, um, I guess if anyone
wants to clarify, I'm guessing
that the negative impact.
Doesn't come from the weeks or
the days, but the New Mexico
licensed races or
school license meets.
Madam chair, um,
I, I'm, that's why I'm reading
the FIR as well. I didn't write
this fiscal impact report, um.
You know, the, the
physical impact report is what
ultimately determines the state,
what shows up on the state's
balance sheet to the point of
the negative revenue loss. And
so, you know,
If, if we can get our analysts
to work with you and reach out
to you, we'd be happy to do that
as well, but
Until that that is changed, that
would be the case. And I commit
to you, Senator, that if it
does, then we'll bring it back
as our first meeting.
OK.
So, uh, at this point though, I
would like to um open it up if
the committee has any questions
or comments?
Senator Ramos, Madam Chair
Senator, so
kind of helped me wrap my head
around this.
When it comes to simulcast
signal for the race outside of
the state of New Mexico.
Who owns it or how does this
work?
Madam Queen, royal member.
That signal belongs to the New
Mexico horse racing at
Horseman's Association.
It is put in place by the HBPA.
The horseman's benevolent and
protective association, and it,
there's a Horseman's Association
in every jurisdiction throughout
the United States, where they do
have a
li racing.
It is
Particular to the Horseman's
Association, the whole group and
For some reason,
Whenever the Horsemen's
Association was unrecognized in
what was the year 2021.
Uh, no, I'm sorry. Yeah, 2021.
They decided they had control of
it, that's whenever the HBPA
said no if it does not.
If it is not authorized by the
New Mexico Horsemen's
Association, we will not import
the signal into the state of New
Mexico.
The biggest race that there was
that was not exported in was the
Kentucky Derby. Kentucky itself
stood up and said, we will stand
by our our horsemen's committees
in other states to defend what
they owe.
And so there was no Kentucky
Derby being broadcast into the
state of New Mexico.
clarification.
Madam Chair, uh, Senator, so the
Interstate Horse Racing Act sets
up that the Horsemen's
Association or the Horseman's
Group in, in a particular state
has a say on the export of that
signal. So for instance, the
Derby was just referenced, the
Kentucky, uh, Horseman's
benevolent protection protective
association in Kentucky, who is
the group responsible for uh
discussing and negotiating the
contract for the export of the
signal with Churchill Downs.
They are the ones that have said
they are not going to send a
signal to
New Mexico for the Derby until
this matter has been resolved
between the New Mexico Horsemen
and the New Mexico racing
commission, and the tracks. So
that, that's how that is. They
expose they have control or a
say in the export of the signal,
just like the New Mexico
Horseman would have a say in the
export of New Mexico signal out,
not necessarily so much the
import, but the export of the
signal.
No more questions, man. Thank
you. Any other questions or
comments from the committee?
Right, uh, seeing none at this
point. We're gonna hold it if
there's change that news, we'll
bring it back for a vote.
Thank you
Thank you so much. Now we've
got, um, we're going on the
house bills 36. So we have
representative Dehaan Viil. So
representative, this is your
first time in the committee.
Welcome.
We, uh, have a couple of just
to, to set some guidelines for
you. What we do is we give you
10 minutes for a presentation
that includes also your expert.
Then what we will do is go to
public comment, then you have
the opportunity to respond to
the public comment. You'll have
5 minutes to do that, and then
we will go to the committee.
So you're welcome to start.
Thank you, madam chair Queen,
Madam Queen, you can call me,
you can call me whatever you
want at this point of the night
it's 6:16. Thank you very much,
uh, delighted to be here. My
presentation on HB 36 will be
short and then I'm, it's my
pleasure to uh introduce my
experts. So House Bill 36 amends
the Optometry Act, uh,
definitions to expand the
definition of the practice of
optometry to include several
types of in-office surgery that
have not
previously been allowed under
the Optometry Act, and uh this
would be mainly laser
application to the lens capsule
and the treatment of capsular
clouding or other defects, laser
applications and structures
within the ocular interior
segment for the prevention and
treatment of glaucoma, anterior
chamber paracentesis and the
emergent treatment of highly
elevated intraocular pressure
and intramsterial placement of
sustained I'm sorry, that was
taken out of the bill, so
scratch that. And also, um,
allows the
Board to develop and administer
credentialing requirements for
the performance of these
procedures, involving the use of
a laser. Uh, and with that, I
will introduce my expert to my
left. This is Doctor Sarah
Bortz. She's been with me since
the beginning and what a wild
ride it's been. And with that,
we stand for questions, Madam
Queen.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Doctor Sarah Bortz and
I've been practicing optometry
in New Mexico for 15 years. Any
of my past president of the New
Mexico Optometric Association.
Thank you for allowing me to the
opportunity to speak on this
important issue. I also thank
Representative um Hochman V Hill
for introducing this vital
legislation.
So just kind of a summary, so
House Bill 36 authorizes
optometrists to perform in
office laser procedures for the
treatment of glaucoma and
imposed cataract care. These are
outpatient procedures conducted
in office using the same
microscope used in routine eye
exams every day. They do not
involve operating rooms or
general anesthesia.
This bill ensures high quality
continuity of care for patients
who already have established
relationships with their
optometrists. It improves access
to more timely care for New
Mexicans, reducing the need for
travel and time off for
repetitive evaluations,
particularly for rural
underserved and working-class
populations.
Opponents may argue that
optometrists are not qualified
to perform these procedures
because we do not attend medical
school or complete a surgical
residency. However, following
undergraduate education,
optometrists complete a
four-year doctorate program
including classroom, laboratory,
and intensive clinical training
dedicated to the human body as
it relates to the eye and visual
system.
Optometrists are trained to
diagnose and treat all
conditions of the eye utilizing
topical, oral, and minimally
invasive surgical management
options, including the minor
surgical procedures we have been
providing in New Mexico since
2007, and the minimally invasive
laser surgeries listed in House
Bill 36.
Our training has been proven
safe and effective, both by the
146,000 laser procedures
performed with only 2 adverse
events reported to boards and
the fact that medical
malpractice rates have not
increased in states where
optometrists are performing
laser procedures.
Optometrists have been defined
as physicians by Medicare, the
largest payer in our country
since 1986. Medicare reimburses
optometrists as the same rate as
ophthalmologists for these
minimally invasive laser
procedures and the 12 states
where optometrists have laser
privileges. Optometrists in New
Mexico have been determining the
diagnosis for these laser
procedures and managing
post-operative complications
associated with these glaucoma
and post cataract procedures
since the 1990s.
I will conclude by saying that
for over 40 years, optometry's
scope of practice in New Mexico
has evolved alongside
advancements in education and
training, though fought by
organized medicine and
ophthalmology in every case, no
scope of practice has ever been
reversed. This bill ensures that
Mexico patients continue to
receive safe, effective, and
timely care within their
communities. I appreciate your
time.
All right, thank you so much. So
at this point, we're going to
the audience testimony just by a
show of hands. How many in the
audience are in support of this
legislation.
Ke, please keep your hands up.
12345688, and 1112, 1345. How do
you get it so fast
Jeez, OK, so we have 17. We also
have um one person online who is
in support, so we have 18. Now
by show of hands, how many in
the audience are in opposition
of this bill.
12345. All right, so what we are
going to do is we are going to
do 5 in the room, uh, 5 in
support, 5 in opposition, we're
going to do 2 and uh if there's
another person, we're gonna do 2
in opposition, and the one in
support of somebody else comes
on, that's fine. Please line up
if you will. Those we're going
to 4 in the support.
If you will, please line up.
You, you get one minute apiece,
you will get 30.
Uh, go ahead and start. And if
you will, please uh say the name
for the record.
Thank you, Me and chair. My name
is Doctor Tracy Ho, and I am an
optometrist who has been
practicing in New Mexico for the
past 10 years. I support HB 36,
which modernizes New Mexico's
optometry laws to reflect
standard medical practice. Since
2007, New Mexico optometrists
have provided patients access to
advanced procedures including
biopsies, lesion removals, and
injections, surgeries that
require incisions, sutures, and
post-surgical care. These
surgeries are more complex than
the laser.
treatments in HB 36, which
involve no cutting, no sutures,
and carry lower risk of
infection and complication.
Most states grant laser
privileges before surgical ones.
New Mexico did the opposite,
recognizing optometrists
training and safety record by
allowing the more advanced
procedures first. Today, the
results speak for themselves.
Optometrists have provided these
surgeries safely and
effectively, with no increase in
complications in the past 20
years. If this legislature
trusted optometrists to perform
more complex surgeries, nearly
two decades ago. Why deny
patients access to safer, less
invasive treatments.
now.
HB 36 is not about granting new
privileges, it corrects an
inconsistency in the law and
ensures patients receive timely,
effective care from the
providers already qualified. Uh,
please wrap up. Thank you. Thank
you.
If you will, please watch
because the vice chair will be
showing you a 32nd time. Thank
you Thank you, Madam Chair and
senators of the committee. My
name is Robert Ratcliffe, and I
live and practice optometry in
Taos.
And the tragic
with my patients today is that
they are required to wait.
As much as 6 months to have
these procedures done by an
ophthalmologist in either Santa
Fe or Albuquerque.
Some of these patients are
visually impaired, and yet
they're driving.
And now they're being expected
to drive 3 or 4 hours to have
this procedures done.
This bill being passed will
allow me to
Easily and affordably place a
laser instrument in my practice
to just as safely.
More efficiently provide these
procedures to the health and
benefit of my patients and the
safety of my.
Thank you so much.
Hello again. My name is Doctor
Erica Anderson, and I have uh
practices in both Albuquerque
and Roswell. As you know, rural
communities face significant
challenges in accessing timely
eye care, particularly in
progressive diseases such as
glaucoma. I have personally seen
my Roswell patients lose vision
simply because they don't have
access to the services. They
also may lack the financials,
um, ability to travel to
Albuquerque, and they may need
to choose, do I buy?
g ro ce ries or do I go to my
appointment to help bridge this
gap, my optometrist colleagues
here have pursued advanced
certification to provide these
services to the people in their
communities, helping prevent
unnecessary blindness, while
allowing our ophthalmology
colleagues to focus on complex
surgical cases. Passing this
bill is a necessary step to
saving vision in rural New
Mexico. Thank you very much.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair. I'm
Doctor Craig Klatnoff. I
practice in Rio Rancho, New
Mexico. I have had the privilege
of practicing in New Mexico
since 1987. Did my undergraduate
work at the University of
Nebraska and with the College of
Optometry at Ohio State.
Um, in our practice, we have
externs from the Ohio State
University College of Optometry,
and they have received training
in all of these procedures that
we are asking to.
be allowed to do.
All right, thank you so much.
Um, let's go to, um, the
opposition now, if you will
please line up. We'll have 4
folks, uh, in opposition.
And if you will, please check to
see if there's anybody else
besides Angela who is in
support, because we'll go to 2
online and support in 2 in
opposition. OK, please note that
you do have one minute. You'll
see a 32nd wrap up. Go ahead and
please state your name. Yes, my
name is Rebecca Laha.
And good evening, Madam
Chairwoman and distinguished
members of this committee. So
I'm the president of the New
Mexico Academy of Ophthalmology,
and I represent over 50 eye
physicians and surgeons, and we
oppose this bill, which allows
non
medical doctors to perform laser
surgeries. New Mexican's vision
is priceless and paramount.
There is no shortage of eye
surgeons in our states, 77% of
New Mexicans live within a
thirty-minute drive of Iogens
and 88% within an hour. These
laser surgeries in question are
not immediately vision
threatening and have no backlog.
Most of our practices can get
the patients in within 1 to 3
weeks for these surgeries.
Furthermore, it's not
financially feasible for for
optometrists in rural areas.
to own and operate these
machines. But do Mexicans truly
need is primary eye care, which
optometrists are qualified to
provide. This bill won't improve
access to care, but will
drastically reduce the quality
of care. Please don't risk
patient safety for the false
promises of increased access to
care.
Uh hello, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, Carrie Robin
Bruunder with the New Mexico
Medical Society.
Wow, you guys have a really hard
decision to make. Um, I don't
envy the position that you are
in in scope of practice
expansion because we are not
experts. I'm not an expert as
lobbyists, and I don't think
that legislators are necessarily
experts either. The only thing
that I have to go off of as the
lobbyist is the experts of the
physicians that I represent and
the ophthalmologists have said
very loud and clear that there
is no such thing as risk-free
eye surgery. The tissues in the
eye are very, very delicate, and
there
can be a lot of complications
that happen from these
procedures. And if those
complications happen and we have
individuals who do not have as
much training as a physician has
to deal with those
complications. It can be a very
dire result for the patient that
undergoes the procedure. I rely
on their expertise telling me
what their training has told
them and their training is
telling them that this is
something that is more better
served by the ophthalmologists,
while the optometrists have a
critical role to play in the
system.
Um, the role that they play is
not this one, and so we do urge
you a no vote on this bill this
evening.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Jason Espinoza,
executive director with the
Greater Albuquerque Medical
Association. I'm here today to
express our concerns regarding
the legislation before you
because we do believe it puts
patient safety at risk. Gamma is
committed to safeguarding
patient safety by opposing
inappropriate expansion of
non-physician healthcare
providers scope of practice.
Such expansions do not solve our
state's healthcare challenges
may compromise patient safety by
allowing individuals without
equivalent training to perform
complex procedures.
New Mexicans deserve access to
high quality medical care in our
legislature must work towards
enhancing quality and ensuring
access simultaneously, lowering
the standard for surgical
competency may jeopardize
patient safety and increase the
risk of complications which may
necessitate emergency care or
corrective surgery by a
physician, by opposing such
expansions as proposed in this
legislation. We aim to maintain
the highest standards of medical
care, ensuring that patients
benefit from the expertise in
oversight that qualified
physicians can provide, we urge
you to protect patient safety
and reject this bill. Thank you.
Uh.
Good evening, uh, Madam Chair
and members of the committee,
uh, I'm John Anderson. I
represented Mexico Academy of uh
Ophthalmology. And I wanna
stress that uh this is not, this
is not minor surgery. Uh, I
think that's very, very
important point to make, and as
a result, there's nothing in
this bill that basically sets
out what training is required to
be credentialed to do these
types of procedures.
I would think that would be
important for the committee to
know and have in the
legislation.
Not only in the curriculum, but
the number of hours that would
be required to be credentialed
to do these, uh, to do these,
uh, particular procedures. More
importantly, I think it's
important to note that we don't
know about what the examination
might be whether it's oral,
written, and also I think the
committee should insist that
there be a report for adverse,
uh, outcomes. Quite frankly, one
of the things in many of the
states
have looked at is a provision
for a duty to reported by
adverse outcomes. My son's a
doctor here in Santa Fe, and
it's hurt certainly his duty
tour.
Uh, it's certainly his duty to
report adverse outcomes to the
medical board, it should be the
the duty of the optometrist to
do the same.
That, thank you very much.
You'll need to unmute yourself,
Nat. None of that showed up, so,
uh, now, cause I didn't have my
microphone on, it's the end of
the day. You have one minute,
you'll see a 32nd warning in
your chat. If you do go over one
minute, we will cut your mic so
that you do have one minute. Go
ahead.
But, sure, I don't have speech
today.
Oh.
00, thank you so much. We do
have that registered. So given
that, I'm gonna go ahead and let
Barbara and then Heather
Applewhite, go ahead and speak
in opposition, but we'll still
go with Angela and Matt and
support. So Barbara, uh, if you
will, please unmute yourself.
You have one minute. You'll get
a 32nd warning in your chat.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I am Barbara McEnany.
I am a past president of New
Mexico Medical Society and it
past president of the American
Medical Association. The, I am
also a trained medical
oncologist. I treat medical
problems for cancer. I am not a
surgical oncologist. I was not
trained in surgery, and you
would be in a great error if you
selected me to do a surgery. The
same thing applies to optometry
and ophthalmology when our
medical, one do.
surgery, it would be
inappropriate to have 30 hours
of training compared to the 12
to 17,000 hours of training of
an ophthalmologist and allow
them to operate on the eye. You
will hear that they will go to
rural areas. The AMA has great
data that people do not go to
rural areas. They practice in
the same places where we have
plenty of ophthalmologists who
can do these surgeries. Rural
people value their eyes as much
as everyone else.
And should not be second class
citizens, lasers are not simple
techniques. When you cut on
something, someone else can
repair it. If you laser part of
the eye, it is vaporized. It is
not there anymore, and it is not
repairable in Oklahoma, which is
the only other state that allows
this. Ophthalmologists have
testified that the complication
rate is significant. Please for
this committee, please spare our
New Mexican.
loss of their vision from unsafe
surgery performed by people who
have not had the appropriate
training to perform these very
delicate operations. Thank you.
Thank you. Let's go ahead and go
to Heather Applewhite. You're
the last in opposition, if you
will.
Uh, please pay attention to the
30-second warning in your chat
box, Heather, you go ahead and
have one minute. You're on mute.
Hello, hi. Um, I, my name is
Heather Applewhite. I'm a family
medicine physician practicing
primary care in Albuquerque, um,
and I urge you to oppose this
bill this evening. Um,
optometrist as was previously
mentioned, do not have near the
hours of training as
ophthalmologists. And my
question is, you know, one of
the, I think the expert witness
said that they were going to
manage complications, but are
they going to have someone on
call 24 hours 7 days a week, um,
like
Ophthalmology practices do. Are
they gonna be, have adequate
training in managing those
complications, you know, there
is a lot of gray area and
unanswered questions about how
these certifications would be
obtained, and I, as a primary
care physician, echo the
sentiments of Doctor McEnany
that our rural
Patients do not deserve lower
quality care.
Thank you.
Thank you so much. Now we go to
Angela who has listed that she
is in support, Angela, if you
will, please unmute yourself.
You have one minute. Please pay
attention to the 32nd warning in
your chat box. Go ahead, Angela.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. I am
Doctor Angela Morgan and I am an
optometrist who's currently
practicing in southern New
Mexico. I am also the current
president of the New Mexico
Optometric Association. Our
organization was founded in 2002
to help our members to provide
the highest standard of care for
New Mexicans. In 1977, we came
before the legislature to ask to
be able to dilate our patients.
In 1985, we asked to be able to
prescribe eye drops. In 19
95, we asked to be able to
prescribe oral medications. In
2007, we asked to perform minor
minor surgical procedures. You
supported us all in all of our
efforts. Every time we heard the
same arguments and the same
misinformation that you are
hearing this time. Every time
none of these came true. In the
entire country, no expansion of
scope for optometrists has ever
been repealed. Over 100,000
laser.
procedures have been performed
by optometrists starting 20
years ago and 12 other states
have the ability to do these
surgeries. We as optometrists
are educated, capable and
willing to help New Mexicans
with these procedures.
Thank you so much. Now, lastly,
we'll go to Matt and a
representative, you will have 5
minutes to respond to the to the
public testimony if you'd like.
Matt, go ahead and unmute
yourself. You have one minute.
Please pay attention to the 32nd
warning in your chat box. Go
ahead.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Matt McGraw. I'm an optometrist
out here in Gallup, New Mexico.
I've been serving out here for
over a decade, and we have
already um placed aside the
money and
The clinic time to make these
procedures available to our
patients out here in Gallup. I
strongly encourage you to
support this bill. It will allow
us to provide the safe,
competent care that we have been
trained for since I was in
school 15 years ago, uh, to some
degree we have been trained for
these procedures.
In optometry school.
And I think it is high time that
New Mexico allow these things. I
have folks that I'm having to
put on the road for a 4 hour
round trip from Gallup because
we do not have ophthalmological
care out here.
And they are having to take
these extremely long trips.
And it is very time consuming
and economically draining on
them for these 15-minute
procedures that could be very
safely and effectively done.
Uh, by the trained doctors we
have here in Gallup right now,
and I thank you for your time.
Thank you so much. All right.
Representative, you do have an
opportunity to respond to public
testimony or you can go ahead
and go to the committee.
Thank you very much, uh, Madam
Chair, I think we'll just go
straight to the committee for
questions. All right. Are there
questions or comments from the
committee?
Is it late
So share, did you want to ask a
question? It's past Miller time,
obviously, but
But I do wanna, uh, say that
that
The scope of practice things
always irritate me. The
psychologist and psychiatrist.
I don't know the difference
between.
irritated me a lot. Now we've
got the optometrist and
ophthalmologist, which I had to
spend like the whole month
trying to figure out how to say
each one of those names.
And figure out who's who.
Irritate me, because
We don't know.
I did ask.
say, Hey,
Come together
What can be done? What makes
sense to be done if, if it can
be done safely in Gallup in 15
minutes as opposed to getting on
high 40 and risking your life.
For at least 4 hours, probably
more depending on the day.
Then why not?
Why not?
I understand that, OK, I don't
want anybody that doesn't know
what they're doing anywhere near
my eye, but I don't, I
Try my best not to go to a
doctor. In fact, most of the
wounds on me have been
Cured with super glue,
literally.
So I, I am.
I am torn and angry because I, I
don't remember the name of the
doctor said.
did this in 1977, this 1985,
this whatever.
I know that that's been going
on.
through scope of practice,
through legis legislation.
But
what are we
legis
legislatures, yes.
We're always here to help you
out. We got, we got to take care
of each other need speech
therapy too.
That's the next scope of
practice on Thursday.
Those darn multi-syllabic words
just get in my way.
Anyway, I know that it's that
it's been evolving forever, but
I don't know where to draw the
line.
What I do know is that
Is that for some people,
It's hard to get into to see the
upophthalmologist.
People in Albuquerque, probably
not a big deal. People in
Gallup, obviously it is.
There was one ophthalmologist in
in Farmington for a long time.
And now there's more.
Um
But my wife actually goes to
Durango.
Because it took so long to get
in to see.
Now, she's been going now for
years, OK? So it's not.
didn't go that often, but um,
but just because it was a long
wait.
I don't think that the, the, the
laser surgery we're talking here
would have occurred here anyway,
or fixed or whatever.
But I do want to know, cause
it's, it's terrible and people
are gonna die.
What
level
I mean, I don't even know.
What you're trying to do.
Or we shaving
Microscopic bits off of the eye.
But we
Drilling new holes in the eye. I
don't know what, what.
Can you describe what you're
trying to do to people.
Madam Chair, senator, there are
3 procedures listed in this
bill. One of them is commonly
done after cataract surgery up
to 1/3 of patients will develop
something called a secondary
cataract that occurs when a
cloudy film grows behind the
nuclear lens. We use a laser
focused on that cloudy film and
releasing the energy from the
laser dissolves that cloudy film
and it typically does not grow
back again. It's typically a
one-time treatment.
Another treatment listed as a
glaucoma procedure where the
laser is focused on the drainage
channels of the eye where fluid
drains out. Most patients with
glaucoma have high eye pressure
in the way that we treat that is
to get the pressure down.
There's a specific laser energy
that can clean out those
channels to decrease the
pressure and prevent blindness
from glaucoma. The third
procedure a little bit more
briefly is also for glaucoma
typically used only in urgent
situations where they're
extremely high eye pressures.
So
Um, Madam Chair, Representative.
How
How do I know?
when I walk into your office
that, that you are going to do
it safe, because I'm going to
assume now that I've spent a
month trying to figure out how
to pronounce the names of both.
That the ophthalmologist
We'll do it right.
How do I know that
How will I know?
Madam Chair, Senator, as I
mentioned before, these
procedures are done in 12 other
states, over 146,000 cases have
been documented by optometrists
performing these procedures with
the same training that I have
out of those 146,000 cases, only
two adverse events have been
reported to optometry boards. So
the safety profile is very high,
not to say that these surgeries
don't have complications. They
do. They have a complication
rate of about 3 to 6%. These are
complications that
We are already managing and have
been for decades.
chair, so you deal with
glaucoma.
Optometrists deal with glaucoma.
Excuse me, madam chair, Senator,
that is a huge part of our
practice, especially in our
aging population. Currently, we
manage it with topical
medications, sometimes oral
medication and the lasers and
another piece of that puzzle
that we are trained to do as it
is an in office laser procedure.
Thank you, man.
Thank you. Any other things from
Senator Figueroa. Thank you,
Madam Chair, at the top of page
3, we are adding, I believe, two
things to the optometry and the
practice of optometry. Am I
correct?
The lines 6 through 9 have been
amended out of this bill, what
we have left are laser
application for clouding and
laser application for the
prevention of glaucoma. Is that
correct, Madam Chair or senator,
that is correct.
OK, then my question, madam
chair is
The other piece of new language
is on page 6, and that's in the
section that says the board will
And it says develop and
administer credentialing
requirements. So is this bill
gonna allow all optometrists to
do these procedures, or is it
going to allow some optometrists
who obtain an
extra credential or endorsement
to do these procedures.
Medica senator, the latter.
OK, um, and we do not, Madam
Chair, in statute put the
requirements for endorsements,
board endorsements, I believe.
And anybody here who knows
better can correct me, or
spelled out by the board in
their rules.
Um, so it isn't unusual that we
don't have them here.
That's all for me, madam chair.
Right. Thank you. Any other
questions or comments from the
committee.
Before I go to a motion, I just
want to say, you know, my mother
has macular degeneration, uh,
which means I'm at risk for
macular degeneration.
And I trust my doctor, who is in
the room, Doctor Tenorio. Um,
and I have a relationship with
him in his office. And I just
cannot, I have difficulty in,
in, in some of my colleagues,
especially Senator Sheriff,
voting against a bill that
provides more access to health
care, when that is, we have been
bombarded as a legislature on
the lack of access to health
care, and a number of things.
And so this is one of those cogs
in that wheel, and it's very
difficult.
for me to vote against this when
there are people who deserve
this health care and that uh it
is not life threatening and that
we can allow other people to
continue to perform this so that
people don't have to drive 4
hours or out of state to pay for
some other optometrist to do the
work that our optometrists can
do. So, I, I appreciate that and
I thank the sponsors. So at this
point, is there, what is the of
the committee?
move a do pass, madam chair. We
have a pass from Senator
Figueroa. Do we have a second?
Second from Senator Berkins.
anybody in opposition of this
due pass?
seeing none. Let's go ahead and
record that all in present, uh,
you have a do pass motion of 9
to 0. Thank you, Madam Queen.
Thank you.
By the way, uh, so yes, and
Chante, you don't have to call
me Madam Queen, but that's been
kind of established, uh, in the
last couple of meetings, the
last couple of bill
presentations. Thank you. I'll
see you soon, doctor.
I watch
I watch
Did you really?
All right, Chair Lindsay, you
are welcome to go. We are sent a
bill 218 team. These are, um,
and just to, this is the.
Big ass bill that you've got,
um, that I looked at and thought
I was gonna have to present it
here in committee. I will be
doing that on the floor and it's
426 pages or something like
that. So thank you, chair, for
being here. If you will, go
ahead and start for Senate Bill
218. Um, I believe we have an
amendment to that. So if you
want to go ahead and explain the
bill and then explain this
really lengthy amendment.
Madam Queen, chairwoman, says
that what I heard, OK, well you
don't have to uh good afternoon
or good evening at this point,
chairwoman and committee
members. House floor 218 does in
fact have an amendment, and if I
may, uh, do you have a copy of
that moment. It is uh 0.231.
064.1 as a reference point and
what this amendment does is
actually, chair, if you don't
mind, go ahead and do the bill
first if you want to summarize
the bill and then we'll go to
the amendment. Thank you so
much. Thank you. So House Bill
218 is an agency bill and with
me today is Secretary Sergeant
Clark from the Tax and Revenue
Department, and it's a a bill
that contains significant
housekeeping, uh, in the tax
code. So every 60 day session,
uh, tax re brings for tax code
cleanup bills proposals
identified by staff.
tax practitioners and other
stakeholders, and so this is one
of those bills and
That's what it does, and if when
you're ready, I can explain the
amendments. If you will go ahead
and explain. Do we need to move
the amendment for discussion.
We have a whisper of a
discussion movement over here.
And I'm sure amongst this. So is
there anybody in opposition of
Or let's just go ahead and
discuss it, it's late. OK, yeah,
uh 3 things that this amendment
does. It's a form, it was, it
was a uh an amendment that was
made after the floor it passed
the house floor in the first,
what it does is that provides a
tax increment development
district may request a waiver to
the 12 month GRT data collection
process provided in this bill.
The department will be willing
to approve the waiver where
there where there is little to
no existing GRT activity in the
tit itself and.
to allow those kids with very
simple GRT bases to move forward
without unnecessary delay.
That's the first one. The second
one is the amendment will also
provide taxpayers with less than
$500 of tax liability per month
to file as infrequently as
annually.
Current law requires filing and
paying every 6 months for these
smaller taxpayers. And finally,
there are the amendment removes
the provisions that the of the
bill that addresses taxation of
what is called skim oil.
We heard some concerns from the
oil and gas industry, or
actually the oil and gas
association, excuse me, that the
department would like to work
through during the interim to
ensure that everybody is
comfortable with that language.
And those are the amendments,
Madam Chairwoman.
OK, that was a summary of all
these pages. Yes, ma'am. All
right.
That's efficient.
Uh, secretary, do you want to
make any comments before we
possibly go to audience or just
the committee? Sure, thank you,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. I really want to
thank the committee. I know that
this, this bill is difficult and
that it is so voluminous, but it
speaks to how much our tax code
needed.
housekeeping. And so the
department, we actually went
through all of Chapter 7 over
the interim, every line by line,
we identified 81 sections, I
believe it is that can be
repealed because they're
obsolete. A lot of um the
sections in here just
standardized um language across
something like 35 or 40
different tax credits and the
personal income tax. These are
just examples. Um, is, you know,
there are places in the tax code
that haven't been updated since
I think 1965 and still call us a
commission instead of a
department, you know, things
things like that.
Um, so really, we, we think that
this makes sense. It'll allow
the department to be a bit more
efficient. It'll allow the tax
code to be a little bit easier
to um understand if you're a
practitioner or a taxpayer, and
we think that it'll also prevent
some disputes, so we thank you
for your attention to this big
bill and look forward to your
questions. Thank you so much. So
there is there any discussion on
the amendment?
Senator Worth. Uh, thank you,
Madam Chair. So just explain
that the tit piece and I'm
curious if that would apply to
Senate Bill 481, the State
Fairgrounds District Act that we
heard today. Madam Chair and
Senator Wirth, um, what we're
doing there is a reflection of
the changes you have to take a
step back and think about how we
set a baseline for a TI or an
MRA, um, now that we are in
destination sourcing of the GRT.
So in the past, tax and Rev
would have to set a baseline of
activity that was happening in
aid.
And now in an MRA um looking
backward 12 months before the
district existed as a location
where you could file your GRT
return, and we could kind of
muddle our way through that, but
with destination sourcing, we
get so many more returns sourced
to areas because of, for
example, Internet sales,
residential deliveries, they
were no longer able to do that.
And so in general with this bill
provides is it's for kids is the
same as the cleanup we did last
session for MRAs. Um, it says
that
municipality or county will form
aid direct us to form a location
code, we'll form it, and then
we'll measure actual baseline
activity for 12 months. So this,
this makes it possible basically
to form that baseline. But one
of the concerns that came
forward um after we had gone
through a house tax and rev was
what if there's, uh, for
example, a greenfield id where
there isn't any activity. Could
we have a waiver? Could there be
language that allows us to go
ahead and and not measure
nothing for 12 months. And we
thought that was reason.
As to your question about the
state fairgrounds, we did review
this language and this bill
against the proposals for the
state fairgrounds, and we don't
see any concern there. The state
fairgrounds, um, if it becomes a
tid, it may request a waiver,
and if it does, I think we would
probably be able to approve a
waiver to move it forward more
quickly.
You'll yield.
I'll be, I'll yield to, I'm
done. I'll yield to you,
Senator. Thank you on, on that
point because what's proposed in
the earlier bill.
It's not a county or city tick,
it might need new language in
the tax code to cover it.
If I can, Madam Chair and
Senator Figueroa, there's,
there's sort of two bills
related to the state fairground
that are companions, the one
that this committee heard
earlier today isn't actually a
tidbi. It's very tid-like, but
Senate bill, I think it's 481,
which one, whichever one you
didn't hear today, 482. That one
actually does contemplate the
formation of aid and that one if
if a tit is formed and it seeks
to increment the state GRT and
all that, then, then we could.
Deal with it under this
legislation I think Madam Chair
and secret, that's my concern.
If 481 is the one that moves. We
are creating something new that
isn't covered by tax code, and
there might be things we need to
add to make sure it's covered in
the same way a regular, the 482
version it would be.
Um, on that, uh, Madam Chair and
Senator Figuero, we don't have
technical concerns along that
line with the bill that this
committee heard earlier today.
We've reviewed that and um as
far as setting the GRT and
dedicating it or the gaming
excise tax were comfortable.
That was 0 question. OK.
There are other questions from
the committee.
Senator Sheriff
on the amendment.
All right. If there are no other
questions on the amendment, is
there any opposition to
accepting the amendment.
See now.
Launched that. Now we're back on
the bill, uh, as amended,
Senator Sheriff, did you? Oh,
thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
She's heard it before, the first
New Mexico tax code was 21
sentences, the first, uh,
The, the, the next one was 21
pages, and now we're up to 1200
pages and like
4 font or something unreadable.
Um
So with this, this, and it's
been my contention we're not
overtaxed, we're just
confusingly taxed. We don't know
what we're doing. And maybe some
of it's because we have 1966
language and we don't talk that
way no more.
Um
Is this actually gonna make
This cleanup is gonna make it
easier for us to understand our
own text.
Or is it just
and commission to the
department.
Mancha and Senator Sheer, it
does make it easier to
understand our own tax code. Um,
it does.
I'll say that there are still
aspects of our tax code that
will be confusing. It doesn't
address, um, the bigger picture
things that, for example, have
revenue impacts or fiscal
impacts, but for example, to
shorten it by removing 81
obsolete sections so that if
you're new to the tax code and
trying to find your answer, you
don't have to spend a whole day,
for example, looking at a film
tax credit and then realizing
it, it's, it's obsolete. That's
not the one anymore, you know,
just for example, um, it's gonna
make that blue book a little
shorter, um, it's gonna prevent,
I think, disputes.
To by we we really aim, we know
that taxpayers by and large are
really just trying to
voluntarily comply, and we want
to be able to best we can
provide them the answers they
need to just do it right,
simply, and I think we clarify a
lot of things in the bill too
that just make it easier for
taxpayers to know the rules of
the game, so they can
voluntarily do it right.
I just wanted to
I don't want, I don't want to
accidentally do something, so
that's what I'm trying to figure
out just how, how do I.
How do I do what's right?
You talked briefly about skim.
Has that been removed from this
while we talk about, I think
that was part of the amendment,
but, but we've just not talking
about that at all right now
until after the summer.
That's correct, Madam Chair and
Senator Scherer in the original
bill we had attempted to clarify
the taxation of skim oil and
sediment and slop and our intent
is to make sure that it gets
taxed once and only once. Um,
but after the House tax and Rev
Committee, we had some industry
um representatives come forward
and sort of say we need to talk
about this more. There's more to
the way we file and produce and
who does what, um, and so we'll
work with them over the interim
to see if we can nail that down.
OK. Thank you, ma'am.
Thank you, Senator Sheriff. Any
other questions from the
committee?
What is the will of the
committee?
We have, you passed from Senator
Sher. Do we have a second?
Second from Senator Sanchez and
Figueroa.
Is there anybody in opposition
of this do pass motion?
See now if you will please
record 9 to 0, do pass.
Thank you. Texas give me
anxiety, so I'm not really
looking forward to presenting
this on the bill maybe Senator
Sheriff can help me out
All right, now we're moving on
to Senate Bill, uh, House Bill
198.
Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chairman
continuation of what we just
talked about, uh, in regards to
every 60 day session as a
cleanup bill. This is again one
of those, um.
Regarding more so uh te cleanup
related to penalties and
remedies such as typically
referred to in the judiciary
committees. With that, we'll
stand for any questions.
So this does go to judiciary
right after the uh after this,
right? Um, all right, so that
was short and sweet. Are there
questions um
secretary, you want to make a
comment to clarify this?
But I need to do that.
I'm good.
All right. So we, uh, wanna make
sure, um, because I think
Senator Sher has a bet that
we'll get out of here at 7
o'clock on the dot.
Are there any questions before
we go to the Du pass motion from
Senator Sheriff.
We have 10, senator she blew
your bet.
Go ahead, Senator Figueroa. I
wondered, um we'll do a 3 point
spread, you know, 3 minute give
or take. I will speak very
slowly, Madam Chair, I just
wondered with the penalty
changes, did you use a
particular system? Did you use
CPI? How did you decide what to
make the new numbers.
That's a great question and
Madam Chair and Senator
Figueroa, we used, you know,
basically an online inflation
calculator that's linked to
federal data. We took the
penalty in the year was last
established, what it would be in
2025 and then rounded to the
closest round number. Perfect.
Was that long enough, madam Ja
timing, but
I think Senator Berins or
Senator Wirth.
Senator Bergman's go quicker. No
kidding. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Our committee analysis is
pointing out that in section 4
on page 11.
Subsection D.
But it says the proposed minimum
5 of 7 of a $75 fine or 50% of
the tax.
Is that how it's reading. It's
on page 11.
subsection D.
I'm sure judiciary.
D as in dog, so line 10, but the
strikeout on line 13 and 14.
Madam Chair and senator, I, I
think I saw this issue noted in
an analysis from the Department
of Justice, and it was, I think
the rate of it was incorrect.
They were concerned that it
wasn't clear, but the language
is clear. It says that the
penalty in this case of willful
intent to evade and defeat tax
of failure to pay is
50% of the tax or a minimum of
$75. I think that's pretty clear
that it's how that works.
I, yes, that makes sense. And I
guess removing the whichever is
greater.
Doesn't really matter.
Unless the lawyer wants to, I
mean, so 50%, so if I have
A 300
Dollar tax.
For a minimum, so that's $150
would be 50% or a minimum of
$75. So basically I'm paying 150
bucks.
OK, fine.
OK. Any other questions or
comments from the committee.
We do have a due pass from
Senator share. Is there a
second?
Second from Senator Figueroa.
Anybody in opposition of the
DuPass motion?
See none. You have a 9 to 0. Do
pass motion. Thank you very
much. Committee, I think, you
know, just to make sure that
Senator Sher's bet is good. We,
I think we did start 5 minutes
late.
So
OK, all righty, so thank you
everybody. We will have uh a
very productive afternoon on
