Sorry everyone.
Okay.
I think we're.
Ready to go.
Little.
Few technical issues this
morning but I think we've got
him all fixed.
So.
Lane if you can the to grow.
Okay.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Griggs your Senator
Hamblen.
Senator Hickey.
Senator how to meal here.
Senator Kernan.
Here senator Sanchez.
There.
Senator Clemente.
I see a Senator Wirth your.
Senator Padilla.
Here.
Shendo I have Brandt and Hickey
not on yet okay we have a quorum
so we'll go ahead and the to get
started I think the first.
Item worse the.
Senate bill sixty eight the
harmonic convergence of Senate
bill one sixty eight and fifty
eight I believe that we have a.
Amendment or substitute of
Science Center Gonzalez and
sent.
Mr chairman of good morning into
the.
I refer to a senator Neville all
of the it's going to be an
amendment.
You are muted Senator.
All right go ahead Senator.
Allman thank you Mr chairman
thank you senator.
yeah we have an amendment.
that was to.
The.
Yesterday and the.
Simply adds a new section of the
motor vehicle code.
About to create an additional
disruption city of a hundred
dollars for.
Full full battery powered
electric vehicles with a gross
right.
Vehicle weight of twenty six
thousand pounds or less than
fifty dollars for the plugin
hydraulic hybrid electric
vehicles with a gross vehicle
weight of twenty six thousand
pounds or less and the fees are
distributed to seventy seven
percent to the state road fund
and twenty three percent to the
local government.
Road fund.
So that this was taken that
directly from
Senate Bill.
Fifty eight.
So that's the essence of the
amendment.
Share yes.
Go ahead.
That's the essence of the
amendment okay
we probably need to move the
amendment to.
Of.
Could have a motion Mr chairman
I move that the amendment for
purposes of discussion on thank
you Senator Padilla so any
questions on the amendment.
Or or.
Senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr chair I do have a
couple questions so Center Tom
and what else was in Senate bill
fifty eight.
Twenty five hundred dollar a.
Thanks for the.
For the purchases of new
electric vehicles are.
With the maximum cost of forty
eight thousand dollars.
Five thousand dollar tax credit
for people who for low income
people who qualify.
And Mr chair was there also
something about.
electric charging homes charging
station yes thank you Senator
there was a.
The tax credit back up to a
maximum of three hundred dollars
the.
For the installation of an
electric charging unit.
And so Mister chair Sierra was
there any thought about.
Putting your whole package in to
this bill instead of just the
the vehicle fee.
Well thank you for that question
I plan on running the.
Senate bill fifty eight.
With those.
Features it we just and numerate
ID.
Although we I I have no problem
with the.
And Corporation the entire
Senate bill fifty eight into
this bill we can go eight we
could do it either way it but
Whatever a.
Flexible yet Mr chairman I want
I don't want to.
Kind of slow this down because
that's a little different than
what we talked about doing I do
want to state though that I
think it's really important that
that there's a package and I
think that's what your bill dies
I'm also going to suggest a
change to the amount of the fee
because again when I went back
and looked at the.
When I went back and looked at
the amendment it brought back.
once of memories of the twenty
twenty legislative session in
this exact issue I'm a we lost a
bill to do this R. because we
have the Senate at a hundred
dollars and we had the house at
fifty dollars and what what I
want I don't want to do is
create a disincentive to
purchase electric vehicles and
so I'm just a little concerned
that having a standalone hundred
dollar fee may do exactly that.
now I'm willing to to support a
standalone fee I'm gonna suggest
that instead of a hundred and
fifty we do fifty and twenty
five and I would just note the
reason for that suggestion is
you know Senator Gonzales is
taking a very baby step with the
gas tax is one sense
and I just think we should take
a baby step here on this
proposal as well if we're gonna
do it this way and and and I'd
be willing to support that.
You know with the understanding
that I think the tax credit
piece you have in here is
absolutely critical and so I I
really hope that you know when
we get to the point of putting
together the tax credit credit
package that we're going to do
in this committee I really think
that needs to be part of it
because again we really were in
transition and I think we're
just touching on lots of
different issues so.
You know so that's just my
thoughts I won't make a motion
at this point because I want
other members have a chance to
talk about this but you know I I
think that you know setting
setting a hybrid that does both
gas tax and the fee is is a good
idea but I just want to make
sure that fees fees rights and
is not a disincentive so those
are just some thoughts all throw
out and I'll jump back in at
some point thanks thank you I
have Senator Kernan has Senator
Hamblen.
Thank you Mr chairman in that
race is really the same question
that I have with regard to the
the without and and and then you
you have the tax credit in
another bill basically by doing
both of those the the fee is is
is really negligible because
you're getting such a.
Right tax credit so we're really
not paying for the roads at by
electric vehicle owners and so I
think that for me I'm I don't
think that really solves my
issue with so many more electric
cars coming onto the roads and
you pay twenty five dollars or
fifty dollars to use the roads
it in my understanding that
correctly Mr chair and senator
Wirth.
So I think Senator Kernan
It's interesting this was
Senator Woods bill you may
remember this we we had at you
guys had and Senate finance and
you spend a lot of time on the
bill and the last session and
Senate finance and and it really
was it was both pieces I think
what senator Tom is amendment
proposes is not both pieces it's
just it's it's adding a fee
along with the gas tax and then
you know that but tax credit
pieces separate and I do I feel
strongly that we should have the
tax credit but that's a policy
decision and I think that's just
like we talked before we went
online about the the other tax
credit bill that came through I
think that's a discussion we
need to have when we wrap wrap
up at the end one overall tax
package looks like and whether
that could be part of it but I
think what senator Thomas
proposing now is just a fee and
and then the question becomes
what's the appropriate amount
and I just have some
reservations about a hundred
dollars I think fifty fifty and
twenty five X. four cents you
may you may want to go the other
direction so I just threw up
thank you Mr chair an incentive
to work and just another
clarification when you talk
about just one cent I am I.
Am I correct that it's one sent
over five years so it's a total
of five cents.
Yeah at the end of the day Miss
Mister chairman Senator current
yes it's a phased in and and
just as a preview for Senator
Griggs a little later we'll talk
about some other faced in.
Taxes are over a five year
period but you're correct you're
actually correct one cent per
year.
So that you know I think Mr
chair and senator Tom and
Potential about putting in the
tax credit at this point we're
delaying the entire bill because
it would be twelve would be part
of the group that will discuss
at a later time and I don't
disagree with senator Wirth we
need to to look at the big
picture and that's included
because when you look at that
the the tax credit and it is a
policy issue you know we're
encouraging people to buy
electric cars and dropped them
on our roads but we're not
expecting them to pay for that
privilege so I think maybe Mr
Senator work is correct that we
should look at the big picture
and see what that total cost and
benefit is to everybody may not
will continue probably to pay
the the tax of the content
it's it's something that that
I'm grateful for good roads and
and so I don't know I just think
that that probably would have
been better to include the
entire bill folded over in.
Consider it with all the other
tax credit bills thank you very
much Mr chair.
Thank you senator Senator
Hamblen.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for this discussion and I've had
some time to to be able to
explore a little bit more about
that the tax credit I was very
excited about the opportunity
for people who own electric
vehicles to have this be able to
contribute to our road repair
and the the impact that they
have
however you have a couple of
things is that the tax credit
doesn't apply to used cars my
correct on that.
Senator Wirth you may know more
about that than I do.
No it doesn't okay so it doesn't
apply to used cars also
according to Consumer Reports
that the funding would only
account for six percent of the
state's road maintenance if we
charge
The end consumer reports
recommends fifty three dollars
as the fee for electric cars to
be.
Sarah for folks for a trying to
be able to drivers and this is
determined by taking the average
fuel taxes paid by drivers of
new gas powered vehicles in the
state anything above that might
be labeled as punitive so I I I
feel that it you know after this
discussion and and as much as
cited as I was about the idea of
getting electronic vehicle
drivers to start contributing to
what they do to the roads I do
think that this might actually
be better as separate
legislation just because we're I
think we're we're diluting the
impact at this this bill with
the V. tax credit can have also
who is going to affect and so
money is actually more of just
kind of committee rather than
questions unless the senator
wants to address any of those
issues I'd be appreciative of
that.
Mr chair.
Thank you senator Clemente.
Thank you Mr chair.
I'm not convinced that fifty
dollars is a is a deterrent.
It's a if you do if you
up multiply this eighteen cents
a gallon times the average.
Hi no mileage which is I.
Google with thirteen thousand
miles a year an average car gets
thirteen miles a gallon you get
eighty six dollars so I can
understand.
I'm not convinced it's fifty
dollars all on that for the
state to get this through all
greed at.
Anything whether it's well a lot
of states are charging a hundred
dollars to two hundred dollars.
but.
I'm flexible as far as a.
As far as the rolling the bills
and and to one.
Whatever it is expedient
whatever will get the tax credit
ask thanks.
Enacted as what all agree to.
So.
whatever the public can come to
some consensus on what how we're
gonna handle this so whatever it
takes to get the the gas tax and
the
Registration fee.
And the tax credit for the
purchase of new EV's L. will be
acceptable to me.
I'm ex I'm not.
Flexible and willing to
compromise.
Thank you senator I have a so
Senator Hamleys to have the
floor.
Okay hi you Mr chair thank you
thank you Senator Griggs.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
and you know think about
electric vehicles still accept
you know some of the the
Nissan's ideas for shows the
price of oil is still relatively
high which means you're giving a
tax credit I guess Center tall
men to
folks who were more able to
afford a more expensive vehicle.
so I'm not I'm not too sure I
mean hi on that tax credit at
all but I see your your your
mask is.
You know I mean we we can debate
that if we want but you know you
can talk about thirteen thousand
miles or eighteen thousand miles
twenty five miles a gallon or
thirty or twenty all of those
things to come up with a with a
number of you know I I tend to
think the higher numbers better
as well.
I realized something I don't you
know I don't know what we really
think we what we want to get
there but.
You know when you go by your by
seven eight hundred thousand
gallons gas annually where you
can figure out what the gas tax
was you paid so you can pretty
much then.
Figure out how much you would
have to pay if you know if your
car what electric show we just
have to agree on a on an MPG and
the and miles traveled bench
that's the way you you come up
with that that particular
number.
And in senators I'm I'm a little
more in favor overall and you
know it's a policy dealers well
when we talk about the gas tax
we talk about this I'm almost
more in favor of looking at the
man's that senator Kalman's
looking at for electric vehicle.
Look at that then for all
vehicles.
And then either reducing the gas
tax.
Show when people of New Mexico
whose rate of who pay more in
registration C. they don't have
to they don't have to pay as
much and gas tax but we still
get the revenue from people
cross driving cross country
we're stopping in New Mexico
need to pay gas taxes I think
again this is this is you know
Senator Gonzales worked
extraordinarily hard on trying
to find ways to.
Take care of our our roads.
But the gas tax is something
when we talk about what senator
Collins doing our when we look
at potentially that we're going
to electric vehicles or or
hydrogen powered or hide
whatever role we're going to
we're trying to get away from a
hundred percent gasoline powered
vehicles so we need to start
thinking about a program that
funds the roads differently than
we do it today.
And I I think we need to we look
at doing it on the front end and
and do different things with gas
tax because I think we could
potentially lower the gas tax
but
That's my that's my comment sure
till then you the you know
something needs to come of of
your bill as far as the feet
part whether the tax credit
cards are good thing or not you
know I've I'm gonna have to I
don't like that very much but
but I think the fee point
absolutely right so thank you Mr
chair thank you senator thanks
Center words for your comments
as well I mean it's this is hard
this is hard but I think we need
to be headed in a in a different
direction we're Senators almonds
initial start we're going that
way thank you Mr chair thank you
senator excess Senator Brandt.
This.
Thank you Mr chairman and and I
apologize to the committee I
can't have my video on today my
internet is too unstable but I
do have just a couple of
questions
so Sir Tom and.
I actually agree with you on the
the feeding avid to electric
vehicles I think that the.
It's it's the only right way to
to actually do the keep the road
fund of the more people switch
over to electric vehicles and
and I'm not against doing that
personally to be honest with
everyone of the more people that
do that
the less money we're going to
have for a road so we do need to
deal with that issue I do want
to ask what we did on to
guarantee the money raised
through the increased gas taxes
only used for roads and not used
for railroads and space point to
know where.
Thank you.
Mr chairman thank you Senator
for your question.
That's because the seventy seven
percent of the fees are going to
state road fund twenty three
percent of fees go on the local
government road fund.
But.
Okay that the state is second
question.
Well I thought you were still
finishing up I'm sorry all.
And then respond to Senator
Griggs I I'll do that later go
ahead.
Yes thank you so and I I
understand that your bill says
goes on the road fund but is
there anything that keeps us
from using the road fund to pay
for a new train or to pay for
spaceport because I know it was
used before for that.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
centers for.
To the best of my knowledge of
the the the.
The funds can be used for
something else although I may be
wrong but that certainly is my
understanding that it cannot be
used for anything other than
the.
The road the fund.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
senator unfortunately
It was used for building grow
rather and it was used for
building the spaceport.
Because as long as legislature
decides to move that money and
use it thank you for anything
we're just putting in the road I
and then we can change our money
and put it somewhere else and
I'm not gonna support a gas tax
increase until we make sure
constitutional a that that money
can't be moved so because I'm
not going to increase gas taxes
so we can build a new train to
nowhere and the spaceport that
still.
Reflect spent almost three years
of the gonna start this year.
And this your gums goes in this
year comes and goes in our three
years and so when they said they
were gonna law.
Sh so it's I can't support it
your gas tax increase so I can
be guaranteed that it's going to
be used on our roads thank you.
Mr chairman thank you senator
Senator Padilla I'm sorry to
thank you very much on the list.
that would you have to Brent
awaits okay well then so we're
on the amendment is that correct
yes with the yeah well.
Yes I would move adoption of the
amendment.
Okay.
We have a.
Mr chair.
Go ahead senator Cormann I just
like to respond thank you Mr
secretary responded Senator
Griggs who are indicated that.
That electric vehicles are are
X. expensive but the most
popular model the Tesla model.
Model three.
We show counts for almost about
half of the sales electric
vehicles this price to thirty
seven thousand nine hundred.
And I according to the FIR the
average price of a new gas
powered vehicles thirty five
thousand so it's only twenty
five twenty seven hundred
dollars more than the average.
The most popular electric
vehicles on twenty two thousand
nine hundred dollars more than
the average price gasoline
powered vehicle just like to
right and as we all know.
Senator electric vehicles are.
Increasingly every year they get
cheaper so that will that in the
very near future they're going
to be very competitive and even
cost less than that of gas
powered vehicle just want to
make that clear thank you Mr
chair thank you Senator Griggs.
Thank you senator Cormann.
Senator Padilla then.
I was just gonna make my motion
I'm I've got camping a lot of
not a lot of paid more so I
won't do that.
Or am I don't think I am so.
I make a motion.
Well you put yourself in a
penalty box sure whatever you
wanna call it okay all righty so
we have a we debated this bill
it seems like it was Senator
Tallman it absorbs twenty five
percent of this committee's time
on this one bills since he's
come to the legislature's.
so we have a motion to adopt the
amendment any opposition to that
motion.
Mr chair I'm gonna vote no.
Okay so there's no second.
we have a second.
Mr chair all second the
amendment.
Okay all right we have a second
the.
So lane can you take Raul please
on the adoption of the amendment
Senator Brandt.
Yes Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen.
Not I like to explain.
Senator Hickey.
Pass.
Senator how to meal no.
Senator Kernan no.
Senator Sanchez.
No.
Senator Clemente.
No.
Senator Wirth no.
Senator Hickey.
No.
Senator Padilla yes Senator
Shendo.
Yes.
Seven knows and four yeses.
He met this past so we're we're.
We're back
so.
I guess with this whole the the.
So what's.
What is go back to debate on the
bill Mr chair back to under the
bill.
Mr Chairman.
Yes.
just to make you some brief
comments so.
You know well.
The twenty seven years that I
have been here it's very easy to
get a bill you know well.
with more inflows or change to a
different direction.
And yes I understand you know
the law.
You know what
There's always change you know
and we're saying that changes
coming by electric vehicles
which it probably will.
You know the part is that we're
not there yet you know it it's
coming.
That doesn't change the fact
that our bridges need work or
will need work are potholes need
for.
Our.
Frontline.
Individuals that are out there
during inclement weather led to
change then they need equipment.
This is a a very models it'll to
just to bring in additional
funding to the six districts
that we no Representative our
state.
The through the intro committees
of the transportation committee.
When we have those we don't have
a single individual legislator
the doesn't say the thirst needs
in their area.
You know we even go to the
extreme of some or we have
school buses again you would
cross some of the bridges
because you know all of the
delay in maintenance.
So this is all it's doing you
know
US legislators is a at one point
if we don't have responsibility
at one point the infrastructure
and the most important
infrastructure to and from you
know the large state that we
have we can take care of.
You know it's a set date you
know it really is and I have a
made an approach for many years
to try to work with this
department right additional
funding.
It always goes back again it's
never the right time.
Will well it might not be the
right time but that doesn't
change the need for lane for
structure you know that doesn't
change the need continues you
know to pool more to compound
you know all the needs that are
neat they're.
Everyone here will spend much
more.
I'm a couple of coffee from
Starbucks what do their
contribution would be you know
to put an end to something that
would give the department of an
additional twenty five million
you know to work.
The from the trucking
association from anyone that
is that you serve the role of
the LC and understand the the
safety to our roads so it's on
us well you know how.
I don't know how many more years
you know that I I will be in the
legislature and I have made my
darndest attempt to be able to
work with this so you know what
what point is do we see the
responsibility we talk about
many other things state needs
and we work with that but for
some reason this department has
always been the actual.
Child you know to the system.
Because it doesn't receive the
the funding that comes from
general fund this others you
know comes in from what is
generated.
You know so well one of the
reasons you know that when the
in ninety four ninety five when
that six cents was repealed it
did a lot of damage a lot of
damage because he can just look
at all the millions not funding
for infrastructure because of
the.
So you know with so working with
that.
It'll come into or we are today
you know well you know I'm just
asking the members to really
consider this it's not a much
more open decrease it's our
responsibility.
You know that we have to
everyone so with that a Mister
chairman.
I just needed to bring those
comments back again thank you
thank you thank you Senator the.
We now have Senator we're back
in the bill so Senator Kernan
Sierra.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Senator Gonzales and and I I
really have given up a lot of
thought to this and you know
over the years I appreciate it
very much what.
The department of transportation
is done for my area but this
legislature has done with the
excise tax addition and and that
certainly has been very much
appreciated but just the
legislature we have policy
decisions to make in just a
Senator Gonzales madam we have
not prioritize that as
legislature.
We have given our extra dollars
to other other at agencies to
other projects we have not done
what we should do.
The general fund over the last
couple years I believe we have
increased
dollars directly to the road
fund and I think that's the way
that we as a legislature can can
identify.
The roads are our priority after
the revenue forecast was given
this last weekend and I'm
certainly encouraged by that
enough been hesitant to do
anything until that was
presented they did include the
risk and and I still believe
that there is great risk
with regard to the forecast over
the next three or four years
certainly this year we are in a
position that we could take a
significant amount of money
certainly more than this
increasing gas tax will raise
and we can move that to the road
I just.
One time appropriation this year
and if things continue to do
well we can continue to do that.
To many there are policy issues
that make the building of our
roads more expensive than they
need to be we're not willing to
talk about that.
So if if we can circle back
around and discuss those things
that because the cost to build
roads at higher than it is in
surrounding states and when we
can make roads a priority in the
state and and those dollars to
the general fund even if it's
for the next two or three years
of our revenues are up to me I
think that achieves a great deal
for our roads and so as much as
I would like to support this
bill I'm not going to until we
address the issue a priority
making roads important and we
put that money from the general
fund into roads.
And we need to do those things
first.
It's very difficult for me to
raise taxes at a time when the
revenue forecast stance as it is
today.
So Mr chairman with all due
respect to my good friend
Senator Gonzales and and
actually I even considered it
because I know Senator Smith for
years advocated for this but at
this point I just think there
are other things we need to
consider before price taxes on
the people of New Mexico thank
you.
Thank you senator Senator
Tallman and Senator Hickey.
Thank you Mr chair and
Just like to ask a Senator a.
Senator Wirth how how he would
like to proceed to like.
Would you like to the justice to
vote on the bill this bill as is
and the run my Senate bill fifty
eight separate are you still
interested in combining the two.
So Mister chair I think based on
the decision the chair made to
move this bill forward outside
of the it's not a tax credit
Senator Gonzales is bill I do
think based on that decision we
should just take the vote on
this bill and then the tax
credit bill should be part of
the overall discussion then I I
want to get a hearing on that
bill we need to do we need to
have that discussion but I do
think it's part of the overall
tax credit we got to figure how
to pay for it and so I just I
don't want to.
You know at the at this point it
feels to me like based on the.
The decision on the motion on
the amendments we're back on
centre Gonzales's bill and it's
up to the chair of course but I
was in the impression from our
discussion before that that he
wants that bill to move forwards
this bill to move forward
assuming it passes of course so
again I kind of think we should
let's let's separate them out I
I don't think it's Center
Hamblin said I don't think we
all quite realized kind of all
the different pieces of the of
the electric vehicle and and and
that and they go together that's
the thing that's important they
go together and I think we just
take the one piece out.
It becomes harder so I think
they need to be together and I
just suggest we keep on this too
to two separate tracks.
Okay thank you Senator for your
response thank you Mr chair
thank you a gentleman Senator
Hickey and I have Senator
Padilla.
Thank you Mr chairman and.
Senator Gonzales
think I pointed out.
The other day.
How.
The game within literally and
resin exaggerate inches of that
five fifty the five fifty and
got info.
And I wonder how many other old
five fifties there are around
the state this summer will be
traveling.
As of legislators around the
state and will be some that will
be on some of those very for
roads.
I don't know the statistics due
to poor road accidents and bass
But to not make this a priority
is to leave some of the the the
basics Act and talk about
massless hierarchy in this is
down in the five Nestle's.
Getting this done and then this
morning I really should grants
to learn.
Then I guess ninety six.
We gave a six percent again the
six cent tax rebate not that you
have the lowering so
we did not do this very very
very modest bill would to me.
B.
it that produce here early
response this is the state and
as I'm thinking back about the
discussion of it yesterday I
probably would have said you we
need to go to to censor three
cents it's not that much and
your Starbucks analogy who ever
made that is right so I want to
commend you Senator for bringing
this this is the basic yes there
are other things we have to deal
with the round that but I hope
you bring back next year for
more because before electrics
really start buzzing up and down
the roads in the state we're
gonna be in the nineteen
thirties we're still on gas for
the for the time being and a
road repair as I drive five
fifty a lot it's good for three
or four years and needs to be be
done again so thank you for
allowing me to weigh in on this
but I think this is a critically
important bill making this a
functional state and for those
who think that the federal
government's going to come in
with their infrastructure in
fixes things we're gonna go for
the bridges first thank god so
we don't have all that but the
but you know Washington's
Washington and you know after
the one point nine trillion how
how well is the is the
infrastructure bill going to be
able to do as well so
and I'm urging my colleagues to
pass this bill and mostly
Senator Gonzales please bring it
back next year thank you thank
you Mr chair.
Thank you senator I think yes
Senator Padilla.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator Gonzalez and I know that
this is that something that
you've been working on for a
while I you know I I fully
support pretty much all of the
comments Senator Hickey maybe a
few others
you know we talk about where
things are with the state budget
right now Mr chairman and others
the committee things might be
rosy at the moment things might
be pretty good right now but if
we don't we need to be a heck of
a lot more proactive in this
legislature that's always been
my feeling the whole time I've
been here and I try to take as
many proactive steps I can
possibly grant through and get
signed in and all that I feel
like I've been pretty good about
some of them with some of them
but if we don't make this move
now we are going to find
ourselves you know once again
playing catch up you're trying
to figure out how to solve this
big issue that we have a we have
the late senator can go over
there trying to for how many
years trying to you know fix
that rolled over and is there
any finally got it and but how
many people died on that road
what he was you know right and
left to right to get it done and
and these are just super
important things and I'm not
pointing the finger anything
like that anybody at all but I
mean I just wouldn't feel good
going to bed at night knowing
that we could be proactive we
see a massive boulder in front
of us we see it it's not that we
don't see it why would we
pretend like it's not there
because things aren't always
going to be is is rosy and
bright whatever with state
budget but we're gonna have a
way to continue to maintain what
we need to so I just want to
make that statement Mr Chairman
did did we did we get everybody
through public comment on this
bill or we did okay I just
wanted to see work for things
were so yes yes we did we're
we're back in the bill would go
to public comment we had one
opposition I believe yeah okay
thank you just just trying to
ask questions thank you.
Okay I don't have any other.
hands up
over Senator Tallman I thought
you just didn't take it down
from previous I know I took it
down I hope you'd notice in and
put it back up.
Who are there to work
independently follow you're
doing a good job since.
I just want to say in all
industries into she wants good
roads you show me a state that's
got good infrastructure actually
is state is probably as a good
economy only for state only
three states have a lower gas
tax New Mexico has been raised
in twenty eight years.
In nineteen ninety three
seventeen cents.
It was seventeen cents.
And today.
Seventeen cents is only worth
ten cents so we're really
falling behind this is very
necessary we want to proceed you
know people say low taxes.
The track business that's not
true I was city manager I'd seen
dozens of reports what to what
those businesses look for in
taxes are always like number
seven six seven right.
Looking for quality of life that
doesn't come cheap good roads
good schools good recreational
facilities cost money.
I urge the Senate committee to
pass this bill is overdue it's
it's very well needed Senator
Gonzales and working on this for
a long time and what he's just
told us is is very true thank
you Mr chair thank you Senator
Gonzales for all your hard work
on this.
Thank you
What is the pleasure of the
committee.
Will move so.
there were three people at once
who
Right Martin Hickey modes Harris
of and also you with the motion
a second Senator Padilla with
the second then can you take
real please Senator Brandt.
No.
Senator Griggs no.
Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Hickey yes Senator hada meel yes
Senator Kernan yeah senator
Sanchez.
No senator Clemente yes Senator
Wirth yes Senator Padilla yes
Senator Shendo yes.
Seven for and four against.
Okay senator Senator for you
have a do pass in the Senate
bill one sixty eight Senator
Gonzales.
Mr chairman of the twelve
members thank you thank you very
much.
Thank you we will now move on to
the Senate bill one seventy five
and I'm not sure if the eagles
yes Mr chairman Senator Gallegos
is driving and he did contact me
he was in a dead spot but he may
be available now okay so before
we move on if I can ask folks
that are not committee members
to take your cameras off of so
that I can be easily be able to
monitor a my committee members
so I can identify who's who it's
much easier for me my eyes SO
four so I appreciate it and then
you can turn your cameras back
on when you're ready to testify
so I I appreciate that thank you
all.
So with that
You may have driven into a dead
spot again I don't know Mr
Chairman.
Guy goes.
Senator eagles are you on.
If not I think I'll just go
ahead and move on to the Senate
bill one eighty nine we have
Senator Duhigg I believe on the
line right yes that we are yes I
Mr chair go ahead Senator.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee.
I Senate bill one eighty nine
creates the financial
exploitation Act and.
The problem is that this bill is
seeking to solve is that.
We there are a lot of situations
where folks who adults who are
either disabled or who are are
elderly and are having cognitive
issues
get taken advantage of
financially I and once once the
bad actors who are doing that
have the money in their hands
it's really really hard to get
it back and so what this bill
seeks to do is really to.
One is to empower banks to
essentially put a pause on
suspicious transactions so that
an appropriate investigation can
be done to make sure that this
isn't a situation where someone
is being financially exploited
and the other thing it does is
it creates
clear legal remedy is so that if
someone is successful and and
financially exploiting someone
who is disabled or elderly that
then then then there is a clear
legal path to addressing
addressing that and and
hopefully making that person
hall and so I have a number of
experts here with me today
Lisa millage who is an attorney
that represents the New Mexico
guardianship Association on and
and and I skip something and and
I think my experts will talk a
little bit more about this this
bill came out as a result of the
attack of the financial
exploitation of elders and
adults with disabilities task
force so Lisa millage Y. as the
attorney representing the New
Mexico guardianship Association
on that task force
I also have Kevin hammer who is
the attorney representing New
Mexico credit unions on the task
force and Ellen Lieser who is
the senior citizen who was with
the senior citizens law office
and was also on the task force
as well and I believe that US
secretary Katrina who from Lopez
from eighteen long term services
I'm not sure if she is on yet
but I believe that that she
wanted to to speak on this bill
as well so she could.
Could be allowed to to speak
with the experts I would I would
appreciate it.
But I will hand it over to I
actually at all start with the
secretary because I see that she
is on.
It go ahead secretary.
Good morning
Mr chair and members of the
committee I could train how to
Lopez and the cabinet secretary
for aging and long term services
I just really appreciate Senator
Duhigg bringing this bill
forward today you know a big
part of what aging and long term
services does is protect adults
in you know in in in really bad
situations and poor poor
settings and one of the things
that we do is through adult
protective services as we
investigate complaints of abuse
neglect and exploitation and we
have several complaints every
year coming from you know fiscal
institutions such as banks that
are reporting potential abuse I
have it and exploitation of our
elderly so we really appreciate
the additional partnership the
the additional work that is
being that has been done on the
off time on this bill and we
fully support it so thank you
again and thank you Senator
Duhigg for bringing this matter
to the forefront.
Thank you secretary.
Mr chair I think I think Lisa
milicich.
We'll speak next.
Okay thank you thank you Mr
chair the committee thank you
Senator do hate.
What I talked to you about today
is a new influence on that theme
runs throughout the entire bill
a person who is the subject of
undue influence we'll do
whatever the under influencer
tells them to do.
So what do the perpetrators of
the new ones do because they're
all very similar you can almost
checked the boxes on what
they're going to do to their
victims first they work to gain
the trust of their victims then
they try to isolate usually
successfully friends and family
from visiting calling talking to
the victim anything.
Victims to the perpetrators will
often tell the victims your
family doesn't love you I'm the
only one who cares about you
they just want your money they
want to put you in a nursing
home and forget you
and I'm the only one who will
protect you from that and that
is another reason that they get
victims to transfer assets I'm
the only one who can protect
your assets from your family so
why don't we transfer them all
to me.
Why would somebody do that well
the.
To abuse that I've been
describing.
It where's the victim down and
as long as they're isolated the
family members can't they don't
know what to do to help
I've never encountered an undue
influence K. that didn't also
have some form of physical abuse
neglect of
section that are withheld and
that kind of thing I wanted to.
You example an extreme example I
don't want to confuse the issues
but this example involved a
guardianship and conservatorship
but that is not required in the
just be one eighty nine you
don't have to be adjudicated
incapacitated specifically so
anyone can be the victim of
undue influence.
Any background any mental
facilities.
Anyone.
So.
Want to tell you about is
probably one of the most extreme
cases I've seen but I sadly
housing cases this bout a few
times.
So mom.
Just a little bit so that it's
not identifiable mom was widowed
she had a lot of money few
million she had a large house
she had three kids.
To the kids live with mom and
they started doing all of these
things so the third child became
our client and this is typical
she came in and she said I don't
know exactly what's going on but
something doesn't seem right
cause undue influence is not
something most people are
familiar with.
The the part I didn't want to
get confused an emergency
guardianship was established for
good reason and the guardian
with in other announced two kids
were home and mom was on the
floor of her own house in her
own achievement.
Excrement drinking junk email so
in my opinion these other
influencers are some of the
worst people and their serial as
soon as they get everything from
one person they just hop to the
next and this is true regardless
of the size of the state because
I do undue influence a lot
and nobody else not nobody else
but few attorneys specialize in
this area.
and part of the reason why is
ordinarily under influence has
been so hard to prove.
The the burden of evidence has
always been clear and convincing
on the petitioner so the
petitioner has to reach the
clear and convincing evidence
standard in order to prove prove
undue influence unless this bill
is enacted if this bill is
enacted a few things will
happen.
The bird will come down to
hundreds of the evidence.
The definition of undue
influence is simplified so any
attorney hopefully anyone can
understand.
What influence is and how to
stop it.
there's fee shifting provisions
so.
What happens is someone will
walk into some attorney's office
and probably say the same thing
I don't know something's not
right here's what's happening
and that lawyer will know
hopefully has reviewed the
renewable.
That.
That lawyer can bring an undue
influence playing.
Prove it by preponderance of the
evidence.
But before you even get there.
There's a fifteen day safe
harbor provision so the attorney
sent a demand letter to the
undue influencer and say bring
back all those assets for the
value of those assets or I'm
going to take you to court and I
will have you pay my fees and
punitive damages that is
specifically for for provided
for in this bill.
A couple more examples
that's fine I I we we want to
get to the debate so if you can
bring closer to your yes only
appreciate that thank you salute
the thank you Mr chair and
committee.
Mr chair if Mr hammer could just
briefly addressed how this would
because he represented the the
credit unions on the task force
if we could hear from him real
briefly about about how
financial institutions would be
would be impacted and and get
that point of view as well yes
it Senator yes of a briefly Sir.
I thank you Sir I'm Kevin hammer
I'm a lawyer in Albuquerque in a
small firm we represent the
majority of credit unions in the
state of New Mexico and we were
a participant on the commission
at least earlier spoke about
speaking on behalf of the credit
union association of New Mexico
what this bill has is basically
two pieces are and I'm really
just gonna talk about finance
the financial institution beast
it create it allows a financial
institution to designate a
qualified individual someone who
has the requisite training
background and skill set to
intercept and analyze suspected
financial exploitation would
drive that nancial institution.
Are the our financial
institution through that
qualified individual can then
suspend the suspected
transactions for a limited
period of time and forth with
make a report to to introduce F.
I do which supervises most of
the state chartered financial
institutions as well as to APS
affording those two entities are
the opportunity to address
confirm or
otherwise characterized as
suspected activities what
financial institutions already
have is some reporting
requirements already one under
the APS act the second is
related to federal reporting
with so called suspicious
activity reports but most of
those.
Not the reporting mechanism
however allows the financial
institution to suspend the
transaction for any period of
our
and the the reporting becomes
mandatory and the financial
institution is granted a form of
the munity of for making this
disclosure and for suspending
those transactions I too could
provide you with a vast number
of stories but I will say this
when I met with a most of the
credit union representatives
are.
And ask them about this
particular problem they all
replied it are there confronting
this kind of suspicious activity
every day and they lacked the
appropriate tools to deal with
it and from the general aspect
of this bill
when we devised it we believe
that it was important to try to
up.
We try to put in place some
arrangements to stop the
pirating of money or other
valuables from financial
institutions because once the
exporter gains control of those
assets even though you can later
sued to get them back of using
the other provisions of this
bill that is by no means a sure
recovery because lots of times
those assets may go out of state
these are these fraudsters also
simply do not move the assets
into other bank accounts are
like they're pretty good about
just a bank in the money or the
other announcements and running
so I think what this bill does
give a financial institution is
the tools to address activity
which is already going on.
Our financial institution does
not have to participate they
don't have to designate a
qualified individual if they're
too small or they simply lacked
the requisite resources we were
sensitive about trying to put
too much responsibility
particularly on smaller
financial institutions.
but I think in general that's
sort of the that the thrust of
what we were trying to do at the
front half of the bill to
intercept and stop the activity
before the money's gone.
Thank you.
Thank you thank you Sir.
So of Senator Duhigg.
Thank you Mr chair I I think I
think that about covers it
and so I don't know if we have
any public comment that yes so
will be I don't know if we have
anybody public comment I believe
we do so we'll go ahead and go
to the the public now those that
are in opposition first.
So here in opposition raise your
hand the will bring at.
For opposition we have terra
Isabel.
Okay moving on we no longer have
anybody in opposition at this
time.
Now we will go to people
speaking for the bill is yes Lou
McCauley here.
Morning.
Thank you very much Mr chair and
members of the council.
My name's also McCoy and I'm the
executive director of New Mexico
developmental disabilities
planning council many apologies
to my untimely appearance on
Thursday when I heard my name
called expect the DD council
participated in the task force
that crafted the civil bill as
many of you know the council
houses office guardianship
although the office currently
has authority only over
professional guardian to serve
our clients we receive calls
regularly about private
individuals who seek or have
gained guardianship over a
vulnerable person this is one
way that some individuals who
want to prey on our most
vulnerable citizens do you
It is critical that we do more
safeguarding Mexicans for aging
or living with disabilities the
council strongly support Senate
bill one eighty nine just a
members need to pass thank you
Mr chair.
Thank you.
Valencia here.
I am here thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee Dion's
of the Lynsey the advocacy
director for a European New
Mexico first off just want to
thank the sponsor Senator Duhigg
for caring this important
legislation air P. has continued
to be concerned with financial
abuse of of our elders I
personally served on the task
force that help with this
legislation together air P.
stands in strong support of this
legislation thank you.
Thank you.
We will now move to postal.
Paul stole.
Okay moving on to trade from
Lopez.
And Mister chair I I believe she
you spoke earlier for the
experts.
Okay that concludes what I have
written down Mr chair there is
Paul Stoll who is looking like
you he does want to say a few
words I do see him there on the
on the screen you Mr chair.
How are you with us.
please
this call yes.
You still with us.
Can you hear me.
Little echo button.
Go ahead.
Good morning Mr chairman are
committee members all school
president and chief executive
officer of the association of
New Mexico and Representative
forty credit unions who serve
about nine hundred thousand
people here in New Mexico I do
want to reiterate what others of
set that we do see the
exploitation of the elderly
every day we've seen it for a
long time and many of our
employees are able to spot this
they've seen it so many times
but it's very easy to do that
but there's no way that we can
report it and actually Kerr
about any safe harbor that would
allow us to stop the
inappropriate use of an elderly
person small.
We also are concerned about the
fact that this type of
legislation hi is very important
in the bank secrecy act
certainly.
Individuals that do take over
another person's bank account
would be able to launder money
fairly easily.
And that would thank you very
much a very big problem for
credit unions and financial
institutions also urge you to
learn all right we have you two
times in this meeting thank you
Paul that concludes what we have
for our public comments.
Is there anybody else in this
meeting I would like to comment.
The NM state.
we already have all right that
concludes that thank you very
much.
Thank you I have a Senator
Kernan Senator Wirth and then
Senator Hamblen.
Mr chair Senator worthless at
the end of may.
I'm sure you'll be a gentleman.
I will be
Senator Kernan thank you very
much in another screen I I try
to keep track of their hands
going up but I'm not doing a
good job you're you're fine at
at so thank you Mr chairman
thank you senator and as I read
through the bill and have a few
questions I appreciate
your help in in responding to
some of these things
I guess first I want to
acknowledge that that this is a
this is an issue and without
saying too much about it that
individual that was called to my
attention by friends of this
elderly lady went through the
process and contacted adult
protective services and and
frankly didn't get much much
help there so I don't know if
maybe we need to first take a
look at what adult protective
services is allowed to date I
don't think it was that they did
not care did not want to help
but we could not that evidently
at confirm I guess you could
call this individual and
eligible without and I think
that
That may be one of the issues on
who would determine
eligible adult would be how
would that person be identified
in that way and if the senator
Mr chair could answer that
question.
Mr chair Senator thank you thank
you for that question and yeah I
think that part of.
Part of what this bill is is
trying to address is that there
are a whole lot of people who
might not reach that standard
where adult protective services
is stepping in but but they're
still exploitation going on so
so there needs to be some safety
net for those folks I'm sorry my
understanding is that under this
bill.
There there were still be
reporting being done to adoption
active services but but
simultaneous reporting going to
FID and I think that the
intention of this bill is that
there would be some coordination
between F. ID and APS to make
that determination about whether
someone is what whether this is
an explosive situation are not
so Mister chairman Senator can
you identify some of the
criteria that they would use to
make that determination.
Mr chair Senator I think that as
criteria that would be developed
the a rulemaking
with F. I. T. and and and if I
I'm incorrect on this any of my
my experts should feel free to
jump in and correct me
but criteria your eye is not
spelled out in the bill
So Mister chair and just moving
on the second issue that I'm
concerned about in the Senate
bill one eighty nine is here now
says states it does not provide
immunity for qualified
individuals or related financial
institutions so I'm just curious
why the credit unions are
comfortable with that because
even though you have a trained
individual that is supposed to
most likely identified the
situations
if they miss one or two or three
and then the family circles back
around it says you should have
caught that.
Potentially us they could be
sued is that correct.
Mr chair Senator so it it
doesn't fall it does include
community it for for any actions
taken with reasonable care and
so so if.
If someone if something gets
through but but the qualified
individual or the institution
overall has has been exercising
reasonable care in general then
then there would be immunity for
for some Mister chairman Senator
who would determine whether
reasonable care has been taken
with that still go through the
courts I mean you're gonna have
a lawsuit.
With that yeah that concerns me
I would just prefer that there
be immunity.
Given to those financial
institutions are stepping up
doing the right thing doing
their best they should be immune
from that and that from any kind
of lawsuit so that's a real
concern for me in this bill it
sounds like
just a lawsuit waiting to happen
and surprises me that credit
unions are willing to take that
risk the final comment I have is
with regard to what's already in
place at the federal level call
the senior site that which does
provide some some.
Addressing some of these issues
with regard to that indignity is
included in that so I I'm
concerned I certainly agree that
we need to take care of our our
people are elderly those with
disabilities there's no question
and an adult protective services
I I I would like at some point
maybe offline to hear from them
to see exactly what they're
doing because when I made the
call to like the just over this
particular individual they
checked into it and said well
the doctor determined that that
she was.
As sufficiently.
Just to take it and so the abuse
continued and she carried out
her assets over to a couple of
ladies that we're using about
casino so these things happen I
grant that but I think there's
some some issues in the bill
that that make it really
difficult for me to support at
this point maybe going forward
to Judiciary that might be able
to fix them up thank you very
much.
And Mister chairman Senator if I
may just say because I think
that the intent of the bill as
you said for these institutions
that are stepping up and doing
their best I think the intent of
of the immunity provision in
this bill is that those folks
would have what for that there's
something out there trying to
protect these folks they're
doing their best they would have
the benefit of that immunity in
that situation because because I
think that would be reasonable
care take and so I just.
Want to clear.
Appreciate that but it's not in
the bill so you know if they if
that's the intent they need to
be given immunity and so with
that in the bill apple so much
better about it again I don't
see that in the bill.
And all that provision for you
and and let you know what that
just because.
Thank you thank you thank you
Senator Kernan we'll go to
Senator work.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator doing in the task force
for bringing this
not practiced law for thirty
years and have done work in this
area and certainly I've seen
really bad things happen to
Senator Kernan mentioned
it's out there it happens
there's a very high standard
prove clear and convincing
evidence and there's just a I'm
not gonna turn this into the
Senate Judiciary Committee but I
do think this bill needs to move
forward to the Senate Judiciary
Committee to get into all of
these exact issues a couple of
questions and a couple things I
want to point out I think
there's some testimony from the
director of the credit unions
that there's not currently
protection for a duty to report
under the adult protective
services statute I don't think
that's correct there is immunity
specifically spelled out in that
statute section twenty seven
three dash thirty one
does have a munity for a
financial institution that has
reasonable cause to believe that
someone is being abused and
makes a report to adult
protective services
interestingly that immunity it
is there last the person acted
in bad faith or with a malicious
purpose so it's a little bit
different way of describing it
but Senator Kernan I think the
current law already does have an
immunity that's got some
language that the lawyers could
also get into to determine
whether there is bad faith and
this is always the challenge you
don't want to give blanket
immunity and I'd like to say why
I've actually had this exact
case where someone using a power
of attorney for a client of mine
turned out was a family member a
client of mine who did have some
capacity issues someone of the
bank flag it and reported this
person to adult protective
services and the next thing you
know I've got.
Adult protective services
showing up to my clients.
Raising all kinds of questions
about whether she was being
exploited in this case she was
not and so it was really
challenging because they wanted
to get into her life and open
all this stuff up and but for
the fact she was represented I
think by a lawyer we were able
to stop that so there's another
side to this you gotta be
careful and I do and and and let
me go to my questions because I
do and and etcetera doing you
and I talked about this can you
walk us through that time frames
because I'm a little bit worried
here that we don't want to go so
far in terms of creating
reporting that we in a sense in
a situation where there is a
report filed I just how long
before the person can actually
get access to their resources if
in fact there's no merit for the
report.
Yes Mr chair Senator thank you
so.
So the time frames are are built
into the bill are are about that
pause on the transaction and so
it creates an initial fifteen
day pas on the transaction and
then either within those fifteen
days either F. I do would issue
a report saying no this is okay
I can go had or if they needed
additional time it could be
extended to twenty five days and
then if it's going to be
extended beyond twenty five days
they would need to get a court
order to do so.
So Mister chairman Senator I
think that's something I I think
you need to look at that
concerns me because again if if
something gets flagged and
there's not an issue fifteen
days I mean someone who's
living.
You know on up.
Paycheck to paycheck I mean
there could really be a need to
have access to the resources and
I'm just concerned about that
time frame hello estimates
fifteen business days is that
correct.
The Mr chair Senator I don't
think that is specified in the
bill but I I would I would need
to double check so just I I'm
just gonna flag that issue
because I do want you to look at
that and it it and I'm sorry Mr
chair Senator you're right and
it does say fifteen business
days you know so so that
basically then is three weeks
that someone doesn't have access
to their bank account because
someone that again in this case
is trained although I would go
back to staff and just note that
right now financial institutions
without people that are trained
under twenty seven seven dash
thirty which is adult protective
services statute they have a
duty right now if they have
reasonable cause to believe that
an incapacity per adult is being
abused neglected or exploited
they've got that do the right
now to report.
So again I just I just think
that.
Stopping everything for three
weeks while the bureaucracy
kicks in I just I worry about
that the other thing I want to
ask about and it was the
testimony about the qualified
individuals are there was some
testimony that that's not going
to be required for all banks are
and I'm concerned about that
because that you know these
financial exploiters are pretty
darn smart in the words gonna
get out real quick which banks
participate in which banks don't
so why I mean I know the I'm
sure that the.
The credit unions in the banks
don't want to have this across
the board but I guess my
question is don't we need to
have a qualified individual
every financial institution
because otherwise we're just
gonna have a big.
I just think the world get out
where to go and and and do the
exploitation if we don't.
So can you address that center.
Mr chair Senator you know I I I
think that that is a good point
I think I we just we certainly
don't want to be creating
loopholes that would allow just
final piece the suspect
transactions to specific I
institutions so I and I think
you're I think that that a lot
of the stuff is our our issues
that that need to be addressed
heading into Judiciary and so
we've been having discussions
I'd internally about what issues
we need to flag and and and
I amendments to it to get
prepared heading into need to
judiciary you Mr chairman I find
appreciate that I don't want to
turn this into the Judiciary
Committee but things that jumped
out at me just the final thing
is.
You know I I appreciate the
effort to put in a fee shifting
provision in the new cause of
action
you know we follow the American
rural in New Mexico where
there's not a prevailing party
fee and so that's the difference
now I will disclose I have
actually carry statutes to put
into the shifting when it makes
sense but I understand it it's
one of those things that also
can create.
Right real risk because a case
that's brought that could be you
know in a one of those close
cases all of a sudden there's
the risk that on top if you lose
if you're the plaintiff and you
bring the case and you lose one
of the close cases not only do
you lose you're gonna end up
writing a huge check for the
other side for their attorney's
fees and so I do that and that's
a debate for judiciary but I
just want to fly get is one more
thing I'm gonna vote for the
bill because I do think this is
a really important area but for
a whole and I wanted to get to
Judiciary but I think you've
heard Senator Kernan brought up
some really good points and
Community always causes issues
in the Judiciary Committee
and and I just I want to point
out the existing immunity and
how they did that in the in the
adult protective services
section but again I I commend
you for caring this and I really
I thank the task force and Miss
millage for the work done on
this because it's it is an area
that that I think we saw what
happened guardianships and this
is kind of an extension of that
so thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Senator Hamblen.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator do you for bringing this
forward as we had conversations
about this this is something
that actually hits very close to
home for me and I'd like to
share that because I think this
is really important for a number
of things my mom lives in Texas
and she was taken advantage of
by her financial planner who
represented a faith based
financial planning institution
she like Senator the things that
Miss millage talked about he did
he told my mom to not to share
the X. the deal the private
partnership with me as her only
child it was a loan to help him
by
mailing list so he could get
more clients for his financial
planning business he was her
financial planner knew about her
money convinced her to give him
a loan of twenty five thousand
dollars and a twelve percent
interest rate and no receipts
and paid in cash when he did
actually paid his deposit now
the only reason why I found out
about this is because she
slipped in telling me about the
agreement so and then once that
happened she did not want me to
do anything because she was
worried he was going to get in
trouble.
what I want to doing this my mom
did not raise me to be somebody
who turned the other way when
somebody was wronged and so I
wound up reporting him to the
financial institution one of
having to go through federal
which is the financial
independent something reporting
they're they're connected to the
the SEC one of getting him
removed from being able to
actually provide any financial
consulting again however the
emotional and psychological
damage that happened to my
mother because of this person is
unacceptable and so I support
this bill thank you.
Thank you senator Senator
Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Senator Duhigg I I appreciate
the intent of the bill
hi I can almost just repeat what
the server Wirth said looking at
a lot of the same issues
I think you should ask for a
copy of our committee analysis
because it just flags almost
everything I just don't think
your bill is ready for prime
time to be honest with you.
the intent is very good.
The intent is right but there's
a lot of areas that it's
duplicative.
the story federal law that
covers a lot of those under the.
Of the federal senior safe act.
So a lot of the supposed to
already be done maybe that laws
not being enforced and maybe
that's part of the problem.
That we need to deal with.
you have the circle areas I'm
not gonna go through a mall
because of time but
I think you probably need to
pull this bill back you need to
look through that analysis you
need to fix the bill and either
come back to this committee with
the sub or go to Judiciary with
us up if it gets out of this
committee but it's just not
ready there are just lots and
lots of issues with the it
causes of financial impact on FY
the they said only five
additional FTE do to handle
those five hundred thousand
dollars a year those like really
good jobs for that of course
includes all the benefits
and so
There's just a lot of issues
there's a lot of current law.
There was a mention in one
section.
Of.
The.
Protecting vulnerable adults
from financial exploitation is
already in our wall and they
suggested maybe this could be
fixed just by amending that
section of wall instead of
creating a whole new section of
wall and that might make it
clear and might not raise as
many problems.
I think there are some issues
with how is a a teller at a
bank.
Supposed to know whether the
person is a vulnerable person or
not the how does that happen can
you answer that question.
Mr chair Senator so under this
bill it wouldn't just be any
teller at the bank who would be
making her nations there would
be a specific individual at the
bank who would be that
The qualified qualified
individual I think it's it's a
defined term in there who would
who would have specific training
in this so if a teller if maybe
something seems a little off to
the teller the teller would then
be going to that person has the
specific training in this area
to then come assessed the
situation.
So Mister chairman Senator that
would probably work with people
that actually go into the bank
now.
I mean I used to know every
employee that sandy federal
credit union twenty years ago.
I don't know any of a male.
As I haven't stepped foot in the
bank and you know probably ten
years
no I I take that back I I took
out a loan about three years ago
and so I had to go inside the
bank to do that.
and and so I don't know how they
exposed to know your illustrious
listing on their.
File and then that's an issue.
so I I think there's some
problems or some things that
need to be looked at with this
I'm.
I really the twenty five days.
Is also business days Sir were
brought up to fifteen days where
there's another one that's
twenty five.
That's five weeks.
By that time you've you've
messed to mortgage payments if
you have a mortgage because your
finances are locked up and so
there's there's just some things
that need to be ironed out and
so what while I totally support
the concept that think we need
to deal with this issue I don't
think the bill is ready and I'm
not gonna be able to support it
because I don't think it's
ready.
And I I think you need to come
back to this committee with us
the but if it does get out this
committee you definitely need to
bring a subject this year thank
you Mr chairman appreciate the
time you'll before.
I do a good thank you Mr wanted
to and and and I also was a
thank you all for flagging these
issues because this is such an
important issue area we really
want to make sure that we get it
right so so I really do
appreciate you you bring raising
these issues and and and giving
us the opportunity to to correct
them going forward one thing
that I think I I misspoke on
earlier and so I just wanted to
clear that up is with the
fifteen days there's and then it
an initial two day haul that
only goes beyond that to day
holds to the fifteen days if
there is is a reason to think
that this is as a suspect
transaction so I just wanted
wanted to clear that up and also
that the hold that would be put
on would just be a hold on that
specific transaction it would
not be a hold on this person's
account over all so so it it
it's not like they they they
would not not be able to to
access any funds while this hold
is in place it would be a whole
specific to that transaction so
I just I just wanted to I don't
think I mean those things clear
earlier sessions because.
Thank you so we'll move on to a
Senator Griggs and I have
Senator Padilla and and senator
Sanchez.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Senator Brandt is is absolutely
correction about our our
committee analysis the committee
analysis points out numerous
things that you know a I can't
tell you whether they're good
bad right wrong exactly but I
think you just of the you need
to go through sure you can see
whether or not you agree first
of all but there's a bunch of
stuff in there and and show the
bill and Senator Brandt
mentioned.
Isn't exactly isn't exactly
ready to meet this if this thing
goes to Judiciary in its current
form it's not going to come out
of Judiciary looking like this
and if it gets.
Yeah that's where you're wrong
rishi disco Lucy.
because there's there's too many
thank you so you know I would I
would suggest that I you know I
know senator Wirth wants to move
it out and it you know it's it's
certainly an approach but
there's there's a lot here and I
don't think it's too hard to
support it right now I'm not
knowing what needs to be here
where you agree with us needs to
be changed.
sure I would I really would I
think it be a better idea to
pull it back out look at those
things and bring it back.
show at least at least you're
not getting it re written
somewhere down the line where
there's no time to fiction so Mr
chair and and senator that's
that's my recommendation I mean
there the concept I mean these
things are the staff to go John
terrible.
No there's no question about
that people take advantage of.
Of
Moms and dads and all sorts of
other relatives and then.
It's just.
You know age is just a tough
tough thing and you Senator
Hamblen I've you know I had to
hand I I handled stuff for my
mother.
So you know I know.
What availability there is out
there and if you want to if you
want to do something that may be
used in correct and improper
issue age there to do but
I just I think you know like you
said you want to make it right
it needs to be right because it
needs to protect people like
Senator Hamblen
that's what he needs to do show
up so thank you Mr chair and and
thank you senator for bringing
the bill.
And and Mr chair Senator I I
would be fine you know I I've I
really am hearing hearing what
you all are saying so I would
have no problem with with
rolling this bill at this point
and myself in the advocates can
can take a look at that analysis
and and do more work on this
bill and come back to you with
the sob before it goes for and I
I would be fine with that.
Thank you senator so we'll go to
Senator Padilla and and Senator
Sanchez Senator great redone.
Okay all right thank you Senator
the I thank you Mr chairman and
I I I was going to try to help
Senator do they live this up to
the next committee and I have
every faith in the world but she
will work with the development
of all COVID she received today
but if she's wanting to to have
it stand here until she gets her
work done I can support that too
but I would love to see this
bill continue I think we all
feel like this absolutely needs
to happen we have personal
accounts we that we can talk to
as we have an Senator Hamblen
thank you for that very
passionate discussion there and
I remember Senator Griggs giving
a little virtual park in the
parking area when your mom
passed I remember that and and
and how are that wasn't you in
the family and so I I would love
to see the bill continue to move
I think that we just jumping
over today literally the halfway
mark and I'd like to see center
do the work continue so I'd like
to see the the the the bills
move
and I'm I have all the faith in
the world that she will go to
each one of us individually to
make comments and and get her
work done so that's what I
wanted to say I don't know if
we're ready for some action on
this yet Mr chairman thank you
sent with the will to Senator
Sanchez.
Mr chair everybody I have the
same feelings
they're all question the
comments were answered I I just
think that
You know like.
The person to take advantage of
senator Kerry's mother those
people need to be this bill is
great and I feel very very bad
for you know and stuff like that
it is very emotional but
The state intentions are great I
I want to go on and on.
I think it's a good thing we
just need to make it a little
more solid so these people are
you know how to pay the
penalties thank you.
Senator Senator Wirth per second
time thank you Mr just be quick
I mean I I do appreciate and I
think that.
That there are things that can
get tweaked in this committee
which are appropriate for this
committee we're not the
Judiciary Committee but there
are policy things that been flag
and I want to make sure that
that we get our analysis to
Senator do it from the committee
so that you can go down those
and and again this is a.
We get these kinds of bills it's
part of the process I've got one
right now that's in Senate
finance and that there are some
issues we're trying to fix some
and I just I just think we can
get all of us on the same page
without solving everything
because judiciary's got to do it
but I do think and I and I and I
really appreciate your
willingness to work with the
advocates come back soon I mean
I think you know Mr chair just
keep I would ask you keep this
if Center doing grease to try
and work on this that we we do
it quickly and just keep this
top of the list for our next
meeting is assumed you get us
out done in the next couple of
days and just stay in touch with
the chair because again we don't
want to slow down because it's a
really really important thing at
the same time I also know my
good friends and and your good
friends and Senate Judiciary
they'll appreciate the fact that
we really worked on this to and
help them to do some of the
shaping so that's just my
thought thanks.
Thank you Senator Wirth and so
I think a lot of the of
questions and and certain of the
concerns that have been
addressed Senator and the this
is an important bill you know
it's happens and all of our
communities you know I have no
Senator relatives and so
situations and it's very
difficult and and are breaking
when the families are getting
the situation so but the if
you're okay with no pulling at
bringing it back working with
the advocates and we will have
our secretary or or even are you
can reach out to our of our
committee analysts and and we'll
get you a copy so that we will
have it and and
and and and come back hopefully
and we will definitely keep this
on the top of this I think this
is important and as our Majority
Leader said that you know with
with there's a lot that needs to
happen if we can do some of that
work here today and hopefully.
Thanks to burn off those
Judiciary because that's a bill
bill bill fixed what we don't
fix here so.
Appreciate it thank you thank
you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee.
Thank you Mr chair.
Senator Kernan.
Representative think if we
finished I don't want to step in
front of are we finished with
that bill I have a comment yes
degree to hold it over and over
and we're getting yes and we I
just told her that we will keep
it on the top because I think
it's important bills.
We need to be addressed so
Senator okay I I do want to make
a comment and as we go forward
over the next few weeks and and
trying to do the best job we can
do in this committee.
When we are in person sitting at
the table in the capitol in
committee work we're provided
with a look with the bills and
that analysis for each one I
just wonder if other committee
members feel I'm at a
disadvantage because we've been
asked to work away from the
capital not in our not in our
range there some are some aren't
sometimes on there and sometimes
I'm not I don't have access to
copies of these bills I can run
the FIR easily when these bills
are often times forty fifty
pages it's very difficult for me
to have a copy of the bill in
the analysis in front of me is
I'm
working as a member of this
committee and I'm wondering if
anyone can share with the have
they're doing it I know I have a
second computer but it's really
difficult to to go through a
bill I oftentimes don't have
good
reception with the second
computer do we have a solution
for this and it's just something
I know the committees always
have copies of the bills for us
prior to meetings or at the
meeting are they prepared to
print these bills within
analysis and have that for us to
pick up so that we have these
bills in front of us I have a
very difficult time with this
and maybe someone else maybe
you're printing all of this on
your own
does anyone else want to share
how they're doing this because
it's really a disadvantage for
me.
Thanks Senator Hamblen has a
thought on this.
Mr chair if I may and Senator
Kernan I'm I'm so we know we
have access to this all through
the and let's just website and
so what I do and as a first time
Senator wanting to make sure to
be prepared is that I have a
folder on my computer and I
download the bill I download the
FIR and I download any
amendments that are there and
then I go through those and then
I can also choose to from my.
Sheeter with the ream of paper
that we received on the first
day of the session is printed
here at my home coming sheeter
if I am not in Santa Fe so that
that is just one approach to
wanting to make sure that I have
all the information they need.
Thank you very much and in what
when I was at home in my office
I could do that but I'm I'm not
I'm I'm in Santa Fe at.
Where I stay here and I don't
have a printer I don't have
access to to that opportunity
just something to think about it
if anyone
has any other thoughts if the
committee is willing to prepare
these bills for us like they get
if we were in person I would be
happy to come I get the map
prior to the meeting and be able
to do my work there but anyway
it's just a problem for me and I
don't think this effective this
I should be because I don't it's
very difficult for me to do this
thank you.
Thank thank you Senator Hickey
and senator Wirth.
Senator Kernan I was going to
make that suggestion the one
that that you pick them up
I do it because I have three
computers open at any one time
and often my phone
to be able to get all the pieces
the
the definite Alice sees and and
looking back and for that and
which of course with paper you
can do very easily although it
it does get to tripped up but
that's that is my I right now I
have three computers going and
that's the only way I can kind
of bounce back in for the try to
prepare the evening before but
when you prepare for about five
or six bills they become words
out in your head and
So
and and I being and the the
other side of a certain age up
with paper I don't know how to
do the Mark ups on the computer
very well I'm just learning how
to file
is Senator Hamblen does state
and and that works when it works
and and you can get your
assistance to do that as well
and I I am toying with the idea
of I mean I like it here in my
home when we're doing the the
hearings because I get to
midwives that hearing that on
March first if I recall
Mr leader we're gonna be there
every day.
And at least at that that point
if we could have things prepared
so that we could come up
on that day or the night before
preferably since we'll be going
into the evening if they could
be brought by our guests that
would be very very helpful and
isn't looking at the calendar
here we're on the twentieth of
March first is just a week away
I believe are coming back on the
twenty fourth is that correct.
Mr leader.
Yeah Mr Mr chair Senator we're
back on next Wednesday.
Okay
so yeah that's pretty much
nonstop till the end of the
session maybe at Sunday here and
now but if we could maybe get
something prepare the evening
before
that would be really helpful and
thank you Senator Kernan for
bringing that up in thank you Mr
chair for being able to fine.
Thank you Senator of work.
I just was going to say I think
we have one more one more
meeting like this Senator Kernan
on Tuesday and then we're we're
back Wednesday and I do think
that are you know there's a lot
of attendance that are.
There there in the capitol and
the fact is we should have a
book for the committee there's a
twenty four hour notice that
that Senator Shendo has been
complying with and so it just
seems to me that the day before
our our meetings on Wednesday
the twenty fourth and all visit
with with staff over the capital
each of us you get a book
delivered order just apply a
ring binders it's got built in
FY ours and then that'll solve
the problem and I think and then
we'll be back and I think we'll
be able to have have it more
more like the way we we we did
in the past so I think that's a
it's good to flag it and I'll
certainly run that up the food
chain on our side I think that
can happen.
Thank thank you Mr chairman
thank you a majority leader and
would you would you recommend
that for all committees.
Yeah it makes sense to me in the
point you make is that that was
what was done before and there's
really no reason that the
attendance we have fewer
attendance but they're still
attendance around so I'm gonna
let me raise it and just see
what our chief clerk I might get
some push back depending on the
number of bodies needed to do it
but it does make sense to me
to have that in place all
certainly what thank you Mr
chairman thank you Majority
Leader and and when I spoke with
rival about this at the
beginning of the session it was
my concern and he he said that
it could be done but it might be
chief clerks decision but anyway
thank you very much for
addressing this.
Thank you senator Padilla.
Thank you Mr chairman so I I
guess and this might be a
question for the for the leader
I'm I'm assuming that once we're
back full time at the roundhouse
and just for the people that are
new I mean this is what we were
in the round house all the time
you know before the pandemic
occurred but anyway when we had
session or whatever or special
session we can continue our
committees virtual Mr leader Mr
chair we are again I think
there's still significant safety
risk and so again we're gonna
have to figure out you know I
also don't want to have some
floor for.
For too many hours straight
everyone's been doing a great
job of of being safe and we've
had you know no no positive
tests but I you know knock on
wood I just think we need to be
very very careful about that and
so that is the plan at this
point.
Appreciate that and and and
again not wanting to chop down
anymore trees but maybe the
solution might be a the bill
books on the floor which by the
way I'm I grew up in the digital
age or whatever but I still
prefer to open the book and
follow it and read it and look
at it as we're working on the
floor and I the end of the
session before session I've got
baby I am stacked up there maybe
we duplicate that for every
senator's office also so that
everything's available in their
office as well as but the other
solution a technical solution I
was going to operate if it would
work for you I don't know but
but I do but you see me doing
I'm kind of running back and
forth you know I might be
looking like we might see really
paying attention to as is I I I
if you have a monitor Senator
Kernan and others you just put
that up to your laptop and now
you said we have two screens on
the same computer so it's not
like you have to have three or
four computers you just put
another and you can split your
your viewing area into too now
table tops if you will and so my
laptop is all of my bills are
running back and forth on those
back and forth back and forth
and then I'm looking at you all
right now on my my primary
computer it's it's a really easy
way to do it I'm sure you can be
trained I can come over and help
you if you want me to do that
with you just one offer that
solution.
You can you can you can bring a
monitor with with you.
Senator Tallman.
thank you thank you Mr chair.
I just want to echo a.
But senator.
Senator Kernan said I'm having
similar problems follow it I
admire a Senator Hickey he's got
three out.
Three screens gonna have trouble
just one although when I'm home
I can you the documents on my.
Stop in and do the zoom and
And that the laptop so that that
works out pretty well you have
to remember that the.
I think it television tell us I
was fifteen years old so I
didn't even go up on with
television so
I think I'm doing quite well
because I did a lot of door to
door and I I found out there's a
lot of a lot of people this
seventy years and older it in
and have a computer they used to
tell people if you want more
information about maybe go to my
website they say what I I don't
use a computer so I stopped
asking people telling people
don't use the computer to find
out more information about me if
they were school for seventy
years all so I just want to echo
what senator currents concerns
and I appreciate those who are
worse.
Of.
This is
His desire to help solve the
problem thank you.
Right okay thank you I I think
that's all we have and I
appreciate the Senator Kernan
well that's what I'm here
everyday.
It is easier of my binder and
everything with all the FIR and
so for but yes good suggestion I
hope we can to resolve this for
for maybe all the committees and
school thank you thank you all
for your comments.
So now we have the.
So Mister chairman Senator I got
it goes is on line is here now.
Okay so okay thank you all no go
back up to the Senate bill one
seventy five.
Mr Chairman just verifying if
you can hear me yes we can it's
good deal thank you and I
apologize for the problems
earlier I finally pulled over to
an area that I think will hold
good why I.
I want to thank you Kim
committee for allow me to
present Senate bill one seventy
five in the I've been a listing
for last few meetings and I'd
like for you guys to get the
bills I was on taxed red in the
house for about four years and I
understand how things just sort
of secretary white I think this
bill will be the same if it even
gets
to that point of I want to start
out by saying that there as with
senator do huge bill a lot of
issues with this bill I have not
had a whole lot of discussion
with
With PED on it and I'm hoping
the sole person pod and give me
some opportunities to visit and
come up with a solution and the
Mr chairman and centers what
this bill does is give some
offer to our rural teachers for
a tax credit and what we have
been on school boarding Eunice
one of our biggest issues are
for for our areas
anywhere along the border is the
opportunity for teachers to
cross the state line and get
better pay and and many times
they don't even have to move and
Clayton
a text line is only like ten or
twelve miles away so they still
live in Clayton and then they
cross over to work in Texas what
I'm trying to do
Mr chair Senator is find a way
to give our teachers of a reason
to stay so that our investment
in our job stay in New Mexico
and this is really more will the
world in metro I know Senator
Brandt is always brought up you
know being from Rio Rancho area
I know they've got teacher
shortage even in those larger
cities but my problem is more on
the borderline in Mr chair
Senators I've tried go to our
superintendent come up with
other ideas stipends of bonuses
and a lot of the issues come up
again for the anti donation
clause and I don't have next for
witness but I'd love to visit
with you about I thought you the
reasons for of and it just comes
up to trying to resolve our
teacher shortage in the rural
communities long on the borders.
Thank thank you senator and the
as with on all of our tax bills
that have either credits or
exemptions we'll go ahead and
have the the input the
discussion the debate and then
of we're just gonna hold these
as well so I appreciate you
bringing the bill forward of if
you don't have any experts will
go to any public the.
Testimony.
We have anybody.
Four Senate bill one seventy
five we do not have any public
testimony is there anybody in
the room who would like to
comment.
That concludes public testimony
at this time.
Okay thank you of we will now go
to the.
Committee.
Where any questions the on the
bill.
Senator Hamblen.
Mr chair this is actually just
more of a COVID I'm we do have
some teachers in even even Los
crucis who go to Texas to teach
because the pay is better and so
I can see the validity of a tax
credit like this to to to help
keep our teachers here I'm
especially in our rural parts of
in my district in district
thirty eight have several folks
we do have a a school districts
there but when Texas pays their
teachers more we are losing
teachers and so I appreciate the
Senator bringing this bill
forward to try and make sure
that we we keep our teachers in
the state of New Mexico thank
you Mr chair that's all thank
you I have Senator Griggs
Senator Brandt and senator out
of you.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator on that on page three
you to find the the rural school
district as have been no more
than four public schools to
serve kindergarten through
twelfth grade so I'm I'm gonna
guess this is kind of like
targeting the maybe Clayton
gelled you H. but not a hobby
for Clovis.
Who actually could and the the
same issue with would teachers
like Senator Hamblen mentions
for Los crucis.
Is that is that what you think.
and comments.
Mr chair Senator you all right
and and actually what I was
talking to Janelle Mason what
we're tracking this this is
actually grant drafted
for the twenty session and we
never got a message but in the
discussion we're trying to
isolate more to the lower
smaller school districts but I
would not have a problem because
I do Sir Hobbs also in in in
Carlsbad I don't know the
Carlsbad has
anywhere for their teachers to
drive to and from to go to Texas
but I would not have problems in
the maybe the main thing that
would more work for all the area
schools there are two
descriptions in there for you
know distances from the larger
schools but that one did come up
in the discussion of last
session we didn't get a hearing
but just in our some are
comments within the house I had
more
Of some.
Just shy discussions on what the
bill's going to do and that did
come up we did not change it in
this bill but I wouldn't have a
problem amending it because this
does have the same issue and it
relies Los crucis would I guess
no passes right there so
I I had not thought through on
the Los crucis side but yes Sir
we would be willing change that
amended if.
Is an issue probably a good
thing to do anyway.
Thank you Mr Mr chairman thank
you senator.
Thank you are moving on to
Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman thank
Senator normally rule is is
Defined in our state is
everything but Albuquerque
literally for federal definition
of rules everything but
Albuquerque so I don't know.
The and obviously your bill is
not targeted to.
Everywhere but Albuquerque but
that is how rural is defined by
the federal government for our
state.
Albuquerque is the only area
that state but Albuquerque
Albuquerque only that doesn't
qualify as rural in New Mexico.
so
I.
I understand the issue but your
rights every every district in
the state of New Mexico has a
problem attracting teachers news
flash every school district in
the country is having a problem
attracting teachers is not
actually something that is just
a New Mexico bank.
Well we're having a hard time
getting people to go into the
teaching profession their
various and numerous reasons for
that
Was an issue that Senator
Hamblen brought up correctly is
that that taxes pays more.
Now if you actually combine
everything and look at the
actual benefits so a lot of
people when they're going into
and starting their teaching
career fairly young and they're
not thinking about the total
package actually when you take
into account the the benefits of
New Mexico Gibbs we actually pay
right there with are just a
little above taxes but most
people don't look at it that way
they only look at the bottom
line pay and so we may have to
do something in New Mexico to
adjust that to where either we
lower the number a budget so
that it looks more attractive.
So that we can offer more Fe.
or.
We make sure when we're
recruiting teachers.
That we're helping them to
understand the total package
that they're getting when they
teach in New Mexico so not
really any question there
Senator Gallegos I I know it's
difficult but it's difficult
everywhere
Go continue to listen I'm not
sure the weather in all sport is
are not
but I know there's issues in the
rural area but there's there's
issues.
Everywhere well when it comes to
getting teachers and in the
country not just in the next
thank you.
Thank you senator Brent Senator
Hotmail.
Morning Mr chairman members of
the committee Senator I
appreciate this bill I'm a
former educator who had to leave
teaching the because I couldn't
afford to live off of a
teacher's salary and so when I
looked at teachers that I worked
with some who were single
mothers whose children qualified
for free or reduced lunch
because their salaries weren't
that large tax credits would be
something that would work no
second comment is just in one of
the school districts in my
district although there thirty
five miles closest to the
Espanola valley they're still
rural New Mexico if you look at
them because they're bordering
school district that's just ten
miles north of them would
qualify for this tax credit
where is teachers in the Avid
queue area wouldn't be able to
qualify suggest maybe expanding
a little bit more on what rural
is because although Espanola
public schools is a large
district some of our small
elementaries are definitely in
rural New Mexico but thank you
Senator for bringing this bill
forward as a former educated
this is a bill that I appreciate
thank you thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Senator a great for
the second time.
Senator I left my hand chart O.
okay all right.
Senator Padilla.
Thank you Mr chairman so I I
think I I have the same
concerns Mr chairman it just a
small one that center how to be
a talked about some of these
districts don't just have for
schools in them but a school or
two are are in the inner lands
and way out in the middle of you
know where they need to be so
did you give any thought to
making that clarifying that
somehow Senator Gallegos.
Mr chair Senator the I've been
writing down the details we're
going along I think what I would
like to do is get with the now
Mason and I'd like to center
branch idea of.
Everything but Albuquerque more
rural.
I'd never considered it that way
I know that they
use that often but we're looking
at different types of
Explanations of what we would
truly consider rule but I think
it is as we go forward I will
get her to try to help me and
then that so that way we can
look at in a broader sense in in
all reality
we're just wanted to teachers in
school in New Mexico and and I
would even think to me and I
know it opens up a whole
different can of worms because
is quite expensive looking up
promptly one point.
I thank you one point seven
million that this could take
from from the budget but the
thing is I am my fear is we're
gonna lose teachers and we have
to go through the process of of
educating number gonna then
doing whatever we can to keep
them but I would think if this
was a statewide issue even in
the Albuquerque area that it
might help rate retention even
in Albuquerque so I think if we
look at it and broader sense I
think that would be good I just
know that the for for me for the
the party has how do we.
Senator hop on me of it on nail
on the head in Eunice we used to
we still have teacher just but
we should talk about the
teachers would need to rent or
eat Bernalillo you know when
you're first starting and that's
why we started teachers and I
know that it's really difficult
think when your new teacher
you know to to be able to
catcher you're all budget in in
check because it's so hard
Schardin out I do have someone
else you brought up the you know
the difference I think is Center
Brandt on wages across the state
across the nation I've got a
cousin left to Missouri she's
over there one year and then
came back in the whole time she
was complaining on how little we
may until she went over there
relies reality beautiful
location and family all rounder
but it was just not the same
benefit package we do here in
New Mexico and I'm just hoping
that this and one of the
benefits of options and and you
know they have to go through PED
to get
the permission that qualify but
it's just one of those things
you just give us another
opportunity to keep our teachers
here keep on helping kids well
fed and and help them out as we
go along.
Okay thank you Mr chairman and
senator guy goes I did not know
response needed but I hope that
you will take a look at screen
size rather than just that that
just the number of schools or
whatever but it thank you I
don't need a response on that
but I'll ask you to consider
that depending on where this
thing goes well thank you
Senator Griggs.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator couple quick things that
I think maybe you should
consider as well I ran a bill
about four years in a row we got
some PED on the head there every
time I ran it but it dealt with
the adjunct teachers to where
you know you don't have enough
teachers in your communities and
maybe there are some people who
can can fill in and teach
certain classes that that
benefit the the students in your
community and maybe and this is
this is almost a statewide type
saying not dealing with just
teachers but any state employees
the state of New Mexico pages
and municipalities all of
argument if we don't pay and but
we turn around and say well the
argument is what we do give you
better benefits or maybe we need
to be able to look at that and
it just that whole approach and
let people select you can take
this salary plan with this
budget plan or you can take this
salary plan which vision benefit
plans show up maybe those are
things that we ought to start
looking at we can get rid of the
argument on we don't pay enough
and and go from there so thank
you Mr chair and and thank you
senator.
Thank you.
Thank you those are all very
good comments and and you know I
think I agree with the Senator
Brandt and grace you know I we
have the same issue you know
even on our our reservations you
know we you know sometimes we we
you know our pay wasn't good but
a benefit is good but just
Brandt was saying when people
are starting off.
You know retirement is so far
away.
That they're not even thinking
about the benefit package
thinking about how much I'm
going to be paid lot of money
when I'm gonna take home and so
I think kind of restructuring
that you might be something that
we need to look at so I
appreciate you bringing this
bill as I stated earlier we're
not gonna take action I think we
all agree that we gotta do
something for teachers in the my
mother was a a Catholic a school
teacher for thirty five years
and retired and.
You know a it tell the story of
I had I never knew that my dad
was a maintenance guy at a and a
B. I. a school and
I never really knew how much my
parents debate until my freshman
year in college what I had to to
of go to college and and the.
Of I I I ended up you know with
academic scholarships at a
private school in Colorado to
Colorado College.
And I was so.
You know I I was so surprised
that the tuition at that college
was almost half of what my
parents combine or or the cost
may from that point on I never
asked my parents for anything
but they raised you know nine
kids and all that salary and and
and and and and never the moment
that I feel that I was in
poverty or poor but it just you
know the sacrifices that our
families and our communities and
especially our teachers make so
we've got to do something so
Senator a appreciate you the
bring a bill forward I I think
if we can do this right inTaos
definitely benefit teachers
across the state so will hold at
the moment we've got the the
bills that the that we're
looking at and hopefully we can
move this along of of as well.
Thank you Sir okay thank you.
Thanks committee.
We will now move on to of Senate
bill two fifty six senator Byrd
are you available yes Sir read.
Your Senator good morning Mr
chairman and and thank you for
this time today.
I bring for you Senate bill two
fifty six.
And and the to the provisions of
this bill allows a hundred
percent of the fund balance be
kept by the council of to to be
distributed to fire departments
all over the state of New Mexico
it also provides decreases in
the ISO rating so that insurance
rates may be more affordable
throughout the state and that's
the purpose of this and and Mr
chairman well first let me
introduce I I have some expert
witnesses if I may introduce
them Mr chairman I guess go
ahead Senator thank you Sir are
with me today Randy Perella
who's at in the deputy fire
marshal for the the state Robert
learned Jaga far grant council
chair also Bianca or tease what
I should say secretary Ortiz Y.
them that she is the secretary
of homeland security and
emergency management and I think
also with this a Russell told
from the New Mexico
superintendent of insurance and
Matthew Steckel who's a general
counsel for the New Mexico
department of homeland security
and emergency management and
I would certainly like to have
some of them mexicana and says
well we also do have an
amendment Mr Chairman I think we
have you have that handy yes you
do have the amendment
And the.
So of.
If I may Mister chairman the
amendment simply is is a couple
of technical cleanup items item
one item two or just some
clarification point number three
and wanted to make sure that
initially in the bill we were
going to keep all the funds if
there were anything left over
through some discussions with
the LFC and and leadership we
thought it best that if if there
are any funds left over at the
end of the year they would
revert back to the general fund.
Okay so that would that's the
gist of the amendment Mr
Chairman.
Okay
Do we want to move the
amendment.
Okay Senator Brandt moved with
amendment what is question
purposes that I think the
sponsor has explained amendment
are there any other questions.
See anything.
Is there any opposition to the
amendment.
I don't see any opposition so.
The amended bill.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee and if you will have
your expert witnesses of.
Go ahead and the federal if all
we're going to speak or whether
they'll be available loads for.
The of questioning alright but I
will ask them to be very brief
thank you Mr chairman.
And so if I may a first if I
could ask a.
Deputy fire marshal Randy
religiosity comments to make.
Mr chair members of the
committee yes this last year we
did have all the grant we gave
all we give us six point one
million dollars and we had a
request of thirty million
dollars in equipment are we had
a hundred and thirty two
applicants and we're able to
fund fifty one so the need is
there for the department and the
the price of the equipment is
going up and we need to lower
the IJssel radius in the rural
communities once we do that we
can actually bring down the
insurance premiums for those
communities.
We do have a madam secretary
also.
Yes madam secretary which you
have some comments.
Yes Sir thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee and
that senator Byrd and of course
Senator for the support thank
you so much as department of
homeland security emergency
management stand in support of
this bill
emergency managers all across
New Mexico many times serve as
fire chiefs and fire department
and some of our volunteer fire
department as well as emergency
managers and the need is is very
strong out there for the removal
of the cap on this fund as that
Mr but I eight deputy fire
marshal that allowed mentioned
there is will there is a demand
for it for this funds and that
we are confident that the State
Farm houses offices and with
conjunction with our department
will be able to spend these
dollars and and assist our our
fire departments across the
state.
Thank you Mr Kirk also Mr
chairman Robert Lynn Jaga.
From the apartment cancel he's
the chairman.
We're chairman.
Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you for allowing
us to present this to you
Senator Burt Senator once this
we also thank you
just a couple of simple facts I
will keep it short seventy
percent of the firefighters in
this state our volunteer
firefighters and most of them as
in the earlier discussion are in
rural areas and they're
desperately in need of funding
one of the biggest issues is the
fact that funding for these
departments does not come out of
the general fund it's an
assessment that's provided by
and not miss can speak to this
further if you like is he a
premium on insurance policies in
the state that are specifically
earmarked during the original
legislation for fire protection
in seventeen a distressed
General Fund required that sixty
year excuse me fifty nine point
eight percent of that.
Money was sent to the general
fund leaving forty point two
percent to be distributed for
the departments in the last
couple fiscal years we realized
that there's a significant
excuse me a significant need by
the fire departments in the
state of New Mexico for
additional assistance
as W. G. water low was stating
we were unable to find
approximately fifty nine percent
of last year's request the year
prior was close to that same
number.
But I will stand for questions
from anyone.
Thank you Mr chairman Senators
thank you.
In the Mr chairman if I may and
I don't know if they they have
comments but the staff
will lose the general counsel
for homeland security is here as
well as our Representative
superintendent of insurance
chair New Mexico a Russell till.
Good morning Mr chair members
the committee I here to help
with technical assistance and
just once I think the
opportunities present from the
committee and
I'm here to help with any
questions thank you.
this is Russell superintendent
of insurance on our.
Which I think you and the
members of the committee for
considering this bill which we
strongly support one of the
biggest consumer challenges we
have at the OSI.
Yes making sure that homeowner's
insurance is not just available
but is affordable
our inability in some parts of
the state to melt
the sophisticated and capable of
fire response in a timely way.
is this bills that are designed
to address that problem we
strongly support we've worked
with the fire marshal's office
on this.
Is to tell you that based on my
discussions this week we also
have strong support from the
American prop in the you know
the American property and
casualty insurance association
the national association of
mutual insurance companies and
many others who were present in
the homeowners insurance market
and wonder stand how essential
this funding and this training
is we just recently at the issue
and I also downgrade and part of
Harding County and the
surrounding areas and that.
Is a real hardship for
homeowners because their ability
to purchase insurance in a
downgraded area like that as is
really really a challenge so we
urge you to support this bill
with the amendments that senator
Byrd has proposed and be happy
to answer any questions that you
may have.
Thank you Mr till.
Senator so Mister chairman I
think we are prepared to answer
any questions that the public or
the committee may have.
Okay thank you senator Byrd we
will now go to a public comment
we will go ahead anybody in
opposition of this bill.
The six we do not have anybody
noted in opposition.
We'll go to of those that are
part of the building in the your
remarks to one minute the I
believe we have a few folks.
And support first we have Robert
letter and I got.
I'm sorry ma'am I was one of the
expert witnesses and I
registered twice my apologies.
Got it John which sets.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee John let you it's
with The New Mexico federation
of labor AFL-CIO Representative
representing tens of thousands
of workers across the state of
New Mexico we stand in
solidarity with our firefighters
you very much support this
measure and we asked the
committee to do this to do the
same thank you very much.
Thank you Jon Boller.
Yes.
Chair Senators please a strongly
accept this we needed out in the
field speaking for Levin fire
districts mostly volunteer we
could use the secretary funding
and we were some of the ones
that got a little bit of the
funding that could use a lot
more.
Please consider thank you.
Thank you Robert.
Okay can you hear me now.
Thank you rural rural New Mexico
or more as a front here you
Mexico I've been a firefighter
for forty five years five chief
road with fire alarm for twelve
years I've been on the grand
council for possibly twelve
years I've seen what is done for
the fire department in the state
of New Mexico since we first
started on the grand council
I've seen the improvement
especially the rural fire
departments the last two to
three years we can kind of a
down fall on
Because of the money wasn't
there to help the small
districts and all act I myself
come from eyes so line which is
now a more as a rural area I
have no longer.
Water hydrants in my area so we
all depend on hauling water but
it's improved my Department of
had to three trucks in a now I'm
getting on at L. building a
strongly support this thank you
thank you thank you join
Esparza.
Thank you chairman members of
the committee my name is Joyce
person on the deputy executive
director for New Mexico counties
we stand incredibly strong
support of this we have
advocated for the last ten plus
years that the intent of the
property owners insurance fees
should go to reduce their ISO
reduce their insurance costs
support the infrastructure of
the local fire department and
the fire protection from fire
protection grant counts are are
absolutely vital to achieving
this with that we stand and
support.
Thank you Steven Rinaldi.
Okay moving on Anthony Martinez.
Chair Senators thank you those
crosses the strong support of US
Senate bill two fifty six we
have been fortunate enough to
receive funds from the fire
protection grant which is help
improve our ISO rating here in
the village Krell us from a nine
to a four we've got projects for
water and we have the first ever
of fire owned are operated fire
protection system which we have
fire hydrants and water mains
and it's actually showing.
Improvement for local businesses
with their fire ratings
insurance and also we have
individuals coming in looking
across for expanding.
Thank you very much for your
time.
Thank you Bianca or tease where
time.
Thank you so much as chairman
members of the committee I
signed up twice as well we well
that security is very supportive
of this bill.
Thank you.
C. N..
So I think.
Okay moving on.
And finally we have and Conway.
Thank you.
Is in Conway registered.
This State Farm insurance
companies we are the largest
homeowners insurer in New Mexico
and for the reasons stated by
the superintendent of insurance
we stand in support of this
bill.
Thank you are there any other
members of the public who wish
to speak at this time.
This this is Dorothy see can you
hear me.
Yes.
I signed up for the military
retirement tax rate not for this
bill thank you Graham okay thank
you very much this concludes
public comment at this time.
Great the now we'll go to the
committee.
Senator Hotmail thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee and so you know as a
former county commissioner I was
able to go out with the number
of our local volunteer fire
departments and assess the needs
of each department and the needs
are so great and I'm just
wondering why this has never
come up before.
Senators birds be sleeping on
the oil that's why.
It along one story short.
We made adjustments in the state
over the last few years with
regards to the fire marshal
firefighters the of the state to
trying to elevate them to to a
proper level.
I frankly in years past not
unlike the the highway fund
funds were diverted out of that
into other projects we're now
obviously trying to get funds
back in the highways department
fund now this is the same
process making sure that the
funds that are available for
firefighters stay with the
firefighters out the state this
by the way.
From metropolitan to the
smallest district when the state
funds will be available to them
so.
Quite frankly Senator.
We're just playing catch up a
little bit here.
Perfect thank you Mr chairman
Senator this is a bill I would
stand in support of because I
still advocate for those
volunteer fire departments
throughout not only Rio Arriba
County but the other three
counties that I represent as a
senator and so this is a bill
that would definitely help the
smaller fire departments get
more equipment or get things
done without that cap more so in
in counties that can't do
matches for these fire
departments this is definitely a
good bill and something that I
support and I thank you for
bringing up forward thank you Mr
chairman thank you senator
Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman the
senator Byrd thank you for
bringing the bill of some you
know I've worked on for couple
years on this issue and I think
this is a good way of dealing
with it.
So our sports bill I hope
everyone else will too system we
need to make sure that the the
money from this fund is being
spent actually on the fire
departments and not in other
places and so.
Very very good way of doing this
thank you.
Thank you Senator Brandt I don't
have any other hands up so what
is the pleasure of the
committee.
Like to refer to past Mr chair
the motion for the past present.
I have a second senator Sanchez
is that correct.
Okay so lane can you please call
role.
Senator Brandt.
Yes ma'am.
Senator Griggs yes.
Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Hickey yes.
How to meal yes.
Senator Kernan yes
senator Sanchez yes senator
Clemente.
Yes.
Senator Wirth yes.
Senator Padilla yes Senator
Shendo yes eleven four no no one
excuse no one against
regulation Senator Burt why
thank you Mr chairman I
appreciate your efforts and your
help and all the members of the
committee wishes for a a good
rest of the morning thank you
senator.
Okay we will now move on to
Senate bill two seventy seven
and the vice chairman ask you to
take over a little bit on this
will take over this bill will
step out for me but was quickly.
Mr chairman thank you we'll go
to Senator pope for military
retirement pay tax exemption.
Thank you Mr chair.
Thank you committee members
today I present Senate bill two
seventy seven military
retirement pay and tax exemption
this bill will give tab will
give tax relief for military
retirees in the state now I know
there's been built in the past I
will make all military
retirement pay tax exempt but I
I take this in a different
direction.
we should be providing relief to
our lower income retirees as a
receiving less pay and they need
more you know of this income to
get more education and in some
cases they have to continue
working in a second career after
they retire so
For me.
Excuse me I'm sorry lost my
train of thought on that
and in some cases.
some of our lower ranking
military families even have to
move out of state to continue to
provide more work to take care
of their families on the other
hand higher ranking retirees are
making more money.
And they have actually or job
prospects and opportunities and
in a lot of cases they're not
leaving the state for tax
purposes
so this bill what this bill does
is it will provide thirty
thousand dollar tax break for
all uniformed.
Military service retirees.
And I just wanted to say it
without full disclosure you know
I would benefit from this bill
now my for charm it would not be
exempted and this bill but I
would get relief and I also
understand that this bill would
cut into some of the revenue
here in the state
but I believe that we need to do
all we can do to help our
military families here in New
Mexico and I I just believe in a
progressive tax structure that
looks out more for lower income
folks so I think this would go a
long way in helping them here in
our state but also retaining and
recruiting military retirees
here in New Mexico.
That being said I don't have any
experts on this bill I do have
an amendment but I'm not
bringing that for today because
it wasn't sent out twenty four
hours in advance but I will do
that going forward what the
amendment does is just confirms
in the bill up with verbiage
that a spouse that signs up for
the survivors benefits plan and
will actually receive the
military retirement wind that
active duty member retiree
passes away that they would also
benefit from this tax relief.
That's all I have Mister chair
committee members and I am ready
for questions and comments thank
you very much Senator pope
excellent introduction so well
like we do and I want to you
notify you in the committee as
well as some analysis points out
that there's approximately or
possibly a nineteen million
dollar impact here a tax package
will be put together but this
bill will sit here in this
committee into the tax package
is crafted so with that thank
you senator both miss Clinton
will go to public comment I I
don't know if there is anybody
signed up.
Mr chair members of the
committee.
In support indicated opposition
to this bill.
In support I believe we have
Dorothy Seton.
Yes yes Mr chair members of the
committee senators thank you
senator pope for bringing this
bill I'm Dorothy seat number
retired military veteran I
served as a volunteer with the
veterans caucus.
Of the Democratic Party of New
Mexico I would benefit from this
and I would point out that New
Mexico is ranked seventh of oil
can least tax friendly states
for military retirees this
analysis done by Kip winger.
The third from the bottom is
something New Mexico is familiar
with I think Senator pope is
trying to remedy the situation
Military retirees from active
duty can retire as young as
about forty years of age and
have a second career.
In the state of their choosing I
hope they would choose New
Mexico because they bring
professional skilled trades and
expertise as well as work ethic
to our work force I would point
out to that we have a number of
National Guard and reserve
members in our state.
twenty seconds you okay there
there
Eligibility and and my done or
do I have twenty more seconds
you still have.
Okay the National Guard the
retirement calculation is
completely different we can
retire after twenty calendar
years of service but we can't
draw our retirement pay until
age sixty.
so there's often a lag time in
there within there's no
retirement pay and we have
second careers.
and civilian careers that we
work at our service pay is
calculated on not on calendar
years but on actually service
days which is about thirty eight
days a year per service here
and so is a retired officer a
major my retirement pay is a
hundred around nine hundred
dollars thank you misstatements.
Which is not enough to live on I
will point out so this relief
would certainly help National
Guard reserve members.
Thank thank thank you Mr Mr
Rubin felt do we have anybody
else.
Yes Mr chair looks like we have
Terry call yes.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is very
poor and president and CEO for
greater Albuquerque the
pharmacist thank you morning are
we have been so grow to support
all these military health
Senator false I'm here.
Using this section we are
welcome this working well done
being a champion of our military
bases to support up to seventy
seven this morning we believe
this will make New Mexico walk
more welcoming to our fire
military service members and
ultimately those seconds the
rear it will help us strengthen
our workforce in New Mexico
which we need so we argue this
morning just work well thank you
so much.
Thank you Mr call Mr Rubin.
Do we have any more.
Members of the public in the
meeting who wish to comment on
this bill.
Mr chair I believe that is eight
four public comment on this
bill.
Thank you Mr Rubin tell let's
move over to the committee first
of all I have a Senator Griggs.
Thank you Mr vice chair of the
the thing about this bill I mean
I think we'll probably have
other military retirement pay
bills and this one may be the
best one I don't know.
But I do have a question Mr
chair and senator because I'm
I'm not sure exactly with some
of the wording what it what it
me.
And on that you know on page one
we're down on the line twenty
one and we talk about that we've
got our have an exemption of
thirty thousand of military
retirement pay include a bowl
except for this exemption in net
income and I'm not exactly sure
and I I talked to my one of my
friends who's an accountant and
he's not exactly sure what that
means either and you know he he
believes probably that taxed
rebel come out with a with a
description of of that if it
goes to to accountants but I I
wonder if you have a have
thoughts on that happy how does
that how do you think that
works.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Griggs with working with the
drafter and and you know full
disclosure I I you know I'm not
an attorney either in this
language and I struggle with
that as well
but the concept of what I wanted
to get across was that it would
be thirty thousand exclusion
from gesture military retirement
but I would welcome looking at
this language and ensuring that
it does that or you know what
the impacts are and what that
verbiage and what that really
means and that it meets the
intent but that's really the
intent for more and in the bill.
And I share Senators thanks for
that because that that does make
it more clear to me and I would.
I mean I don't know maybe it's
clear to everybody else but I
think that would be something we
are work on before.
Before the bill.
You know moves into its final
form to show it does exactly
what you wanted to do.
Show up so thank you Mr Mr vice
chair thank general.
And thank you Mr chair Senator
Griggs I I will definitely do
that because I want to make sure
it matches the intent and we all
understand what's in the bill in
language.
Thank you senator grace and
Senator pope let's go over to
Senator Brandt now.
Thank you Mr chairman for ****
Sir pope I.
The what what Senator Griggs
said brought up.
The question to me and make it
so we need to look at before you
vote on this bill
when we bring these back but are
the way we file our taxes in New
Mexico is we do the federal tax.
And so I don't know that the
exact
Amount is shown from each source
on the state tax form.
And so there may be some issues
there.
because usually you just bring
that over I guess that they
could put another in a long
line.
For a specific deduction it is
that the way you see that that
would work.
Mr chair Senator Brandt I I
share your concerns and that's
one of the things that I wanted
to find out of of house
specifically that work in your
taxes because I.
I think I
I'll start have look into your
concerns as well as a lot of
times it's just going to have
that total amount of income
right like it's going to have
your retirement your current
money coming in and that's
probably what's going to come
over so I I need to have further
discussions on how we actually
implement this.
Thank you Sir pope that was I
was just trying to think about
you know because I normally file
my own taxes and so I was like
where would you put this I guess
they would have to develop a
separate line.
You do turn your your W. twos
and
Your realtor a truck I don't
have military retirement pay
console minus disability pay so
I'm I'm assuming this is your W.
two or something that identifies
that that amount.
you have to then put that.
I guess taxed Representative
configure that part out your how
to put on the tax for so thank
you I appreciate that.
Just something I I've always
supported this idea.
I will like you always wanted to
be for the lower income military
personnel.
and so the thirty thousand
something I have suggested and
supported many times in the past
so I appreciate you bring out
and putting that it's cap thank
you.
Thank you senator Graham Mr
Chairman did you have a any
comment Mr etcetera
I know Mr chair thank you thank
you very much all right so it
members once you speak if you
could please lower your hand so
I don't get confused on the
electronic thank you Senator
Representative we'll go to
center it you know.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator pope for bringing this
bill forward
I just another bus through the
FIR and maybe I'm
misunderstanding but
something that
ms call brought out they had as
the chamber for Albuquerque has
there been a CBO type of
analysis on this not only see
there's gonna be some costs of
the state that intentionally
however the more attractive we
can make Albuquerque two people
retiring here
I've.
The more revenue and and I think
Miss call brought up the the
very very important pieces that
a lot of these folks are going
to go get a second job they'll
have a train skill are which we
desperately need in the state
and that will generate more
income for tax that we can
potentially offset this with the
nice that we have I understand
there's speculation that the CBO
does of all time at the
Congressional Budget Office and
I'm hoping the and and maybe I
just missed that but you know my
senses this is gonna be more
than
it's gonna be more than pay for
itself and you know Colorado
springs interesting face are
also pretty as a nice
environment but not as nice as
ours
you know is is the home to
airforce in military retirement
from all over the country and
it's it's a booming booming town
I've I've been going there for
probably forty years and and to
see how big it is some of
stretching out there but not
quite that
of the Denver and and a lot of
it has to do with the military
retirees and then you put that
in there what else they have
their US Olympic committee is
located there are because of you
know great training and again
you know getting this train
going to the polls and other
trains
is something we have you don't
need to always be thinking about
and particularly when we're
making some concession impacts.
but building the business I
think this is just an
outstanding Barrone Air Force
base here a lot of people go
through their we have lots of
airports faces of with all due
respect to our My Girl
colleagues some people because
of jobs you want to come to the
big city
where there are more jobs and
we're gonna get more the rural
areas anyway I just the I don't
know if that analysis is been
done but you know my back of the
envelope says it's probably very
strong MFA for itself and and
just continue to build so I
don't know if you have any
thoughts on that R. Kelly if you
Kelly o'donnell that is if you
have any insight into that that
would be well appreciated.
Thank you center both in Mr
chair.
And miss o'donnell that you want
to comment briefly what do you
think.
I can yes Mr chairman members
the committee this is Kelly are
what committee on on the Senator
he's comments.
I.
One of the one of the one of the
traditions in New Mexico is to
do static analysis essentially
not to our factor in any any
stimulating or a tax on the
economy into
the offsetting cost of the tax
expenditure that said you know I
think that that that study to be
done I I I I would okay have a
dime Representative the tax
expenditures going to pay for
itself I'd be very rich right
now I I I I your.
Eight and with this one this is
your line users has to just do
you have a thank you Mr Donald
and if you're not speaking if
you can please mute your line I
would appreciate that thank you.
And I don't see the one we just
scanned real quick I don't.
Members does anybody any other
members of the committee.
Or question for senator both.
Okay so since we don't have any
additional comments from members
of the committee I would like to
get Center pope at an
opportunity to wrap up the
discussion here and then as I
mentioned previously will hold
this are with the tax package
discussion for the tax package
Senator book.
Thank you Mr chair this will
touch on a little bit with what
Senator some a question Senator
Hickey hat you know I really
wish that we didn't have to tax
any of these retirements but the
reality is here within our state
this would put a hole in and now
revenue here so once again my
philosophy specially being a
person that started in the
enlisted ranks and became an
officer I know more than need is
with the folks that retired and
the enlisted ranks and that's
where I just really want to give
relief because these are the
folks that may have to go get
further education it's going to
be tougher for them to get a job
on base where as the higher
ranking folks some of them can
retire and get a job is in the
federal service working on base
doing almost the exact same job
so I think this will help with
retaining folks and especially
our military folks at retiring
come back to our state it really
just give them an opportunity
once again even though it's it's
only going to thirty thousand
still we're part provides relief
to all military retirees which I
think is a good thing and I
think that money will get
reinvested back into New Mexico
because they will spend it here
and I also just wanted to
express that a lot of veterans
organizations here in our
community we have
the current one partnership
committee and I know that many
of our our bases and
installations here folks want to
come back in may support this
type of legislation as well so
thank you for the opportunity
thanks for the time I understand
that we'll have to wait on a
decision to vote on this bill
and I just appreciate you
listening to me today thank you.
Thank you very much Senator pope
and and just so you know I'm in
the same corral of of tax bills
as well and and I've already
presented one or two that way so
thank you very much and will you
know just Mr chairman I see that
you're back at the next bill
actually is yours how do you
want to proceed.
I'm hoping next week by care all
right well there we go we'll get
a Senate bill two eighteen so we
wrap up our holdover calendars
or agenda uniformed division of
income tax income for tax
purposes and I guess only to
hear a little bit more about
that this is one of the ones
that winds up in the in the all
to grow also so Senator Shendo
Mr chairman please percent okay
thank you vice chairman and
members of the committee this
Senate bill to eighteen is just
a a a a minor technical clean up
following the twenty nineteen
house bill six corporate income
tax reform reform and
What it does is the it deletes a
provision in the multi state tax
compact that allows the taxpayer
to elect to apportion and
allocate income in the manner
provided in that compact and so
I have secretary Stephanie
Schardin Clarke as my expert
witness and of I'm just going to
go directly to her of course you
see expert in this and she will
explain to the committee what
we're trying to do.
Thank you Mr chairman and the
international super sensation
rockstar Senator Schardin
Clarke.
I think I just got promoted and
Mr vice chairman.
thank you members of the
committee I hope you can hear me
all right as a Senator Shendo
chairman Senator just mentioned
what we're bringing forward here
is some technical cleanup
necessary to effectuate all the
provisions of house bill six
that was passed in twenty
nineteen that build made some
reforms to the corporate income
tax of course it had mandatory
combined reporting as well as
market based sourcing for set
and and so we changed our it's
kind of confusing but but we as
a member of the multi state tax
compact we have the compact
inner statute in section seven
dash one dash five that's the
model compact that all states
adopt the next to it and seven
dash five four excuse me we have
our own version of the uniformed
division of income for tax
purposes act that's more
commonly known as you did you
did or you did because depending
on how people pronounce that and
so in house bill six we amended
you did cut to.
Basically per require market
based sourcing for corporate
income tax purposes however we
did not take out of our compact
statute seven dash five dash one
the language that allows
taxpayers to potentially elect
to use something else so we're
just cleaning up to make sure
that the intended reforms that
were included in house bill six
are completely in effect without
a stand for any questions.
Thank you madam secretary and Mr
Chairman did you have any other
experts are no that's it and
now we're ready to go to public
and and stand for questions.
All right thank you very much Mr
chairman us we'll go to Mr Rubin
felt if you can walk us through
opposition first and then
support.
Mr chair members of the
committee at it does not appear
that that anyone is on either
for opposition or in support if
I am incorrect and there are
members of the public on the
call today I would like to speak
on this bill could you please
raise your hand.
Mr chair looks like we have no
public comment on this bill
thank you Mr Rubin's all will go
to the committee and Majority
Leader works.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Senator Shendo
This was a bill actually this
that Representative Harper and I
carried in twenty nineteen that
got will be into the house bill
six tax package and it's it's
it's really a fairness issue we
were apportioning
Tax for tangible personal
property which means that when
their sales made in New Mexico
we get a share of the tax but we
had an old formula for
intangibles so and that
basically said you know is where
the bulk of the sales happened
so New Mexico could potentially
of sales happening in our state
we got no no tax a portion to us
because of that so again it was
a fix that Representative Harper
and I would try to do for all
for quite a while it got done
you dipped
Is is kind of the holy grail out
there the uniform law and we do
have this compacts so I I it is
just a clean up and and we don't
want to have kind of a back door
way around the law we passed I
think that's what this is doing
so I certainly supported thanks
Senator Shendo for bringing
this.
Thank you Majority Leader worth
I'm just going to stand up for
the committee and that I don't
see hands virtually rates of the
committee an opportunity raise
your hand literally.
Right have nothing there
Let's see here Senator mentioned
did you have any.
Follow ups before we take some
sort of action your forces one
of the ones that you're wanting
to hold.
But no one in the I don't think
this is a
this is.
I don't think this is only with
the the whole would come with
the phone I move past Mr chair
okay so we have started work we
have a second by Senator Brandt
and Sir Senator Brandt was at a
second.
Yes Sir thank you Senator Brandt
if we go to miss Renfro to take
to call the roll please.
Senator Brandt.
Yes.
Senator Griggs.
Yes Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Hickey.
Yes our meal.
Yes.
Did Senator Hickey just vote yes
please.
Senator Senator Kernan.
Yes.
Just.
Yes Senator Tallman.
Yes Senator Padilla oops I
forgot Senator Wirth yes Senator
Padilla yes Senator Shendo yes
and I miss to made the motion to
That was that Majority Leader
worth and then the second was
Senator Brandt thank you.
Okay view Levin.
No nobody excused all right
thank you just a Mr chairman you
have a do pass on your bill
thank you madam secretary for
being here the space how did you
want to proceed Mr Mr Chairman
no you're good you're doing a
great job so we'll keep going to
the ninety seven thank you of I
chair members of the committee.
just I'll keep moving then we'll
go to senator Thomas I believe
is yeah he's right there Senate
bill ninety eight.
We can see why set up on the
screen there thank you economic
development incentives reports.
Okay thank you Mr chair.
This bill is very similar
senator Tom before you begin I
just want to ask the chair are
we gonna have a hard stop at one
PM for the rest of the advocates
that are because we still have
quite the agenda or we gonna
keep on rolling to one AM.
Mr Chairman.
This one let's some of these
folks know case or wait around
for us because we're now at
twelve o'clock we have in our
lab
we looks like we have about ten
bills on the docket right now
so.
We can't hear you Mr Chairman.
It doesn't want to die.
Okay all right that will just
keep growing it is just trying
to be kind of the people that
are waiting around
so we'll go Sierra thank you for
your patience.
Thank you Mr chair of this bill
is very similar to Senate bill
fifty two which.
Passed the house floor last year
and then we ran out of time in
the house.
I got interested in this this
issue after reading a few
terrible trust.
Study that was completed in two
thousand seventeen the stated.
Quote New Mexico lacks a well
designed plan for regular
evaluation of tax incentives end
of quote.
In two thousand eleven the the
governor issued the executive
order requiring taxed
Representative to prepare an
annual report on tax credits
exemptions and deductions
however evaluation of the
program typically consist of
only a few paragraphs with
little or no our regional
economic analysis.
So if a state or local
governments going to provide an
incentive there needs to be some
kind of clarity.
What the realistic expectations
realistic expectations over with
they might get back.
The state does not have a word
rigorous evaluation system of
tax incentives.
Mexico is now.
One of the roughly twenty to
twenty two states that do not
systematically evaluate centers
using historical data.
Hi.
New Mexico statues are not
required by statute to evaluate.
The incentives but this bill
Correct said.
That.
Issue.
So those three things Mr chair
done number one edge reporting
requirements to the local
government Development Act
number two it requires a state.
Texan Representative to continue
publishing the annual tax
expenditure report required by
executive order.
And number three.
It requires taxed route to
perform an objective assessment
every three years and economic
development tax incentives with
an estimated cost of more than
ten million dollars for fiscal
year.
Mr chair the bill requires.
But I think IT Opeth Development
analysis cannot be performed.
On a tax expenditure.
Then taxed revenue must make
recommendations on how the
legislature can make changes so
it through the system so that we
can make.
And economic analysis.
And Furthermore the bill gives
authority to Texan road to
request information from an
executive order local government
agency to complete the tax
expenditure budget for
assessment of a tax expenditure
is deemed to have a purpose of
economic development.
Mr chair the The bill
appropriates a hundred ninety
two thousand dollars for the
purchase of a tax modeling
software.
Without that expenditure Mr
chair with the.
We would not be able to carry
out what we're trying to
accomplish with this bill.
So Mister chair.
Every year the thank you
Representative this repair
fairly extensive
Report outlining
Some information in that report
the in in in A. F. F. I. R. the
list of top ten economic
development tax incentives over
the five year average cost
the cost of tax incentives.
Of these the top ten in total
about a hundred forty five
million ranging from a high of
seventy billion for film credits
to low of one point six million
for software development
services G. R. T. detection.
So.
Our is indicated earlier.
Mr chair the future of the trust
ranks New Mexico is that
trilling others there's ten
states.
Our.
That.
Are considered to have a well
designed planned there's
eighteen states that are making
progress and we are one of the
twenty three states that lack a
well designed plan to regularly
evaluate major tax incentives.
So.
The need to be a balancing is a
girl balancing act between the
desire to maintain a high level
of taxpayer confidential
confidentiality and the desire
to provide public accountability
oversight and evaluations of tax
expenditures.
The Economic Development
Department that's state fair in
support of what we are are
trying to do.
And.
In conclusion Mr chair.
Dislike to a state that again
the New Mexico lacks a detailed
economic analysis.
The tax incentives.
And the.
What we have now.
Market reports only includes the
the number of claimants in the
estimated total cost and
expenditure.
Well this is useful.
Of the.
Report is generally insufficient
to verify whether a tax
expenditures resulting in the
desired effect.
Where does not focus on incomes
and does not cover information
that could.
The vital to determining
effectiveness.
Such is the number of jobs are
created.
So Mr chair.
Well we are doing making some
effort toward the valuation
these tax incentives really need
to do more in order to to
determine whether or not they're
affected whether we're getting
our money's worth
in weather and that we're.
A creating at doing what is
expected to do so with that Mr
chair thank you and
That includes a presentation I
have an expert witness on board.
On a iglesias from the LFC.
Who is my expert witness and she
may wish to make a few comments
at this time thank you.
Thank you senator Tom and that
Miss Iglesias would you like to
make a few comments.
Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you for having
me here today
I'm here to provide any
technical assistance with the
bill or answer any questions I
would like to state that LESC
strongly supports evaluation of
of tax expenditures the tax
expenditure report that TRD puts
out every year is an incredibly
useful tool for the for the New
Mexico legislature and for.
LFC staff in order to evaluate
tax expenditures however as the
senator mentioned that only
includes descriptive data
usually the number of claimants
who take advantage of a
deduction or a credit and the
total cost to the state but it
doesn't provide sufficient
information for determining
whether or not a tax expenditure
is really meeting its intended
purpose and so this bill helps
to get that.
Requiring TRD to provide that
evaluation at least for the
economic development incentives
that are greater than ten
million dollars so it's a start
in the right direction and it
helps to address some concerns
that were brought up with
previous versions of the bill
regarding confidential taxpayer
information and therefore by
situating the responsibility of
that analysis within TRD within
the agency that has access
already to that confidential
taxpayer information would not
require sharing of that data
with other agencies that don't
have access but the bill does
require TRD to work in
consultation with both LFC and
EDD economists in order to
determine those fiscal impacts
and that that economic analysis
and so we are are in support of
what this bill is trying to do
and I'm happy to stand for any
questions.
Excellent thank you Miss
Iglesias Center common there any
any other expert witnesses will
go to Mr Rubin bill for public
comment first in opposition and
then in support.
Mr chair members of the
committee.
Have we received no indications
of opposition to this bill.
In support.
I believe we have Mister Bill
Jordan.
Mr Jordan.
Thank you Mr chair and members
of the committee on Bill Jordan
with New Mexico voices for
children we really want to thank
senator Solomon for his
persistence and bring it back
this legislation every year we
forgo hundreds of millions of
dollars in revenue it gets spent
on the tax side of the budget
without any evaluation of
whether it has achieved the
goals intended for the promises
made.
The issue of dynamic scoring
came up in a previous debate
just an hour ago and that's been
rejected because nobody's found
a credible way to measure the
future impact of the tax bill.
If we're serious about
accountability then let's go for
the bill after it's been passed
to see if it's really paying
dividends you all are right to
now put a sunset on tax breaks
but what good does that do if
you come back in a few years to
evaluate and you have no data on
which to base a decision about
whether or read not to renew
that legislation if we want real
transparency if we're going to
be good stewards of our tax
dollars David list this
legislation is an essential part
of that stewardship and we
strongly urge your support thank
you.
Thank you Mr Jordan are there
others.
This is the committee I don't
believe that that aren't any
other members of the public
wishing to make comment if I am
incorrect and you on the call to
make commented this bill could
you please use the raise your
hand function.
Mr chair I believe that is it
for public comment on this bill.
Thank you Mr Rubin felt we'll go
to members of the committee the
only person I have so far as
Senator Kernan.
Thank you Mr chair I think I
think that Mr Jordan answered
one of my questions is and this
is for miss Iglesias is this a
sign bill that has been
presented in prior years to to
actually really get at the meet
at what these tax
deductions credits and
expenditures are doing.
Mr chair Senator Kernan it is a
very similar bill it does two of
the three things that previous
versions of this bill did the
leader reporting requirements
making sure that we get
sufficient jobs information
reporting on recipients for
eight dollars it also includes
the requirement for tax
expenditure reporting from TRD
right now that's only required
by executive orders of this puts
that in statute so that no
matter the administration we
continue to get that reporting
on in in the third piece it does
something very similar but
slightly different than what the
previous versions of this bill
that so it requires what this
does is is more I would say a
definitive in its intent in
getting an economic analysis
produced by the department of
with the tax department for
certain economic incentive
legislation so particularly for
those that cost more than ten
million previous versions of
this bill focus primarily on
data sharing in order to have
that tax department share
confidential taxpayer data out
with LFC DFA and EDD in order
for those agencies to try to do
an analysis but it really just
focus on the data sharing peace
and made no specific
requirements for that analysis
was sort of assumed that if data
was shared the analysis could be
performed by several years in a
row the bill is kind held up in
terms of what exactly that
confidential tax payer and data
sharing would be have those
measures would be
protected so that confidential
information is protected and
what this bill does
situate that responsibility
within the tax department who
already has access to that data
so in its limit some of the
concerns that were previously
Stated for this bill in terms of
that tax payer data sharing I'm
still required those other
agencies to participate in that
economic analysis once data is
aggregated by the tax department
for people who are receiving
that data and it very
specifically requires reporting
every three year on major
economic development incentives
and that's a new addition to
this bill on that we think makes
it much stronger in terms of
providing a very specific
evaluation plan this was
something that LFC recommended
in a brief to presentation to
the the legislative finance
committee in November of last
year do telling that we should
do a rotating schedule of of.
Objective economic analysis for
our tax incentives and we
believe this bill does that does
that for a certain subset of tax
expenditures not all of them
this would be a first step
toward that in and should this
be successful I would hope that
the legislature would come back
and expand the type of economic
analyses that are required for
various tax expenditures.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
and distinguished see that that
was very clear and and so I I
would agree that are would you
agree that the confidentiality
issue that many of us were
concerned about for our that is
not to be part of this bill
correct.
Mister chairman Senator Kernan
yes that is correct I ate the
changes that the senator made it
to this bill address that
confidentiality concerns so Mr
chairman and that Miss Iglesias
who will determine which
expenditures credits of up hello
that be determined where you
gonna start are you going to do
something every three years and
it's got to rotate where do you
begin and who makes the decision
on on that were you look first.
Mr chair Senator Kernan that
would be up to the tax
department so it does say that
they need to find that analysis
every three years for anything
that they deem to cost more than
ten million dollars per year so
they would establish those costs
for an economic development
incentives so they would
establish in their tax
expenditure report the economic
development incentives versus
other types of incentives those
that have sent us a benefit or a
health care related it cetera
and for those of the identifies
economic development related and
if it has an annual cost of more
than ten million they then bear
the responsibility per this bill
to provide economic analysis
every three years it would be up
to them to develop that rotating
schedule I I think that allows
them sufficient flexibility to
determine which one to start
with and then proceed each year
into doing the next one on
trying to regulate that within
the provisions of this bill
could be a little restrictive so
it does allow the department
flexibility thank you thank you
I think that's that's very clear
thank you very much.
Thank you Senator Kernan and
Senator Tallman gonna Senator
Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Tolman
so would this be every type of
of tax credit or just comply to
leave the.
I'm.
What is the.
The bill analysis there are
implies to lead a Mr.
Senator Mr chair.
Mr chair if I may yes please so
the very specific reporting
additional reporting
requirements that applies to
lead it has a list of various
things that once Leader
recipients to report on that
sort of that's separate from the
tax expenditure report provision
TRD which requires them to
report on every single tax
incentive anything that is a tax
deviation for the purpose of
providing some sort of benefit
to the recipient as opposed to
those types of the Tax
deviations that might be to
prevent federal preemption but
for those that are intended to
provide an incentive their tax
expenditure report has to cover
every single one of them and
then that's a little separate
from the third provision which
is on an objective economic
analysis and assessment of those
economic development incentives
that cost more than ten million
a year so they have to report on
the number of was number of
claimants the total cost for
every single tax expenditure and
then separately they have to do
a objective economic analysis
for economic development
incentives costing more than ten
million.
So Mister chairman maybe you
could help help answer those
Dawn
With the film tax credit then
that receive this analysis so we
actually know if it's benefiting
us wrong.
Mr chair Senator Brandt yes it
will I would also point out that
is part of previous legislation
that was passed for a changes to
the film tax credit already
required the economic
development department to
participate in an objective
economic analysis presumably
those two requirements could be
lined up with this bill so that
TRD and EDD would work together
specifically for the film credit
to meet the provisions of this
bill and prior legislation
specifically regarding the film
credit but then it would also
require TRD to do other economic
development incentives as well.
and Mr chairman
Dawn or search homa whichever
one what about some of the
Sir Sir Coleman has the the.
electric vehicle tax credit and
some solar panel tax credit so
there's a lot of other tax
credits within our tax code with
those be reported back to us on
whether or not they were.
Meeting the objectives.
Mr chair Senator Brandt because
this bill limits the requirement
for that economic assessment to
those that cost more than ten
million a lot of those other
economic development incentives
cost less than ten million per
year so this would not be
required under this bill it
would be something that
potentially future legislative
sessions could consider if back
cost requirement was lowered
then it would capture additional
incentives that would need to be
reported on I think the ten
million dollar threshold was set
as a as a starting point if you
will in order to get the ball
rolling for our highest cost
economic development incentives
so that the tax department can
develop a plan for how we're
going to do this we can see the
method through which they do it
and then hopefully in the future
the legislature would come back
lower that cost fresh hold and
require more analysis for
various economic incentives.
So Mister chairman
On that's I like that idea we're
we're trying to catch the
highest ones and then maybe we
come back later either change
that threshold where we put that
threshold in now changing it
we're you would phase in to a
lower threshold those are either
way we could do that to make
sure it's capturing those
because I think you'd be really
interesting no matter what the
credit is I think you'd be
really helpful for us to have a
report on whether those are
working whether it's providing
an incentive that's creating
jobs are not we're helping our
economy or not
I'd love to actually see just
look at things more objectively
when it comes to our taxes and
not just what we like or what we
don't like thank you Sir Thomas
thank the the idea behind this
bill is a really good idea I
think it'll be very helpful for
us to have that information
thank you for bringing the bill.
Okay thank you Senator Brandt
senator Clemente school did you
want to make comments that are
comment I don't want to jump.
Thanks thank you Mr chair for I.
Giving me the opportunity this.
Just the.
Thank you for the opportunity to
present a bill and I urge of.
All members of the committee to.
Active on this bill favorably
because it's the right thing to
do is that the.
It'll set us in the right
direction
And so we can join those states
that are classified is doing an
adequate job of determining
whether that we're getting our
money's worth from tax
incentives thank you.
Thank you senator Clemente I
don't see anybody else I just
wanted to briefly mention I
thought we had a report like
this it's in the first couple
years I was here in the
legislature but I could be wrong
there was a report sitting on my
desk every time I come into the
session and and it was a great
read and literally what I I know
so exciting you know I really
exciting like we take it on with
me and it's in the bathroom and
read it thank you wherever would
read left to right it really
interesting stuff seriously I
encourage you all to look at
those reports
but but again I also believe in
in what senator Tom is trying to
do here because at the end of
the day is what we might be the
fifth which is our largest state
we're not the fifth richest
state and and we don't have all
the dollars that say the Texas
enterprise fund to tip the two
hundred eighty three million
dollars sitting there to close a
deal and make something happen
at the very wise with our money
Sometimes you are wise and
sometimes we aren't in my
opinion at least so what what's
the pleasure of the committee on
this on this piece of
legislation.
I did pass we have a due pass by
Senator Kernan we have a second.
Mr chair the second by Senator
Hamblen if miss Renfro if you
will please take the role.
Senator Brandt.
Yes.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen yes.
Yes Senator had a meal yes
Senator Kernan yes senator
Sanchez.
Yes.
Senator Clemente.
Yes Senator Wirth yes Senator
Padilla yes Senator Shendo yes.
No excuse eleven for.
Thank you miss Representative
home and you do have a new path
thank you miss Iglesias for
being with us also so Mister
chairman just a minute important
ask you one more time we have
quite the agenda remaining we
have about and according to the
schedule you set press about
thirty six minutes should we
give some visibility into the
folks that are still waiting for
the bottom of this of this
agenda on what you'd like to do
a one o'clock I did I believe we
have Pete Campos on the we did
get start slowly but are we
gonna go beyond one o'clock my
question so that they know what
what to think what to do.
Probably not I mean I've spent a
long morning then notes people
haven't had lunch so we'll do a
hard stop at one so probably
just get through a Senate bill
one ninety five in the world.
All those over till Tuesday
thank you Mr chairman I just
wanted to give those just to be
kind to all that are waiting
thank you very much for being
here I'm sure you learned a lot
as I did so Mister you want to
go back over everyone to this
all right that's fine I'll go
ahead take over now Senate bill
one ninety five a Senator Campos
thank you vice chair.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
thank you members of the
committee for the opportunity to
present before you today Senate
bill one ninety five
appropriates are would
appropriate two hundred fifty
thousand from the general fund
to the department of
transportation for the purpose
of implementing teen driving
safety training to better
recognize and understand and
navigate work zones vehicle
trouble on road road size and
and move over laws for our teams
Mr chairman members of the
committee with me also is Mr
Franklin Garcia from the
department of transportation if
he can make a brief statement
and that would be available for
questions.
Good morning Mr good afternoon
out Mr chairman members the
committee Franklin Garcia with
the department transportation
mortal Division Department
reservations that neutral on the
bill however as you see in FY
are we do oversee the driver
education program for the state
so we would incorporate this
into our drivers cation program
if it were to pass in the
funding were to come over we
would utilize it according to a
the language access right now
teen drivers are still
overrepresented as far as the
crash rates compared to other
drivers and so any additional
education would be valuable.
Mr chairman if I may um Mr CST
just a system a little bit with
exactly what's already in place
when it comes to the program
itself that would really be
helpful.
Yes thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee so our
our duty oversight includes the
certification of all the driver
education schools in the state
all the private drive education
schools have to annually apply
for a licensure to the
department transportation we
also participate and those who
collaborate with the public
education department to certify
all the driver education
instructors in the public school
settings so we would be able to
incorporate this training in
both the private driving schools
and in public schools throughout
the state.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
were available for questions.
Thank you Senator Campos of.
This time we will go to public
comment.
Mr chair members of the
committee.
Received it now at indications
opposition to this bill.
I do believe that we have and
con way on the call with us to
speak in support of this bill.
She may have gone down and and I
believe that that is that we
have and if I am wrong and there
are members today at public on
the call and please use the
raise your hand function.
And I believe that is it for
public comment.
Okay thank you
We'll go now to the committee
for questions.
Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Senator
help me to understand this may
be a better question for.
The former transportation but
it's actually how would you use
these funds to change the
current program since you're
already being funded to oversee
our driver safety program how
would you use these funds so
thank you very much Mr chairman
thank you senator Brandt this
would continue to be an
expansion of that is Mr and I'm
gonna go I'm gonna discernment
to Mr Garcia but in essence
because as we move forward we're
seeing more and more of our
younger people who are directly
involved in serious accidents
rock New Mexico so this would be
resources used to continue to
provide and expand upon the
services if I may I'd like to
defer to Mister Garcia for the
more technical explanation thank
you Mr chair.
Yes Mr chairman members the
committee and Center grant
Senator Campos correct this
would be and enhancement of our
current driver education program
we don't receive any specific
funding for this we use our
operational budget for our
driver education oversight so
there isn't necessarily specific
fund that we utilize so this
would definitely benefit the
program by enhancing it one of
the items is dealing with the
works in high navigate through
work zones and with all the
construction going on throughout
the state I think it's a great
opportunity to get the young
younger drivers that education
early so that they could
continue their life knowing how
to navigate through a work zone
in the proper.
Navigation and the and the
issues that come up with that so
it would be an enhancement we
would just I utilize our typical
procurement process for existing
contract for outreach and media
to get this in place.
So Mister chairman Mr Franklin
or is it just Frank I'm sorry.
Mr chair it's it's Franklin
Garcia okay sorry the last name
so as I appreciate that
Mr Garcia the
Did the department request in
their budget request through
LESC this year in in this money
for updating program I'm
guessing that's what your son is
just updating the program.
Mr Chairman up members of the
committee and Senator Brandt
this wasn't as I mentioned the
department is neutral on the
bill this wasn't an agency bill
however since we do oversee the
program if this bill were to
pass we just want to be here to
provide this support to show
that we would be able to utilize
that funding if this bill were
to pass.
Thank you Mr chairman Mr Garcia
it seems like this is already
the responsibility of the
department to do this updating
I'm with you all the
construction
but **** isn't that already part
of the driver safety training
and if not the you guys are the
ones recertify everyone every
year so why not make that part
of it without this funding.
Mr chairman members of the
committee Senator Brandt the
driver's education program
currently has thirty classroom
our training along with seven
hours behind the wheel in the
private driving schools and the
public schools at the fifty six
our classroom only training so a
lot of the information that has
to be trained in the class it
already is pretty condensed in
pretty tight so looking for
other areas in opportunities to
get additional information in
there I think this would be an
enhancement of that training so
if we were to mandate it would
have to knock something else out
so I think this is an
opportunity to do some expansion
without having to risk losing
some other training that might
be going on already.
Thank you Mr chairman that much
for Garcia for state that of.
Senator Campos Mr chairman Sir
Campos
how much of your junior money to
put in the funding this.
Thank you for instance and
chairman Senator Brandt I did
not but in any of the
supplemental resources for this
particular program as we
continue to see expansions and
dealing with quite a few issues
regarding health and of course
it will be but I did not put any
money into this particular area.
So the Mr chairman and Sir
Campos my understanding was.
From the chairman of the finance
committee is we're not going to
be doing all these little
separate amendments to house
bill two
in there we continue to see all
these bills wanting to do all
these amendments to house bill
two so how would this gets
funded.
if we're not doing that this
year.
So Mr chairman again I know that
the process continues to
be and slacks when it comes to
waiting for house bill two to
come over from
from the house and so it was in
that to continue to keep this
issue raised of local you may be
able to have some resources but
in there because it is a serious
issue I will also indicate that
there's quite a few issues that
I am dealing with that directly
go to programs like this and
unfortunately in the process
that we haven't had the
resources available but again as
I've done before I'm gonna
continue to bring source the
issues because this is something
that is at the forefront today
as you see now within the news
of the the number of accidents
are occurring and again we want
to continue to support the DOT
they were hoping to have
resources but right now as you
indicate that may not be
possible.
Mr chairman Senator I guess it
it these all these bills have
always concern me as you know of
because I have asked very
similar questions for the last
nine years that I've been up
here as we get all these
appropriation bills coming
through our committees there is
a process that every department
goes through that every
apartment sits down and looks at
the needs of the state looks the
needs of their apartment and
then they bring those budget
request to the.
Legislative finance committee or
the LFC your during the interim
that they look at and they then
put their budget together and it
concerns me when we do these
little young nickel and diming
that budget to death
and so I rarely if ever support
any of these because I think we
have a much better process from
which to fund.
Hartman's if the department
feels like it needs an increase
so that can change the drivers
safety program or do some kind
of public awareness campaign for
young people then the part it
needs to come and ask for the
money I appreciate that Mr
Garcia saying we're not for
against the bills percent
neutral on the bill and
I'm I'm sure there are reasons
for them not doing that so I
appreciate it thank you don't
really works in the department
of health but they have there is
a proper process to do this I
don't think this is the proper
process thank you Mr chairman I
yield.
Thank you Senator Brandt I have
Senator Kernan Senator Hickey
but I don't think I didn't catch
who went first.
So Mr chair doesn't matter to me
I just have a quick question
You know I've always wondered
about driver education courses
across the state I remember that
many many many years ago when I
took that course through my high
school but I wonder if
Department dispersing could at
give me some idea not exact
figures on what percentage of
our school districts have the
eighty nine.
Actually offer that through the
school district is it rare or do
most districts do that.
Just curious what we have in
here.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee and the Senator
Kernan.
The duty does license all the
public school instructors I
think the last time we looked I
think we had about two hundred
plus public high school
instructors so we do have about
twenty five to thirty private
driving schools and I understand
that of course they're going to
driving school in every in every
city however when there isn't a
driving school every see for
instance local New Mexico as a
real robust private education
program within the high school
there is language in the within
the.
This school licensing act and
then to the hours the traffic
safety bureau that state statute
that mentioned that every we
would collaborate with PED to
make sure that every public high
school provides driver education
for elective credits so as far
as I know it is available in
every school and if it isn't we
do facilitate and work with the
school the principles if they
lose instructor if they want to
get back on track we could find
that private education program.
So I'm Mr chair then is there a
year is there a cost if it's in
the public school do is there a
fee associated with students at
yes I take that.
Mr chairman members committee
instant Center Kernan it's it's
it is in the public school
setting there would not be a
cost unless there was a minimal
maybe a lab the or something
like that there is no mandatory
behind the wheel driving with
the public school force because
of course you have to have the
upkeep the vehicles insurance
liability and things like that
so the fifty six hour course one
allows for the elective credit
to be able to get elective
credit points towards your
graduation and then also doesn't
affect the school as far as
having of to to fund that
program so it could just be a
regular classroom setting so for
the most part it's it's a free
course in the public school
setting just like a math
classroom science class during
class.
Thank you very much I learned
something today I didn't realize
that it of course I think behind
the wheel is really important
that parents can do that I
believe that's requirement to
get a license that you have to
have so much time behind the
wheel with without a doubt thank
you for for answering this
question so I appreciate it.
Thank you Senator Kernan Senator
Hickey.
Thank you Senator thank you Mr
chair and Senator Campos and Mr
Franklin Senator Kernan just as
part of my question
The.
In medicine we say learn one do
one teach one and you all are to
be afraid of that but it's doing
it a lot and then eventually
teaching up so I'm glad to hear
there is Ansan but
I just I I tend to agree with
Senator Brandt that this chopped
up in the finance committee so
is this is is there not some way
you can get this and structure
and in as a part of is
directions for next year with
without the funding.
So Mr chairman.
Mister chairman Senator it again
I'm gonna go ahead and get
deferred to a Mr Garcia.
This but if I may
in terms of the language of that
is a piece that will be
reviewing and this could go and
with language and let me just go
back a little bit because
through the LFC and listening to
testimony in years past and
that's the rationale for this
piece of legislation I have
heard that this continues to be
a serious issue as the forward
now and it could be the
possibility of.
Hundred million dollars to
appropriated to the department
of transportation for road
improvements there will be a lot
of construction that will be
occurring so the intent is as a
legislator in listening to
testimony we to reinforce that
pieces of legislation that would
assist our departments so
language could be included and
then in the future additional
resources could be applied
specifically to an issue like
this thank you Mr chairman what
if I may just a deferred to a Mr
Garcia.
Very quickly so possibly in line
just indicate also of the need
for for this program in the
expansion of the program.
Mr Garcia just very quickly.
Yes Sir Mr chairman members the
committee and the in center
so just like other bills you
know we're new the department is
neutral on several items such as
a gas tax bill while we would
benefit from the the revenue and
things like that
Of course the we we aren't
always able to advocate for
those things but if the bills
were to pass we want to show
that we do have the capacity we
do have the oversight we do have
a program in place to be able to
utilize any funding that would
be submitted or Aston eligible
for us to use.
Thank you our.
And thank you Mr chairman I have
one follow up question Senator
Campos I.
I'm not quite sure in New Mexico
but when I've been driving
through other states
I do seem to remember is that
there if you violate your danger
and certainly yes in our road
construction purses purchase
you're gonna pay a hell of a
fine and I'm just wondering if
that might not be a source of
revenue yeah I don't know if we
have those laws on the books but
on the books that I think we can
take a lesson from other states
and significantly find people
who are not following the
directions construction and they
have some supplemental revenue
and with that Mr chairman and
senator
IBM thank you.
Thank you a Senator.
Of I don't believe we have any.
Hands up so of what is the
pleasure of the committee hello.
With that.
For the past Mr chair.
Motion for do pass by Senator
Hamblen.
Second second Senator Padilla.
The main thing the fiscal throw.
Senator Brandt.
No Senator great.
Right.
No Senator.
Yes.
Thank you.
Yes Senator how to meal yes.
Senator Kernan no.
No.
Senator Clemente yes Senator
Wirth yes Senator Padilla.
Yes Senator Shendo yes.
So it's seven four.
For and four against.
Okay so you have a do pass seven
four Senator Campos thank you
very much Mr chairman members of
the committee really appreciate
that thank you Sir.
Okay thank you the committee
just for your information the
sponsor of for one ninety seven
I talked over we're going to
hold it over till Tuesday we
have a several bills that are
hopefully are pretty
straightforward Senate bill to
oh two two oh three and of two
sixty four so we have about
twenty minutes so want to move
on those so Senate bill two oh
two Senator Padilla.
Okay Mister chairman I'm getting
my experts back on
they are
We just do that real quick yep
so okay Mister chairman.
Did Mr chairman go ahead senator
return them we sent everybody
device that we're we're just
gonna do this the one bill we
just completed I'm worried that
that everybody's logged off I
mean if that's not the case then
I think we can perceive that are
worried that I thought I heard
you say that but I may be
totally wrong I did mention that
the.
But then I talked to the sponsor
and with the freight that we
were going to go over the one.
One PM time line and so of I
talked to her and we were gonna
roll that over so.
Be sure to make you know of a
COVID to that that.
Of.
Today effective maybe will
continue on at least a one one
PM and get several those of the
bills okay I think I
misunderstood so hopefully
people did not especially those
for and against did not walk up
and down so thank you yes we
still have twenty six
participants log on so.
I think most folks are still on
the listening so hopefully of.
Thank you Mr chairman I'll start
with the Senate bill two oh two
and again the experts for this
are going to log back in I think
I can carry this though without
any real issue this is a
something I'm caring for the
secretary of state's office so
Senate bill to a to it just
simply requires all names of
businesses that transact
business in the state of New
Mexico to court to require the
articles to find the name in
which the organization transacts
business in New Mexico in
addition to their official name
so that it makes it a little
easier for the secretary of
state's office to track
businesses down for consumers
and other businesses that they
may have had issues with or
whatever up sent to track those
down provides additional
transparency over what we have
today and then it's if the
businesses under one umbrella
and operates under another name
conducting business in New
Mexico and is registered under
another name it makes it
difficult again like I said
identified the business starter
serve them or communicate with
them because a lot happens my
business for examples been in
we've been in business for
twenty one years and I've
actually had to business names I
added the name to the original
name and it might make a little
more difficult so this just make
sure that everything's on final
everything's transparent and
nobody's getting left by the
wayside thank you Mr chairman.
The Senator of the D. R..
You have it you know you have my
experts one of my experts
actually is the the chief there
should there she is one of the
chief experts right now it's
just log on she's the director
of operations in the secretary
of state's office and that is
Christina Chavis are Christina
and I did just for our budget Mr
chairman she was I she did log
out now she's back in again I've
introduced the bill The purpose
what the bill does it cetera I
don't know if you had anything
you wanted to add this Chavis.
Go ahead and have.
Good afternoon Mister chair and
members the committee thank you
very much unfortunately I did
not here Senator pias
introduction so
but I trusted that he had all
the information and I am
available for questions and also
I would like to state that the
secretary of state's office is
in full support and still and I
am available for questions thank
you very much.
Thank you Mr Abbey is well
that's that's introduction it's
a pretty straightforward bills.
Okay so now we'll go to the to
the public.
With bills Mr chair members of
the committee.
There was no indication of are
opposition or support.
To this piece of legislation.
Okay Sir okay thank you all
right so we'll go to the
committee at this time.
Committee questions from members
of the committee.
If there is not Mr chairman I
will be passed okay I don't see
any hands going up so we have a
motion for two passed by Senator
Padilla we have a second Mr
chair second was Senator Hamblen
so.
And broken the please take Rowe.
Senator Brandt.
Yes.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen yes Senator Hickey yes
Senator how to meal.
Yes Senator Kernan yes senator
Sanchez.
Yes Senator Tallman.
Yes Senator Wirth yes Senator
Padilla yes Senator Shendo yes.
Hello.
Senator you have a do pass on
Senate bill till two will move
on to Senate bill two oh three
thank you Mr Chairman gosh I
wish all of my experts prepared
me this way because.
I don't ever have this
experience and I hope that
doesn't change for this next
week but but essentially us a
two or three takes the what I
just described a little bit
deeper and provides additional
transparency to the membership
of any LLC in the state you know
today you don't have to have a
your membership of your LLC as
part of the
the incorporation paperwork
And so as a result you know just
kind of chasing our tails around
and and and and let's say you
had a member that was in your
LLC and then that person was no
longer a member the LLC that
person could actually still come
in and do any number of things
to your LLC begin and typically
if if there's a dissolution are
are sometimes in this
dissolution it's overrides
spatter some sort of an issue or
whatever but this legislation
also provides additional
transparency
The
Legislation also yeah requires
that you know that everybody
that's part of the LFC just
simply be registered with their
names so that you can track them
down as well there would be
another couple of options of how
to do this but it's in our state
we don't require this Mr
chairman which would be that the
LLC filed a report every three
years or within thirty days of
any changes I will tell you that
I feel like I'm pretty good
about this kind of stuff Mr
chairman but I can't remember
the last time I felt anything
with the secretary of state's
office and I surprisingly had to
go in and correct the piece of
information that I didn't
realize that that changed the
other thing is we don't require
operating agreements in in our
state for public record those
are simply held at the
corporation or the business were
there the LLC whether they're
operating so I I believe it's
probably less than fifty percent
of the time that this would
actually occur so what this
legislation does is it provides
a name and number and whatever
any contact piece of information
on how to contact anybody that's
part of an LLC that's all this
and does Mister chair and this
was also brought to me by the
secretary of state's office and
Mr Abbas is also the expert here
as well.
Okay thank you any of anything
from a Chavis.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee and no additional
information thank you very much
okay thank you of now we'll go
to the public comment through
until at Mr chair members of the
committee.
No one had pre registered for
public comment I'd in opposition
or in support of this bill.
Really interesting Mr chairman
of the it would you say really
interesting stuff Mr chairman
yes yes fascinating so we don't
have any public comment so we do
have Senator Kernan and senator
Sanchez.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
thank you senator for the so is
this is this retroactive and and
and so how we going to notify
how many LLC's are there in the
state of New Mexico and how will
they be notified at to respond
to this legislation should it
pass.
thank you Mr chairman Senator
Kernan Mr Abbas.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Senator
currently I do not have a number
of how many are registered I
could give you a number of how
many a new entities have
registered however this bill
will will not be in effect it
will only be in effect for new
registered businesses always or
retroactively require any
businesses that are currently
registered with the state of New
Mexico under the secretary of
state's office to provide this
information.
Thank you very much on that I
think that
I think Senator Padilla is
exactly right sometimes when
things like this occur at maybe
we don't even know we need to do
it and and and I have an LLC as
well when I just wanna make sure
I follow the rules and
regulations and at that but I
probably would not know about
this if I if I were sitting here
voting on it today so I
appreciate that and I think
going forward that probably is
good information to happen
certainly wouldn't mind
responding to that but I do
think it's going to be difficult
to make sure this work gets out
thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Kernan senator Sanchez.
Mr chair of Mr but yet thanks to
bring in the bill just one quick
question is there any penalties
like if you didn't register are
you somewhere that you're not
compliance not in compliance
with something you know they're
in the penalties like you said
you would have no I don't know
you you made a comment about you
have to go register some paper
somewhere do something you know
about it is there a penalty to
these LLC's that don't know
about this even though they're
gonna be new LLCs coming online.
Mister chairman Senator Sanchez
excellent question I have this
very a similar question to
almost exactly what you're
asking so this is for new new
entities I want to make sure
that Mr Abbas can respond but so
I don't know that there would
necessary you're really not
going to get registered unless
you find the info should we make
this move but going
retroactively is Senator Kernan
mention that that doesn't apply
so I don't know the staff is if
you want to give any additional
info there.
Thank you Mr chair and senator
Senator yes correct there would
be no penalties currently the
LLC's as far as when you
register them
the only time the LFC would
would be and not in good
standing as if they're if the
registered agent were to change
and you did not find excuse me
I'm sorry to maybe our fault is
that are you would not provide
any additional information for
the new registration would be
but again it's not a penalty at
all it's basically your business
without being would be and Adam
notwithstanding but other than
that there would be no.
Mr chair Senator Padilla and
mischievous thank you for that.
Thank you senator.
Right so I don't see any.
Hands up so what is the pleasure
the committee.
Yes Representative Senator
Kernan was second.
Second Senator Tallman second so
Renfro broke office.
Senator Brandt.
Senator graceful.
Yes.
Senator Brandt.
I'm sorry yes okay sorry I
didn't hear you Senator Hamblen
yes Senator Hickey yes Senator
how to meal yes Senator Kernan
yes Representative just yes
Senator Tallman.
Yes Senator Wirth yes Senator
Padilla yes Senator Shendo yes
eleven to nothing.
The pass on Senate bill two we
Senator Padilla thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee for the to do passes
thank you Mr for being here.
Thank you so
want to jump to two sixty four
Senator Griggs.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee I hope this bill is
equally is as simple as Senator
Padilla
the the Elks club in Alamogordo
brought dish brought this
concern to me and what this bill
does is it increases the number
of times a club license holder
which is like the Elks VFW may
allow other nonprofits to use
its facilities including this
licensed premises for fund
raising purposes currently they
can usually twice a year this
increases in to four times a
year and often times in small
communities like Alamogordo the
Elks club has the larger
facilities and and can help and
help nonprofit shows raise money
show Mr chair that's the bill
I'm happy to stand for
questions.
Okay thank you Senator.
Well for that very clear concise
explanation.
I hold a public comment Ms
Trujillo.
Mr chair members of the
committee at no members of the
public pre registration at are
in opposition or in support of
this bill.
Okay thank you so now we'll go
to the committee of for
questions any questions from the
committee members.
Mr chair of Hamblen.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator thanks for putting this
forward I have many many years
experience with nonprofits and
the opportunity to raise money
and to be able to use facilities
that are already in place and
already have the infrastructure
I think is really really welcome
I'm especially in those rural
communities and as we get back
to normal times nonprofits are
going to really need to be able
to catch up to their fundraising
goals and so I think this is a
great bill and I appreciate you
bringing it forward thank you Mr
chair
thank you Senator Hamblen.
We don't see any hands up what
is the pleasure of the
committee.
Motion for do passed by Senator
Hamblen second by Senator
Tallman.
Raul please.
Senator Brandt.
Yes Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen yes Senator Hickey.
Yes.
Senator how to meal yes Senator
Kernan yes senator Sanchez yes
senator Clemente yes we're.
Senator Wirth.
Senator Padilla yes Senator
Shendo yes.
One excused and ten yes votes.
So.
Have a the past Senator Griggs.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
committee thank you a committee
members we went over by one
minute how will I appreciate all
of you for taking your Saturday
I know these are for bills for.
Of the for folks and then the we
will adjourn now and then we
will reconvene on on Tuesday so
thank you all you as the rest of
the enjoy the rest of the
weekend thank you.
Thank you have a good day.
Thank you so.
