So bright and early Sunday
morning Saturday.
Good morning to leave it at that
of the thank you all this is the
Senate tax business and
transportation committee just
kind of give you folks a road
map we want to go was going to
start with the.
Two forty then we're going to
take care of the G. R. T. two oh
five four oh three four forty
eight.
And then then I'm gonna start
skipping are we have some folks
that have traveled from out of
state to be here for some of the
Saturday we have put some stuff
in here so we will probably take
care of those and then we'll get
through as much as we can before
we have to go on the floor.
So with that of the we have sent
a bill to forty.
Mr I'm sorry I will go ahead
with no just as we were added to
pass motion at the end of when I
was here before two forty is no
tax although its second.
Go ahead in have the courage to
take the role to move okay.
Rents.
Senator with Senator how to
Hermio but that the.
Senator Kernan.
Senator Lopez will roll call.
Senator Sanchez.
The gentleman here.
Senator Wirth.
Senator Hamblen here.
Senator Shendo here we have six
present for a quorum okay great
already okay two forty note
mandatory audits for small
charities with an annual budget
of under seventy seven hundred
fifty thousand
no no opposition that use you've
seen this before we're really
happy this time we have the
active support of the audit of
the accountants society by in
the form of learner and anyway
where I left the last of this
wonderful committee were on a do
pass motion so I don't know like
I can answer any questions but
but that's why I'm here and
cutting in front of the line in
a very rude way.
Okay all right yeah.
So we went out to the audience
we took would we were on
questions and any other
questions to this and we did
have a due pass motion at the
moment.
Is there any opposition to the
do best with.
I see none you have a do pass.
Extending your very.
Okay great Senate bill two oh
four.
Leave of her meal
your presented us photo I am
sorry.
County Hospital gross receipts.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee I presenting
this bill on behalf of Senator
Gonzales and if he's listening
and I hope he's feeling better.
So this request is for one half
cent for gross receipts tax G.
R. T. this particular G. R. T.
was first approved in nineteen
ninety one requiring a local
referendum by the voters now
this G. R. T. was approved in
increments of ten years expiring
and twenty or two thousand one
the first ten years the G. R. T.
was used to build Holy Cross
hospital inTaos after ten years
and at that time the nasco
Cuesta and tell schools we're
having problems passing a
successful bond issue for their
districts so G. R. T. were used
for those educational purposes
since two thousand one it has
been an active twice for a
period of twenty years bonds
continue to assist at the asco
tau schools charter schools and
the university of New Mexico
PTA's since then these entities
to pass successful bond issues
on their own the last year T.
expired in December of twenty
twenty two.
What we're requesting of this
bill is authorization to be
enacted for Holy Cross hospital
and the university of New Mexico
nursing program the use of the
G. R. T. for Holy Cross hospital
and you an empty houses twenty
five percent as we had it before
for the nursing program it is a
local opt in in every ten years
the voters inTaos have to
approve it it can only be used
strictly for capital outlay
improvements and cannot be used
for operational cost benefits or
salaries Holy Cross hospital is
in dire need of capital
improvements in order to be able
to serve the patients of this
area joining me this morning is
our expert witness Mr down weeks
if he has a few comments.
Thank you Mr chairman
pleasure to be here this
morning.
this is back to the future bill
we're in an act this legislation
in nineteen ninety one and it's
been an of supported by the the
voters in Dallas County since
that point time of
Representative Gonzalez change
it to help the schools after the
bonds were retired
after the ten year period
starting in nineteen ninety one
now they want to do it back to
the hospital from the schools
it's a it's a of thing that will
be required to be supported by
referendum the people inTaos the
hospital now is almost thirty
years old as an alternative some
improvements and so the the
legislature needs to authorize
this for.
And then the next month at the
local level for the next ten
years so with the.
Thank you okay great all right
at this time will grow in the US
before Mr Chairman we're ready
to hear from supporters are
those who oppose the bill okay
great all right that this time
we go out to the audience
anybody here in support of
Senate bill tool I.
But generally to come up here in
the.
Speaking to the Mike.
Good morning The
Chair Mister chair members of
the committee I'm Bob up role
metal I am a vice chairman of
the house county commission in
Senator had a meal and I miss
Weekes give very good summary of
the legislation I'd like to add
a little bit more of historical
of a perspective on it of that
so I I am here to speak in
support of of Senate bill two
zero five and also Holy Cross
hospital Holy Cross hospital a
has been appropriations since
nineteen thirty six and thirty
years ago it became a county
owned hospital and at that time
the county went into a new
agreement with the house health
systems for operations of of the
hospital and so currently the
hospital not only services the
health needs of the community
but it's also an economic driver
it the employees about five
hundred people it has a thirty
million dollar workforce a
budget and the eighty million
dollar budget the over all and
so on as you probably know on
rural hospitals are having a
difficult time
stay in open and operating and
so with the same is the case
with the Holy Cross hospital it
faces the increasing costs for
employee salaries and increasing
costs to maintain the hospital
and so this legislation does not
request any money from the state
the it is a it is a piece
legislation that gives the
community an opportunity to help
itself you still have to go to
the voters in November to put
the G. R. T. in place and so
it's been a place before and I'm
I'm very much in support of it
then so respectfully request
that would ask you for your
support for this legislation
thank you.
Can you.
The body on the.
Okay all right anybody in
opposition.
Anybody zoom opposition.
Okay R. O. go to committee and
we have.
Any questions.
Of the legislation.
Senator Wirth.
So just to be clear it's it's a
local options the voters will
get the proven Mister chair I
know the house as one of the
highest G. R. T. range but I
just as I was sitting here
thinking about this to the
extent we're going to pass a tax
bill this session that lowers
the statewide G. R. T.
which I'm hoping we will do that
then at least will lower the
capacity which gives the voters
here chance to pull it back up
to do this and potentially keep
the right pretty close to where
it is so I just want to point
that out because otherwise Mr
what's what is the tech what is
the G. R. T. right right now
Taos County because like it's
over not is a nine percent.
Mr chairman I would defer to our
expert witness if you refer to
the FY are up the tax rate
varies according to the local
jurisdiction at it appears that
the highest one may be.
And Taos ski valley and the law
it does run tools water and
Cuesta it's it hovering around
and in red rivers nine point one
seven fund.
So they're pretty high but I
will tell you that Intel's
we've looked at some of the
analysis of what who pays the
gross receipts secretary a lot
of it is exported to the tourism
sector and so the the residents
are of course paying this higher
rate but a lot of the six board
I would I would say probably
twenty five to thirty percent of
the local gross receipts tax is
paid by tourists and other
visitors to to that area so
I think you know even though
it's a regressive tax a lot of
it's exported self this and this
is very important for the local
situation relative to the
hospital will issue bonds that
will be paid off over a ten year
period so it is very important
to for them to be able to
improve their high I Mr chairman
it's a county that the county
the counter one thank.
So again I think that the key
and this is this is a perfect
example of something I'm gonna
support I think it is again the
voters need to make the decision
but.
We've got our G. R. T. at a
point where because we've more
the base the right is this high
and the problem is it it's just
this is an incredibly regressive
tax and so you're right maybe
fit twenty five percent in
certain parts of the county get
but everyone else every single
thing their purchasing ten
percent is going for G. R. T. in
less it's exempted so that's why
I think it's good that we're.
I'm just making these points to
put it in the context of what
we're doing this session which
is trying to lower the G. R. T.
and for local governments
especially for many counties
have other options because they
do have they got some some
property tax and the cities on
the other hand I mean rely so
heavily on the G. R. T. that
basically when we lower it it
gives them a little flexibility
and you know what I'm not going
to one of things we had talked
last session was was have a
requirement that would prevent
the local governments from
reimposing the G. R. T. which we
didn't do and I work I don't
think we're going to do that the
session because I really think
the local governments this is a
perfect example you know we're
going to lower it so that's
going to give a little more
flexibility for you know.
Of the body to assume the county
commission to look at this and
make the decision of whether to
send it out to the voters and at
the end of the day you know
we're not gonna see a massive
increase which we would if we
had if we don't take action so
it's just good to think about it
in the total context and and I
appreciate you know bring in the
bill and certainly understand
you know that this is a target
for the hospital which is a good
thing thank you Mr Senator.
Thank you Mr chair to questions
the hospital is county owned who
manages the hospital today
today have somebody come in and
do that actual management Mr
chairman and Senator Kernan they
have a management company that.
Hospital Mr chair what with that
company do.
In one I I can't remember
exactly what company it is but
they've done a pretty good job
up there it's not one of these
fly by night kind of groups that
comes in and exploits everything
there they've been and they've
that the management contract for
twenty years so Mister chairman
Senator they a nonprofit company
or that for profit are they a
corporation is much is much
which is chairman and senator
there no proper corporation so
they are Corporation all right
which you know we have to be
careful I going forward health
what we do at this Legislature
affects affects corporations may
not come out ahead at the end of
the day up with regard to the
schools and we said that at one
point they took that money and
that you they shifted some of
that money to the local school
district just inTaos.
Mr chairman the yes just okay
well it County for those school
districts in that county.
Okay and so now Mister chairman
Senator that many will just be
for the use the hospital and and
the voters again I understand
that when when they have that
there's a portion of the screen
Mr chairman and senator there's
a portion of this will go to the
nursing program the UNM runs in
their forecasts so that's kind
of the center just to kind of
situation the hospital's not
coming in need the entire
instrument and Senator Gonzales
was very adamant about putting
some of the money into the local
branch college of nursing
program which is very important
thank you Mr chairman you know
County on hospitals are it is
difficult for them and and our
particular area we have a
special hospital district and
they tax themselves and we all
benefit from that hospital and
so very important they have the
resources so slow so people can
can take that vote make that
decision and schools are aware
that that's going to have an
impact on the that's all I have
thank you thank you.
I don't have any other questions
of committee so would you pass
motion for the past for your
Senator Wirth thank you second
by Senator Hamblen.
Any opposition to the to pass
motion.
Okay so clerk to call the roll.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Griggs.
Senator how to meal yes.
Senator Kernan yes.
Senator Lopez.
Senator Thomas yes.
Senator Wirth yes Senator
Hamblen yes Senator Shendo yes I
have six.
For it to pass the opposition.
To an office okay six two impact
thank you Mr chairman thank you
of moving on to the Senate bill
four oh three.
Hemphill.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee.
During the this senator is that
what you're.
So we have Senate bill four
three this morning and it
creates a personal income tax
credit and corporate income tax
credit for hotel renovations
that twenty percent thirty
percent of qualifying costs
qualifying costs are limited to
the renovation of actual hotel
rooms and credits are not
available for renovations of
other common areas or hotel
facilities the credit would be
administered by both their
tourism department and TRD the
total amount of allowable
credits would be certified each
year and capped at thirty
million against pit and thirty
million against C. I. T. and the
credit will help hotel owners
most of which are owned by and
operated by local business
groups improve the quality of
the product they offer to the
public without incurring too
much debt and it'll also help
facilitate continued growth in
an industry that's the second
largest employer in revenue
generator for the state of New
Mexico I have with me my expert
witnesses all let them introduce
themselves go ahead.
Good morning chairman members of
the committee my name is Kathy
home all I'm the CEO for the New
Mexico hospitality association
and joining me today I have
image media from premier
hospitality Yogesh Kumar from
hospitality management services
Michael shepherd from paramount
lodging advisors W. secretary
internet be hell of the tourism
department and Jason Weaks the
lobbyist for New Mexico
hospitality I'm just going to do
a quick intro and then I'm gonna
vote
the opportunity for them to
share a little bit about the
importance of this bill to their
businesses across the state
As a senator mentioned the
hospitality and tourism industry
is a driving force in New
Mexico's economy we're the
second largest employment sector
for the second largest revenue
secretary for the state we
average six point six billion
dollars in visitor spending
inject millions of dollars in
tax revenue across the state and
are currently generating more
than eighty thousand jobs in
every county in New Mexico and
helping fund quality of life
announcements for communities
across the state one of the
things we want to address today
is that a lot of people tend to
think of hotels as that brand
name on the on the banner in
front of the hotel they think of
it is a big business but the
fact is over fifty percent of
hotels in New Mexico are owned
and operated by local people who
invest and are invested in their
communities and the people that
work for them and the people
that live in those communities
and so we are looking for
creative way to help them
overcome the setbacks that they
faced in recent years and fully
rebuild their businesses and
importantly rebuild their work
force the industry has been
recovering well we've sent out
some statistics yesterday to
talk show you what the what the
national and New Mexico numbers
are but they're still some
recovery that needs to be done
that needs to be achieved hotel
ownerships and some of the small
businesses face dramatic
increases like other businesses
and the cost of goods wages and
general business expenses and
they're also dealing with
repaying the funds they borrow
during the downturn to keep
their properties a float a lot
of them also face franchise
requirements for regular
remodels and renovations and
that debt burden coupled with
the debt that they're already
dealing with places severe and
strict restrictions on their
ability to improve and renovate
their properties and to rebuild
their workforce this hotel
renovation tax credit will
provide a much needed option for
them to leverage access to
capital.
And allow them to renovate and
re invest in their community and
their businesses so we hope that
you agree with us that creating
this hotel for renovation tax
credit conserve Senator purposes
all bids beneficial to the
tourism industry and the economy
as a whole and at this point I
would like to turn it over to
our lobbyist Jason Weaks are you
going to go I'm just going to
public comment okay perfect then
I will turn it over to Mr Vegas
to share a little bit about his
perspective Mr chairman members
of the committee.
Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you so much for
letting us speak to you on this
my name is Umesh badia I'm based
in Albuquerque I grew up in
Hobbs our hotel business started
hops we own two properties and
hops to in Clovis two in Los
crucis one in Albuquerque.
The the points that the.
We were there that were just
made let me give you some
numbers attached to that over
the pandemic each property that
we have averaged six hundred
thousand dollars in debt we've
accumulated.
The last remodel that we
finished I just finished this
last year in Clovis the expected
budget was one point two million
the total cost came in at two
million dollars due to the
expenses of the the products
being more expensive the
shipping and and then labor.
About two million dollars eight
hundred thousand dollars of it
was spent in New Mexico for
subcontractors and purchasing.
So this credit would help me
specifically and and many other
hotels in this industry in the
state.
At advance and increase the the.
Amount as well as the time frame
in getting our renovations done
it once we do the renovations
our expectations are to make
higher revenues which in result
will result in higher taxes for
the city and the state.
Thank you.
Members of.
Then as we got from our.
We have been in the industry.
And the film tells.
Dr Rogers of Health.
that sorry we we grew up I grew
up in the hospitality industry
and we being in Gallup since two
thousand one and maybe invest a
lot of money and not communities
we.
During the pandemic like a mesh
said we did.
Suffer a lot of losses and this
tax credit not only helps the
businesses that we have but it
also helps the business ends
we've grown business has been
extremely well these last few
years after the pandemic but a
lot of businesses did not make
it out as well and so I believe
in passing this bill would
improve their ability to
renovate and to increase their
occupants is and these are these
people other smaller economy
brands the independent hotels
that need this help right now I
see our franchise locations do
well
due to the increased advertising
dollars that we have but I
really do believe that this
would be at impactful not only
is state taxes employment
we have a better.
Environment for the travel
travelers so.
I I really believe this will be
a thing and it's very
progressive it's really not seen
elsewhere in the country thank
you.
We stand for Christ questions Mr
chairman.
For several of the.
Your support of Senate bill four
oh three yes in the.
You guys manage.
The second get.
Mr chair members of the
committee I'm Jim Trier
secretary of the tourism
department I stand here in
support of this particular
legislation while I know this is
something that will support a
lot of the businesses that did
it have
Some economic injury during the
pandemic I also see this as an
opportunity for growth the
tourism industry here in New
Mexico has realized at thirty
percent growth over the last ten
years and we now represent a
third of the GDP of of oil and
gas so if you think about
diversifying our economy and
really supporting this industry
to be able to keep up with the
growth that we're realizing this
tax credit is going to be
instrumental in that future for
us to realize that thank you.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee Jason Weaks
register of this for Mexico
hospitality association and
Albuquerque Hispanic chamber of
commerce travel and tourism is
becoming a kind of cornerstone
in our efforts to diversify our
economy it is the second largest
as you've heard industry in the
state in terms of employment and
revenue generation for state tax
dollars the industry was hit
hard during code but this isn't
talking about COVID recovery
this is a talking about looking
forward to giving the industry
to really the industry the
ability to really get a foothold
in New Mexico and further expand
especially in rural areas this
credit will particularly benefit
rule tells because it'll allow
them to improve the quality of
the product that they offer
there by competing both with
hotels in urban areas and with
hotels in other states this is
really important tax credit to
help but the travel and tourism
industry improve the quality of
their product because of the New
York thank you good morning
because because we had the
reality is they take on the they
took on a lot of debt service
during COVID and prior to
comment in this will help them
offset that will still improving
that product so for those
reasons we stand in full support
thank you.
Okay just before you start JD we
will be trying to if you can try
to keep your comment a few
minutes and and we'll go ahead
in time okay good for you it is
German Ms the committee JD
Bullington with greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
supporting this legislation
tourism a key is a key driver of
New Mexicos economy and there's
no question that an improved
hotel landscape will contribute
to more trips to our state by
visitors elsewhere even with
this credit hotel renovations
are costly but one last point
this is not a bill that would
favor urban over rural areas in
fact many of our mid size in
rural communities have tourism
based local economies and they
would benefit greatly from
having transformed hotel
properties thank you.
Good morning Mr chair.
Twenty Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Allison
Smith of the registered lobbyist
for The New Mexico restaurant
association for the reasons
previously stated The New Mexico
restaurant association stands in
support of our restaurant are
sorry our hotel members and
partners and support this
initiative thank you.
When Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Michael
shepherd I'm gonna associate
with paramount lodging advisors
based in Albuquerque.
A couple of points I want to
make real quickly had given that
the hotel industry employs
almost thirteen percent of the
state's workforce the fact that
this bill encourages re
investment in hotel assets that
only makes sense but in
encouraging is that it's an
allocation of funds and
resources that will benefit New
Mexico and its residents and
workers the unemployment
standpoint tourism is a vital
industry in our state with
regards to the tax revenues
generated for state through
gross receipts tax lawyers tax
and property taxes just before
three not only knowledges that
proposes a mechanism that has
the potential to expand it.
It's important to the New Mexico
legislature show support for the
hospitality industry in this
bill does that considering the
capital markets and hospitality
financing.
Rising interest rates are and
will continue to significantly
hamper hotel investment Senate
bill four three helps offset
those costs and finally the New
Mexico hospitality industry
needs to remain competitive with
our neighboring states states
like Arizona Colorado and Texas
are each doing their best to
convince customers to select
their hospitality offerings over
New Mexico Senate bill four
three provides a helping hand
for those that are trying to
compete with these other
locations and a financial
incentive to get the quality of
the hotels they own to match the
unrivaled culture and history of
New Mexico.
Thank you.
Okay.
All right.
So that.
The the it will be in operation
of of Senate bill for three.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator for bringing this
forward I'm thinking of when
you're talking about our small
business our small locally owned
hotels I think about the Smokey
bear motel and RV park in capita
in New Mexico I'm thinking about
the cabins and really does so
that I used to go to as a kid
and as a young person and I'm
I'm with couple questions but
also just really support of of
this is this just to clarify
this doesn't cover Airbnb.
Correct okay
when I mentioned the the the
cabins in Ruidoso that's an
establishment but they've got
the rooms in essence our
individual cabins does that
cover that.
Senator Hamblen chairman members
of the committee as far as I
know as long as it is considered
a traditional lodging
establishment with there's a
minimum requirement there I
believe it's fifteen rooms a
minimum of fifteen rooms to
qualify okay and so it you know
I appreciate this legislation
because I think of these places
that are all over our state they
don't have access to big
advertising budgets if something
catastrophic happens like a
flood in a room.
that is repairing drywall
replacing carpet
who knows in terms of plumbing
as an example and
you know those are all at the
event that can actually like
like reduce that that revenue
for those for those owners and
and therefore the communities
but I also think about the small
hotels that are owned by folks
that really could use a facelift
because that's how they need to
compete against the chains you
know usually when people go to
small parts they're trying to
get the local flavor and if you
have of the establishment that's
not necessarily living up to its
potential and reflecting the
local flavor it gets very
difficult for them to to compete
so I I appreciate that and
appreciate you bringing that
forward and that's all I have
Mister chair thank you very.
Thank you Mr chair Senator yeah
I think this is the this is a
good idea I'm I want to be clear
though ideas as we as we look at
it
Senator Hamblen brought up
certain types of lodging
establishments would this not
also apply to a a day Jan the
holiday and or or any of those
as well or they restricted from
accessing this or or is it
available to them as well.
Senator Griggs chairman members
of the committee it is available
to those midrange franchised
hotels.
Most of those are owned I local
business operators and are are
held as a franchise agreement so
they would be eligible chair
Mister chair and and senator
that's that's what the way it
appeared to me show that and
then
we've we've got it set up under
the department of tourism.
And.
Are they are they the best the
quip Department to to utilize
their Senate is not that young
critical of them at all issues
that you're the economic
development department does lots
of different things it may have
and they may be better equipped
to to deal with something like
this in the department tourism
so I was wondering maybe if the
secretary could could talk a
little bit about how the she
this is been implemented from
their from their perspective.
Thank you Mr chair members the
committee thank you senator for
that question what what this
bill would also allow us to do
is to set up and have some FTEs
that would be able to administer
and and manage this credit I
think it's actually very
appropriate that is in the
tourism department because this
is an industry that we focus on
we have a deep understanding of
our constituency and economic
development is not.
And an agency chairman and
senator and secretary at I.
It's just the you know it's the
implementation of some of the
stuff which seems like it it's
not within your scope exactly
but if you feel like you can can
readily adjust and and do that
and you know I'm not gonna be
opposed to that Mr chair members
of the committee and senator I'm
very fortunate that my deputy
cabinet secretary actually stood
up some of the programs that EDD
including Lita Angie tip of in
so she is going to be
instrumental in bringing this
forward and and thank you Mr
chair and chair sectors at
Lansing.
Mr chair members of the
committee as senator while
Lansing is phenomenal my deputy
cabinet secretaries Antoinette I
feel better now.
Of those thank you for sharing
thank you.
For thank you Mr chairman
Senator when you think about the
locally owned hotels many of
those are franchise in it's my
understanding that those hotels
because their franchise have
certain requirements that they
have to fill in order to remain
part of that franchise and when
they are told by holiday in days
into whoever it's time for you
to do a renovation you don't
have a choice if you want to
keep your franchise and those
are very expensive would you Mr
chair and senator would you
comment on if that is the case
at some point that that that is
very important that you're
required to do.
Thank you senator Kernan members
of the committee chairman we are
required to have regular updates
to our our facilities what we're
trying to do is be proactive and
be more competitive so most of
the times we will have a twenty
four to thirty six months to
complete or begin renovations
this credit will allow us to
implement those
Cough almost immediately I think
Mr chairman and senator that
this is this is a good way to
make sure that those hotels can
maintain that quality and
continue to be part of that
franchise which I think does
attract many people.
when they're looking for for
lodging in New Mexico thank you
that's all I have.
All.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Senator for being is bill for.
So I thought.
We've kind of made a decision to
cut back on the.
Tax credit to get a billion
dollars every year we give out
and taxpayers should have to
answer that.
so what's so special about this
industry that they need a break
we keep we design of other
industries I want to come
forward and get the same break
what white white this industry
what this says start a parade of
industry coming forward looking
for the same thing yeah.
Senator members of the committee
chair madam though
this is a very unique and
special industry and it is an
industry that was specifically
impacted by the pandemic and had
to deal with long term occupancy
limitations that a lot of other
industries I didn't have to
didn't have to face and so we
are sort of behind the starting
block as a major industry and a
major economic force in the
state and we're just looking for
ways to help the industry do
that catch up and get back to a
level playing field to be able
to move forward and continue to
contribute to the economy.
Thank you for that answer.
Mr chair so what.
But the obstacles that they face
that other industries didn't.
And Mr chairman and senator all
have that W. secretary Vigil.
Add a few more comments thank
you said.
Thank you good morning Mr chair
members of the committee Senator
Tallman.
I I do understand that this is a
unique
industry this being focused on
with regard to this tax credit
this is a high performing
revenue generating industry that
was not only the hardest hit
during the pandemic but it has
also been the first to recover
the in addition to that during
that time as you've heard from
our experts that have testified
before you is that access to
capital has changed there is
there are number of
Provisions in the credit market
and the credit criteria that is
running from federal programs
down to local banking programs
that have changed the the credit
criteria for these businesses to
access capital when there is an
opportunity to use an incentive
such as a tax credit to offset
those development costs to
potentially re invest that
savings of that tax credit back
into the property so that's less
capital that they have to up
staff or attract
is definitely setting our
businesses up for success we do
know that in evaluating moody's
and in looking at new markets
tax credit and other financial
programs that are available to
this business and any under
other business in particular
there are not a lot of landing
opportunities within public
private opportunities to support
this industry number one but
number two a lot of that has to
occur in the secondary market
and really high interest rates
or a matter of garnering capital
from a variety of investors just
to make the project work and so
I think that by putting and the
tax credit specifically for this
industry is supporting the
industry for a temporary period
of time because this does have a
sense that
so that it has an opportunity to
renew add new product to the to
the to the state new assets and
potentially attract new capital
into the state because as we
know from an economy standpoint
capital goes for capitals wanted
and I think that if we can find
a way for these businesses to
serve to attract that capital
into New Mexico it's a benefit
for us as as a whole.
Okay thank you for that to
happen.
Thank you for the answer Mr
chair.
this is just another reason why
we should diversify you know
tourism is she's very volatile.
And we should be.
Maybe in the.
Offering tax credits to
industries and businesses that
are not so so of all to that's
all I have Mister chair thank
you for this thank you Mr
chairman and mine is just to let
you know that I support this
bill sponsor site reached out to
several of the small locally
owned hotels and trauma the
northern Rio Arriba County our
major driver for our economic
economic driving forces that
told second time I've been told
tech and press railroads and so
that's what we have the majority
of people come into Rio Arriba
county on that board and which
is summer and fall and so in
those winter months we don't see
many people coming by their
having to drag or they're having
to provokes a this tax credit
will help us and ensuring they
can renovate our our small mom
and pop at hotels and so on
behalf of those Chama hotel
owners they wanted me to thank
the sponsor for this bill and
thank you for that no further
comments or questions Mr chair.
Representative.
Thank you Mr chairman
As mentioned that there's a
sense of on this how many years.
Mr chair members of the
committee Senator Brandt I
believe it's ten years ten
years.
and you know I appreciate that
your industry was affected
I wish you could Senators
affected by comment wasn't
affected by COVID it was
factored by governor's order.
so we can disagree about whether
that orders are gonna place with
the orders what affected your
business not comment a lot of
states that have that effect
So I think that the.
What will roll this I'm sure Mr
chairman.
And look at is part of our tax
package possibly but yes you
know.
It's a great way to diversify we
already paid film to be here
and we give them tax credits you
know just for coming to the
state you are always been in the
state.
and it's it's good way to maybe
get some of those updated I know
the hotel six and motel six down
Alamogordo that really needs
some renovating so
all never stay there again but.
Thank you.
That's
already thank you Mr chairman
thank you us and for Brett.
The what is well we're not going
to take action on this this is
for work expect that we'll take
a look at any other questions
for me to committee members.
If no one of the one of thank
you will bring it thank you for
your industry and so forth so
thank you for chairman thank you
members of the committee.
I'm going to.
Percent I'm gonna have of he's
got a.
I want.
I guess we're not sure okay.
All right senator Munoz in in
the.
The.
Mr chairman I think we're gonna
not do bill Senate bill three
twenty three twenty at a the
response and Astor road three
twenty.
And so we would do a three
eighty two and then we'll get
back to a four forty four after
thank you Mr chairman members
the committee three eighty two
creates a fun for biosciences
about eight or nine years ago we
created the bioscience industry
New Mexico I did in the
Representative learn Jaga and so
as a native biosciences one of
the most robust economies in the
state
Still.
Shuffling the deck that's fine.
One one little guy for one more
little guy.
You got you got to you got two
offensive linemen.
The.
Awesome.
Go ahead they give free haircuts
today at the barber.
I need to get over there there
in my office three twenty five
from twelve to twelve thirty.
Okay I'll get back to this the
biosciences when it was created
was to drive an economy in in
bioeconomy
Adrian who everybody knows
worked in my office worked very
hard to create that file
sciences and senator Wirth
remembers that but it's it's
driving in New Mexico and what
we need to do is co invest with
companies that need investments
so we can create this bioeconomy
I'm gonna be able to.
My expert witness for secretary
okay thank you.
Billions of.
Great thank you.
Federal but thank you very much
for this opportunity to address
the committee.
My name is Dale Beckerman
architect planner in
Albuquerque.
Principal photographer seventeen
but today I'm here as chair of
the New Mexico bioscience
Authority.
And I think this is one of those
initiatives that the state of
New Mexico the Senate and
senator Munoz vision was created
in twenty seventeen really.
Set up the stage.
Four how ARE state could get in
the game relative to bio
sciences and economic
development opportunity that
economic development opportunity
was further.
Recognized in the states
economic development strategy
which will.
Appeared in twenty twenty one by
the state's economic development
department for the biosciences
was recognized as one of those
cluster industries that could
really help diversify our
state's economy.
In this bill further
would enhance and accelerate the
diversification of our economy
what's really great about this
bill is for every dollar that
the state puts in we provide
private equity
around the United States that is
willing to come to our state and
to invest two dollars so we take
fifty dollars we push it to a
hundred dollars million dollars
that's a hundred fifty dollars
total and.
That could be made in our state
so thank you very much for this
opportunity and I'm gonna turn
it over to our one of our board
members Paul lore.
Good morning Mr chair and
centers my name's Paul or I am
the president CEO of mercury bio
which is a biotech company that
is developing a novel drug
delivery system for bioactive
molecules like RNA and cancer
therapy small molecules I've
been an entrepreneur in the
state for thirty years I started
several other companies
including Eldorado bio fuels and
I just want to give you a quick
idea of what bio science is all
about there is the medical
aspect but there's also solution
for climate change using algae
to suit a sequester carbon
dioxide and we did a pilot
project in two thousand and ten
and John New Mexico to
demonstrate that we could do
this using produced water from
oil and gas production so we're
talking about bio remediation of
the atmosphere we did a
technology at economic analysis
of what it would take to
sequester all of the carbon
emissions emitted in the world
in one year with taken out to
pond the size of Texas which
some people would object to but
at any rate it's doesn't have to
be in one place and the fact
that we have these resources in
the state flat land we have
produced water we have the salt
water reservoir the size of the
Great Lakes we can actually do
the carbon remediation here and
produce jobs in the oil field
that are going to be displaced
if we curtail oil and gas
production so there's many many
uses and when we talk about and
and also the national labs have
been involved in these LG
suppression for Carmen
suppression strategy so we have
intellectual property here we
have natural resources here we
can create wealth that the state
can participate in by investing
in these companies that are
being spun out of the national
labs and universities by people
like myself that are passionate
about to solutions that provide
solutions to world problems.
With that I'll turn it over to
the show.
Good morning Mr chairman
committee members I want to
explain just a bit about how the
bill works what it does is it
makes it a man's the bioscience
Development Act which is been on
the books since twenty seventeen
that act created the bioscience
development fund so the fund's
been in place what this bill
does is it puts money into the
fund and basically what it does
is it authorizes the bioscience
Authority to co invest so
they're going to partner with
qualified investors such as the
New Mexico angels we do have to
Tolchin from the angels on the
soon so he can talk to that
point but investors like equity
funds so the bioscience
Authority partners with this
private money the private money
puts in two dollars for every
one dollar that the bioscience
Authority puts in and then they
choose a New Mexico startup
company up bioscience company to
co invest in so what that means
for the company like we've got
at other bioscience companies
lined up to talk to you today
but what it means for the
company is that if they went out
and raised two hundred thousand
dollars if the state co invests
the end up with three hundred
thousand dollars brought it to
the company so it's a real boom
for these companies their court
it's it's hard the company that
I work for and I didn't
introduce myself I don't think
Michelle Lujan I work for Google
labs in Los Alamos and we're
we're one of these bioscience
start ups what we work on is
food security helping plants
fight off viruses kind of like
how probiotics help you're gonna
get a little stronger so our our
us back to bio sciences food
security trying to get the
plastic on the ground on your
table so you can eat them
without the interference of
viruses in between with this
this proposal what we would like
to do is ask for appropriation
from the general fund fifty
million dollars to one time
appropriation that would go into
this co investment fund and
what's really cool is that when
the bioscience Authority co
invest in these companies it
gets equity to get shares in the
company so get something back
for its investment when the
company is successful myself.
That means the state gets money
to put back in that bioscience
development fund so it's an
evergreen fund it's pretty cool
we get it set up once in this
help us for years and years down
the road the the bill also makes
this fund non reverting so that
the money that goes in the fund
can stay in the fund even at the
close of the fiscal year.
Okay thank.
Thank you.
For the audience okay anybody
here in support of Senate bill
three eighty two.
Gentleman to just one
recognizing same thing I'll give
me a minute.
Thank you Angelo C. with the
universal express for health
sciences center and I decided to
thirty full support of this
thank you.
Greg burns the executive
director of an and bio on the
bioscience Authority board and
probably more importantly for
fifteen to twenty years I let
the economic development
initiatives for greater
Philadelphia including the
biosciences also consulted for
Maryland Delaware and New Jersey
the one thing that all of them
have and why they're successful
is they had a dedicated source
of money without money we're
going to stay twenty years
behind Arizona Utah Colorado
this is our one chance to really
make a forward step really get
behind this industry which
Michelle has made a target
industry thank you.
Hold the button down twenty
talking.
Morning Mr chairman members
members of the committee my name
is TJ trio I'm a registered
lobbyist for the biotechnology
innovation organization were the
largest trade organization and
in the country as well actually
in the world dealing with
biotech issues New Mexico came
across very brief Mexico's
leader we fully support to
suffer thank you thank you.
Good morning Mr
Mr chairman and committee my
name is other things.
My name is John to work and the
president and CEO of done a pile
we were one of the first
recipients of this program and
we receive matching funds from
the New Mexico bioscience
Authority as well as the New
Mexico angels on this funds were
very very important for us to
help the director Google
milestones want to retain
critical person that we still
have on the company as well as
to build inventory and new
instruments right now this is a
critical stage for our company
and all companies go through
what's known as crossing the
chasm it's an important aspect
we are trying to get customers
and you're trying to build the
company and this money was
critical for us to keep going
and moving forward and we got
our first commercial placement
recently so thank you
congratulations.
Cosponsored Senator Hickey.
Very briefly.
No one of the things that was
mentioned that's of critical Mr
chairman and colleagues is that
the companies have to stay in
New Mexico for five years it
creates New Mexico well paying
jobs and that is just the key to
our future thank you thank you
for.
Okay with that the.
Okay go ahead.
Well whoever's out there yeah
one minute each yes.
hi there Tolchin New Mexico
angels one minute.
Yes.
Thank you to talk to New Mexico
in present New Mexico angels and
also the managing partner of the
New Mexico vintage funds we're
the ones who worked with our
colleagues today as well as that
of bio as the first CFO of now
will we had to learn very very
hard the school of hard knocks
it out of raise capital here in
New Mexico to build local
companies in New Mexico and this
is an excellent opportunity and
not only that but it's got very
strong management and very solid
oversight so I feel very good as
a taxpayer and a citizen of New
Mexico to have of the funds of
our state he used to be
maximalist and have one dollar
to two dollars and many more
dollars down the road I thank
everyone for their time.
Thank you.
What.
This is stored Mr chairman and
members of the committee I am
Stewart Rhodes the founder of
the the bio Science Center in in
Albuquerque this is and each
debater for companies that are
pre revenue that are trying to
develop new technologies some of
the things going on in New
Mexico we have a company that
has developed a product that
will prevent airborne allergies
if you're allergic to juniper
cut what is a product that will
actually relieve your symptoms
we have a company that has
developed a new theory of what
causes Alzheimer's disease and a
mechanism to prevent that we
have a company that can diagnose
depression schizophrenia and
other mental conditions and and
identify them early so that they
can be treatable an early stage
we have a company that has a
technology that can get around
the any by resistance problem
that's becoming increasingly to
make it into our current
antibiotics not work we have a
company that's working in the
space that is is not at
addressing longevity and and it
disease aging.
Problem is most of these
companies are likely to fail and
they're going to fail because I
can't get enough money to
complete their research and
development activities the
national funding sources that
exist ten dot.
Skip New Mexico we're just not
attractive enough too small or
too hard to get every every
state that has had successful
programs and biotechnology have
started with a significant
funding effort from the from the
government and that's why we
need this bill to help us.
Make these companies survive
once they're big enough and
there's have some success the
rest of the world start paying
attention to us so I support
this bill.
Very actively and aggressively
thank you thank you.
Go ahead.
Good morning Mr chairman and
committee members my name is
Janet Pena I am This CSIRO
outside the doctor take a start
up company in Albuquerque we
specialize in producing regions
products tools that I've used to
researchers and scientists and
diagnostic laboratories we have
a client laboratories from the
US but we also have
international clients it is for
us to have access to funds that
would help us grow I speaking
not only as the CSR but also I
was really a recent graduate
from the university of New
Mexico the New Mexico four years
ago I graduated from there and
to find a place of employment
thank yous bye learn skills and
provide a good salary to sustain
my family was a gift if I want
to talk about by tech start ups
ask cars in New Mexico New
Mexico has check the oil has
topped it with gas it has it all
and we can turn on the engine
but in the process we forgot to
give them the world's and it's
very difficult if not impossible
for them to arrive to their
destination and this bill three
eighty two which I firmly
support is the tires that will
help the life science start ups
arrive in New Mexico it will
help us grow and it will help us
drive thank you thank you.
That.
All right okay anybody in
opposition.
I
non scene notable Committee.
Questions.
Madam.
just a quick call we'll go to
questions for sure for comments
all right thank you Mr chairman
and I appreciate this bill I
think it's important to note
that we have the finance chair
chair here supporting a fund
it's going to be non reverting
and there's a reason for that
and this is this unique
opportunity we have right now
with all this nonrecurring money
and what a fantastic way to.
Put it in a place where it can
get used to it doesn't get
pulled back and it's can take
risks and all the kind of
fiduciary conf confines of the
state investment council.
You know art overlaid on this I
don't think but that's my
question so fifty million
dollars we will that money goes
where how's it invested and you
know those questions of.
You know the types of
investments of the corpus of the
fund I get the distribution and
all that piece but when you've
got that much money sitting
there how's that handled.
Chairman members of the.
The fund goes to the treasury.
And private equity companies and
we will put out an RFP that will
go national in the R. P. will
have very stringent selection
criteria for the.
Mexico investment partners the.
relative to a them understanding
that any investment that is made
would be a co investment and an
investment of direct investment.
Business in New Mexico or a
business that is our bioscience
company that's looking to
relocate to New Mexico I think
that's very important because we
have
sent a lot of science in a lot
of scientists out of New Mexico
who have started companies that
we believe might want to come
back and bring there's.
So this is a really a two for
it's a it's a fun thing I can
provide seed money for New
Mexico companies there strings
attached to it it's very
rigorous realty to the
legislation as to what's
required of the qualifications
of the Mexico investment partner
in as a taxpayer I would have it
no other way and someone who's
lived here all my life and
believes that this is one of
those industries clusters that
could totally change our economy
and diversified I agree with
you.
And and such as Mr chair and so
the the corpus well well this co
investment partners being
located in figuring out how the
dollars are going to go out the
corpus sits in the treasury and
it just I soon generates a
standard interest rates or I I'm
just curious also about the
oversight on that piece of it
to it again the the co
investment partner with you
selected.
They would bring to the New
Mexico bioscience Authority
those opportunities for
investment co investment in the
bioscience Authority in
partnership with that co
investment private equity fund
would determine those
investments in the good thing
about our board it's it's all
volunteer is from throughout the
state of New Mexico and besides
me is architect chairman we have
experts that are in the field
biosciences that could help that
the company science.
Success so that's one of the
things that they could
legislation will provide those
guard rails for the St Onge very
due diligence or go into those
and and just finally Mr I would
note that the board the let else
on page three line nineteen of
the it says the board is
responsible for determination of
additional restrictions so you
guys obviously as we working
with the co investment partner
can put additional confines on
exactly how it's gonna work and
so I just again I appreciate
this and I know we're we're at
that moment to and there's a
number of different funds around
here and I think you and I have
a meeting at ten o'clock we need
to start thinking about things
and so I just I hope we can do
this this does make sense to me
and it's consistent with what
we've talked about is using this
non recurring money to really do
some exciting things and I just.
I can remember distinctly in
twenty seven house House Hamlin
I remember the night that we
pass this bill and there was a
moment when we kind of took a
risk and and we were in a very
different place and twenty
seventeen as a state financially
than we are today so super
exciting to see this here so
thank you Mr chair Senator of
Tolman you have a question or
comment.
Two quick questions okay.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator for bringing this
forward to so I just want to
confirm this is revolving loan
fund right.
Mister chairman Senator no no
it's not a revolving loan fund
it's a fund that will co invest
with other investors in
bioscience it's not a revolving
loan that you can keep coming
back and getting more money you
take one single company you co
invest with them with angel
investors plus our money and
then we see what comes out and
and what happens.
It says here it.
But the proceeds back into the
vial science development all
invest in another New Mexico
because because the investment
will come in the form of stock
for the I holding will become a
former stock the stock will
still be sold in the money
transfer back to the fund.
Okay so what is the second
question is.
With the five year minimum in
the.
Bill that was enacted in two
thousand seventeen.
It was a something new.
You this.
Mr chair you have a bad
experience because of that.
Know what prompted you to put in
the five year middle.
Right
guard rails.
Thank you for that one word
answers.
Succinct well I have we want to
protect the funding project
investment so how do you do that
you put guardrails of so so
doesn't run away and and
something happens in in.
Thank thank you Senator Hamblen
thank you Mr chairman thank you
sponsor for bringing this I do
appreciate the opportunity for
public private partnerships and
really being able to leverage
that money for folks
it's very similar to my age if I
bill that's sitting in finance
but my request is actually to
get your contact information
because I do have you know
access to Mister decker but
during the in from I would
really like to get more updates
on this as it helps with our
economic development so if you
would before you leave if I can
get that information because I'm
very excited about this very
eager to support this as we
continue to talk about we need
to walk the lock if we're going
to talk about diversifying our
economy we need to we need to
take those steps to do that so
thank you thank you Senator
Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman
Senator so you you talked about
the the state are the investment
fund would receive shares in the
company when we invest going
exactly is that gonna be part of
the negotiation with whoever
starting the company as to how
many shares how's that gonna
work.
You want to give an example.
Certainly so biotech injures in
general is it's something called
bio Bucks and essentially you
start out with an idea that idea
it takes quite a bit of capital
to bring to a patent then you
protect that with
other blocking patents and you
raise the valuation of the
company so it's a right now I
guess raised of one point five
million dollars for mercury
buyout at a ten million dollar
valuation we're gonna go out and
I we have several scientists
working on our product and as we
develop that and then get to
proof of concept with the
technology will be operating a
hundred twenty million dollars
and a hundred million dollar
valuation so it depends on the
the valuation and getting in on
the early stage you could go
within a year from a if if the
state for instance invested one
million dollars it could be ten
million dollars in the year and
going back to the five year
guardrail many companies are
required and then the state gets
that back as the a big
pharmaceutical company for
instance comes into by the
company so it depends on the
amount of investment page of the
company in terms of its
valuation thank you Mr chairman
and and so but.
It is it is it shares or is it
just a percentage of the company
that the state would out it
depends on the it depends on the
structure of the company so
we're a Delaware C. Corp so we
would issue stock if it's an LLC
then you will get a subscription
agreement for a share of the
company so four percent of the
company correct okay and then
based on your it if it was
twenty percent of the state
owned it sold for ten million to
a required for ten million the
state we get to the.
That's correct.
Then that would go back into
this fund to be reinvested so
the the hope is.
That this fund would continue to
grow and as we know with all
businesses there's also the
chance that someone will fail
that's right there's that that
serve high risk but that's why
we need state support because
we're always going out trying to
raise capital in the private
sector and it's very difficult
and I know talking to the
venture the venture capital in
the state they're very excited
about this if we can put it
together.
Okay.
R. Representative is so.
Yes better planet casino.
Thank you for thank you Senator
Lopez.
Thank you Mr chair I appreciate
this coming forward because
we've heard a lot about these
angel funds and such over the
years
I am very happy but I have one
question Mr chair.
And this is in reference to it
and it's in our our blue
analysis.
there's no money contained in
the fund at this point that's
being proposed to house bill
two.
But it says here that there is
money a fifty million dollars to
the Economic Development
Department for public private
partnerships so is this the same
thing that they're trying.
Information force or do I need
to be updated Mr chair Senator
that came out of the house.
That was used to be hydrogen
money and has reshuffled what
that's for I think the house has
a bill it's Representative small
state and Texans I really don't
know what that bill does but
that's where they're looking
that's where they put that fifty
million comes from the house.
Just I know we're still the last
two weeks a lot of stuff still
moves nothing solid yet but just
a question Mr chair just to see.
With the dollars are thank you
thank you for Senator Woods
question
on the.
In the area were if a company or
when you start ups get acquired
by a large company.
Of so you is there so I know
there's a little you have to be
here for five years or whatever
so if something happens within
that time before the five year
happens where the club out
provisions or or how much you
know if you can answer that to
what we.
What's the the rate is a penalty
is it just the money's in the.
Mr chair committee members right
now that is not in the bill
please know this is going to go
through rulemaking and so
something like that would be
addressed in the rulemaking okay
I appreciate that thank you.
So let's move the past that I
reckon any opposition to the do
pass motion.
You know you have the best thank
you.
What's the number ten two zero.
Okay Senator Moores.
Senate bill for forty eight.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
are to the committee.
Having served on this committee
in the past I hate G. R. T.
bills much you guys too.
but I also hate that we tax
gross receipts tax on health
care in New Mexico I I I just
find that it's unbelievable
after all these years so this
bill is not to repeal G. R. T.
on health care in New Mexico
it's only one of the many things
we tax and health care in New
Mexico copays and deductibles
you might be aware insurance
companies in New Mexico about
fifteen years small someone else
got a exemption from what they
a page or see stacks but
healthcare providers still pay
gross receipts tax on everything
except except for Medicare and
insurance companies that you
actually contract with so if you
pay a fee for service
all the other things in health
care you have to pay gross
receipts tax so this bill
actually only targets one of
those things that medical
providers pay gross receipts tax
your copay and a deductible
healthcare providers can not
pass on that G. R. T. to
patients are they have to suck
it up you know for instance in
Medicaid this is not deal with
the Medicaid issue on gross
receipts tax healthcare
providers will still have to pay
gross receipts tax on Medicaid
and obviously that we have lower
Medicaid rates reimbursement
rates plus you have to my
subtract the gross receipts tax
providers have we're not dealing
with that this is is just the
the
the deductibles and the co pays
that they have to pay tax on so
it doesn't change the Byzantine
that aspect of the G. R. T. on
all health care
this is one of really important
as we track conversations of
this committee before on the
health care is challenging to
say the least in New Mexico the
the third issue after low
reimbursement rates on Medicaid
minus G. R. T. and malpractice
issue the for the third issue
health care professionals in New
Mexico complain about as a bill
here is the gross receipts tax
they have to pay we're one of
only four states that actually
charges Health Care.
Services so I'll turn it over to
carry at this point this just
deals with one of the G. R. T.
issues and it's I really hope we
can have make the argument to
include this in the the G. R. T.
package that we're looking at
because I do think this is a
huge issue to see Center Thomas
point why is this important
purses all the other things or
talk about because it's how it's
literally health care that every
single one of us in the state
has to pay in one form or
another and it's so critical
that as part of the macro issues
we talked about with health care
New Mexico to Senator Thomas
question earlier with that I'll
turn it over to carry on with
the medical society to give you
a little bit more in depth I on
this thank you for care good
morning Mr chairman members the
committee Kerry robin printer
with the New Mexico Medical
Society I'm one of the things
that we wanted to talk to you
all about today is why it's so
hard to actually run a medical
business in the state of New
Mexico medical practices in New
Mexico are really the only
industry in which we cannot
control the price of our
services so every year we go
through negotiation process sees
as practitioners with insurance
companies and those insurance
companies establish the range in
which all of our services will
be reimbursed all of those rates
quite often are paid into
Medicare reimbursement or
Medicaid reimbursement so what
we gave you all this morning is
a chart that the American
medical association actually
publishes every year we're gonna
start on the one that says
Medicare updates compared to
inflation so the state of New
Mexico doesn't control chair
right that's something that's
established by the federal
government but this tells you
the story of the revenue that's
happening within our practices
particularly independent
practices so in the chart on you
see that the you know blue
orange red lines are Medicare
reimbursement rates that go to
hospitals and so.
Skilled nursing facilities the
purple line is CPI so the
increases that are happening
every year just based on growing
costs in the CPI the Green Line
is practice costs for
particularly independent
physicians so you'll see that
practice costs were going up and
then we kind of leveled out a
little bit and that's because
the federal government said
there are a sufficient sees that
independent practices can try to
find and those independent
practices around the country
really try to hard hone in on
those efficiencies and drive
down there practice costs but
the black line on the very
bottom is physician Medicare
reimbursement rates and how much
lower Medicare is reimbursing
physicians than their actual
practice costs that's the gap
between the Green Line and the
black line Medicaid is below the
black line Medicaid in our state
averages somewhere between
twenty and thirty percent the
low Medicare rates and that's
fifty percent of our patients so
in practices not only do we not
be able to control revenue on
the private insurance side we
also cannot control revenue on
the government pay side so what
we're trying to say is that our
industry is unique in terms of
how we're able to actually bring
revenue into practices but it's
also unique particularly when it
comes to gross receipts taxes on
physicians and medical practices
for all different kinds of
providers are prohibited due to
insurance contract language from
passing taxes on to patients so
that's because when you as an
enrollee and health insurance
plans signed contract you're
signing a contract that says my
cost is going to be my twenty
dollar copay to see the doctor
my two thousand dollar
deductible and all have some co
insurance that goes along with
that and in that contract that
you sign it says no.
No additional fees taxes or
charges can be tacked on to the
cost so when you go see your
physician and you pay your
twenty dollar copay under your
contract with your insurance
that's all you can pay that
means the physician actually has
to eat the gross receipts taxes
and pay those on your behalf to
the state rather than passing
them on to you like we do pretty
much every other business right
so what we tried to show you all
I'm really visual learner on the
backside of your sheet you'll
see a chart where we tried to
explain to you all what's
happening with your T. for
physicians and independent
practices so when you're patient
you make an appointment and you
go to your physician's office
you pay your copay G. R. T. is
levy on that copayment on and
that is actually paid by the
physician to the state the
physician then does your checkup
they charge the insurance
company for the cost of your
check up and the insurance
company pays the physician the
the first service right that was
reimbursed for the check up that
is deductible the G. R. T. on
that payment that we receive
from the insurance company is
deductible under current law but
quite often if you have not met
your deductible and if
especially if you're going in
for a procedure it's not just
your annual check up you have
not yet net your annual
deductible you still will pay or
have another charge that the
physician has to levy upon you
because the insurance company
only pays the fee for service
reimbursement rate and then they
say if there's anything that's
left over for the charge your co
insurance is only going to pick
up eighty percent of it right so
there's you get a bill afterward
from the from the physician when
you get that bill from the
physician and you pay it as a
payment as part of your
deductible that is also not G.
R. T. deducted so the physicians
are also.
Paying the G. R. T. on that part
they're paying G. R. T. on your
copay and then they're paying to
your T. on anything else that
you owe the physician after the
insurance company has done their
work so we're just trying to
target those G. R. T. payments
that are on the left hand side
of your graph we know that the
fiscal impact is about thirty
two million dollars to the state
we are very sensitive to local
government conversations that we
know are happening in this
committee we think that if
there's a way where we could
have a relief from the state
here T. still pay local
governments we're totally
willing to talk about that we
think it's very reasonable but
that's why we believe our G. R.
T. scenario is unique we can't
control our revenue and we are
prohibited from passing G. R. T.
on the patients due to this
contract provisions right.
Thank you.
Already okay any anything else
Senate for that audience no I
think she's on the securities
always does a very good job of
explaining the issue and I just
want to reiterate this is and
take it off G. R. T. off of all
the other issues at that
physicians have to pay and and
nurse practitioners and everyone
and health care have to pay it's
just that one we're trying to
release sympathetic to what we
are doing as a state in our
state policies and all the
issues with G. R. T. so we're
not asking for the big chop
we're asking for that part of it
thank you all right so at this
time we'll go to the audience to
anybody here in support of a
Senate bill for forty eight.
Thank yes please.
What about down.
Mr chair members of committee
Linda Siegel representing nurse
practitioners nurse midwives O.
T.'s chiropractors all of these
health care providers providers
which have this very same issue
of having to pay the gross
receipts tax themselves on the
deductibles on the co pays and
in in in time of incredible
shortage of every single kind of
provider this is an extra burden
as Kerry has said we don't even
get reimbursement for Medicaid
at the chair right on most
providers there is an increase
proposed in house bill two to
increase provide a range of some
providers depending on what they
are up to a hundred and ten or a
hundred and twenty percent of
Medicare.
But Medicare is pitiful so.
A little more of pitiful is
great we're very happy for that
but think about a P. T. O. T. a
patient coming in for we have
you know two or three times a
week and they have and they make
their payment and then the
provider has to pay the gross
receipts tax on it so this is
really important for our
underpaid providers thank you
thank you.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee Louco Tero I
represent the New Mexico
optometric association.
And
We look at this the same way
Linda and Carrie just laid it
out as well but I'm gonna give
you another angle as we're
trying to retain and attract
other optometrist to come into
the state they look at these
things they look at the tax
structure and this is something
that may not be very attractive
for them to come in and do it
practice so of we hope that you
can find a way to vote for this
bill thank you thank you.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Kim looking
at time representing a more
ambulance this morning
this would be a much needed
support for the ambulance both
public and private we haven't
gotten a Medicaid increase in
over twelve years and so with
the increased and cost of gas
and so forth this would be
extremely helpful thank you.
Okay anybody else you to to okay
go ahead the give me a minute
each.
Thank you this is barb American
Anne and I am the CEO of New
Mexico cancer center.
I want to talk about another
unfunded mandate that goes with
this when we have to figure out
what the deductible is for a
patient who generally doesn't
know we have to call the
insurance companies and I'm sure
many of you have tried to get
information from insurance
companies and it's not easy so
not only do we have to pay the
gross receipts tax on these
copays and deductibles I have to
pay several billing staff to try
to figure out whether or not the
patient has met their deductible
and what their deductible is so
by passing this bill you would
not only relieve us of this
gross receipts tax on these
segments of health care services
you would lower my overhead but
not making you spend lots of
time on the phone trying to
figure out with the insurance
companies whether or not a given
patient has met their deductible
thank you.
Thank you next.
What.
Okay all righty anybody here in
opposition.
Okay well committee Senator
Kernan.
Thank you very much and that Mr
chair and senator for bringing
this a couple of things people
may not realize as well New
Mexico I think one of the few
states to tax services one of
four and so that puts it at a
disadvantage right there what
we're trying to recruit
physicians and so that's why
this is so extremely critical
the other thing that I wonder if
people realise with regard to
Medicare reimbursement and how
all this is tied in is New
Mexico gets of low reimbursement
rate for Medicare then just
right across the state line in
Texas and every state has a
different rate assigned to it in
New Mexico is lower than than
Texas so if a physician in New
Mexico happens to see a patient
right across the state line
sometimes actually they do come
into New Mexico at least along
the border that physician can
only recoup the New Mexico right
so they're already at a
disadvantage with regard to the
chair right that always tidy and
but Dr Mechanix nailed it would
she said it's about reporting as
well if you can imagine a small
independent practice and that
book keeper accountant whoever's
responsible for that trying to
segregate and separate all the
different G. R. T. taxes that
that are being
put on to these bills I think
this probably could be after the
malpractice issue the second
most important issue that we
need to address the state so I
appreciate this and hopefully we
can get it get it on the matrix.
Thank you.
Nobody else Senator Griggs.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you senator I'm trying to to
look at the at the FIR and she
the responses from the municipal
league.
But I don't find them all on a
show I don't know what that
means is that if you have them
but I don't see on
Mr chairman and senator can you
guys.
The the league and and one of
the things that we know is going
to happen with there's we know
there's going to be impacts to
local government show the the
question is.
how do we she Municipal out
municipalities and I suppose
even counties well making up the
loss and what what we what we
think we need to do to do that.
Mr Senator the obviously every
time we mess with G. R. T. it
affects all local municipalities
also or where where it that's
what we were asking for just
this one part of it in the macro
issue is you know health care
access not only normal Gordo
this Albuquerque will take a big
hit of this because of my within
my district particularly in
Albuquerque in general there are
a lot of health care services so
we'll have a bigger impact where
you have that aggregate demand
in Los crucis in Albuquerque so
it is going to be here and we're
willing to work with them on
that and continue to move for
but we do think this is such a
big issue in addition to the
malpractice any other issues
that we're talking about that I
think the mother speak with
monopoly but they're not here
same deducted normally our
national chief about this
particular deduction but it is
definitely have an impact on
them also were very cost of
that.
Mr chairman and we all we all
know when we removed the tax on
certain services and we removed
the tax on food the impact that
had on municipalities and show
that.
Even though this may be the
right thing to do it's what how
do you how do you take care of
those those communities will
which depend on this revenue
source or a revenue source to
provide for senior centers to
provide for libraries to provide
for parks all the things that
they do.
That they count on the show the
the.
The issue when we talk about
taxes when we talk about gross
receipts taxes especially in we
remove portions of it.
We we affect more than just the
state show and I Mr chairman and
senator I appreciate the fact
that you're willing to to do
some things I just don't know
what those things might be and
I'm I'm hopeful.
That if this bill moves forward
there's a way to to determine
that the kids we.
You know we can't should appear
sometimes is the state and make
decisions that affect these
other guys.
Just kind of **** nilly
sometimes
because in there down there
they're down there where the
rubber meets the road trying to
help those people the you're
talking about and to provide for
the other services for for
people there's a there's of the
building Senator Kernan just got
to trying to balance out some of
the losses from destination
sourcing.
That that's important and it's
because we made the decision
appear.
It didn't didn't maybe M. you
know I understand the impact
that we're going to come from
others that you at least
initiations no there's going to
be an impact issues trying to
figure out how best to
To deal with that and in
communities are going to have to
have I thank you we're going to
continue we're going to continue
to reduce G. R. T. around we're
gonna have to figure out other
ways to provide for communities
to have has taxable revenue in
order to provide for the
services that they provide sure
thank you Mr Senator your yeah
absolute having served on this
committee I I get everything you
just said that you and I've had
this conversation for eleven
years now and we've met
understand that macro issue and
we're just trying to narrow in
on this hopefully smaller issue
project I'm you're speaking my
language center.
Senator for the Senate rigs okay
all right Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
procedure bring in this you know
this is on all of the G. R. T.
right not just the state
portion.
Do as currently Mr chair Senator
Brandt as currently drafted but
as we talked about we are
willing to work with that to
just the state parks portion Mr
chairman and senator I mean the
difficult part of of working
with that is if you kept the
local portion you'd still have
all the reporting.
and that really wouldn't help
when it comes to all the
paperwork and all that alright
so I think there needs to be
maybe another fix because I do I
do know that the overhead is one
of the things are just killing
so or smaller practices or
independent practices
Mr chair Senator Brandt you're
you're absolutely right that
would fix that problem but we
also cards of the the real
politics of this issue and to G.
R. T. and the five percent
reduction of the state would
have incremental improvement of
what the for medical providers
around the state are facing
right now and I I know it's
Mr Chairman centres not a very
popular thing but actually might
want the center to my right this
has had the right solution for
the locals for a long time and
that's to allow them to put
the food tax back on not us as a
state we we stay out of it we
don't get anything from it but
allow them to put that local
portion back on the food tax so
that it can balance there's so
that we can build things like
this this seems like this is one
of those things that should have
been done first.
Right I mean.
When we're excluding things from
G. R. T. and we've excluded a
lot of things for G. R. T. it
seems like Medical Center then
one of the first things I mean
we did it with you know with all
kinds of other things but yet
with the medical.
we didn't and that that's really
surprising to me that we've
we've excluded so many other
things but never medical
researcher Senator you're right
when I serve on this committee
on if you guys still do we see a
list of all of the G. R. T.
exemptions and it's kind of a
shocking to see what.
Some of those were historically
it's like a history lesson Mr
lesson of who who the pop
powerful lobbyists in this
building what.
Yeah Mister chairman Senator and
and you know the you know what
we know with the food and G. R.
T. taxes that if you're on food
stamps all term sorry John snap
you don't actually pay.
You wouldn't pay tax on the food
you buy with those so actually
when we remove the tax from food
we were giving the biggest tax
break to the wealthiest people
not to the point people that we
thought we were giving it to
and so but here we're actually.
Your.
Hurting everyone hear doctors
which makes it harder for all of
us to see a doctor.
and the paperwork issues is huge
in this situation so I thank you
for bringing this I think it's
one we really need to see about
getting in and then we need to
figure out what we're gonna do
about our municipalities that's
an issue that needs to be
addressed but no one ever seems
to have the political fortitude
to to actually addresses so
thank you thank you Senator
current for a second time thank
you very much I just want to
stress again the uniqueness of
this did you find services in
charge G. R. T. you pass that
charge on when you sell
something whether it's any
retail you pass that on in the
customer Hey Seth but in this
particular case it cannot be
passed on and that's the
unfairness of this it's the
unique issue of the provider not
being able to recoup that cost
just all of the providers can do
with your current elektrische in
a plumber whether you're selling
retail you can pass that on to
the customer you cannot do that
here that's what makes us
different.
Compromise would be welcome the
state has certainly of get their
money right now and maybe try
for profit but I think that's
what you need about the medical
piece is that it's not allowed
to be passed on thank you.
You.
A great to questions a little
bit hold this will be part of
the matrix in our tax package
will take a look then so for so
please please please please
please think in there already
okay that will go to of the
Senate bill three forty three.
Well he's up to he's going to do
I'm gonna have a really House
Bill pretty quickly.
The very next.
It.
Already.
Chair of the going bear with one
moment of this Texas someone or
on.
Okay thank you Mr chair many
further in this bill this
morning I am joined.
Today we I think with.
So I figure out who is that the
retailer who owns.
Any by company and create a
roomy biking and she's really
becoming one of the kind of
leaders in the outdoor community
here in New Mexico and educated
me a lot about E. bikes
pandemic.
Committee what this bill does is
is it's a it's a rebate
basically to help low income
residents of low income
residents alone two hundred
percent of the poverty level be
able to purchase any bike and
the safety equipment to go with
it you know very often are a tax
incentives are.
You know are a.
Incentives to help people tap
into this type of technology is
geared towards people really
well a lot of disposable income
in that upper income people this
is the first kind of incentive I
can think of for this kind of
technology that's geared just
particularly to lower income New
Mexicans.
And up it would allow.
It would allow participating
retailers certified by DFA to be
able to offer up to twelve
hundred dollars towards any by
purchasing a home at the bike
retailers we have to get
certified by DFA the the
residents would have to then get
qualified as eligible for this
from DFA they would go to
retailer.
Give them a three day and then
the retailer would go to DFA to
get the payment up to twelve
hundred dollars that's the way
it works and so so it's a good
for the retailer that they don't
have to have a lot of
verification because it's
handled already it's great great
for the low income residents
because they don't have to be
out of pocket those up to twelve
hundred dollars.
We believe this is incredibly
beneficial for these residents
because there many cases
struggling to pay their bills
from want to hang on to their
homes struggling to pay gas
prices food prices this is
something we can do to lower
their over had and
Improve health as well and so we
do this very much as a pilot
program other states like Denver
excuse me other cities like
Denver.
Dates are starting to do this
you're saying this all over the
country a proliferation of the
bike Public E. bike policies
because of the benefits seven
where they really see a big
proliferation there Singh wrote
use down there think benefits to
local governments and not
accelerating and we're chairman
wrote climate change and climate
reductions so system shifting
people is just a very beneficial
thing and final just close by
saying.
It's really interesting but the
research is also showing the
people using the bike actually
get more exercise than people
with regular bike because these
somewhere off the and you can
travel farther distances with
that Mr chair
to questions you have anything
to add to that well I would add
we've got data coming in from a
number of the programs that they
existed for at least a year and
what they are finding not only
with low income residents
but other residents is there
substituting of up to thirty
percent of the car trips that
they normally would take by a
car and are doing that on the E.
bike over fifty percent of the
car trips that Americans take
our it less than five miles that
is easily achievable and often
quicker when somebody is doing
that on an E. bike without being
in the congestion of traffic
and so is some of that data is
proving to be hugely valuable as
we move forward with ten other
states excuse me six other
states have already had the
program for a year and then
there are I think eleven states
now working on this.
The okay thank you of we'll go
ahead and to the audience if we
anybody here in support of
Senate bill three forty three.
Good size of money from your.
Should check check yes yes hold
on hold on the but they're very
go thank you Mr chairman members
the committee my name is JD
Bullington I'm a registered
lobbyist for people for bikes
coalition and we help to draft
this legislation with Senator
Steinborn and this is a this is
an important bill because as bit
has been mentioned electric
bikes are a growing phenomenon
and because of the pedal
assistance that they find
particularly if you're in a city
that has a network of bicycle
paths it is a very viable form
of alternative transportation
and the petals will the
batteries will help you go up to
forty miles and with the pedal
assist from the motor hills are
no problem for you anymore so
it's a great form of New
transportation one issue though
they're pretty expensive you
know these bikes run between
around two thousand to seven
thousand dollars right now and
so this bill is aimed to provide
a financial incentive for people
who have a lower income there's
a threshold there so that they
can enjoy these new types of
mobility devices which are which
are great I have one my wife has
one and I'll tell you they're
fantastic so anyway we could
support this bill any stronger
thank you if.
There hi my name's Alex
Applegate I am with the
transportation working group
with the environmental justice
caucus and this bill it's both
of our key pillars first it's
great for the environment the
transportation sector is the
largest contributor to climate
change and green
the bikes are the cleanest
motorized vehicle around
therefore it it hits that but
also
economically speaking low income
In our state are the largest
group of bicycle commuters in
the state
giving them an access to E. bike
is the more greater economic
freedom because they can go
further distances and that is a
very important thing to people
so we wholly support this bill
thank you very much.
That's about.
Good morning chair members of
the committee my name is Andrea
start to let up here
representing myself as a
citizen
in the interest of full
transparency I am an avid
cyclist I don't own an E. bike
but anything that gets people
the other car is part of the
roads cycling around getting
healthy I fully support thank
you thank you.
Representative Texas.
Thank you.
Good morning Committee committee
chair my name is Muriel
carpenter and I first got on
electric bike Care in Santa Fe
with my needs to do a tour of
the city I was scared to death
can I really drive this thing to
myself but we did it and I loved
it I am a biker but I can't go
as far as I used to I'm seventy
six years old I've I am a low
income
resident of the state the only
thing that has prevented me from
getting an electric bike so far
as I cannot afford it so I
really wholeheartedly I hope
that your support this bill I
hate when I get in my car and
spew emissions into the air just
to go to the grocery store so
please so in favor of this bill
thank you for considering.
To have anybody.
Want to mention Charles good
government one minute.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
members of the committee and
Charles good marker speaking on
behalf of both the natural
resources defense council and
the New Mexico NMDC action fund
this is a great effort to make
it easier for more people from
all socio economic levels to
replace some or all summer all
of their car trips
significantly cutting carbon
output in New Mexico is really
serious about reducing the
impact of climate change are
people of the land we need to
pass this bill the additional
sales of the bikes this bill
will foster will help grow green
and clean jobs in New Mexico it
may lead to new businesses and
will certainly help homegrown
small businesses here in New
Mexico to I know this bill the
eligible bikes must be sold
through New Mexico retailers
paying taxes in New Mexico so
even if I was qualified under
the income guidelines I couldn't
buy any bike from one of the
many vendors online to keep
trying to suddenly want thank
you very much please pass this
bill thank you.
Anybody in opposition.
I see none committee questions.
Senator Hamblen thank you Mr
chairman thank you sponsor for
bringing this I think you and I
both share communities where
these would be really beneficial
in terms of my district a lot of
folks use bikes as
transportations because a car
and insurance and all that is
really out of their reach
because they're busy struggling
to try and put food on their
tables
and so you know I I I think of
the the residents in my district
and I think is this a priority
for them probably not you know
there are other things that are
priorities for them but I I see
this is it is an opportunity for
options if they so choose
and so I'm I'm excited about
this and I know that we're not
voting on this that we're we're
because of the financial impact
but I I do have just a couple of
questions how to people qualify
for the rebate what what are the
the process is that they have to
go through in order to get that
Mr chair Senator the bills with
the bill says is that you have
to be two hundred percent of
poverty level you would have to
apply to DFA if they would be
really the managing entity for
this purpose they would apply to
DFA to prove their income
eligibility DFA with that issue
them a certificate in the order
they are received and then they
would also issue give them a
ring of retailers would have to
also you know get signed up so
then they would find them.
Retailers that they could go to
and then they would bring that
certificate to a retailer who
then use that to receive
reimbursement potentially from
different okay thank you Mr
chairman thank you sponsor you'd
mentioned retailers and and
really becoming qualified
how would that I'm thinking of
small businesses in our area
what do they have to do to go
through in order to be.
Part of that list.
Thank so Mr chair Senator they
would basically go to DFA and I
guess prove that they are a
legitimate dealer in the state
of New Mexico for eve bikes able
to fullfill this transaction and
that's that's it I mean it's a
fairly low barber you have to be
a viable business it business in
this space to be able to get on
that list so Mister chairman
Senator probably their their
business license their liability
insurance all that stuff.
okay lastly what are the things
that I think would be really
helpful for these is to allow
people to do test drives of the
bikes because those folks were
were used to traditional bikes
may not understand the
difference and just the
difference in power and the
difference in feel and so I do
hope that that if this goes
through that that's an
opportunity because as we all
know when whenever we're driving
a vehicle once we get in the
vehicle and we like it your life
motor trying to we can't get it
and I think the same thing is
with with E. bikes is you know
opportunities to try and help
folks have access to the so that
they can go ahead and use this
for transportation I see many
people using this for
transportation for work.
Senator smaller communities so
thank you Mr chairman thank
sponsors Mr chair for the
committee's knowledge I just
want to a point on page for the
bill a participating dealer
me to retail in the business of
selling a box as a primary place
of business in New Mexico so
we're really supporting New
Mexico companies here.
Thanks.
Right.
I don't have any questions for
the committee will hold on to
this and then we.
Mr Chairman asked the question
on this particular bill
I think this is kind of an
appropriation bill not.
I think it goes on the finance.
And as a member of the committee
I might suggest that's a a good
resting spot for it is I make
the case and try to get funds if
you want to pass it as opposed
to a tax as opposed to a tax
expenditure item but if your
call I just.
But I would be happy having it
added to the tax package Mr
chair of the what let me you
will hold off for now and we'll
devices.
Be sure to get okay thank you
thank you Mr Garcia.
Okay who's gonna go to of.
What us Steinborn while you're
there
go ahead and take care of the
house bill eight a.
For Sanchez to.
The current are doing that.
Right now for our.
But they thank you Mr chair and
committee this is house bill
eight to create a new creative
industry division in the state
of New Mexico economic
development apartment.
This is one of our biggest
reason the state employing over
ten thousand people in the
creative spaces and every corner
of our state including a places
you might not think.
Has a vibrant arts community or
gig economy of digital workers
this bill really it kind of goes
after the low hanging fruit in
the state to try to grow grow
the secretary and and what I'd
like to do is turn it over to
the primary sponsor of the bill
which is representative semansky
to talking about the bill and
our expert witness.
This.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I I'm
really thrilled as Senator
Steinborn said this bill would
create a real center for the
growth and leveraging of our
creative industries across the
state and actually ten years ago
there was a large study done by
the bureau of economic research
at business and economic
research UNM that showed that
this industry was it incredibly
poised to take off statewide and
you know sometimes it takes
awhile to get these ideas to
come forward and
we have been working with
creative people from all over
the state in every community and
that what this bill seeks to do
is support creative
professionals and businesses
that are everyone from people
who are doing traditional crafts
that have been passed down
generation after generation to
more modern large businesses
like it
it multimedia companies sort of
the forefront of technology they
initiatives like meow wolf and
other initiatives that we have
all over the state I'm very
pleased that we have miss Alice
Lloyd with us who is the founder
of her own creative business
called creative start ups and
she's worked with entrepreneurs
not only across our state but
also all over the world and so
I'd love for her to add her
committee Mr chairman.
Go ahead.
Can you guys hear me should yes
right good morning Mr chairman
and members of the committee my
name is Alice Lloyd and I am co
founder and CEO of creative
start ups we are the world's
leading entrepreneurship
education platform for creative
entrepreneurs and I was invited
to date to share some of my
expertise in regards to New
Mexico's creative economy and
the exciting opportunities that
we see both for New Mexico
in the world in building jobs
for people who may have been
left out of the economy to date
creative start ups was born of
the culture and creativity of
New Mexico and from our home
base here we have delivered
entrepreneurship programs for
designers culinary artists
software start ups immersive
arts and entertainment companies
three D. manufacturers in more
in countries around the world
from Singapore to Saudi Arabia
Portugal Peru Malaysia the list
goes on but every time I come
home to New Mexico I see that
our culture and creativity is on
par with or outpaces the
cultural and creative assets of
economies around the world.
However we are falling behind in
building the infrastructure in
the human capital needed to
thrive in this growing economic
sector.
Couple of stocks which you may
already be aware of between
twenty ten and twenty twenty
global exports of creative goods
and services grew from nine
hundred billion to one point
seven trillion.
That outpaces growth of healthy
growth of health care
manufacturing and all kinds of
other sectors.
The global creative economy
create contributes six point one
percent to global GDP.
And after the pandemic global
revenues are on pace to create
three trillion in revenues
annually.
In twenty ten when bureau study
was done one in ten New Mexicans
worked in the creative economy
today nearly one in line.
We see the return on investment
made into these businesses first
hand a few examples we let the
co creation of the Zuni pueblo
art walk in within two years
visitor ship to the Pueblo
double.
And several of the artists who
were willing to report their
income their income had gone up
fifty percent in one year.
We were able to generate through
businesses we supported here in
Santa Fe two hundred thousand
and growth in G. R. T. within
two years during the pandemic.
We were we all wells first
investor in twenty fourteen we
know how that story goes it's
been able to create a thousand
jobs millions in G. R. T. and
really revitalized a lot of
Santa fe's creative and cultural
infrastructure so I'm here today
to say that this is an
incredibly important piece of
legislation and that I have
witnessed first hand our ability
to lead in New Mexico and
beyond.
Okay thank you.
if you know if we go to the
audience you Mr chairman thank
you I will go ahead to the
audience and but here in support
of house bill eight as amended.
Scott Scanlon registered
lobbyists for the Santa Fe opera
Just got to see that now.
Scott Scanlon registered
lobbyists for the Santa Fe opera
and we support anything that
provides creativity in the arts
in the state of New Mexico.
Thank you.
Of support and support okay go
ahead.
One minute each.
Or less.
just.
They're not respond okay are
that's why so the but in
opposition of this bill.
You know go to committee.
Question service center thank
you Mr chair and senator
Representative sorry and and
Senator but I have a question
with regard to who really it's
going to be in charge of this in
the FIR talks about the tourism
department being a little
concerned that it's going to be
under
the Economic Development we had
that conversation not too many
minutes ago about that seems to
be some struggle back and forth
between the two departments on
who's in charge so have that
question in the end of the two
million dollars if it is
appropriated at the cost for
additional FTE ease it's going
to take almost half of that way
so but can you maybe just those
two concerns thank you Mr
chairman and senator out we did
have a wonderful meeting with
our tourism secretary after the
analysis came out and talked
about sort of the difference
between some of the tourism
services in the vision for this
division at economic development
department and a big piece of
that is the infrastructure and
community building element the
work force training element we
really felt that the economic
divide Development Department
was the best place for that but
certainly
I I think the way that it would
flow is as businesses expanded
and creative professionals got
that training to create a
business plan to create that
kind of revenue estimate and
plan for their for their
forecast that you know if they
were endeavoring to create
products that could be marketed
by tourism that would be sort of
a win win because tourism has
New Mexico true they have an
incredible amount of marketing
sophistication at that
department but there's also
things like you know we met an
artist in Gallup that was at
hair design if your hair and
beauty and that's not
necessarily something that
tourism would be marketing but
the.
At something she really wants to
be a hub for training new hair
and beauty professionals in
Gallup and have kind of a
community space that potentially
could be in partnership with
other artistic endeavors and
that might be an opportunity for
some capital outlay in
partnership with the city of
Gallup for example so if we see
them as distinct but very
complementary and synergistic.
Thank you Mr chair tell me about
the if T. cost under the
economic development department
now that takes big chunk of the
money actually for well Mr chair
Senator so there is two million
dollars in the budget for this
to this is a funded item at this
point in time and really you
know this is a scalable for as
low as one F. T. E. two is much
energy and resources you can put
behind it the template we use
for this bill with the outdoor
division and when we started
that division does something
kind of similar we had about a
two million dollar appropriation
we ended up with two hundred
thousand dollars coming out of
the session started with one
person axing this who punched
way above our weight did an
incredible job for the state of
New Mexico created all kinds of
programs and so it now is
growing to a four person staff
so the reality is we're sitting
in a better place now than we
started on that division and
being on finance working on
maybe supplementing that and
getting that fine tune but the
reality is.
You know that the funding is
there for the FTEs and to really
launch this thing successfully
thank you that's all I have
thank you all right senator
Coleman.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Senator Representative bring is
forward says
You say you already have two
million dollars
top of page two it says.
House Bill would appropriate
sixty seven million what what's
that I yes Mr chairman and
senator we I had an amendment to
remove that appropriations so
that's no longer in the bill if
I could if I could expand on
just to clarify your curiosity
so we created a fund in addition
to the division to fund projects
grants to entrepreneurs to
nonprofits and create public
infrastructure there are several
other states that have these
divisions Colorado is one of the
many Colorado the governor
actually made this one of his
top priorities and they created
a fund I think signing it over a
hundred million dollars because
this also funds public
infrastructure which we know if
you're creating an arts and
culture district can be very
expensive and so if you look at
the buckets of money this can't
fund this grant program
it can be pretty expensive and
so we we just aspirational we
set that framework for the
legislature to understand the
scope of this but I think at
this stage where we're going to
end up is funding a division to
launch and maybe have some
funding in the grant program but
but not not anything close to
that number this.
Thank you Mr chair so Colorado's
got over a hundred million and
we get.
Really one million if you pay
the employees right.
Kind of a.
Is it worth the effort.
This of.
Mr absolutely and because you
know the one of the biggest
powers were saying of this is
the organizing force behind in
industries that really doesn't
have a voice doesn't have a
landing spot thank god for the
purpose of this right well
that's one thing you can do that
with one person let alone two or
three or four rate four person
team so this is going to be
impactful from the beginning and
I think with the level we funded
it's going to be.
Successful.
Thank you for that answer it
that's all I have us Mr chair we
thank you.
Senator Wirth would pass motion
for the past.
We have a second.
Any opposition to the motion.
See none in the past.
We'll go to Senate bill five to
fourteen.
That was two zero eight that was
the the eight two zero I'm
sorry.
Senator current.
They'll get it fixed.
Okay.
Everybody at the.
Okay all right
Committee.
This right here.
As good as it.
What do I need to use this
service is put that that's fine
this is where the folks you know
kids are very that one is that
okay one or two good there you
go Mr chairman members of the
committee over the last couple
years I think all of you are
aware that we've come before you
and discussed the issue of the
destination based sourcing issue
for both municipalities and in
Carlsbad in in house of course
have Representative Bram with me
Representative Scott nor expert
TJ Trujillo we've we were told
please come with some solution
so we've come with several the
first one was the one two two
five bills that are carried last
year and that would have
replaced the funding that we
lost out to not only the county
but to the state and that bill
costs the state about fifty
million dollars which
Representative which what we do
is to communities were losing
but that bill didn't get very
far we've had a couple of bills
this session certainly we've
just for an appropriation to
help us get through a here so
just to to replace some of those
dollars temporarily and then we
also have another bill in the
house that changes the
definition of service provider
we know that we amended
the destination based sourcing
bill a couple years ago to
include accountants attorneys
and what was the third when we
added facial services
professional services in general
so that they were exempt from
having to report depending on
the county where they were
providing the service of their
all brought back into their.
Business site and so we thought
well let's add a limited number
of service providers to that
list to go along with the
accounts and the the attorneys
that bill is still in the house
and will be heard over there but
the bill would bring before you
today is another option it's
pretty.
It's pretty extensive and so
this is a bill that of really I
have to give Representative
Scott credit for he's been
working on this over the last
few months and we thought well
if we can help all
municipalities maybe this is a
better way to approach this
problem so that it's not just
about Hopson Carl spent so I'm
gonna turn it over now to
Representative Scott to kind of
walk you through what this idea
is we know it's up something
that's pretty big and we don't
have
we're not under any illusion
that maybe this would be done
today or this year that is
certainly something that we
seriously think should be
considered so here we go and I
Senator you have a substitute
right okay I'm so sorry yes I
have a committee substitute for
the committee substitute which I
don't think we've ever done
before so so yes we want to
move.
Starting with the.
Do not pass on Senate bill five
fourteen but if you pass on the
committee substitute of the
committee substitute get pretty
close exactly right so we
discussions okay I thank you
then we're on the committees the
double committee so the double
committees throughout the.
So.
All right go ahead thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee.
this tax the destination
sourcing problem that we were
experiencing in the southeast
from the revenue distributions.
It appears as though.
The state currently is floating
on the ocean of money.
And.
Cities and counties are not
doing well.
So what we ended up developing
here was a formulaic
distribution of eight percent.
Of the total gross receipts
coming into the state.
We hope to the state eight
percent comes back in a formula
that distributes it free to just
waited.
I the revenue that was sent.
And so intense waited by the
revenue.
I actually per capita in each
county.
The consequences of this
legislation at this rate percent
level three hundred million
dollars approximately going to
every municipality in every
county in the state in effect
what this does is let the state
in total participate in some of
the oil boom that is occurring
in southeast New Mexico.
Great thank you.
To get us here just a few
comments up you can this point
that point you'd be better.
Mr chairman members of the
committee just a few comments to
add on to what the
representative in this in the
center said number one I think
it's very important for everyone
and and and I I think we have
all the data that as of the
representative said that under
this doubles Senator but so the.
The senator and representative
what the representative said
that every that every
municipality budget and I
believe we have the spread sheet
that this particular
municipalities the you have
questions on we can answer
the amount of fact we will we're
estimating the each municipality
would benefit and again I can't
stress that enough that it's
it's meant to hit every single
municipality to to their benefit
number two I would say that you
heard we've been here before in
a couple different bills and
there's two ways in my mind to
look at the issue
of distribution sourcing Health
fits and everything one is
there's there's two issues at
play one is the collection of
the G. R. T. and that's what
distributions sourcing gets to.
What you collected the issue
becomes how is it distributed so
the issue of the collection is a
previous bill you've heard the
dealt with
carving out a professional
services which is already done
and there is a bill that talked
about carving out of services
for oil and gas production right
and that's dealing with the
collection of the G. R. T. tax
revenue that's one side of the
equation the other way to
approach it is what the
representative came up with and
that's instead let's focus on
the distribution of it and
figure out what you collected
weather's distribution sourcing
origin based sourcing we're
going to get a big pot of money
sitting here what's the first
way to get a back to the local
government to let the local
governments then take advantage
of this change in tax policy
because ultimately what happened
when in two thousand nineteen
with Senna built tool six we get
the right Cinco two one nine no
what what we we went to
distributions or hospice house
bill six thirty up at.
Thousands of how can I forget
after doing this for three years
the the issue is the state is
really truly the benefactor from
the what we could call one two
two five so the state.
Got the benefit because there's.
The easiest way to put it is the
one to two I now isn't with Dr
on the municipalities the one
two two five is going back to
the states of the state got the
windfall of the tax bill that we
passed the past a couple years
ago and so this bill says no the
state we're gonna stay give the
doctor the municipalities
because that's what the tax
revenue belongs at the G. R. T.
level this redistricting every
single municipality let them
take advantage of instead of the
state meeting the revenue source
that's all I think about it the
collection in the distribution
this double substitute deals
with the distribution side as
opposed to the collection side
of trying to fix how you're
collecting the revenue whether
be distribution sourcing or
origin based sourcing at I'll
leave it there but I wanted to
at least at the big picture
explain to you what's a plate
and Mr chair I want to and also
if you're looking at the F. I.
R. associated with my original
committee sat that's incorrect
based on the part of money we're
talking about we went back and I
looked at Representative Scott's
a lower percentage at eight
money was way too high and that
would have cost the state nine
hundred million we're not doing
that we're going back to the
eight so that's not correct in
in actually have copies of the
F. R. I. that goes with his
which is but it's just a matter
of the formula you could make
that any amount you want to make
and in the end everything would
flow out accordingly and I'm I'm
just going to say one simple
thing because I'm a first grade
teacher and so for me to
understand this I had to draw a
circle on the paper divided into
three pieces of pie intake
thirty percent one piece of that
pie is dedicated to the amount
of revenue that that the area
since in the county since into
the state that seventy percent.
That represents the the
population of the county then
divided by the municipality to
municipality so that's the only
way that I could really
understand that formula but it's
correct in here Clinton Turner
helped a great deal with the
formula and other tax experts
but that's the simplest way to
look at it it's a two factor
issue population and then what
CYFD county have sent to the
state in its returned in that
manner that's I think we're
ready for questions that make
sense okay okay here are very
scared me Madam R. I'd at this
time I will go out to the
audience to see whose support of
committee substitute for
committee substitute Senate bill
five forty.
What is support.
What I just said which is also
resume back.
anybody no opposition.
Okay I will go to questions from
the committee.
Senator are real Mr chairman I
just wonder if you have your
chart with the need for that
like three at the time I just
could be I can draw on the floor
for that yeah.
So Mr Chairman the major
difference that on that
committee sub is what you
explained last that Mr Trujillo
that's the only difference that
this substitute bill brought it.
Mr Chairman Senator yes the in
in this case we change the
formal instead of Graham if I'm
wrong but instead of doing the
one two two five amount we
changed it back to eight percent
is because we felt that that
lead up off of the one two two
five the state cap do that the
change to distributions sourcing
without that was about half of
the one two two five and so
eight seems a fair
representation of the bleed off
that was occurring thank you Mr
chairman thanks for that
clarification thank you senator.
But senator thank you and and I
look forward to seeing the chart
because this gives me a lot of
anxiety
and just to understand.
The the taxes and and what
you're doing and I appreciate
the explanation of destination
sourcing because when you're so
deep into it it's easy to use
that terminology but also forget
that there are other folks who
may not understand experiences
especially that the eastern part
of the state is going through
and so on that can you give some
kind of personal stories as to
how this affects people because
we can talk about that we can
crunch the numbers all all day
long well at least you can I
will curl up in a fetal position
but can you tell some some
personal stories as to how this
affects people have been Mr
chair and senator I think this
is what I'm gonna ask
Representative Brown to weigh in
because I think I. Hobson
crossed better very similar in a
lot of ways but also there's
there's a bit of a difference in
how oil and gas is fairly new to
that community compared to what
we have experienced although it
affects both of our communities
I would like to give her an
opportunity to to say some
things thank you Mr want to turn
that into my to Mr Chairman
representative Senator Hamblen.
So I I think of this really came
to our attention through panic
phone calls from our city of are
mayors and our administrators
and they were finding of I might
mention that this house bill six
which change destination
sourcing mainly to care for
internet sales was passed by the
legislature in twenty nineteen
it went into effect in July of
twenty one and so around July of
twenty one we begin to get these
panic phone call saying our
revenue is dipping severely and
in the case of Carlsbad it's
around two million dollars a
month that the city is not
getting in revenue because the
G. R. T. of the G. R. T. change
so that's pretty significant to
our community because of gross
receipts taxes at least half of
the revenue for the city and so
when it started declining so
precipitously and again this is
been going on for it'll be two
years in July of these lawsuits
it's about five million dollars
a year that's not going into the
city treasury so it affects
everything in the way of city
services from Mr chairman
Representative Senator from
police and fire protection to
have library city parks senior
centers just pretty much
everything the cities do and so
it's been very difficult for
them to deal with Mr chair.
Senator of.
Yeah you all right the the yeah
I appreciate that because it's
it's Mr chair
Not finished yet of the because
it's when we're talking about
something like this and
especially you know I mean we're
all heroes to represent our
communities and to really make
sure that our our our
communities needs and concerns
are heard
and in those personal stories I
find a very impactful because
it's really putting a face to
the circumstances appear more
experience inside I do
appreciate that thank you very
much that's on the subject thank
you senator X..
Thank you thank you Mr chair
Senator Representative za
you know I think this is this is
one of those deals when you look
at
How to distribute lots of staff
I think Representative you've
come up with a with a way and
often times here we look at at
what to do with revenues should
you should you poem directly
from
you know what to communities
report and and then give it back
for should you create a
distribution light light vicious
and and issue certainly a
looking to be a viable viable
approach to do that
the question I guess I've got on
it is when we when we look at
this Mr chair Senator
Representative we're talking
about incorporated
municipalities.
Mr chairman and senator I think
the original version was cold
governmental entities within a
county.
And it Mr chair and and
Representative centers
the.
Your use you may not have H. as
many over in in your part of the
world but the the communities of
Law loose the communities of
chaparral the
a variety of colonias that exist
in the in Dona ana county now
they're they're not incorporated
and I don't know if there's a
way to distribute to them other
than the distribution that would
go to the county hello I mean is
that how you see that would work
for.
Mr chair Senator if the
government we're gonna do is
recognized by the state.
In the population in Campos was
a governmental entity would
receive the distribution.
Information Mr chair
representative so there's not a
government and in chaparral
which is not there's not a
government in law lose show
those distributions which go to
the county Mr chair allocation
correct correct.
Mr chair and and Center
representatives at.
That's about the only way I can
see how it would work as well
but
I appreciate you guys working on
this I appreciate you guys
coming up with this this
solution because I think it is
you know which it certainly.
I want to say is more fair
because that may not be the case
because maybe it be fair to to
the places like Carlsbad and
Hobbs that they could be but
the fact that it's an approach
that can benefit everybody
because we don't understand.
Exactly how distribution
sourcing and distribution
sourcing impacts Alamogordo or
Albuquerque you guys have a
better grasp of what's going on
in your communities I don't know
that these others do specially
places like in Rio Rancho but
shoot.
The
All the all of you do okay I
tried we've got to but you need
thank you to all but the
Mr chair and and senator
representative thanks for
bringing to build thanks for
coming up with the idea and and
hopefully we can move it for.
The other questions
I don't.
Looking at the notices of I
thought it was a quadratic
equation is like I start
freaking out like oh my god no
I.
For instance there then it is in
fact in the collision.
The.
There.
The.
Was this formula distributions
have been successfully employed
in a number of other instances
in in the state of New
previously for gross receipts
tax and the perhaps it'll one
that is still most widely used
business school SCG for.
Okay appreciate that no I don't
have questions I think this is a
of you know I don't Center
current you know appreciate all
the work we try to do try to how
do we solve this thing that you
know has impacted your
communities in a way that I
don't think the we would we
would imagine and so forth so
of you know I don't have any
questions but I'm glad that
we're trying to you got a
question.
Just be ready I will deposit
okay.
Okay so it would just make a
comment and and and we have a
due pass motion.
Second by Senator Tallman.
Any opposition to the do passed
motion.
But we have to pass Senate
finance further discussion we
always like to continue to
discuss that's right that's
right thank you all right out of
Senator Kernan she's got to get
a change but for the I.
the one thank you for the.
House bill forty four.
Hello he she's here yes okay
Matthews okay all right.
Intelisys to seventy four.
It would to take.
Which one are we hearing house
bill forty four.
Thank you Representative
Matthews.
Thank you Senator you Mr chair
and members of the committee I
serve and running back and forth
between two rooms so appreciate
that we're able to get on and
get the right bill bill
HB forty four relates to the
federal home loan bank which
lends money to other lenders
like credit unions and insurance
companies.
And what this bill does is allow
the federal home loan bank to
recover the value of their
collateral more quickly when
there is a default and I loan
made by an insurance company
their land there a creditor I'm
sorry your lender.
Know the creditor it is a change
that has already been approved
in twenty three states and it's
kind of complicated banking
things but something that would
hopefully be helpful in our
state and with me is airy Care
with the.
Federal home loan bank of
federal implemented Alice's
right with that we would stand
for questions.
Okay so if we go to this first
anybody here support of house
bill forty four.
Mr chair members of the
committee on press one of the
independent community bankers
association of New Mexico we
stand in support of this bill
because of federal home loan
bank of Dallas is is a strong
liquidity partner for many of
our financial institutions here
through the state solicit
support they're seeking some
sense for thank you.
Okay anybody in opposition.
I see none.
The committee questions.
Senator rex thank you Mr
chairman and thank you
Representative I'm just I at
yeah she the representative in
the and in the hall and in the
in the elevator maybe more so
than any other representative
here yeah I just I'm glad to see
that she does some stuff.
So if thank you Mr that that's
all I have.
a motion for the past by Senator
but second second by Senator
Hamblen.
In the opposition to the to pass
motion.
See none.
The best thank you thank you
senator Senator of seven to zero
thank you thank you of I know
that we of I have the.
seventy nine can do seventy
seven one two seven I real quick
because that's an easy one and
then we'll go tomorrow and will
about three Senators nana we're
we got some time.
Somos gonna be up and then.
Dr the incident is.
I.
This shouldn't take long yes.
This.
Mr chair members of the
committee this is house bill
seventy nine and covering for
Representative Hochman Vigil and
I have my experts here to talk
about what this bill does Mr Mr
chairman members of the
committee my name is Brent Moore
I'm a registered lobbyist for
fidelity financial and we're
bringing this bill forward today
house bill seventy nine is a
bill that makes a change in the
process is that the office of
superintendent of insurance uses
in its title insurance
ratemaking hearing the title
insurance ratemaking hearing is
something that the state of New
Mexico does it every two years
it creates a a framework for the
different premiums that are
charged in the state of New
Mexico we are definitely the out
liar when it comes to setting
these rates there are only three
states that go through a
rulemaking hearing to promulgate
rates for title insurance it
those two other states are Texas
and Florida but even in those
states they do not have a
mandatory hearing they have a
review that they conduct on a
different cycle in Texas it's
once every five years in Florida
it's once every three years and
they will go look at the rates
and see if they need to conduct
a hearing and if they do they
move forward with their
processes there so we are
definitely the out liar when it
comes to conducting a mandatory
hearing every two years the
proposal in the bill is to move
it from two years to three years
we have spoken with the office
of superintendent of insurance
about this proposal admittedly
it was with the former
superintendent Russell till and
they agreed on that it's an
expensive process it's a time
consuming process and their
official position coming into
the session was they had no
objection to this proposal and
infidelity one.
And to pursue it go ahead of the
new just the interim
superintendent Jennifer
contentious said that is there
continuing position as it
relates to this hearing and the
primary driver for this is that
the hearing is expensive it
takes a lot of time we would
like to lessen that burden from
every two years to every three
years and that is the for the
full extent of this proposal
thank you it thank you ready.
We'll go to the.
The audience.
W. support of Senate bill
seventy nine I mean house bill
seven.
There.
Anybody in opposition.
With the committee.
Senator Griggs.
Mr chairman and senator and and
expert the that title insurance
hearings are are problematic and
they've been problematic.
For as long as I can remember
because what they do is a title
insurers and companies
the independence primarily are.
Are the guys you want to be in
step with the rage that are
promulgated
for whatever length of time it
it is with urged one year two
years three years and
They don't have any real real
options in in in title insurance
the only way you make money is
you receive a share of the
premium plus you receive your
closing costs charge and that is
how you how you make money show
if rates which are a gesture
Aid.
After a good year.
Which then drives your ability
to collect your share of a
premium because they cut the
premiums
and then if they don't manage to
have a right hearing for awhile
which often times educators even
though we sheeter talk about two
years it might not occur
show if this can if this can.
mate.
The O. H. I have these hearings
every few years three years make
them sh sat rate each every
three years then it's quite
possible that that's a good
thing I don't I haven't heard
from any of the title insurance
companies and in my part of the
world so I don't know where some
of these guys are on on this was
they believe it's an effective
thing or not so I'm not going to
oppose the bill of but.
This is one of the in a this is
a it's a tough business to be
and all the which is it's a
great business to be and but
These guys have.
You you know they have no way no
way to
to make money.
without relying on rage being
shipped in a fair and equitable
manner because the only other
thing you've got are the are the
closing fees and.
It makes it in our it's just a
it's a tough tough we operate
you have all you've got to
really do need to be better to
business than the other day and
As a disclosure I've in the
title business for for seven
years and we were better for
everybody but that's just the
way that worked but anyway
you usually communities across
the state.
With one title insurance company
in those communities and this is
why.
Is because you can't compete
competition is difficult
and the the setting of rates are
problematic show Mr chair and
and senator Representative
hopefully Representative excuse
me I I promoted you the grant
but the.
Expert expert and the so there
you there you go you just that's
that's my comments I don't have
any issues with the bill.
Mr chair if I.
Mr chair Senator Griggs if I
could find you a little bit more
comfort as it relates to the
proposal I would say three
things the first is that New
Mexico and Thailand Association
is in support of this they
believe that it is something
that helps them in terms of
dealing with the process and
what we're dealing with is that
the the required hearing that is
conducted right now every two
years and moves to three years
but which you'll see in the bill
is existing language in the
statute it's in
article thirty section eight
subsection B. the superintendent
can call hearing whenever the
superintendent believes it's
necessary that could be because
they miss the mark and the rates
were set too low it could be
because they miss the mark and
they set the rates too high in
the if they need to come in and
make an adjustment the
superintendent always has that
authority into the extent you're
talking about fluctuations in
the market in terms of we're
real estate prices are those are
accounted for within the context
of the hearing they do take
their best guess they don't
always get it right but there is
a mechanism.
For the superintendent come back
end to the extent state title
insurers in the small community
say we need relief they can go
to the superintendents say we
really need an adjustment and so
the the ability for them to
engage in requests that is still
there now superintendent does
have to grant that hearing I
will admit that.
We shared and just record I
don't think it's ever happened
when wind but regardless if
they're if they're satisfied
with the way it is within that
that's a good thing.
Three.
Okay in the.
I would be an endless so was
still pleasure of the committee.
The past motion with Senator
Griggs second by Senator
Hamblen.
Any opposition to do pass
motion.
I see none of the path.
Earnings to.
Committee with five six seven
eight nine.
Our workers are.
Okay we'll go to of.
Senator my Estes.
Thank you Mr chairman this is
Senate bill three hundred ninety
and it gives us an opportunity
to.
A consider of modern procurement
code update Senate bill three
ninety amend the procurement
code to allow responses to
invitations are to be it you
don't need to use that but for
the little Mike is this in the
article that thank you up to
consider a determination of best
value rather than the very
limited of.
Thing of lowest bid the best
value procurement looks at other
factors Mr chairman including a
best quality economic value
timely performance the ability
to meet required outcomes
a limited selection criteria
based solely on lowest price
prohibits purchasers from taking
no account the quality of the
goods and services in a cost
benefit analysis to the taxpayer
as articulated in the FIR from
CYFD the amended definition of
best value will give entities
the ability to select the vendor
who is most beneficial overall
rather than automatically
selecting the lowest responsible
bidder as the current statutes
requires and it will I I'm I'm
joined up B. as soon Mr chairman
by may expert witness from of
the plumbers and pipefitters
local for twenty this Jon Baker
if you have a minute or two okay
sure go ahead go.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee
so best value I'd like to say is
pro business and pro worker
there are many states such as
Massachusetts Michigan Oklahoma
Ohio Georgia New York and the
Minnesota department of
transportation use back value
strategies and our procurement
and many of those states have
found that there's improvement
in safety record there is
improvement in labor labor
compliance and overall working
conditions for workers but
there's also benefit to the
business and there's benefit to
the state they provide that best
value of create less than a one
percent increase in in the
initial price that they pay but
there's thirty seven percent
less cost growth so the price
you originally received versus
the price you actually pay in
the end so the state will
actually pay us save money and
know what we're expected to put
out down the decreasing change
orders so I will definitely be
available for for questions
thank you Mr chair committee
thank you Mr chairman will stop
questions okay good at this time
we go out to the audience
anybody here in support of a
Senate bill three ninety.
Go ahead in a copier for the
button on the Mike and.
Thank you Mr chair members the
committee John let used with The
New Mexico federation of labor
we stand in strong support of
this measure something that
we've actually been trying to
work on for number of years we
thank the sponsor very much for
bringing it up you know I think
the old adage of you get what
you pay for can definitely apply
in this case I think you know
when we all are doing work on
our own homes or our own
projects we probably don't
automatically just go with the
cheapest rate we actually ask
around and see who actually does
the best job why should we try
to do this with our state
projects as well you know this
also takes into account not only
quality of work safety as
mentioned but also treatment of
workers as well and we want to
make sure that our contractors
are treating our workers fairly
and not exploiting them like
some unfortunate contractors can
do so for all these reasons
again we do stand in strong
support and we hope you do as
well thank you thank you.
All ready.
Okay now go to committee senator
Sanchez thank.
Every job we went out either.
Or best about.
Thank you Mr chairman of the
center is not just the I think
up I think with requests
requests for proposals or RFPs
it's it's more geared towards
best value it's it's the up
arterias in total of what the
purchaser once in these but in
these
But the in these I. T. B.'s the
invitations to bid it is
strictly of Lois better.
Thank you Mr chair Senator so
and I and if the I. T. B. is
requests like that yeah but they
do there's a lot to gaming fist
as a DOT does it all the state
agencies that put out stuff it
depends on what.
how they're asking for the
proposal be done but there's
tons of best value out there.
Mister chairman Senator just
maybe yeah maybe so that the
statutes that the builder after
identified.
say lowest responsible bidder
and we're changing that language
to the bidder who just been
determined by the state
purchasing agent or a central
purchasing office to offer the
best value so there is up up.
Requirements on on the purchaser
of with a local agency or state
agency to go with the lowest
bidder many times Mr chair
Senator I think it's depend on
the agency how they put it out
and if you look at any
procurement with the state's
putting out game and fish DOT.
They could either ask for low
bid or best value especially
like in a design build it's
always best what you bring your
thing on the table I bring mine
who brings the best project and
that's basically best value you
know might not I might be the
lower bidder but you've got more
years of experience or in
whatever you're doing a soul I I
think this is done quite a bit I
I I I read the bill would like
to build I'm not against it I'm
just saying I Mr chair Senator I
think this is done a lot it just
depends on which agency.
And you know you have different
people putting out the the I. T.
B. so however they want to put
it I think it's how it comes out
for Mr chair Senator that's all
I have for now thank you senator
Senator Griggs.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator I'm I've get
difficulties and I don't I don't
know if it's with this new
language or not I've got I've
got concerns about procurement
and and she'll be
and when we talk about and this
one was going to be the best
value
Well let's just kind of reach up
and grab the the that saying
that if if we want to come in
and we want to deal with
procurement in ways that I think
you should use Sarah as you're
trying to get at as the the
gentleman who spoke
and then the tax payer.
Because we we should turn and
come up with the staff and say
this this is this and we like
this guy better because we think
he does better work.
And then you can award the bid
to own.
in the the difference in price
is you know I've heard and
schools across our our state
where the difference is been
several million dollars in in
better.
and show the.
Who won in that deal whose rate
Mr chair and and etcetera the
tax payer paid several million
dollars more for project did
with that because really the
best values because you together
like that.
And I those are the things when
we talk about procurement those
are problematic we need to what
I believe is we need to come in
and we needed dental I when we
talk about that criterion as
possible we need to set in
statute that price.
Is fifty percent of every bit
forty percent sixty whatever
might be.
Because that's the tax payers
cost.
In the other staff.
The other stuff that may go in
on that needed to have a
percentage as well and you don't
really do that in this bill and
I don't I don't expect that to
me we know what that ought to be
today
but we're going to and we're
we're not.
We're not necessarily giving the
best.
Contractor the pride the best I
mean we're not getting the best
deal for the state and I don't
know how to get that.
I just I think we're gonna have
to honestly sit down and look it
at procurement across the board
for construction which is which
primarily with issues dealing
with and.
And see what we can we can come
up with so we we best protect
everybody the kids best value is
a meanwhile that could be right
they could be the ultimately the
best value but it could come at
a at a cost that is
substantially greater and we
just have to we have to figure
out how we want to do that.
Because we can't we can't
continue to award contracts in
ways that could appear that
we're given it to are Forand in
our our buddy in this order
staff gets at that a little bit
so we we need to we need to be
sure we're we're doing.
Procurement I think differently
and I don't know what that
answer is Senator but I'm I'm
glad that you're at least
looking at it and hope that this
bill moves on this bill passes
that you start looking at that.
In depth so thank you Mr
chairman thank center thank you
Sierra.
Thank you Mr thank you this
center for bringing this bill
forward just a comment don't
have a question I agree with
this Senator Griggs that we so
we need to take a hard look at
our.
Procurement code needs all could
use a lot of improvement so I
use this a.
S. value is a city manager use
it all the time if we could
prove that.
Over the long haul the costs are
going to be lower we would
necessarily take the little bit
little bit is that are all over
the long haul is not always your
best bet so it over the long
haul of the you might.
The little more expensive bid
might have.
Lower maintenance costs lower
replacement costs in the product
or service which would last
longer so I support this thank
you.
Great what is the pleasure of
the.
Committee.
Also for the precedent Census
the server was senator Clemente.
Any opposition to the to the
past motion.
I see none of the best.
Senators about this.
Senator.
Seven zero.
Of.
Good morning good morning
senator Senate bill for seventy
two as chairman ready very
simple straightforward build
this last year I had a home
mortgage which I want to pay off
I called my mentor to find out
what the payoff balance was and
they told me that they would
tell me for a fee this bill
quite simply prohibits the
lenders on a retail mortgage
rather than someone contract
from charging a fee to provide a
pay off balance the in my
circumstance one of the larger
lenders in the country The
socially said they would tell me
instantly if I if I pay them now
if if I wasn't willing to pay
them they would send it to me by
mail and I'd get it in a couple
weeks which you know kind of
defeats the point of knowing
what the payoff balances finding
out what it is going to be in a
couple weeks later so this real
straightforward just says you
can't charge of a fee to a bar
where to find out what the
payout balances that's it Mr.
All of all right anybody in
support of a.
Support of the bill no William
Bill.
Anybody opposition.
I see none.
The committee Senator Kernan
thank you very much I paid off a
mortgage Mr chair last year to
but I don't remember I'm gonna
go back and find out if they
charge me a fee yes I have to
ask for that money back but I
guess it's too late so the
federal government today under
federal law they have certain
requirements do is it does it
state and federal law that they
need to find all that
information and maybe they're
just not doing it.
Sure I'm consider I don't know I
don't know the answer the
federal law here all I can tell
you that in my circumstances to
national under one larger
lenders and again pretty simple
question and I I presume they're
complying with federal law which
means that
if there comply with federal
license suggest me there's not a
federal law that prohibits them
from that practice but again you
all can understand that we do
everything we we bank when we do
our transactions electronically
online you'd think that I can go
online right now and find out
what my payoff balances and and
then when I finally got somebody
on an eight hundred number you
know which takes thirty minutes
to get a person on the line
there too they said they'd be
more than happy to tell me
instantly so long as I agreed to
pay them a fee for the privilege
of knowing what my payoff
balance was
and and they told me that if I
didn't want to pay the fee that
tell me the payoff balance but I
get it in the mail in a couple
weeks so I I got to believe that
someone
kind of a bit of a exploitive I
can match most people whether
Khan for the past balance or not
going to say yeah I'll I'll take
it a couple weeks Senator in the
mail because you want to know
what it is then and there to
take it take care of it early so
managed manages somehow and of
course then when you get in the
mail two weeks later it's not no
longer your payoff balance
right.
Right.
Yeah I think so like get them
thank you Mr chairman you I just
paid off of our guests such as
mortgage seven months ago to I
need to check the what you're
ready I'm ready for do pass.
Well you're going to go check
and find out.
Charged.
Or will do best motion by
Senator mail.
It Sen William Carey have a link
any opposition to the press
motion.
I see none of the of the present
I think we're all crappy now
because we're like we just sent
a fax.
This to.
The church but it sure.
We're going to get the the is
this bill to thirty five to
thirty five yes Senate bill two
thirty five good Senator senator
and thank you senators for
hearing this bill
it it was on first with the that
the first very last in the last
year we first I get that.
The
and I won't tell you about the
PTSD I've had sitting here all
morning good anyway that's just
a joke the
this bill
puts a tax
all nicotine products and
primarily is aimed at use and
vaping.
And and just very briefly I mean
the data you've heard it thirty
four percent of eight twenty
nineteen survey thirty four
percent of high school students
are vaping twelve percent of
middle school and we haven't had
a survey sensors being one down
this year but every indication
that is is going up in the FIR
is there some earlier numbers
but that just tells you is like
twenty five percent and that was
back at the years before
nineteen just how rapidly this
is going up number two it's
really important to remember is
doctors Dona said vaping is the
gateway drug to addiction and it
does it's the ability to use the
nicotine and thinking that
you're not getting the smoke to
deal with stress particularly
when you're younger and you
don't have a lot of judgment
then don't connect their frontal
lobe until thirty women around
twenty and so there's just not a
lot of good judgment
particularly among young people
and what this can do when you
build that addiction pathway you
can then get stuff there's
substitutes for the nicotine
going on to alcohol and to
others and particularly if you
have the the gene for craving
and so it's a very very
destructive Drug and we need to
do something about it and this
bill really focuses on youth
because we know from cigarettes
and other tobacco taxes that the
higher the tax the less the
uptake by use it's been one of
the most effective methodologies
to reduce all of that thirdly
the state currently spends eight
point seven million dollars on
cessation and prevention
activities through new pack in
the department of health and
also in CMS of the CDC
recommends that the state should
be spending twenty eight million
dollars those activities and so
we're we're way behind the
calculation of this bill.
is that it would raise about
seventeen million dollars which
would help us close that gap we
Are not getting any other
revenue coming in for for
cigarette and and vaping and
this year and again the the main
reason for this is that the
higher the tax thirty one cents
on a wholesale price is will and
have that young people from
going and trying and getting
hooked into vaping one of the
FIR said well they may go to
smoking well that's the other
unfortunate fact a study by the
D. O. H. show did if you do
think you're seven times more
likely to go on to smoking and
tobacco which in of itself is
also a self of medicinal drug
and does have more damaging
effects so essentially what we
propose is to put this bill in
place the first part of the bill
demonstrates that that we have
been able to get the departments
of health together that's where
the money would go and they will
work with the departments of
higher education and the P. E.
D. and this H. HSD to
collaboratively figure out how
to put education programs
together that some of which are
in New pack there is a great
program that you NM anti vaping
and so forth that higher
education department said we can
spread to all the twenty nine
other or twenty eight other
institutions and actually boast
of that up so this really is a
use prevention activity and so
it is earmarked many people say
you shouldn't earmarked but
because we're so far behind in
where we we should be in the
money that we're spending on
prevention and some people
certainly helping for cessation
in particularly in use or most
of on a ball and then I just
want to point this out and you
have a hand out there on the
back of that that the it's
really the fact
this is a fentanyl pool.
This is what is used to get that
now in and the fentanyl overdose
deaths in the U. S. in our well
over a hundred thousand and it's
just going to get worse and so
vaping is the gateway to
fentanyl to death is well as the
gateway to addiction and with
that I was it's a stand for
questions unless my colleagues
experts have any other brief
comments to make.
Thank you Mr chair members the
committee vote yes thank you Mr
I just want we have some drugs
appear and I just want to to
show you some because one of the
main things this bill does is it
defined synthetic nicotine.
Where are statutes are written
only tobacco products are taxed
but synthetic nicotine is not
tax this is.
Twenty nicotine pouches
absolutely no excise tax on this
zero and any other of these
chewing tobaccos or the E.
cigarettes they have
the the cigars.
Have a twenty five percent of
product value tax with a cap of
fifty cents so any cigar three
hundred dollars a guard has a
fifty cent tax on it.
All of these E. cigarettes.
They have a twelve point five
percent tax on them.
Which is much less than the tax
on a cigarette.
The
The the
what do you call on the the
cylinders that you use in E.
cigarettes have a fifty cent
tax.
So when you compare the price of
cigarettes and the tax on
cigarettes to these other
tobacco products the cigarette
taxes here the other tobacco
products down here almost every
other state in the country
charges a percent of the
wholesale price on other tobacco
products and we charge twenty
five percent on some things of
the product value which is much
different we're the only state
the taxes on product value so
our contention is all of these
are under taxed or not taxed.
Are not comparable with the tax
cigarettes which make them much
more attractive for youth to
begin using so that we feel like
if we just raise the price of
all these other tobacco products
to be equal with the cigarette
tax that first we'll get more
revenue and maybe we can use
some of the for prevention but
we will also be discouraging
youth from buying these products
thank you.
The.
my other expect by.
Mr chairman members of the
committee I think of what one of
the key factors I want to
mention is the the synthetic
nicotine products so the E.
cigarette you know manufacturers
have been using this product to
to avoid FDA regulations so in
March last year Congress passed
a law saying like the head FDA
has the authority over
regulating you know the
synthetic drugs as you know
nicotine products so I think
that this the you know the the
bill proposed here you know a
man's the tobacco products act
to include synthetic nicotine
products and tax them as such so
by doing that we will be in
compliance with the federal law
that was passed last year and
you know just for example you
know the FDA has not approved
any synthetic nicotine products
to be marketed and they sent out
seventy five warning letters to
manufacturers to stop you know
the marketing these products and
you know they also rejected you
know for nine hundred and twenty
five thousand applications for
new products for these synthetic
drugs so I think you know it's
it's important that we comply
get in compliance with the
federal law and tax them as such
and and these are cheaper drugs
for example like you know the
pouch of eight milligrams of of
nicotine and and one path which
and they're like twenty pouches
one cigarette contains one
milligram of nicotine so that
box of twenty is four dollars
and fifty cents and it has the
equivalency of eight packs of
cigarettes of nicotine when you
buy those it's like almost
eighty Bucks so kids are going
to these cheaper versions and
and the industry in the
manufacture tobacco industry are
coming.
Help the new synthetic drugs so
I think it's it's important for
us to you know getting complies
with that thank you Mr.
Mr chair just.
Mr chair one last thing I forgot
to mention there is a five
hundred thousand dollar
appropriation for our out of for
the regulation and licensing
department and that's because
they need help in the localities
a lot of the shops are popping
up and not getting license
they're definitely selling to
minors all the time and that
would help them and that's a
that's a one time just to see
how that would would work and
this will go next to the finance
committee if that's not gonna
work in finance will call that
taxable get some other ways to
do it so this bill It standing
in and of itself is likely
what's going to come around and
will work on the licensing and
regulation Department next year
but this is the initial wall we
need to put in place to stop the
chain reaction that ends up in
detection too much more harmful
of drugs thank you doctor so at
this time we go to the audience
anybody support.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee.
Excuse me my name is Andreas
Archuleta I'm here representing
the New Mexico outside counsel
and tobacco for a coalition of
more than sixty organizations
both local and national.
Would American hearts can long
cancer
back with the kids of particular
data list off of it I'll keep
going.
got a minute perfect all right
so tobacco is the leading cause
of preventable death in the
state in this country that is
why we are focused on this issue
more than ninety percent of
smokers start before the age of
eighteen and I have vast
majority of teens and young
adults who start smoking are
currently smoking.
These vape products try their
single use this is one of the
most common types of these
products I this one contains
five percent nicotine.
That is for the five thousand
hits that is contained in this
device your disposable they get
thrown away on this one in the
street the other day.
that is the equivalent of four
packs of cigarettes.
that that that all right well.
These products are are teaching
young people to rely on
addictive substances.
to deal with their mental health
problems you know that young
people are are having increasing
depression anxiety
Yeah we should be allowing this
thank you very much for your
time thank you all righty.
Right up to.
Three okay all right.
Okay that that's fine I think
will go up anybody in
opposition.
Guys gonna please.
Scott Scanlon registered
lobbyist for Altria and we stand
today in respectful opposition
to to this legislation we've had
several conversations with
Senator Hickey we've offered a
couple of alternatives for for
this issue and and we're more
than happy to discuss it maybe
move something forward but we
also do agree that synthetic
nicotine products are not taxed
and they should be taxed and so
we up we do what we do agree
with that and finally I think if
we are going to have this
discussion in a broader scale
and we're talking about use
vaping use state building of
cannabis is going on a on a line
like straight up and
you state building of tobacco is
going on a line like that so for
going to have this discussion I
think all adult drugs should be
discussed thank you Mr thank
you.
But at.
Mr chairman members of the
committee that on yeah okay my
apologies John Thompson I
represent a nonprofit trade
association of independent
storefronts throughout New
Mexico I'd like to make two
points Mr chairman the first
building in in this was brought
to my attention the house
commerce committee recently The
New Mexico on New Mexico statute
is silent on the minimum age
that somebody who can sell
tobacco right so I think that's
something we need to look at
when we have this discussion
about youth access if we don't
have a minimum age of who can
probate tobacco products that's
a weekly Mr Chairman secondly
the clients I represent I was in
front of one of their stores the
other day they all the big sign
on the door if you're not over
twenty one you can't go into the
store doesn't matter if your mom
with child's father with child
you cannot go in the store so I
believe that that's something we
need to examine again as far as
that youth access I would also
like to echo what Mister Scanlan
said currently right now Mr
chairman tax on cannabis in the
state is twelve and a half
percent intoxicating said I
think it's a relevant
conversation worth having as we
talk about adult use substances
particularly those that are
intoxicating appreciate the time
thank you Mr chairman thank you.
Mr chairman my name is Bob are
Bruce you representative of the
of the cigar industry of
America's of the cigar industry
has been around for quite awhile
I'd like to point something out
of.
There's.
Children don't smoke cigars this
is lumping everything in with
with the the thing you're trying
to get rid of.
But but of a a cigar or
something different four years
ago.
With the legislature but other
people we got together and put a
cap on what you could charge for
premium cigar.
That was done.
And this worked very well up
until now because.
The price of cigars got so high
that of we had put a cap on the
because people could afford to
buy them and and we put that cap
on and it's worked now for about
four years so we we we we oppose
this bill because we're once
again to everything that that
you're trying to get rid of
without total regulation and I
would I would ask that you to
consider this because of.
The guard or different and I'll
I'll just point out I've been
doing this a long Sir we're
right to the end of okay
I've done this a long time and
I've never seen a kid smoking
twenty dollar cigar and I don't
think you ever will but I
appreciate your concern on this
thank you.
Up the
thank you doctor more.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I know it's been a
long morning but Louco Tero
registered lobbyist for rental
of and we to stand in opposition
respectfully we look forward to
carrying a on a of meaningful
conversation to fix this because
as you've heard from the
previous speakers.
The issue isn't yes with the
vapes it's with cannabis it's
let's look at the whole the
whole spectrum Mr chairman
members of the committee let's
have a real meaningful
discussion and let's fix it
thank you thank you.
Already.
So with that we'll go to
ET Senator Kernan.
Thank you Mr chairman I know we
are kind of running out of time
that.
A couple of things I want to
mention I was called to my high
school couple months ago and the
principles all four of them had
a meeting with me and showed me
a video talk to me about the
huge increase in overdoses at at
my high school showed me the box
of vaping material where they
don't know when when they
approach a student that has
overdose whether they need to
put gloves on because it could
be fit and all whether it's
cannabis this is a major major
issue and our schools and I
think the focus as much as you
know the E. cigarette the
definition in the state of this
I would expand to include
nicotine and thank you for the
gentleman that use the term
addictive substances because
that needs to be included in
this and this isn't just about
nicotine it's not just about
cigarettes with regard to our
young people I don't I think
that maybe have a start a little
bit but very quickly I think
they're going to cannabis it's
on our campuses they have to put
detectors in the bathrooms to to
catch them if they can they're
very expensive sometimes they
don't work kids are afraid to go
the bathroom now because that's
where it's occurring but the
overdose issue with regard to
cannabis has got to be part of
this bill cigars cigars at I
take that out we don't I mean
that is a non starter for young
people we have got to address
what cannabis is doing and with
regard to our L. D. and giving
them more money I've got the
name of the gentleman into for
years with our LD he's the one
who is supposed to have
oversight over when a young
person goes into those shops in
your correct we have people
under age they're actually
working in those shops selling
the materials but that's RLD's
responsibility but I can't more
principles this phone number you
all should have it so when you
hear about.
People that are selling to young
people allowing them into those
shops this is so you need to
call in in the consequence is
gonna be they lose their license
immediately and so this is a
huge problem I don't think
cigars has anything to do with
it I don't think it's I don't
think I think you cigarette is
the wrong name for those vaping
devices because it's about
delivering substances that are
they're killing our kids and so
I don't know the answer to this
is a good start but I don't
think it's broad enough and I
think you need to include
cannabis I told my principles of
said don't expect anything from
the state on on campus because
it's all legal now and you're
gonna have to deal with this
from a community standpoint and
try to educate our kids about
putting anything in anything
using the banks it's all over
this state in our high schools
and our agency schools so I
don't know the answer I mean
this is a start
that it needs a little bit of
work in my view before I can
supported on the floor and I
hope you to remove some of the
stuff that the thing to do with
anything in increase that
definition under E. cigarettes
to include addictive substances
and we've got to do that for our
kiddos thank you thank you
Senator Hamblen thank you Mr
chair and I echo some of my
colleagues statements about
addictive substances I hope
that's a consideration
because I I do agree that that
you know when when we have kids
in high school getting high in
the bathrooms there are problems
there and I've always been
against kids having access to
cannabis and and want to make
sure they don't you know I I got
to meet with the young group
from an organization called the
vault meant and that is a youth
led group and they are just
brilliant as young people who
are realizing that their
population that youth but also
I'd like to add that LGBTQ
people are also targeted by by
the tobacco industry and we're
talking about the.
E. cigarettes or vaping just a
affect transgender youth
currently used tobacco products
at higher rates than cisgender
youth including four times
higher cigarette use and three
times higher of the cigarette
use when it comes down to L. G.
B. T. Q. females they are for
cigarette use three point one
times more likely to use those
substances and with E. cigarette
use two point three times more
likely and so the targeting of
these populations in this is
historic that the LGBTQ
population has been targeted by
the tobacco industry is
repulsive and so I'm grateful
for this I do think that there
are some things that would like
make this stronger which I think
is the intent of the sponsor is
to make sure that kids don't get
stuck on that and so I
appreciate that I appreciate the
comments thank you Mr chair.
Already on gentleman.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
thank you thank you for bringing
this forward.
So this this bill address.
The flavoring.
Mr chairman and senator Tom and
we we we actually have the
number of have and probably have
a number of the tobacco bills we
did have one and flavors the the
convoluted nature of flavors and
banning M. is so difficult to
ride out that that basically
that bill failed around.
That that activity so that we
would we would love to do it and
certainly if you hear the people
on prevention for vaping getting
rid of flavors so we will go
back and trying to figure out
that convoluted language to get
rid of flavors in in the vaping
but was too much to really be
able to get across this year.
Yes thank you doctor in.
Mr chair of so I just want to
say that I agree with the
senator current we need to make
some of them as but we are at a
time we can't wait another year.
It is it is this the first
committee or subcommittee and so
the first committee to Senate
finance have to this this goes
to Senate finance and I'm I will
absorb your amendments about
addictive substances and with
the vaping I think that's a
really an excellent suggestion
I'm a little confused about the
cigar component I don't I think
that's covered under the other
bill I may be wrong but we will
look into that we couldn't that.
And and and this is this is the
start I'm
Senator Schmedes and I Senator
Kernan Mr chair are looking at
could we.
What a bill together that would
get rid of vaping all together
in other words the the products
I mean they're still nicotine
and we hope to stop that in in
the youth but the cause of the
delivery systems into presents
for marijuana for other things
are under age
we would like to get rid of it
in the state and the people who
are in cessation programs there
are patches there are other ways
that they have to be able to
reduce their addiction to
cigarettes but this this is a
start this comes out of this
rock of the tobacco settlement
review oversight did and we had
a number of bills we're still
trying to get the firm and then
what's going to be passable and
engaging folks but this this I
think is one of the most
important bills we have and
would like to use this is a
start but will take in the very
good suggestions from the
committee before finance.
Thank you of.
So what are the pleasure of the
committee.
The defense of a motion for do
passed by Senator Hamblen it was
second.
Second second was senator
Clemente.
I have called rules but not
that.
Senator Brandt Senator greats.
Senator Hotmail yes Senator
Kernan yes.
Chair of the senator Sanchez.
Senator Tallman yes.
Senator Wirth excuse Senator
Hamblen yes.
Senator Shendo yes we have six
yeses and one no.
Senator Kernan
or I'll just go real quickly I
do want to see some changes some
additions and some subtractions
a hope of in.
Maybe more information about
what we are taxing with regard
to cannabis and how that
compares and which ones really
doing the most damage to our
young people so
Act that's what I'll be talking
about going forward thank you.
Thank you madam center and I
will come in the would you and
those changes.
Senator breaks thank you Mr
chairman and senator being I
think what we heard in the
audience is you know some some
valid concerns and I hope that
you know you talk to those guys
and see how you can best
implement because you know it's
all going to be important let's
all come and it's all problem
so let's see if we can do some
good with that thank you Mr
sanction.
Mr chair Senator real quick the
reason I voted no was let's see
these put in there and then I
can let's talk.
Ordered to produce.
What was the
so we had to six yes and one no
okay all right have to pass.
Thank you thank you Mr chair
okay so I know we want to it's
four sessions starts at twelve
thirty so we're going to two
more bills Gonzales's of you can
get on there and then Senator
souls and that that would be the
end role the restroom over.
And then
and then give folks a little
break before we start floor
session at twelve thirty.
Thank you.
Okay all right senator Glenn
other meals intolerances bill
thank you only for payments of
yes this is a Senator Gonzales
bill this is about the bar
central regional transit
district we refer to that as the
blue by just and we're that
requesting an amendment to the
are to the regional transit Act
to authorize law enforcement
officers for the buses now this
amendment will allow rtds with
bus services to provide the
state law enforcement that's
currently permitted on trains
and so we cover more than ten
thousand square miles with
approximately seventy
communities that house Rio
Arriba Los Alamos and Santa Fe
counties including eight
northern Pablo's and providing
some transit our transportation
between what I and Farmington as
well as the the way this bill is
right and it will allow any of
the four existing are to do is
create their own transit law
enforcement agency if needed in
the R. T. D. can financially
support such department.
And with me today is Tony or
tree all of which is the
executive director of our to do
not too sure if you want to add
a few comments good afternoon
Mr chairman and members of the
committee
Senator Karmiel explained it
very well it's a very
straightforward amendment
allowing the the law enforcement
activities on buses as well as
the existing activity on trains.
And that's I don't have the
toward and then that plan to
stand for any questions thank
you of kids go to the audience
anybody here in support of this
bill.
But as soon.
Anybody in opposition.
I see none committee anybody has
any questions with regards to
the bill.
The motion for do pass by
Hamblen second by Senator
current.
Any opposition to do pass motion
see none of the best six two
zero.
Senator souls.
I think I'm the last one is kind
of like an elementary school
before I got big that I was the
last one chosen for sports and
things like.
As you read through this
probably whether short is built
that you've seen in a while I
did have this bill two years ago
the.
A little bit of explanation up
in the world of aviation we're
talking and I'm talking about
the piston aviation not jets or
turban.
And motors.
They are still spewing lead into
the atmosphere every time they
fly in New Mexico there's
probably hadn't about a thousand
to two thousand pounds of lead.
Dusted over our communities over
our children every single year
at the federal level for twenty
five years they've known this
and have not done anything
because there's been no urgency
to it.
That is beginning to change at
the federal level.
But there's a concern still that
at small airports that there
have been exclusive contracts
for a particular brand of
aviation fuel that contains lead
in it it's often called hundred
low let it actually contains
about five times the lead the
two cars used to contain unit
per gallon.
This bill would prevent someone
with the new totally unleaded
fuels from coming in this would
allow them you could not prevent
them from coming in it's almost
a double negative from coming in
and selling fuel because someone
has an exclusive contract to
sell aviation hundred low lead
fuel my little airplane you all
know that I'm a pilot flies best
on what's called no gas which is
the unleaded no alcohol auto gas
it is unavailable at all most if
not exclusively any of the
airports in New Mexico some
because there are some exclusion
contracts either from the fuel
distributors or the local
community that is given a sole
source FBO fixed base operator
for to sell fuel at the airport
and therefore it's not available
for those who can fly on what is
already an established fuel for
those this would just make those
kinds of contracts no avoid that
if somebody wanted to come in
and sell unleaded fuel at an
airport they are not prevented
either by local ordinance by
exclusivity through a
distributor or other.
Right thank you.
expert witness I'm it.
All righty okay so I could tell
you way more about to address
the letter in a letter tools
than you would ever want to know
but we've got a floor session in
about twenty minutes and you
don't want to hear me talk for
forty five minutes good are I
appreciate that okay so we'll go
to the audience anybody here in
support of US Senate bill
seventy five three.
That's going to make sure.
Watching there's nobody else
here.
I'm the last one chose anybody
in opposition.
Now we go to the committee for
questions the current thank you
very much Mr I've heard this
bill before yes I've had this
conversation and and so but it's
my understanding that you make
your own fuel is that correct
sorta chair and and senator no
that was for my car I need my
own do sol okay your point out
for your individually I carry
the fuel out in five gallon jugs
that I'd buy at this store or
the one
civilly station in Los crucis
that sells the most guests the
unleaded ninety octane auto gas
no alcohol on a gas fitter
carrying clothes you carry gas I
carry two five gallon jugs out
with me to put in my airplane
because my airplane runs better
on it and the the leaded fuel
makes my airplane less safe Mr
chair just be clear that this
does not require airports to.
Contract with those companies
that could find it it just if
you find a company that's
willing to do it then they would
need to allow both types of fuel
to be available at an airport
this particular one just
prevents the exclusion of
somebody coming in due to some
other contract Mr chair the the
airports are managed by I guess
different counties would would
date who seems a liability if
you've got two kinds of fuel
accidentally one gets what for
the other what's going to happen
to that airplane if it's filled
in correctly Mr chair and
senator and that's a very good
question and the liability is
always with the pilot at the
ultimate liability is with the
pilot to ensure that the
airplane is properly fueled up
part of pilot training is
learning which fuels your
airplane is usable is allowed to
use how to properly fuel the
airplane how to monitor how much
and in airplanes we don't even
rely on the gauges we actually
have a dipstick that we measure
how much is actually in the tank
each time the different fuels
have different colors to them
also we drain the small amount
out and make sure that it is the
proper light blue color is the
hundred low that the the auto
gas is kind of a of a straw
color.
That's all I have thank you
Senator told I know when you
want to notice just warning you
I appreciate this Mr chair and
and bring this up I you know
Center souls like this I
remember the first bell and we
didn't get any emails on this
one what's the difference.
This one is very different
indeed this one just prevents
when when for instance one of
those companies that makes the
the new unleaded fuel comes in
that the airport whether it's
run by the county whether it's
run by an individual that they
cannot exclude that the other
one.
Talked about that by twenty
twenty eight did you could not
sell any unleaded fuel or any
leaded fuel in New Mexico this
one is getting ready for that
that as those coming in that
they be allowed to start
operating in till they're
required to.
Thank you Senator Griggs.
Thank you Mr chairman and ensure
Senate current product basically
the FBO and so the FBOs are
contracted by the the owners of
the airport which are usually
the counties or the cities any
case yes and so.
If you know you've got another
person that wants to come in and
then do that that's not that FBO
are there are there contractual
issues with that Senator mean as
far as the the communities and
having to allow another.
F. B. O. out there to help how
would I do you envision that
happening.
Mr chair and senator and and
you're asking exactly the right
kinds of questions in most cases
this would not be an FBO coming
in it might be somebody that
sets up a self serve
but guests auto gas pump that
people can go but the credit
card in and and fill their own
airplanes most of the FBOs have
a crew that comes out drive the
truck up to your airplane fill
it out they also provide pilot
supplies they provide that the
charge for parking on the ramp
or hangar space overnight they
got a number of other things
that they provide maintenance
services and things of that sort
and so in many cases I envision
somebody coming and quite
frankly there some airports in
the Midwest that somebody comes
and parks an old fuel truck
there that is loaded with the
unleaded fuel and it's got a
novel on it with a place for
your credit card and if the of
the regular operator doesn't
have unleaded fuel the the
unleaded fuel is better for the
airplanes that are there this
just would not allow the
prevention of someone coming in
doing that and and Mr chair and
it.
The the issue with that is
course it's still got to be.
Determined by the community I
guess it owns the airport it
would have to decide how the.
How the contract with someone to
do that which I would of I would
honestly imagine most would
prefer to give you know the
allows their F. B. O. to do it
so they wouldn't have the the
duplication the the the.
The city the city there you go.
But it's shy I don't know how
would actually turn out Senator
I usually I yes you know you you
won't know in two years do you
have something there but I don't
know that I see a.
A great risk although you don't
have a fuel truck parked out.
Might have some to community are
well I don't I don't know.
But that would be the staff
isn't as it played out to see
what would what was what
reserves the communities get
issues kind of like a hangar
lease they're gonna have to
lease them something in order to
to put whatever the weather to
track or a unit tank however may
be show thank you Mr Mr chair
thank you center thank you of.
I was gonna ask but I think that
the answer was partially into
the question Senator Griggs so
it's.
So.
Like you you you do your own so.
You feel your own planes at the
smaller ports nobody's are.
Committee so so you know exactly
so the cross contamination what
she was talking about forming a
likely with the small place
because you're doing your own it
Mr chair across the country
there are Miss fueling accidents
all the time by the FBOs people
who are they're tired they're
under trained and they they most
of them occur when someone puts
jet fuel into a piston engine we
had a very serious accident
probably eight or nine years ago
in Los crucis that killed four
people when that happened
certainly the FBO had some
liability because their employee
minuscule them put the wrong one
in but the pilot also was
responsible because the ticket
clearly show that they put jet
fuel in instead of aviation fuel
and the pilot is supposed to go
and check the smell very
different also and so it
ultimately also is upon the
pilot to be there watching and
make sure the airplane is
properly fueled the.
Yes I think what all right what
I what I want.
One.
Second by Senator AUMENT any
opposition to do pass motion.
See none of the press zero thank
you we are adjourned thank you
members of the committee it's
