Thank you.
Okay
I'm gonna go ahead and the call
the media the Senate tax
business and transportation
committee order thank you all
for for joining us
a slight change in the agenda
I'm gonna go with the the Senate
bill five first US senator
Mooney osis of the is getting
other Senate finance they're
also creating a meeting right
now so he needs to get back so
we'll start with Senate bill a
bill I they would jump back to
Senate bill fifty three and then
the.
On down the line Mr Chairman yes
thank you Mr chairman just
wanted to acknowledge our state
auditor whose president also
okay.
All right great is your summer
there is yet no I I can't see
everybody at once approximate
started.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you.
And then so.
I know that the gonna of for
Senate bill.
Fifty three we have about forty
folks that have wanted to speak
either in favor or against them
for Senate bill sixty six we
have sixty plus so I'm going to
give each person so let folks
know if you're listening you're
only going to have a minute to
speak on in their public comment
hello we need to get through
public comment so that we can
have the committee debate these
bills so I appreciate appreciate
your cooperation in that.
Of.
I might move Senate bill seventy
two up depending on how far with
grace and Senator the bill is in
Farmington and open a drive down
tonight so we hope that we can
get his bill up a little earlier
maybe after a.
US Senate bill
Sixty two so with that of.
Senator Munoz are you on.
I am Mr chairman okay go ahead
senator espys I local economic
development project changes
Senator Munoz thank thank you Mr
chairman you're aware we have a
substitute rate of I believe so
yes.
And so we'll we'll go into the
bill first and then then we'll
explain this understood it's
it's one quick changes swapping
money and where it comes from us
so good afternoon Mister
chairman and everybody.
Senate Bill I will provide
immediate economic assistance to
small business and mid size
businesses in New Mexico.
It also creates a long term.
Significant impact to create
jobs in New Mexico.
we know that during the COVID
approximately two thousand
people closer businesses and so
that's a very rough time and we
need to help them in we know
many are struggling including
landlords tenants keep up with
those of rental payments and so
Senate bill I.
She helps us with tenants in and
helps acquire large companies
that may come in
sure sure research shows that
the hardest type of businesses
are necessarily traditional
economic businesses restaurants
small retail clothing shops
bicycle shops
in all those will qualify for
the grants in so with that I do
have Secretary keys in that
secretary John Clark with me
today and so secretary do you
want to go for more than just an
office to the W. secretary.
Thank you senator Munoz Mr chair
and members many yeah basically
this bill has two components
that both expand how we can use
Lida to help businesses and
create jobs but the two parts
are completely separate so the
first one provides an immediate
economic assistance in the way
of requests for thousands of
small and mid sized businesses
to use for mortgage rents or
leases abatement so that they
can re hire workers or new
employees and speaking with
businesses businesses recently
this was the number one concern
that that they had incurred on
their rents as all you know as
all of you know lead it is the
job creation funds and so the
businesses that accept this
money have to commit to hiring
or bringing back a specific
number of workers and EDD will
monitor these benchmarks as we
do for all other lead to
investments.
We would utilize the NMFA
application process now in place
and the money would be paid out
through EDD's leader funds which
permits assistance or buildings
including mortgage rent and
lease payments.
So the second part of this bill
provides as a tool to be able to
incentivize larger he's like big
pharmaceutical caught artistical
companies or manufacturers to
come to New Mexico by providing
partial sharing of G. R. T.
revenues during construction
only at the approval of the
selected County and our
municipality so these larger
companies would not be eligible
for the recovery requests I just
mentioned.
This additional funding will
make our state more competitive
for big job creators it will
also ensure that funds all great
opportunities a rise the
recapture of G. R. T. is limited
to the construction phase of the
project into a portion of the G.
R. T. revenues Representative
project over three hundred and
fifty million dollars.
Like this do not come along very
often in New Mexico but when
they do what we want to be able
to win them and get the long
term economic gains to our
communities.
The question has come up about
the G. R. T. sharing and why it
can be used for smaller
developments so we have lead a
balances for those smaller
projects and what we really
struggle with now is winning the
bigger deals the goal of this
change is to maintain a
sustainable lead up balance so
that we can move forward with
investments all around all
around eight so really kind of
think of this as a big projects
will help fund smaller projects.
By not depleting Leda for
companies like Facebook or
ascent aviation deal with Justin
and Roswell or other large
projects we can say yes to
smaller projects like most of
Lana's or C. for farms are high
plains processing
and so other projects in the
community and other projects
around the state so this
provision also uses some of the
new revenues these bigger deals
generates to help us with the
smaller projects we need to do
it all and this bill actually
gives the tool to do that no I'm
gonna handed over to W.
secretary are you.
Or about the constitutionality
of this bill and why we are
using leave that as a mechanism
and also to talk a bit more
about the process for using G.
R. T. and how counties and
municipalities will have the
ultimate decision about whether
they participate W. secretary.
Thank you secretary keys and
thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee of this bill
addresses a key question that
might be raised about the issue
of constitutionality and that's
the anti donation clause leader
is granted an exception to the
anti donation clause of the
state constitution as long as
job creation is involved so
that's why we're going through
the legal process but also why
the bill requires job creation
for typically to deals EDD will
provide a portion of leader
money up front and then the
companies have to meet certain
milestones and the contract to
receive additional tranches of
money this bill continues that
same framework by providing one
of the four quarterly payments
up front and then requiring
companies to meet hiring
requirements to receive all or a
portion of the additional
quarterly payments.
We the constitution requires me
to funds be used for land
building infrastructure and this
can include mortgage rental
lease payments which has the
secretary mentioned we know is a
significant concern for
businesses across the state.
Not also want to talk briefly
about the G.R.T.  sharing
portion of the bill this allows
us to decide together EDD the
county and municipality if we
need to use this mechanism to
attract really big deals that we
couldn't land otherwise all
three have to agree or there's
no deal so it's optional for the
local governments this takes a
little more than half of the new
G. R. T. revenues generated
during just during construction
and allows that to flow back to
the project through the normal
legal process in addition a
little bit extra from the state
portion only for a total of
seventy five percent will remain
in the lead to fund using some
of this new revenue that's
generated by this company to
attract other projects or help
local expansions they're still
allows a quarter of the new
revenues generated to flow to
the state's general fund in
nearly half of the new local
revenues to stay with those
local governments so this is a
win in terms of jobs and
investment but it's also when in
terms of revenues this is just
for very occasional really big
projects that we can't land
otherwise and just as a quick
example look at the jobs
investment and economic activity
that lost blue is seen because
of Facebook what if we didn't
have enough uncommitted leader
dollars to compete for that
project if we couldn't land that
deal in the other way we could
have all agree to use this this
is just a way to make sure the
big deals don't pass us by with
that I'm happy to answer any
questions.
Mr chairman we do have a
substitute.
We.
I and.
Okay so you wanna make the
motion for do not pass to the
new introduce a committee
substitute is that.
Mr Chairman yes twenty year
members maybe Sierra.
It's an.
Thank you
Senator Padilla yes Mr chairman
I would move a do not pass on
Senate bill.
Somebody have the number in
front of you Senate Bill I
Senate bill five and a due pass
for the.
Purposes of discussion.
Committee Subsys get a Senate
tax business and transportation
committee substitute presentable
I.
For discussion purposes only.
I'll second that.
Do we have a second any
discussion.
Senator what the substitute bill
does is it it's what it's swaps.
The severance tax money for
Or cash money or one time money
that we have in the budget that
because that's one.
Yes correct okay.
All right any any opposition to
the motion.
Mr chair I think.
Are we on the bill are we going
to to hear public comment.
Mr chairman my motion was for
discussion purposes only you can
act on that so we can discuss
the bill.
Okay so.
So who's that.
Okay sentiment okay so so we
have a a discussion any of.
So do we vote for the substitute
bill at this time.
Now Mr chairman we're going to
discuss the ability this point
we should go to public comment
look at it and go on to
committee members and all that
okay all right well thank you so
we'll go ahead and the the
public comment Micaela.
Mr Chairman with your permission
I just wanna make sure that the
sponsors have an opportunity to
fully address is if you want to
say anything else about the
substitute because I'm sure it's
very different from the
original.
Senator minnows any Mr chairman
and senator the subject is not
different other than the spot
from its to be used for
severance tax permanent fund to
general fund money for the two
hundred million.
Thank you Mr chairman so I guess
we going out of public comment
okay thank you.
Okay great first hearing any
soldiers.
Mr chairman we can barely hear
mark hello I I can I cannot hear
I hear her talking but I don't I
can't hear what she's saying is.
That's much better thank you Mr
chairman.
Sorry about that.
Now we'll be hearing Senate bill
five opposition.
Are there any members of the
public who wish to speak in
opposition.
Okay we will be moving on to
support we'll be hearing from
Jason Espinoza.
Your manages.
The chairman members of the
committee Jason Espinoza
registered lobbyists with the
New Mexico technology council
and we stand in support of
legislation thank you.
Thank you Mr Espinoza now we
will hear from Ashley Wagner
actually.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I'm Ashley Wagner
director of public policy for
the New Mexico chamber of
commerce we stand in support of
Senate bill five because it will
provide some relief in the form
of grants that qualify
businesses can use to pay the
landlord and get people back to
work small businesses are
substantial part of the New
Mexico economy and according to
the FIR the small business
administration reports New
Mexico has one hundred fifty
thousand small businesses with
three hundred forty thousand
workers many of those businesses
have been decimated by the
pandemic shut down and the
grants to be delivered by this
legislation would provide a
critical lifeline for many this
bill will also help to see to
track very large economic
development projects by
providing more competitive
incentive offers this in turn
will also expand our workforce
and help grow our economy thank
you.
Thank you Ashlee now we will
hear.
From S. C. Currier.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
and members of the committee my
name is Missy Currier and I sat
on the New Mexico partnership
board and work with the economic
development corporation of Lee
County we stand in support of SB
five the goal of the partnership
and the EDC LC are not only to
attract new industry to New
Mexico but the retain and
expansion of current businesses
of all sizes due to the economic
hardships we are currently
facing SB I would allow for New
Mexico businesses to not only
have a chance for recovery but
ultimately future expansion
economic development and
diversification are always
crucial but now they are more
important than ever therefore we
stand in support of SB SB five
to support current business and
future expansion development and
diversification thank you for
the opportunity to testify.
Thank you missing now we will
hear from Jay branch more Mister
Moore.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Roy Moore
and I'm a registered lobbyist
for Albuquerque economic
development and we stand very
much in support of Senate bill
five the.
Attraction of Senate bill five
is the ability to allow for the
adjustments in the leader funded
allow for the state to be
competitive on large projects
were also sympathetic to the
relief that is provided to the
smaller businesses but the
tweaks and laid out are very
very appealing to Albuquerque
economic development we stand in
strong support of the bill thank
you so much.
Thank you Mr Moore are there any
other members of the public who
wish to make a statement in
support of Senate bill five
again these are statements of
support for Senate bill five.
Okay.
Loses portion of the public
statement percent of bill I
thank you so much.
Thank thank you Michael and I
will go to the.
Committee.
Members.
We have any.
Senator Hamblen please.
Thank you Mr chairman I'd like
to just actually just make a
comment and thank Senator
menulis and secretary keys and
all of the the partners who
worked on this as we know and
and miss Wagner New and this
career also brought this up
about how our small businesses
are suffering terribly and I
think we need to be able to give
them an the opportunity to
receive financial support so
that they can be around once we
come out on the other side of
this pandemic so I'd like to
thank Senator Munoz Secretary
keys for working on this thank
you very much thank you Mr
chair.
Thank you senator.
And so with that Mr chairman if
with your permission I'll move
it to pass.
Just a real quick question that
I have Senator of before we move
on to that motion of there's a.
The grant portion on the just a
clarification maybe a madam
secretary or a or W. on the.
This is a quarterly installments
sure if if if an individual or
or company is awarded the so the
requests there paid out on its
own Stallman bases is that the
correct and then
how does that work and then once
you awarded what are the
qualifications for those bills
installment pay outs pretty
explain little bit about that.
Senator.
Thanks to all my payments are
based on the leader programme so
as a business comes into New
Mexico and builds and and here
to it's a goal then the lead at
first the payment would be made
and and then once I get the
second gold in that second
quarterly payment would be made
and so that refers to the leader
portion of the bill the grant
payments in the grant loans
would be funded all one time if
you applied in your landlord and
you did not you for again
requests and so then you would
be eligible to apply for that
grant money and that would be
distributed all one time.
Okay so that's the
distinguishing between the grant
to small businesses and the
larger investments is that.
That's correct.
Create already with that we have
a motion for do pass from
Senator Padilla we have a
second.
Okay this one Senator Hamblen.
Okay with that laying the take
the role.
Program.
Thank you
here no.
Senator Brandt in here.
Yes I can hear you as chairman
can't hear anybody else in.
Would.
Senator Brandt.
Yes.
Sorry Senator Griggs.
Yes Senator Hamblen.
Yes Senator Hickey he's not here
yet Senator Hotmail yes Senator
Kernan.
Yes senator Sanchez.
Yes.
Tallman.
Yes.
Senator Wirth.
Senator.
Yes Senator Shendo.
Yes.
To want to use.
Right so ten to one Senator
manual so you have a do pass on
Senate bill five.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee.
Thank you thank you.
All right now we'll move on to.
Senate bill of fifty three that
was held over from the US to.
we have a.
The committee sub as well.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee as remember we
we presented last time in a
limited way and we had some
public comment in some
discussion but we bring now a
committee substitute and
secretary can Ortiz should be in
the zoom ready to explain what
we're bringing to this August
committee.
The secretary or tease their yes
sure thank you senator Mr
chairman members of the
committee thank you for this
opportunity to explain Senate
bill fifty three which is now
committee saw substitute for
your consideration this
committee substitute as part of
the General Services departments
by New Mexico campaign which is
in it in initiative to drive
more state and local government
contracting dollars to New
Mexico businesses particularly
veteran minority and tribal
owned businesses.
This bill will keep more New
Mexico taxpayer dollars in New
Mexico helping homegrown
businesses recover grow and
create jobs for New Mexicans
this measure will also promote
purchases goods reducing the
carbon footprint of state and
local governments and cutting
greenhouse gas emissions the
bill is good for New Mexico
businesses and the.
This legislation will make
several changes to the
procurement code and related
laws that govern billions of
dollars in any state purchasing
by state and local governments
this bill is going to create an
advantage for resident minority
and veteran owned businesses as
well as tribal owned businesses
will currently only residents
small businesses and residents
veteran owned small businesses
currently have a built in
advantage the veteran owned
business preferences due to
expire in twenty twenty two this
bill will also extend that
bedrooms preference this bill
will also allow purchasing
offices at their discretion to
restrict contract awards to New
Mexico businesses want to small
New Mexico businesses.
And it's also going to require
state and local our purchasing
offices to buy recycled goods
and other sustainable goods when
the cost of the goods is no more
than ten percent of the hiring
compatible or conventional goods
we have a couple of other small
technical fixes as far as the
administration of the
procurement code Mr Chairman we
stand for questions.
Thank you representative and
thank you secretary of we'll go
to a public comment Mr Chairman
did you wanna motion on this to
go for a ride in the commotion
for substance As suggested to
them would move to a do not pass
on Senate transportation
business.
Senate tax business and
transportation committee Senate
bill fifty three and a due pass
for purposes of discussion the
committee substitute for the
Senate transfer to access
business transportation
committee subs to present about
fifty three thank you Mr.
We have a few more weeks to go
to get the news.
I appreciate thank you Senator
so we'll go to a public comment
now.
You'll be hearing from the
opposition for Senate bill fifty
three are we hearing from
heather rentals first heather.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
and members of the committee my
name is heather rentals and I'm
a buyer for less than a school
district in sixty seconds isn't
long so I'm gonna talk fast
thank you for expanding on the
definitions of negotiation and
for modifying thirteen dash one
dash one one six regarding
disclosures but while I can
appreciate the intent to offer
more flexibility to procurement
officers to allow for exclusive
procurements there's nothing to
protect chief procurement
officers from being completely
ramrod it by local elected
officials the implications for
continued public correction or
high chief procurement officers
are held to a very high standard
but more often than not are
governed by those who are not
held to that same standard I'm
requesting that language be
inserted that clarifies the
chief procurement officer is the
one who makes the determination
to issue exclusive procurements
based on what is in the best
interest of their agency it's
easy to say that if it's closer.
Is issued and the agency doesn't
get what they need they just re
issue but that also costs
additional resources and becomes
burdensome to agencies only have
one or two people in their
purchasing offices thank you.
Thank you heather
that was the last person for
opposition on my list candid you
want to speak in opposition.
No support okay we'll come back
to.
Are there any other members of
the public who would like to
speak in opposition to the bill
fifty three.
No all right we will move on we
will now hear from Randall
Cherry Randall.
Mr chairman I'm here as a
technical
adviser I'm not here to speak
and supporter opposition thank
you thank you.
No.
My apologies Joanna Nelson.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I am
with the New Mexico economic
development department and the
strategic program.
And.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Jason Weaks Mr Wilkes.
One more time to Mr weeks Mr
Jason Weaks.
Okay moving when I hear from
Jeremy Farris Mr Ferris.
Mr chair committee members my
name is Jeremy Harris and
executive director of the state
ethics commission I want to
thank the sponsor and senator
and and secretary Ortiz and
director hated for working with
the state ethics commission on
on amending section thirteen one
one sixteen the confidentiality
provision of the procurement
code in the committee substitute
the ethics commission supports
that that amendment thank you.
Thank you Mr.
We will now hear from our chief
Garcia Mister Garcia.
Yes we can thank you Mr chairman
US secretary Ortiz as I stated
last week in in the prior
committee hearing light.
I am the president of the New
Mexico business exchange which
is a small a service disabled
veteran company and I.
We want to thank the of the
committee for.
Extending considering the
extension of the the current
resident veteran and resident
veteran contractor provisions
there would due to expire on in
twenty twenty two.
I think that's very helpful and
I would like to do it again just
to extend my my support for the
inclusion of the tribal and
seconds travel companies there
were it formally excluded from
the veterans preference by TRD
and I'm I'm glad to see that
there are going to be included
thank you.
Thank you Mr Garcia we will go
back to Mr Jason Weaks I saw him
pop back into our room here Mr
weeks go ahead.
Thank you Mr chair
representative Jason Weaks on
average through this for the
Albuquerque Hispanic chamber of
commerce we stand in support of
this legislation think it's much
need I think it will help
diversify our economy and also
help grow our economy really do
need to know utilization of on
minority owned businesses in
terms of how what percentage of
them are being contracted with
we think this is a fantastic
bill really want to thank the
senator are Senator we often
bring it as well as secretary or
tease and Mr Hayden thank you.
Thank you Mr we are we will now
hear from more than men's Mr
ness.
One more time for Mr Marvin then
is.
Okay you appears we will move on
to Mr Derek watch Mr watchmen.
One more time for Mr Laxman Mr
during watching.
Okay we will move on to Steven
Hogan Mr Hogan Mister Steven
Hogan are you available yes I'm
here good afternoon Mister
chairman members of the
committee Senator o'neill and
securities.
As a member of the board of
directors for the New Mexico
veterans business advocates and
also I am a member of the New
Mexico procurement technical
assistance center and a veteran
owner of a small business I am
in favor of Senate bill fifty
three and the preferences that
it affords these various
categories of New Mexico small
businesses thank you.
Thank you Mr Hogan.
We will now hear from Gabrielle
Anwar test Gabrielle.
One more time for Mr Marquez
Gabrielle America's.
And we will move on to add Now
Senator agency sent out are you
available.
Moving.
Is miss lily Irvin Valletta
available.
Okay Sharon Berman go ahead.
Hello there good afternoon I'm
my name is Sharon Berman and I a
work for New Mexico First.
And I want to thank you Mr
chairman committee members thank
you for this opportunity to
speak in favor of Senate bill
fifty three and a key to Senator
o'neill for sponsoring this
bill.
New Mexico first how hosted town
hall every two years each time
on a different topic last year
the topic was health and
community conversations around
the state leading up to the town
hall during the event and
through the president people
have routinely brought up
economic well being as a vital
part of health.
When thinking about food
insecurity and local food
systems people emphasize that
part of the problem is that
economic development
opportunities that empower
entrepreneurial endeavors and
financial sustainability are not
prioritize for low income
communities and people of color
we support Senate bill fifty
three because we know financial
well being now to other kinds of
well being thank you for this
opportunity.
Thank you chairman.
Now we hear from.
Mr king.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
committee members my name is
Keegan king I serve as the
bureau chief at the Indian
Affairs Department we said
instruction for this bill will
greatly benefit tribal minority
and women owned businesses
supporting minority in tribally
owned businesses as an
investment in our state's
economy.
In our tribal communities native
women are the backbone of our
local economy.
Recent estimates eight two out
of three native American women
the primary breadwinner read
winners and that additionally
the national women's law center
estimates of native women are
paid only fifty seven cents for
every dollar paid to their male
counterparts.
B. fifty three six address
inequities and make investments
where it is needed the most and
supporting sole proprietors and
entrepreneurs the Indian Affairs
Department and secretary we need
to support this bill thank you.
Thank you Mr king.
Now we were here for Mr can use
can.
Good afternoon this Mr chair and
members of the committee my name
is Jenny Hughes I'm speaking
that a for two organizations a
Rio Grande chapter of the Sierra
Club and the coalition of
sustainable communities
typically like the portion of
the bill that.
Offers
Purchasing agents the chance to
buy more recyclable products
even one is a bit more cost to
them.
Thank you for your support.
Thank you Mr Hughes I'm sure
reduced Rivera miss Rivera are
you available.
Yes I'm here you see here we.
Yes we can all right yes many
mysteries river of with the New
Mexico procurement technical
assistance center and we stand
in support of a Senate bill
fifty three thank you also to
the sponsor to sat Senator
o'neill for sponsoring and for
secretary Ortiz for bringing
this forward.
Thank you very much Mister Vera.
And now we were here from Alicia
mora I apologize if I
mispronounce your name.
Good afternoon members of the
committee chairman and secretary
Ortiz my name is I some what I
and I am the director of the
audit and compliance division of
the taxation and revenue
department but we currently
administer the resident business
and resident veteran business
preference certificates we stand
in support of the bill and with
the minor administrative changes
will be able to accommodate the
new classifications as part of
our existing process thank you.
Thank you miss more and finally
we will hear from Mr Bryan
Cologne our state auditor Mr
Clinton will not be timing you.
Thank you mark hello Mr chairman
and members the committee it's
not to be before you I will
stick to one minute I do stand
in support of substitute Senate
bill fifty three again I'm the
state auditor New Mexico we do
have a role in this particular
set of statutes and this work in
terms of auditing potentially
auditing certifications and we
work very closely with secretary
or tease and with the
procurement awesome arcade New
does a phenomenal job of
educating all of our
stakeholders that we audit on an
annual basis I would just say
that we at the office the state
auditor appreciated being
engaged in a conversation with
us secretary Thiessen his team
and and I would just quickly
just say that the agency from
those comments or of course
something the park by yourself
when you talk about making sure
that we are doing everything we
can to push back and fight and
avoid corruption in procurement
I would just say that every
agency certainly has the
discretion under this bill to
limit procurement to New Mexico
businesses and in the event the
bid price is too high or
otherwise non responsive to the
R. P. they can certainly expand
it to all businesses so there
are some stop gaps in place to
try to push back on any
potential waste fraud or abuse
and in the event stakeholders
have concerns about that we
always welcome them to call the
fraud hotline of New Mexico at
the office of the state auditor
one eight six six oh is a fraud
thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee and thank you to
the center for bringing this
bill super important in Mexico.
Thank you for.
Yes thank you are there any
other members of the public who
wish to speak on this bill and
that did not get an opportunity
please raise your hand using the
reaction button at the bottom of
your screen.
Give me one second.
And it looks like that concludes
all of our public statements for
Senate bill fifty three thank
you.
Thank you Micaela so now we'll
go to committee members I have
Senator direction and Senator
Hamblen.
Thank you Mr chair and and you
know we've discussed procurement
for a long time secretary or
secretary Ortiz and I've talked
about different approaches are
with the committee substitute
we've raised the
The number to ten percent from
from five percent show guide
could be ten percent higher than
the low bid and because she's in
New Mexico business he would be
awarded the the project one
might argue that the that that's
waste because the taxpayer winds
up pay and ten percent more for
job there and then he might have
otherwise.
So while there's a lot of this
bill that I think is is just
fine.
The that part of it is part I. I
struggle with and and I probably
won't support the bill because
of that.
I do wish I do wish it some
point we get have the the real
discussion about the way the the
city of Alamogordo handout
procurement which means there is
a local preference but the local
preference still has to match
the low bid on the projects of
both the the business the local
business gets the opportunity to
do the work.
But the taxpayer gets the
benefit of the best price so
what we have in this instance is
we have just the opposite we
have the taxpayer pay and more
so the business can be able to
to have the award and that's not
you know that's a New Mexico
business which is positive that
might not be in New Mexico
business in Albuquerque
and the projects in Albuquerque
so I just believe that there are
better ways to do this Mr chair
and I appreciate the sponsor
because I know I know his
heart's in the right all the
time so sure thank you Mr chair.
Thank you senator Senator
Hamblen.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator o'neill for bringing
this forward and just the voices
that we've heard so far of how
this can affect especially
minority owned businesses I just
have one question because
auditor Cologne answered my
other question is when we're
talking about the different
communities was there a reason
to not include LGBTQ owned
businesses or is that is that
consideration.
Secretary Ortiz can you answer
that.
Sure Center o'neill Mr Chairman
Senator Hamblen we feel that
that the L. LBGTQ community
actually fits within the
minority business definition
okay well what we're saying is
women ethnicity sexual
orientation all fit within the
minority business but that's
very good.
Thank you so much for clarifying
thank you Mr chair.
Thank thank you senator.
I
don't believe we have any more.
Mr Chairman this is what happens
okay go ahead a secretary then
respond to Senator Griggs
question I think it brings up a
really good point
Several discussions with them
and and senator grace thank you
for your reference of that hello
city of Alamogordo procurement
code we've actually researched
it and we're looking at at it to
see how possibly we can
incorporate it but the price
isn't the only thing that is
graded on our procurement so
when when in valuation committee
reviews are potential proposals
the look and the score
accordingly based on the product
actually offered the experience
of the company the financial
stability of the company
references that the company has
and of course the price is one
of a in the evaluation of the
scores typically the highest
bidder receives that with all of
those factors so I just wanted
to point out we just don't look
at the price but we look at a
series of attributes the company
brings in for possible contract
award I just want to clarify
that for you Sir thank you.
M. and Mr chairman if I might
those are those sort of things
when we get into the procurement
code we get into a variety of
subjective things sometimes and
I think there's some real
discussion it needs to be had
about the way we do bidding and
and some of that so I I would
love that opportunity to sit
down with the secretary Ortiz
and talk about Alamogordo and
talk about the whole process
speakers there are things that
we're the state auditor Mr
Cologne talked about you know
there are there are things in
there that are open to reveal.
I mean I I think they're the
real problematic show leads as
to where I of you it but the I
look forward to maybe sit down
with secretary and and talking
about ways it might might
ultimately make it better so
thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you senator I have Senator
Kernan.
Thank you Mr chair and so now I
have a question is that try to
figure all this out this is an
area I'm not estimate with that
I'm my question is when you
consider all the different
factors that are involved in
I'm putting something out for
bid do all of those factors are
weighted differently so with if
you're considering multiple
things so they all waited the
same way or are they different
can you kind of give me an idea
how that works.
Mr Chairman Senator Kernan
that's a really good question
the typically are weighted a
little differently I'm going to
introduce our state purchasing
director market in who typically
oversees evaluation committees
and as well as the committee
report distributed improved
director painting you mind
providing an example of of
weights and and the scoring
criteria on a typical
evaluation.
Yes thank you Secretary thank
you chair woman thank you
Senator Kernan and members of
the committee there are
different weights given to
factors depending on how
important certain criteria are
for example a past performance
of an entity that is done
business with government might
be weighted very heavily as
opposed to somebody was just new
in the business financial our
history might be a criteria
that's important but not
weighted as heavily there might
also be some staffing
arrangements that they have on
that that's weighted heavily so
that they can help bring the
expertise they need to to the
project so there's a variety of
factors they're all weighted
differently and it's dependent
on how important it is to the
outcome of the project thank you
for that question.
So Mr chair who determines the
weight given in one particular
project so it's not consistent
the project project project it's
the New Mexico termination that
on this project we're gonna wait
it this way and on another
project it might be different.
Mr Chairman director he didn't
go ahead please.
Thank you Secretary thank you
chair woman and thank you
Senator Kernan the the weight is
determined by the agency that's
requesting the procurement
because they may value let's say
in the construction field
somebody that knows how to build
a tall building much more
important than the fact that
that done concrete there might
be another example of where of
public education once somebody
sophisticated in administering
testing to to the school
population and they feel that
they're testing capabilities is
a very important criteria more
so than their staffing more so
than their history more so than
our financial so the HSD would
be the in the best position to
know what those criteria are and
how important it is to project.
Thank you thank you very much
and that help so when you talk
about the agency we're not
talking about well the public
education department for all
projects at this school might do
with regard to at a contractor
building up building up whatever
each individual local school or
school district would have the
opportunity to set the
percentage are would that come
from the public at or.
Forty from public school capped
out late you know if we're
talking about building schools
would be consistent across the
state which each district in
other words I have that
opportunity to set those
standards Mr Chairman Senator
Kernan it's K. the procuring
entity that would set the
standard so to answer your
question specifically Mr
chairman Senator Kernan it be
the actual school district if
they're going out to bid would
would wait find the weights on
the scoring evaluation.
Thank you that's really helpful
I appreciate that thank you
thank you.
Okay.
Thank you Senator Kernan I don't
see any other.
Hands up from our committee
members was a pleasure of the
committee.
Chairman I move it do not pass
on senator taxed business
business and transportation
committee Senate bill fifty
three and a do pass on Senator
transportation business
transportation committee
substitute percent or fifty
three.
Thank you senator we have a
second.
Chair I second whatever Senator
Padilla just sat.
I'm not even sure Mr chairman
Senator Senator had met but that
that's a couple you have to say
the whole thing oh my goodness I
don't know there's gonna be a
quiz.
I'm just kidding okay thank you
so much.
Mr.
Mr Chairman okay so so that
that's fine but we do have a a
motion and a second and so thank
you to do a roll call for a do
pass motion on.
This committees.
Senator Brandt.
No.
Right
now.
Senator Hamblen.
Yes.
Senator Hickey C. here yet yes I
I am sorry.
Thank you Mr chairman having
just come in and the last five
minutes or so
and I don't really know the
topic is there a way that I can
not both that's okay.
Yes.
Senator the new yes.
Senator.
Senator Sanchez.
Can I do a.
issue of not vote due to a
conflict of interest.
We keep.
Reviews there you go thank you.
Our test.
Senator Wirth yes Senator
Padilla yes Senator tion.
To have one.
Six yes three nose and to use.
So we have a two passed on on
Senate bill
Committee subdivision.
Senator fifty three committee
substitute thank you chairman
thank you members of the
committee.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you to members of the
committee.
So we will now move on to the.
Senate bill was sixty two.
Is Jerry is very billable.
Thank you.
Go ahead Senator.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee Senate bill sixty two
deals with an issue that we
continue to struggle with hope
to attract.
Our youngest and brightest
health care professionals to
remain in the state.
And one of the things we we
tried over the years of course
our.
Things like.
Tuition we pay for their tuition
we we essentially give them
after the facts fellowship.
We we.
Give them tax breaks themselves
is a located in rural or
underserved communities.
But this bill deals with another
one of the barriers to that and
that is that many times
people studying for these feels
medicine nursing dentistry and
so on.
We need to have practical
experience and.
They do that.
basically working as as
assistance from somebody else's
office and somebody else's
practice this call the
preceptors ship is an
opportunity for for somebody who
is studying to become one of
these professions to work under
the supervision of an already
licensed professional.
The more these you have
obviously the more attractive of
these provisions we've come
because people see firsthand
this is something Hey I'd like
to do B. I can do and see I'd
like to do here.
What are the barriers that is
finding preceptors said is
finding professionals who are
willing to take the extra time
to put in the hours with the
with the student and to
cultivate them as somebody that
to.
The nose field and is willing to
sit down and discuss why things
are done this way and that.
Takes away from their own
practice the dentist is doing
that is not able to see as many
patients the physician is doing
that isn't able to see as many
patients nurses doing that isn't
able to see as many patients so
the idea of this bill is to make
it a little more.
To incentivize it a little bit
more by making tax credit
available if they want to claim
this legislation shows in a
preceptors four of the four
weeks minimum preceptors ship
this involved in in this and
it's a one thousand dollar tax
credit is awarded.
And I believe that it Mr
chairman that we we forwarded an
amendment the expanded the
number of professions that would
be included as potential
preceptors.
Senator of.
We we did get that it it's on
the screen.
Yes.
Would you like me just talk
about that in the secretary said
yes.
Mr Chairman the amendment was
put in a three professionals
certified nurse midwives they
need to currently
before they can become certified
have to put in some.
Whatever you call it practice
internship.
Madam chair and and this would
make it possible for those
already certified nurse midwives
who do this for the new up and
coming ones too also be eligible
for that tax credit.
Thank thank you center.
So.
If we can get a motion to to
move this a amendment.
Mr Chairman center Brandon moved
the to pass them up.
They can okay.
So any opposition to the motion.
The non we have an a.
Amended the bill so what we're
back in the bill Senator.
Thank you Mr chairman and I'm
not sure if the.
I had letters of support to that
we're alluding to in the FIR
from the.
Both you and them and from the
Burrell call osteopathic
college.
The real college of osteopathic
medicine down in Los crucis but
I don't know if any of them
we're here to to speak.
As expertise on this matter but
if they are this is a time for
them to be identified.
Any of those experts can speak
the have the power to a need
themselves at this time to
contribute to the conversation.
When did you want to contribute
yes thank you sorry I wasn't
sure it cut out a little bit
good afternoon my name is Pamela
Blackwell and I am the policy
director for the New Mexico
hospital association
so Committee thank you so much
for taking the time to let us
comment today on behalf of the
New Mexico hospital association
in our forty six member
hospitals we stand in support of
SB sixty two as you know we have
to long have a shortage of
health care providers in the
pandemic has unfortunately
exacerbated that shortage so in
working with our nursing
educators we know that there are
for example were qualified
nursing student candidates and
their actual spots for them in
our education programs
preceptors good educators of our
future health care providers are
very hard to come by so
typically health care
professionals can make more by
practicing than by teaching this
bill helps create a modest
incentive for those who have an
interest and ability to teach
and to do so in such a way that
will
That will help to create a last
a financial impact to themselves
and their families.
During this time our doctors
nurses and allied health
professionals have become our
communities health care heroes
young people are looking at
their next steps in supporting
themselves and their families as
we have all seen and they're
turning toward health care as an
Avenue for their future this
bill is one way we can leverage
that desire among New Mexico
residents to become health care
professionals here in our state.
Thank you senator for bringing
this bill and thank you for the
opportunity to comment we stand
in support of SB sixty two.
Mr Chairman will stand for
questions or personal income
into there is any.
At this time I don't have you
listed for comments of
opposition for Senate bill sixty
two if there are any members of
the public that are currently in
the meeting that would like to
speak in opposition to Senate
bill sixty two now is the time
to raise your hand.
Sheri Berman did you want to
speak in opposition.
No I'm sorry about that and I'm
I'm in favor thanks okay we'll
connect you.
And there any other members of
the public who wishes who wish
to speak in opposition to Senate
bill sixty two.
Okay we will move on to our
supporters Mr Dale tanker Mr
tanker you available
yes I am thank you.
Mr chairman and members the
committee my name is Dale Tinker
Representative The New Mexico
pharmacists Association.
And I do want to encourage
passage of this legislation we
struggle every year with getting
pharmacists to be preceptors for
us students at the college of
pharmacy
every year and during their
fourth year of college which is
active seven year college with
fourth year college of pharmacy
the students go on rotations
which means.
Basically nine nine months of
rotations one month at a time at
different pharmacies are are
different clinical experiences
and it is difficult to find
locations and in those numbers
we struggle with that and we
think this incentive would help
in that regard as well and so we
do stand and support thank you.
Thank you Mr Tinker hello we are
than the left have you joined us
slowly.
Okay we will move on to Nicole
Mandall.
Nicole billable yes Mr chairman
members of the committee and the
Clemente Allen I'm representing
strictly for health innovations
and New Mexico's primary care
training construction.
Support this bill Reuters wanted
applicables to preceptors while
working for all underserved
areas and are not employed by
institutions of higher
education.
Now we will now hear from Mr
Chairman Berman Sharon.
Hello good afternoon again Mr
chair and committee members.
My name is Sharon Berman I am a
civic engagement and policy
manager at New Mexico First and
I'm a registered lobbyist for
New Mexicans first.
Health care workforce was one of
the four tracks in our twenty
twenty health town hall last
year in which over five hundred
and fifty people from around the
state including senator Ortiz Y.
Pino thank you participated.
workforce issues growing our own
attracting and retaining talent
and health sector and keeping
them in the state receive
unanimous approval from
participants in that town hall
and others a tax credit will
incentivize people to practicing
in New Mexico please support
Senate bill two as amended thank
you.
Thank you Mr.
at this time are there any other
members of the public who wish
to speak and support that didn't
get an opportunity to send me an
email.
Mr Dan.
Would you like to speak furnish
our my apologies thank you thank
you Mr chairman loveless health
systems is my client in the
stand in support of this
legislation thank you.
Thank you are there any other
members of the public who wish
to speak in support to present
all sixty two.
Thank you and that concludes all
of our public statements for
Senate bill sixty two thank you.
Thank you Micaela so now we'll
go to the committee I have
Senator Kernan Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino can you tell me
what level these students are in
are they medical students
interns or residents where where
where do they fall within that.
Education correct.
Mr chairman and and Senator
Kernan.
I was just looking at the the
the restrictions.
These are graduate students in
their in their in their not
undergraduates they are if for
example
In the final two or three years
of medical school or they're
doing these.
Incomes are or internships.
Field experiences.
Maybe nursing students nearing
the graduation who are getting
the the hands on experience in
the classroom the vote to then
as other legislative.
Pharmacy students similarly.
And so they are they're not
they're not residents I don't
believe this bill covers
residents this covers those who
are.
On the virgin graduating getting
ready to get into the actual of
the practice of their
profession.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
thank you senator and I think I
think the program is is already
going very well in fact I think
my husband participated so as a
physician and hops UNM sins
medical students to rural areas
across the state for this very
purpose and they do work the
four weeks with a physician they
experience what it's like in a
rural area which really helps us
recruit people to come back to
rural New Mexico and and I do up
he's no longer practicing so
there's no conflict here I do
support the bill I think it's a
great thing to do I didn't know
that at decisions that
participate in this I believe
they are given some that I
believe that receive CME credit
so that's a benefit to the
positions and probably the
pharmacist and all the people
that would participate I'm sure
they do that as well but I'm
it's a great experience not only
for the students for the
position I'm not has been did it
for a number of years and it
really did he was impressed with
the young people and and
actually that really like to
come to Hobbes we take really
good care of them when they come
down there so thank you it's
really really good.
Thank you senator we have
senator Brandon Senator Hickey.
Thank you Mr chairman and
chairman RTZ Pino you I thought
I was done with these kind of
bills from.
In the end or I didn't think I
was going to have to see these
kind of bills actually I really
like this one.
We've talked a lot over the last
eight years you and I am
committee about trying to get
doctors and nurses and and
medical people at our state.
One of the things that came out
several times was the lack of
instructors and a lack of
supervising physicians and
supervising nurses and so I
think that's what this is
directly related to is that
correct.
Mr chairman and senator rand
you're you're absolutely
correct.
And I'm gonna neglected to
mention in in my presentation
and this bill is a bill that was
endorsed by the interim health
and Human Services Committee
because we heard testimony about
this issue during the interim.
Thank you Mr chairman I think
also forty even though it wasn't
or for that committee just.
The.
And I think it's a really good a
good bill we really do need to
build some of our health care
problems in the state and one of
the real issues is trying to
find instructors and I think
this will help one that way so I
think you and I as for the.
Thank you.
Thank you senator Brent Senator
Hickey.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino thank you
for bringing this bill
it is absolutely critical
especially as the number of
physicians who are in private
practice or practice continues
to diminish in the state
unfortunately
but I I have two observations
and one is a.
A question I don't know if there
would potentially be an
amendment the the first
observation is that a lot of the
students do precept or with
physicians who work and health
care systems such as love less
and Presbyterian.
and and now even more with the.
D. O. school in the state but
one of the problems with being
an employed physician is that
credits like this often don't
passed down to you they get
taken by the hospital or the
system and put into.
General funds or whatever in a
credit so I don't know what it
is you can do to be sure that
the actual thousand dollar
credit got to the position I can
tell you that positions in the
system practices are very often
particularly in primary care
that I know well eighty percent
of their income is tied to the
number of patients so taking the
time out and it does take time I
I've worked for six years a year
amendment became the associate
professor
when you're when you're in
clinic in your precepts ng I I
work at the VA and try to see
patients this is the text it
definitely takes time out of
your day so I want to be sure
that the ones who are in the
systems are and perhaps not the
VA in university because part of
that is is what you but in these
other systems that the credit
goes to the individual does the
actual precept the because they
are giving up the income to do
that whether in in private
practice working with the
system.
You have been you is there any
way in the bill to ensure that.
Mr chairman and senator Hickey
fund we cover them and maybe not
to the right on the very first
page very first paragraph in in
really the way this is set up it
would be that individual
practitioners.
Individual personal income tax
filing.
Where where they would apply for
this
and to my knowledge.
I I don't know if there would be
a way for the for the system to
intervene and and and basically
intercept that but I see Senator
Kernan has and a few more and.
Experiences and and know how
that is done.
You're raising your organ issue.
If I could Mr chairman and
senator and senator.
I think it would be very much
like the rural health care tax
credit that physicians that work
in rural communities
full time get get a tax credit
on their personal income tax my
husband was an employed
physician and of course he was
able to to do that as well and I
think this would work the same
way it's on your personal in our
income tax.
That you would take this I don't
think the hospitals would have
any opportunity to do that.
That I may be wrong but I think
I think you're probably okay.
Thank you Senator Kernan I I I
hope you're right I I have had
experience and other
I I have worked in the places
around the country where of the
of the hospitals have been able
to step in but I do I think I do
hearing you reminded me of a
potential solution Senator Ortiz
you know and that's basically
college in front of the our
health and Human Services our
oversight committee in the
summer call the hospitals and us
more they being sure that this
is passed down and they're not
somehow intercepting it so that
probably can be easily dealt
with but I just I want to make
you aware that that that does
happen
that sometimes the hospice's
wine for you I I get that.
The other and.
Come in.
Reporting the hostels reporting
and could be done that way Mr
chairman and senator he the
bill does call for the.
Tax department to make a report
to the legislative tax
stabilization tax revenues
stable revenue
internationalization Committee
so then that's a mechanism we
can use to try to monitor the
possibility of of of uses of
this program.
Thank you.
The other thing and and I my
question is why were residents
left out of this and and let the
I explain why I'm asking that
question if I may Senator Ortiz.
And Mr chair
In my residency I did a number
of.
Receptor ships in private
practices I was in a special
primary care program and I work
with over to my aunt's and
private practice learning G. Y.
an ophthalmologist the learning
common I situations are in very
often
even surgeons will go out the
staff and
generally in rural areas and the
potential to key positions in
the state are is impacted much
more by the resident experience
and by their education their
form of the state.
And as such if we want to keep
people in New Mexico and I
certainly hope to work with our
national delegation and work
with the primary care
group that's being formed
actually through a memorial to
expand the number of primary
care residencies.
In the state and to be able to
absorb those those residencies
out in the rural areas are going
to have to depend on private
practitioners and so I don't
know you'd be willing to amend
your bill to include
residents I'm not sure what
their call for clinical nurse
midwives are others I think most
of the other professions
once you get your degree
and and you're done but yeah and
for medical students they
obviously have to go through an
arduous residency and again
everyone expand primary care
particularly in rural areas
including
residents I think would be
beneficial.
And I I'm not sure if we can do
that with this bill not I think
that your job thank you this
thank you Mr chairman and
senator Hickey
the way the middle was drafted
it just meant for name became a
doctor they were no longer going
to be receiving PreSession
preceptors ship so they would no
longer need a presenter
But I don't know if that's the
case residents to have three
centers working with them where
changes to.
If they do I would certainly be
open to that.
It if I might Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino and Mr chair yes once you
receive your and the there's
only one state and I think
thankfully they may have gotten
rid of that that was Texas where
you could go to work without
that postgraduate training every
other state in the country
requires postgraduate training
at least an internship to be
able to get a license the but
precept being as I said
particularly in primary care a
lot of and in pediatrics of
which is our primary care and
OBGYN R. is in primary care and
and also I know for seven years
on the Navajo reservation I
precept of medical students from
all over the country and that
would probably affect those
physicians who are in the Indian
health service because it's a
very very valuable cultural
experience why your in your
residence year postgraduate
training before you actually go
out and propane you're single
to have that the preceptor
experiences so I think it's in
that thing that I hope that.
Before it gets to the next many
perhaps you could work with to
make sure we've got the the
right wording I I'm learning
that's very difficult these days
take together stated correctly
but to include residents who
have not
gone into private practice or
simply.
Thank you Mr Senator Mr.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator Hank yeah I would I
would certainly be glad if this
bill moves on when it moves on
to to work on that for the next
to committee for sure.
Thank you Senator Ortiz you know
that that's and I yield the
floor thank you Mr okay thank
you Senator Hickey Senator
Kernan.
Thank you thank you have Mr
chair I think I think probably
my only concern about foreign to
get any further would be it's
going to be a significant cost
to the state of New Mexico I
just yes because if you look at
the real health care at.
Tax credit that has grown to a
very large costs to the state of
New Mexico and now by adding
this which I think is very
appropriate very needed.
Each of those positions that do
a preceptor ship well include
them they can do up to five so
you're talking about pretty big
chunk of money I don't want to
harm the bill by adding too much
two hundred this point and so I
would be able to support the
bill as it yes but I would
really worry.
With regard to the cost if we
expand it much more but we could
certainly have that conversation
I'm going forward but I
certainly can support the bill
as it is now thank you.
Thank you Senator Kernan I
Senator Wirth and and Senator
Hickey for the second time.
Thank you Mr chair I just have a
question on page.
One of the bill
why eighteen section a I just
I've been reading this and I
want to make sure I understand
and it says a taxpayers not a
dependent on another individual
who is a precept are employed by
any twelve New Mexico
institution of higher education.
Can you just explain to me I
just wanna make sure what what
what is the New Mexico is I
haven't heard any discussion
about New Mexico institutes of
higher education here being part
of the so what just help me
understand what this is trying
to do here.
Mr chairman and senator Wirth
gladly and and that's an issue
that was raised in the FIR as
well
We're talking about here these
are students who are enrolled at
U. N. M. New Mexico state morale
any of the colleges in the
state.
Who are studying in these fields
and who is part of their course
of study need these preceptor
ships or or need to be need to
have some kind of internship or
hands on experience that
requires a preceptor.
So that that I think is what is
what is getting and the word
including the is is kind of the
tricky one
I think.
I was thinking you know the the
point of this is there would be
a official relationship as with
Senator Kernan husband when he
was a presenter it was on an
agreement with the university of
New Mexico school of medicine.
And so the medical students will
be assigned by the university to
work with him.
There's no thought here then
then there.
That she was paying by the
university then there was a a
Maybe instead of employing the
use by your.
That was easy the definition
employed by I think that we were
after nine they are employees
of.
But I'm certainly open to
considering a better wording of
that intense intensive problem.
Mr chair digest I mean I was
just trying to navigate through
and I was thinking about Senator
Kernan supposed and and he
certainly wasn't I don't think
or maybe wise.
I mean he's you know just trying
to figure out what this employed
by what because in white
employment is a legal term and
an employee is a specific
relationship I just a I'm a
little I don't know if I have
the answer on the line but I
just think and I'm not sure Mr
chair this one of the bills this
this are are we gonna.
Vote on this bill today or is
this one of the tax bill that
gets held here I guess that's a
that's a question I haven't and
it's being held and we could
certainly look at this and
trying to line it up but I think
also the point that Senator
Hickey makes
about the residents I realize
that broader building what we
have here but this just makes a
lot of sense I really like this
concept and I and I feel like
this is exactly the kind of
build should be part of this.
You know deal that we've put
together that's how you're gonna
do it Mr chair but I do think I
want to look at I mean I just
think was I I kept reading it
going one of mine FY are.
What I just and so but let's
let's I mean I don't know the
answer here now but I I do think
we should look at that thank.
Mr Chairman lower lower
identifying if you are going to
hold in to and and other uses
you're you're absolutely sure
he's
The FIR also raises the
possibility of a sunset clause
which I think it actually is a
pretty good idea because that is
why our estimate for cost.
Just seems wildly beyond what I
would expect and maybe I'm wrong
there may be that many
students who need preceptors.
But it would give us a chance to
test it out before we we we we
we dived permanently into this
concept so that would be another
amendment if you're gonna hold
and would want to work into a
into a substitute bill.
Okay thank thank you senator
occurred on a turnover to our
our analysts Kelly.
Well done for the moment and
maybe some.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee UNM recommended
that the term Lloyd could be
replaced by twelve faculty so
rather than an individual
employed by university they
would be twelve faculty of the
university that would cover them
as preceptors and and they could
be in the community and not an
employee of any university I
actually think that if you keep
unemployed language in there you
won't have any volunteer
preceptors you'll have
preceptors who are employed by
universities and and do precept
ng as part of her job.
This.
Thank thank you Kelly.
Up what do you have a I believe
senator Hickey for the second
time and then we'll come back to
Senator a Ortiz Y. Pino.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator cheesy piano and Senator
Kernan and senator Wirth a
couple of observations on the
points that that you are making
and also to miss o'donnell who
makes a very very good point
out.
Basically a medical school
wouldn't want anyone to be a
free secretary who has not been
certified by them in their
capabilities to do the precept
and work in I agree to the
twelve by should should replace
the term employed because of
right that might restrict that
are secondly Senator Kernan the
people who are would be teaching
the residents are by and large
can be the same people who he's
a medical students and the
they'll they'll hit the hit the
number I pretty quickly so I
don't think it will expand the
cost of the bill
but again I can't emphasize
enough how important it is for
cultural reasons for the
tracking residents and we know
residents are much more likely
to stay the medical students are
in and underserved area down
there residency there and so and
I don't think it will increase
the cost so I just want to be
able to address that that.
Thank you very much and Mr
Chairman ideal.
Senator Hickey I apologize
Senator G. or T. Pino I actually
made a statement that we're
going to hold this bill at the
beginning but I think we will do
that to give you time to make
some of the adjustments to the
bill language and and the
comments that you heard by the
committee members as well as
some of the testimony that was
given.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Okay with that I don't have any
the other of members so we will
hold this this bill here and
then the.
What will come back to the no
you're ready for when and I'll
try to have a sense to prepared
by the time thank you senator
thank you.
Thank you committee members for
great discussions.
You know moved to the Senate
bill sixty six.
Are you Senator.
The Senator either center sold
up during ready.
Okay
Yeah we're we're we're making
very good times will go ahead
and take Senate bill sixty six
at this time and then the just
for the public we had an
enormous amount of folks that
wanted to testify for the public
so I'm gonna allow of folks
tested by boat instead of two
minutes you'll have one minute
so just so that the people that
are on on the call will know
that so the Senator souls go
ahead in the but your bill on
Senate bill six six thank you Mr
chair of Senate bill fifty six
demands The New Mexico thank
installment loan act and small
loan act it is a governor
endorsed priority bill and it
would reduce the maximum
interest charges for small loans
to thirty six percent as an all
in cost of these rollovers it
just right everything thirty six
percent total of it does have
some protections if the prime
interest rate were to go up it
would escalate during those
periods when the prime goes over
ten percent and that would come
back down when the price drops
below that in New Mexico we had
usury laws from nineteen forty
seven to nineteen eighty one
when hyperinflation hit the
country and at that point many
states including New Mexico got
rid of all of our users laws and
since then we have seen triple
digit rates with some instances
of four figure interest rates
being charged this would return
to the thirty six percent that
was in place from nineteen forty
seven to nineteen eighty one
over seventy percent of New
Mexicans supported thirty six
percent interest rate cap and
some of the opposition is
because people think that's
unconscionably high they think
that that is way too high up
most of us would never take out
a loan for thirty six percent
most of us take out a loan when
we are trying to use it to
increase our wealth a lot of
these predatory loans are when
people are using them try not to
fall into this.
I role of of of of that.
Triple digit rates are a drain
on the local economy the flow
there are recovery from the
pandemic and their drain on.
Economic can cause economic
downturn.
Many people find themselves in
the spiral of debt that robs
them of any accumulated wealth
that they might have.
Eighty five percent of the
company's that without the small
high right it's just loading New
Mexico eighty five percent are
from out of state and that such
money directly out of the local
economy.
If we rate in expensive
predatory loans millions of
dollars will stay in our New
Mexico communities where the
money will be spent and turned
over in the New Mexico economy
there's a saying in economics
when money moves the economy
improves.
It stops money from moving in
the local economy.
Predatory loans harm please they
pushed people into poverty they
prey on people on the margins
and they weaken the very
foundations that strong
communities and economies are
built upon.
A couple other small pieces with
this
It does increase the size of the
loans from five thousand dollars
to ten thousand by making larger
loans that out that protects
some of the companies that are
able to move to a thirty six
percent interest rate cap
because they so the amount of
the margin they get is smaller
the total loan is larger and so
the total funds coming in is a
little bit more also the federal
government several years back
within a thirty six percent
interest rate cap because they
thought it was in the national
security interest to make sure
that our service then we're not
feeling trapped by high interest
rate loans that is not cause
problems within the service
industry or the service.
People it is actually protected
that New Mexico has a hundred
seventy five percent our current
interest rate cap is one of the
highest in the country
many states have moved to much
lower interest rates with a lots
of them at the thirty six
percent that is been chosen
because that's the one the
federal government with the
military has landed on as being
one of the most important ones
I've got lots more data and
information here about how it
harms families operate instance
in two thousand nineteen there
were two thousand two hundred
ninety three New Mexicans had a
vehicle repossessed because of
these lenders.
Often those are families that
may be the only vehicle that's
available for people to get to
work to continue to support
their families to provide you
get their families to medical
care to get them to school and
this is taking that vehicle up
with them further into the
poverty debt and the poverty
trap New Mexicans pay two
hundred and twenty million
dollars in fees and interest to
the small loan companies in two
thousand and nineteen.
This particular bill and the
thirty six percent interest rate
cap is supported by quite a
number in a wide range of groups
and if I could read a couple of
those in the business area
credit union association of New
Mexico support that one would be
credit you pretend that.
Among our native Americans the
Navajo Nation is come out and
support the Navajo Nation Human
Rights Commission some of the
out of poverty group center for
responsible lending New Mexicans
for fair lending coalition New
Mexico Center on Law and Poverty
prosperity works in civic areas
of the a a RP supports this the
American federation of teachers
supports this native American
voters Alliance education
projects supports it Mexican
Asian families New Mexican based
for children New Mexico cafe New
Mexico thrives progress now with
New Mexico education fund Ole
retake our democracy the New
Mexico and the update New Mexico
what did officials as I
indicated this is one of the
governor supported and endorsed
bills so governor Michelle lu
Han Grisham it groups Lutheran
advocacy administrative New
Mexico New Mexico conference of
Catholic bishops New Mexico
conference of churches and the
local governments the City of
Albuquerque's come out and
support the city of Los crucis
can we County New Mexico
counties ability account there
are many others that are
probably support those are ones
where we have your receive
direct support for this
legislation I do have a couple
of experts to help me with some
of the technical side of things
Mr chair of first would be Karen
Meyers an attorney with
expertise in consumer
protections she's a former
employee of the consumer finance
protection bureau and then also
leasing Cutler The New Mexico
Center for a lot of poverty and
with your permission Mr chair if
they could both make a couple of
statements.
Yes Senator so so thank you so
go ahead with your expert
witnesses whoever wants to go
first thank you this is Karen
Myers thank you Mr chair and
members of the committee and I
want to first thank senator
schools and Senator Duhigg for
sponsoring this bill just
Senator schools indicated
I'm a consumer attorney in
Albuquerque I was head of the
consumer protection division of
the New Mexico AG's office from
two thousand seven to two
thousand fourteen and I worked
at the consumer financial
protection bureau in Washington
for a few years after that
lending and other consumer
issues.
I'd like to testify about four
things about this bill and I'd
like to start first with why
now.
We have a lot of information now
in twenty twenty one about what
happened after the loans up the
cap was implemented at one
seventy five percent one into a
fact and we understand what the
business model that's being used
by these lenders.
For example we know that the
business model is to refinance
loans repeatedly for people who
are having trouble paying the
first loan within a few months
of taking it out and before
maturity of the loan.
We know that corporate profits
depend on the number of loans
that are refinanced with a
direct correlation between
revenue and refinancing loans.
We know that the sale of
ancillary products is also
profit center for the lender.
We know that the business model
for many lenders includes
calling borrowers to actually
encourage them to take out more
debt or dissuading them from
paying off debt when they come
in to make the payments.
We also know that the business
model encourages borrowers to
extend their loan terms and
they're having trouble making
the loan payments and usually
ends up increasing their monthly
payments and the length of
indebtedness all of this leads
to an increased debt load debt
trap and often times usually
leads to default or just more
refinancing.
So what that in information on
my relying on for these
conclusions first.
We have consumer attorneys some
of whom you're gonna hear from
who's reviewed borrower loan
files from different companies
that demonstrate the business
model in place since the one
hundred and seventy five percent
APR when and and into law for
installment car title loans.
It demonstrates that these loans
depend on refinancing repeatedly
and if you look at the loan file
and your chart and you actually
the chart in your materials that
they'll be talking about if you
chart out the day of the first
loan the date a refinance the
date of the second loan the date
of the refinance and the date of
the third loan you'll see that
people are being refinanced on
the same day that they are
taking up a new loan and using
most of the money from the new
loan to pay off first or the
second or the third.
It's sort of interesting to note
in all of these debates that
when payday loans were being
debated at the legislature
rollovers was one of the
problems you heard about and it
was one of the reasons why the
legislature decided to eliminate
payday loans we suppose we fix
that problem however refinancing
is the new rollover in
installment loans it's just the
same problem the same debt trap
with a different name.
Another point corporate revenue
flows from the financing it
keeps people in debt not from
borrowers paying off the loan so
the message about access to
credit really should say access
to that we know that because
company reports of publicly
traded companies support that
conclusion for example there are
two of the largest wonders in
New Mexico that publicly reform
report their data one company
reported that more than sixty
five percent of the company's
loans were generated from
refinancing of existing loans
part of maturity and that
information was reported in
twenty seventeen twenty eighteen
twenty nineteen a second company
also reported that a majority of
its loans are refinanced as
well.
So we see that the revenue and
is linked to the ability and the
the practice of refinancing
We also know that consumer
experiences confirm this that
the business and marketing
tactics tactics are used in
you'll hear about that in public
comment.
Lenders are going to argue that
this bill is premature because
we should wait for the data that
was submitted to FID about the
twenty twenty lending year but
as I've noted we already have
the twenty nineteen data and the
Senator schools mentioned that
shows the two hundred and twenty
million dollars was paid in
finance charges.
It also shows that the total
number of loans that we're ten
days or more past due at any
time during the calendar year of
twenty nineteen was over thirty
percent in that the total dollar
amount of bad debt expenses
incurred during calendar year
twenty nineteen was over twelve
percent.
This indicates that when people
take out these high cost loans
that are inherently on
affordable they can't afford
them.
high cost loans at these rates a
hundred seventy five percent are
harming New Mexicans right now
we're facing the worst financial
crisis that's been brought on by
the pandemic.
These high cost loans resulting
in debt trap long term
indebtedness and increased debt
collection activity and
contributing to the financial
and emotional strife it's not
the answer and we need to fix it
this year and not wait.
We also I just want to also add
a couple of other points.
One is that when when the bill
was passed to expand the data
which you probably have heard
about and you may hear about
more in twenty nineteen a bill
is drafted HB one fifty and it
was for to require lenders to
see report additional data.
After and that was because most
of the data reporting
requirements were stripped from
the twenty seventeen bill
capping interest of one seventy
five
an interesting notice before
that the lenders and a hundred
and seventy five or less had
gotten themselves excluded from
having to report anything to FID
so the twenty nineteen bill
really was to put back in a
level field a level playing
field kind of data reporting but
as you can well understand we're
always one year behind in
getting that summary from that I
do and we already have the
twenty nineteen and we already
have the information about loan
practices that I've described
which I think is frankly equally
or more compelling.
Senator schools has summarized
the bill and I don't want to
repeat I think that the only
other thing to add about what
the bill does that significant
Well actually two things one
thing is that it does strengthen
the anti invasion language in
the bill the reason for this is
we're seeing that as more and
more say states adopt thirty six
percent caps of businesses are
becoming more and more creative
there's naming loans different
things they're creating products
that they think can invade the
provisions of these protections
and so we have strengthen those
protections to make sure that
all lenders can't evade whatever
protections the legislature
adopts the other thing is that
the thirty six percent all
inclusive is consistent with the
military lending act approach to
these of lending practices
We.
I'm sorry.
I'm sorry up okay I thought
there is a problem
so one of the other let me
address two other issues that
you may hear one is about what
happens after thirty six per
cent goes into effect.
we know from other states who
have adopted these rates and
studies that have been done that
credit will not dry up the
absence of try triple digit
landing
into and eliminating that will
not have a significant impact on
the availability of credit
borrowers in South Dakota and
borrowers in other states who
have had thirty six percent put
in place actually report that
they are better off financially.
Additionally we have
alternatives already in place
and of the credit union Mister
school I believe actually is
also going to be an expert in
he's going to testify about that
and we also have to connect
which is a safe and affordable
loan product that makes loans at
less than twenty five percent
APR it's an employer secured
loan product and it is currently
now being offered across the
state in cities like Albuquerque
Santa Fe Los crucis
the town of bir Leo Espanola
there's a whole range of places
in New Mexico that this product
is available we also for learn
bank of America as a new loan
product within APR far less than
thirty six percent for small
loans so they're all or turn it
is and all more alternatives are
becoming available and the
experience in other states
demonstrates that that that is
what will most likely happen in
New Mexico and that families
will be able to get access to
credit.
Safe and affordable credit it is
well and the opioid last
argument that sometimes is
raised is that everyone will go
online everyone will go to
tribal lenders well for and that
none of those are regulated
first of all online lending is
regulated it's already let
regulated by New Mexico law and
many of the online lenders are
already you know registered and
listed in the FID database and
they've already complied
there is no evidence in any
other state that online lending
will expand and I haven't heard
anything from any of the lenders
that substantiates their claims.
The tribal lending and any other
kind of lending is regulated by
the CFPB the consumer financial
protection bureau as well so
there is regulation.
Up to close we now more than
ever need an all inclusive
thirty six percent cap and I
want to thank the committee for
considering this bill and I will
stand for questions thank you.
Thank you and inspires and
Senator souls I think you had
another witness.
Yes thank you Mr chairman
Lindsey Cutler with New Mexico
Center on Law and Poverty.
Actually Mr chair can I think we
we switched the proposed expert
and Paul school from the credit
union Senator schools was going
to substitute okay right yes Mr
so.
Senator Mr chairman and members
of the committee I'm Paul still
I am the chief executive officer
of the credit union association
of New Mexico I represent forty
credit unions and those credit
unions serve around nine hundred
thousand New Mexicans also I
would point out that credit
unions handle over eleven
billion dollars in assets of New
Mexico residents are we see
problems with I had a landing
each and every day in my nearly
forty year career I have seen
this problem of from New York to
Arizona and here in New Mexico
we are concerned about the death
trap that our members can fall
into we are always willing to
attempt to help people get out
of debt.
It's very difficult when you
have people attempting to trap
them into more and more debt
others a process known as
stacking and that's where one
payday lender I encourages
someone to go to a second rate a
lender to borrow the money to
pay off the first and we see
them go to a third payday lender
while the money to pay off the
second that they use to pay off
the first it's not hard to see
how someone would be able to be
trapped in that and struggle to
get out of it to the point that
they may lose their auto may
lose their home and in some
instances we've been seen payday
lenders
assist and I don't use that in a
good word a good way hi in
helping people lose their jobs
by arresting them on the job and
in their employment situation
all we are also concerned from
the standpoint that we have seen
good results hi in doing away
with payday lending I was deeply
involved in a ballot initiative
in the state of Arizona where
there was a ballot initiative to
end payday lending in two
thousand and eight and that cap
small loans at thirty six
percent although we were told
that
people would not be able to get
a small loan they've done very
well in Arizona and the continue
to do so even though there
continues to be a push to bring
payday lending or predatory
lending is I like to call it
back into the state of Arizona
when we encounter a member of
the credit union that has a this
type of that we like to help
them pay it off but we also like
to help them under.
And how to avoid those debt
traps in the future there is a
great alternative to that and
that's called saving credit
unions are all about providing
and promoting financial literacy
as well as helping people
achieve financial independence
we are not for profit so our
motive is to help people be
financially independent the more
independence in financial
services the better it is for a
community and allows people to
participate fully in the economy
I can certainly does provide a
great background of for the
local community hi in providing
more goods and services to
individuals who truly can use
them and can't participate are
rather than having to worry
about paying off loans that
really are
very predatory.
And I'm designed to do only one
thing and that's to drive profit
and to drive them further and
further into that we've seen
issues with small loans even in
the hundreds of dollars the wind
up with balances in the
thousands of dollars and you can
possibly imagine what that would
be like to be hit with thousands
of dollars worth of costs fees
and interest are to try and pay
off the loan may have only been
a few hundred dollars
thirty six percent is the number
that in this long I would let
you know in my career that
thirty six percent works
perfectly this loan is a loan or
this legislation I'm sorry I has
been well drafted well thought
out and is a perfect example of
how to do this thirty six
percent with a floating rate is
assuring that these small dollar
loans at a lower rate will be
available not only now but into
the future using the floating
rate of the
cost of funds the prime rate
allows that to go up and down
and so at times when funds are
less plentiful and the rates are
higher it's still would make
these loans available so it's
not putting a dollar on this
where it won't become possible
to do these loans in the future
there are available now they
will be available for years and
years to come so the legislation
is a well drafted in our opinion
and will certainly do a great
job in trying to alleviate the
debt trap of payday lending.
We're more than willing to
answer any questions but I do
think that
looking at good legislation
designed to protect consumers
and to help New Mexico grow
goals and financial independence
is in the best interest of
everyone and I would urge you to
join us in supporting very
strongly Senate bill sixty six
thank you.
Thank you of Senator souls in
the more before we go on to
public comment.
Just quickly a couple recaps of
the of the high points.
No state has moved backwards
from lower interest rates back
to the high levels that we have
in New Mexico again no states
have moved the other direction
several states are currently in
the legislature's considering
capping their interest rate that
thirty six percent but no one is
moving the other direction
because it hasn't worked
out also these companies often
that use very aggressive
marketing techniques there ones
that stick in my head from some
of the the commercials and you
all probably a few other ones
like get your money does if it's
already your money and you just
haven't gone and signed up for
it yet for the money you
deserve.
Those are very predatory ways of
trying to drop people in I think
they're missing out if they
don't sign up for one of these
low out many times is that use
the words dangers and of the
whether the loads are safe or
not it truly is a matter of life
and death in many cases most of
you know that I very big and
education and these kinds of
loans but families and children
in danger no it's important
something that we do also the
loans tend to be clustered
around west of north communities
and other vulnerable groups you
don't see the lenders in
downtown Santa Fe you don't see
them in the appellate areas of
Los Alamos Inspiron the
communities that are most living
on the edges we have an
obligation as legislators to
protect them this is responsible
legislation and it matches with
what's happening across the
country to protect consumers
with that would be open for
questions.
Senator souls at this time we'll
go to a public comment and we'll
start with the
Senate bill sixty six Martel.
We will start with Mr Dan here
Daniel.
Thank you Mr chairman damage are
representing access financial I
wish we had more than a minute
to respond and hopefully some
others will obviously we don't
agree with a lot of the
characterizations and been made
and I'll let others address that
but I would like to clarify
payday loans in New Mexico have
been illegal since two thousand
seventeen and if the small loan
industry goes way there are not
going to be the alternatives
that keep getting mentioned a
couple of them that have been
examples one main corporation
average loan eight thousand
dollars for fifty three months
opportune average loan thirty
one hundred dollars for thirty
three months those are not our
customers Mr chairman our
customers are borrowing between
four and twelve months twenty
seconds thank you my experience
is the best way to address
complex issues is to compromise
and collaboration not
confrontation I hope we get that
opportunity thank you.
Thank you Mr we will now move on
to Mr Andrew Morris Mr Morrison.
Can you hear me.
Yes.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name's under Marcin
I'm with bondage Management
lenders will not make loans at a
loss that cost or combination of
fixed and variable costs
variable costs are expressed as
a percentage of the loan amount
like an interest rate fixed
costs like salaries and rent of
the same and dollars whatever
size learning making reqs
Preston dollars alone.
Because APR as a combination of
interest and fees APR was
declined as the loans get bigger
therefore no APR can be fat for
rural and sizes the federal
reserve estimated that the size
of loan in which a lender can
break even with a thirty six
percent APR is two thousand five
hundred dollars that people who
need five hundred could they
just borrow more than they need
even if they qualify it wouldn't
be good for the big of the loan
that I would be a yup the higher
the cost in dollars on the
longer it takes to pay the loan
off one size fits all APR caps
come to offer access to the
lowest cost loans I urge you to
oppose this thank you Mr
Morrison sorry to cut you off
there we would moving onto Mr
David Emery David.
One more call for Mister David
Emery.
All right moving Mr healthier
our.
Yes can you hear me yes we can
okay good afternoon Mister
chairman and members of the
committee my name some hero were
live in Los crucis since
nineteen eighty seven I know
what it's like to live paycheck
to paycheck I personally
struggle to establish my credit
in my early twenties I remember
when I needed to buy baby crib
for my daughter and I it was
easy to get a loan from a bank
the bank did not approve me
because I did not have any open
lines of credit or established
yup part was that I had been in
the job for three years and
thought it would make a
difference I turned to a credit
union and they're asking for a
deposit understood quickly I
would not be able to get what I
needed for my daughter and it
broke my heart this experience
taught me doesn't come easy I
did not have anyone to help me
in this is a and must transcend
recommended and installment loan
for a second.
What was approved so the two
that for two hundred and by my
daughter these furniture
installment loans play a
critical part installation
credit and helping anyone with
emergency for this reason I
propose and.
Thank you happier are we wanna
hear from Jeff Crandall Jeff.
One more time for Mr Jeff Graham
learn.
Okay moving on Mr Thanh keepers
Tom.
Yes can you hear me OK.
Yes we can.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee thank
you to opportunity participate
I'm timekeepers the presidency
CCA we work to foster consumer
finance security by ensuring
healthy markets for voluntary
protection products like credit
insurance and W. actually
consumers purchase these
products protector Billy to make
loan payments from adverse
events like death disability and
of all three job loss and by the
way they cover the pandemic like
COVID nineteen we would ask that
you to for the matter the the
further matter to further shape
it as written inputs Mexico
household finances at risk
country to raise the the bill
includes the cost of the
voluntary products in the APR
calculation which crowds of the
ability for installment lender
to make the products available
second of summers a hundred and
eighty five thousand of your
constituents help drugs the
protector finances at the end of
twenty twenty this bill puts
tens of thousands of households
at risk especially during these
difficult to.
Sorry to keep thank you very
much for COVID Gloria Ann Begay.
One more time for Mrs Gloria Ann
Begay your can you hear me.
Can yes we can okay thank you Mr
chairman and committee my name
is Gloria Ann Begay and I'm
speaking on behalf of sun loan
company and its employee along
with a faithful customers are
not a faithful customer
postings Senate bill sixty six
Mr Chairman implementing is
Senate bill sixty six would
jeopardize not only hundreds of
job in New Mexico but thousands
of customers ability to get
financial help they need also
also without installment loan
company license loan customers
will not be given a chance to
build their credit are qualified
for small loan not all loan
companies are the same we just
no pride ourselves in making
sure customers understand their
responsibility as loan borrow
any sure they can afford to it's
true we also strive to be
inclusive and transparent by
guiding our customers through
the loan process in a language
they feel most comfortable with
we believe we always.
You miss big games I will go
back to Mr Jeff granular Jeff
yes.
Yes we can okay thank you I'm
I'm here to talk about this
installment loans that this bill
has nothing to do with the
payday as was pointed out
installment loans came about a
century ago and small loans are
only being offered underground
by loan sharks not banks or
credit unions crime families
satisfy the public's demand so
what did officials do
progressive legislatures across
the country enacted laws
essentially creating installment
loan industry has nothing to do
with payday.
The this product again public
access to safe and legal credit
for people thirty six percent
recapture for study then in the
concluded they only made sense
large loans me eight thousand
dollars today but not small in
the second.
Product remains popular with
those that actually use it
complaints are almost
nonexistent and consumer
satisfaction is very very high
data are clear actual borrowers
are not clamoring for this
please understand its history
and don't do more hours to the
mistakes of the past.
Thank you Mr Gramm.
We wanna hear from Tony Tanner
Mr Tanner.
Yes can you hear me.
Yes we can go ahead Mr chairman
members of the committee good
afternoon my name's Tony Tanner
and one of the owners of tech or
finance we respectfully oppose
Senate bill sixty six has
presented.
With small family owned Mexico
business operating in Gallup
Farmington since nineteen eighty
nine we've been in business in
New Mexico past thirty plus
years offering products
requested by our customers at
affordable prices suggestions
for change we to possibly
incorporate the tip right or
total interest percentage in
conjunction with a PR short term
loans may show high PR but
significantly lower tip right
perhaps a combination of a
parent tip could be effectively
utilized in New Mexico to bridge
gaps left with a PR of roll
Senator souls for quite sometime
and have great respect for the
Senator we look forward to
working with the senator to
achieve a balance which keeps
small twenty seconds and
business and consumers.
Thank you Mr ten are we wanna
hear from Mister John nine.
One more time for Mister John
nine.
Yes my name is John I live in
Santa Fe we have three family
owned lending stores within a
business nine years and proud of
never having a point.
We sixty three percent of all
loans made in two thousand
nineteen or or we're under one
thousand dollars and I know that
credit unions that I've worked
with do not make the loans were
of an average of five hundred
dollars or with a credit score
is five hundred twenty the
problem that we're doing we have
here is that the thirty six
percent cap that we're talking
about and the people they're
gonna take care of running these
people money does not include
this segment of borrowers are
now borrowing from small loan
companies.
It's also been stated that New
Mexico as the highest rate in US
of a hundred seventy five
percent this is incorrect thirty
two states have no cap thirty
states.
Make payday loans between three
hundred and seven hundred
percent there is a lot of errors
in what the presentation is made
so far we do not make payday
loans and there it.
Thank you Mr Nani we will now be
hearing from Anna seek seek are
you available.
One more time for agency mana
seek.
She seems unavailable we will
move on to Mr drew secretary Mr
Shettar.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is drew
setter and on behalf of the
online lenders association we
stand in opposition to
legislation I won't repeat what
has already been set on the
provisions of the bill I will
say that we support waiting for
the data is still pending for
the previous agreement how to
handle and manage this very
serious and complicated issue
and look forward to working with
all the stakeholders once that
data has been delivered to
ensure that we protect consumers
greater more equitable and fair
environment for financial
services for everyone thank you.
Thank you Mr Senator they want
to hear from Mr Raymond Sanchez
Mr Sanchez.
And I have given my muted now
can you hear me we can't hear
you Sir yes thank you very much
my name is Raymond Sanchez I
represent between installment
lenders association of New
Mexico we stand in opposition to
Senate bill sixty six I just a
comment I'd like to make quickly
and that is that based on the
testimony that we just heard
from miss Myers I think that's a
perfect example of why we need
the database looked at to
separate fact from fiction all
fact is that we are looking at a
legislation that was set for
twenty nineteen we had agreed on
Madden twenty nineteen and we're
still sitting here fighting over
this here are some facts that
you should be aware of there are
thirteen thousand thirteen
hundred ninety five employees in
New Mexico they average forty
six thousand dollars or salary
we have a total compensation
package annually of sixty five
million dollars a year we pay
taxes to the state of New Mexico
of over six million dollars
sixteen million dollars in
leases for a total of nine
hundred fifty thousand dollars
annually that would be lost to
the state in the van.
Thank you Mr Sanchez we have to
move on Mr Jason Weaks.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee Jason Weaks
representing QC holdings for
individuals with poor or limited
credit transit.
Traditional loans can be
impossible to access in the
short term installments on
offered by the small lending
industry can help many New
Mexico families access much
needed credit we appreciate the
intent of the Sanchez tomorrow
for lending practices however
imposing a thirty six percent
APR on small short term loans
would drive almost every one of
these businesses in the credit
they offer out of state well the
current hundred seventy five
percent APR may not be viable
long term interest rate for
short term loans in New Mexico
imposing a flat thirty six
percent APR on small loans isn't
either if you are the general
does not work well within the
context of small short term
loans as Representative right
that does not translate well
into small loans with shorter
terms to the statewide thirty
six president APR on short term
loans will make landing to folks
with lower credit scores almost
impossible this will cause some
to seek alternative loans from
offshore online lenders that are
not subject to any consumer
protections at all.
As an alternative we truly feel
legislature should with.
Thank you Mr weeks our next we
will be hearing from making.
Arnett.
Making.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee of I was the state
senator that lemonade all
usually laws in nineteen eighty
one on the belief that a market
place always sits better rates
than the government.
All I still believe that if it
were true that there's plenty of
lending available at thirty six
percent you would need this
legislation there were B.
lenders out there loaning at
thirty six percent and they
would have driven all of my
clients and all of speaking out
of business.
Of I encourage you to always
search for a market rate row
that are artificial government
right that's not well thought
out I urge you to oppose Senate
bill sixty six thank you.
Thank you.
Now we will hear from doctor
Rikki cheese Mr keys sorry
doctors.
Can you hear me.
Yes we can.
Okay my name is Dr Richard keys
I own and have developed an
educational platform that
provides financial education
coaching and coaching to
minority communities I have
brought copies of resolution I
worked on for the national
Hispanic caucus of state
legislatures are dealing with
access to credit as you know the
quality is a central theme of
the new by administration and
nothing concerns to groups that
I've worked with more than and
equal unequal distribution of
critical resources among various
communities and ethnic groups I
studied.
Various divisions including
pharmacy does this hospital does
is incredible that's it is a
fact that minorities minority
communities suffer because even
distribution of available
credit.
If you if you pass this bill is
been estimated that astonishing
forty six percent of all New
Mexicans will lose access to
safe affordable state regulators
cracked thank you.
Thank you.
We will now move on to chase
until Alice J..
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee.
My name is Jerry Santiago Mr
president in ten scored finance
we propose Senate bill sixty six
as presented ten quarters of
small New Mexico owned family
business operating in Gallup in
Farmington since nineteen eighty
nine.
Provides a niche short term
product in the lending industry
and serves a need which not
represented by many other
lenders in the state what is
this is probably to the small
dollar industry member was very
important to those who have
utilized I continue to utilize
loans which are not refinanced.
In a short term loan APR can be
confusing APR is going for long
term multi your rate of return
products twenty eight make sure
these loans are more easily to
find the total interest rate
which defines the actual total
percentage of interest prepaid
for the duration of the loan
thank you very much.
Thank you we will now hear from
Mr David.
Mr Penna.
Mr chairman members of the
committee David paying a
registered lobbyist select
management resources with all
due respect to this bill sponsor
we stand in opposition to SB
sixty six the small industry
loan industry a regulated
industry New Mexico the
experience significant changes
on the way to conduct business
in New Mexico after the
enactment twenty seventeen and
twenty nineteen legislation in
twenty seventeen eight in twenty
seventeen provided did away with
paid workers APR went from four
percent two hundred seventy five
percent providing for data
reporting business is required
to pay into a fund established
financial literacy program the
twenty nineteen legislation was
a result of compromises reach
the stakeholders data to be
gathered and analyzed to
determine whether additional
changes are necessary that
hasn't occurred yet twenty we
would request an opportunity are
data reviewed and analyzed we
can determine what changes may
need to occur working families
continue to suffer under the
current endemic we have high
unemployment rates and many
small businesses shut down
permanently now's not the time
exacerbated problems you're
struggling financial realities
and then for the small arms is
it going to go away so make.
Thank you Mr.
we will now be hearing from
Wichita Centel less my apologies
and then this afternoon.
Thank you chairman Shendo and
members of the committee my take
us on the honest representing
ten court finance respectfully
opposes Senate bill sixty six we
appreciate senator so we'll
sponsoring the bill and look
forward to working with him as
you know I have great respect
for the legislative process with
that said why legislation the
financial institution division
has an enormous impact on the
industry as a regulate the
industry the F. I do has the
ability to identify the business
the licensee the lender or the
person who's doing the abuses if
I do you can isolate the
unprincipled lender if we have
complaints or the data shows an
abuse regarding a licensee how
is the department handling it
let's go after the licensee not
the industry twenty chairman
members of the committee thank
you for the opportunity to speak
with you today.
Thank you will not hear from Mr
A. L. part al park.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee thank
you very much for hearing me out
park registered lobbyist on the
behalf of the New Mexico
consumer credit association we
regrettably regretfully stand in
opposition to Senate bill sixty
six over the last several weeks
we have had a albeit brief
opportunity to visit with some
of the advocates in support of
the legislation however as Mr Jr
pointed out the bill is
extremely complicated and coming
to a place from collaboration
and cooperation is really
important Mr Chairman as this
committee has a long history of
doing I think it's important
that the committee allow the
advocates and those in
opposition to the to work on the
legislation to craft amendments
and craft a compromise that is
acceptable to all people to
protect the public as well as
the industry we would ask that
the committee will the bill over
until the advocates and the
industry have an opportunity to
talk.
Thank you Mr Parker we wanna
hear from Danielle are low
Daniel.
Thank you this is Danielle
figure hello from the American
financial services association
we're association has been
around for over one hundred
years we oppose SB sixty six
principally because it does not
recognize the difference between
larger loans and very small
dollar loans thirty six percent
is noteworthy thirty six percent
of New Mexico adults have credit
scores below six hundred we
represent banks we love banks
represent larger dollar lenders
but banks and larger dollar
lenders are not in the business
of making very very small loans
to subprime customers it's just
not their business model would
love to see SB sixty six change
to reflect these differences and
we note that with SB sixty six
right now is now New Mexico's
complete will be New Mexico's
elite will be fine as they've
always been because they can for
the larger loans necessary to
break even at thirty six percent
thank you.
Thank you very mentors are local
are there any other members of
the public I would like to speak
in opposition to Senate bills
sixty six I see an iPhone with
their phone raised I don't see a
name if you could and yourself.
Yes.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee my name is Cheryl
about that I am here on behalf
of the Emory would you cannot
make it today and I represent
use the financial last year we
are able to approve eleven
thousand eight hundred and eight
request for loan and those
requests we helped our fellow
New Mexicans pay for everything
ranging from home repair the
holidays.
Can.
if you would please preventing
to certain example of a typical
five hundred dollar long and the
cost to our customers I would
appreciate it a five hundred
dollar loan taken out today and
paid back in thirty days but
have a total interest cost of
sixty six seventy four if the
longer to run eastern meaning
that once the total finance
charge for the long would be two
hundred and seventy three
thirteen total payment being
seventy seven seventy three
thirteen.
The regulated industry best
those away as a result of the
proposed legislation the need
will not replace offshore online
lenders will continue to offer
loans out.
Thank you we will now hear from
Mister John Martinez.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee my name is John
Martinez and I represent some
loan the family own licensed
lender that's been operating in
the state of New Mexico for
twenty five years we have twenty
eight stores and a hundred and
seven employees to begin some
loan is not a payday lender in
fact in two thousand and
seventeen we supported the
initial one seventy five right
cap we also supported the
proposal to study our industry
and to use this data to help the
state understand craft better
legislation we anxiously await
results due this summer and
committed to working with the
state after this that has been
accumulated I believe it would
be the benefit of our employees
customers as well as the state
of New Mexico if we base our
legislative decisions on the
upcoming that we meet our
customers needs by offering
fixed rate loans hello the state
allowed rate of one seventy five
but thirty six is not a viable
option thirty six percent rate
cap would force the license
lenders like some loans to leave
New Mexico and many citizens
will be forced to unlicensed
lenders to protect our customers
and employees we stand firmly in
this position to Senate bill
sixty six thank you.
Thank you we will now hear from
miss Katherine creation.
I thank you Christiana thank you
Mr chairman and members of the
committee my name is Katherine
Posada number registered
lobbyist for all plans we
respectfully stand in opposition
to this bill our plans is not a
payday lender and and make
installment loans that are under
it and have no fees at all they
also also offer there and
financial literacy we're
experiencing historical
historical unemployment rates in
New Mexico due to the pandemic
is the worst time to remove
credit options from so many New
Mexicans additionally
additionally as others have
stated we should await the
statewide study results from
wonder from lenders directed by
this legislature in two thousand
nineteen before changing
regulations in order to
understand the universe of
landing in New Mexico New Mexico
should look at creating a safety
valve with strong consumer
protections prevent steering
that would allow those who
qualify for a loan at a lower
rate to obtain it and those who
don't the opportunity to apply
for a loan at a higher rate
opulence is prepared to help
establish these protections
thank you Mr chairman and
committee.
Thank you Catherine we will now
hear from Norman staff.
This is actually is why my name
is ana staff and along with my
husband we've been in business
for with our small company
Intel's for the last eleven
years and we have passed every
single audits that we've had by
the state in reference to the
the state to overseeing the
online lenders I have to
disagree our illustrious career
shut down for two months it was
only two months that we were
able to loans after this we had
several customers come in and
actually applied through through
online lenders other fees may
have been capped maybe at forty
forty percent or so but along
with that came anywhere from
five hundred to a thousand
dollars in what non refundable
fees so for this reason I
respectfully do not support
Senate bill sixty six thank you.
Thank you.
Are there any other members of
the public that wish to speak in
opposition that did not have
time to ask themselves.
Please raise your hand time.
Okay we will be moving on to
support I will be hearing from
Mr mat may charge.
Matt.
Good afternoon Mr chairman and
committee members my name is
Matt Markey and I'm the director
of advancement for prosperity
works and we express from
support of SB sixty six are
grateful to the bill Sanchez the
current interest rate have a
hundred seventy five percent as
debilitating the high interest
rate that can quickly thrust
hard working limited income
borrowers into an inescapable
deathtrap triple digit interest
rates hit communities of color
and members of tribes and
pueblos the hardest all told
hundreds of millions of dollars
are being extracted from limited
income families leaving our
state each year because of out
of state predatory lending
subsidiaries with the pandemic
and it's associate economic
downturn reducing the interest
rate cap from a hundred seventy
five percent to an all inclusive
thirty six per second than ever
when families have access to a
more equitable credit sources
such as for true connect at a
reasonable interest rate the
socioeconomic advantages rebel
through their respective
communities enhancing community
health as we collectively
rebuild our state post comment
thank you.
Thank you we want to hear from
Mr David Humphreys David.
One more time for Mister David
Humphreys are here apologize and
make more but I'm is David how
a consumer protection water the
press one for thirty years and
in Santa Fe and I spent a great
deal my life's work representing
poor people people trapped in
that.
Just simply by the installment
loan industry not payday loan
industry installment loan
industry.
Most of it is you've heard their
national players and they have a
business model tracking people
in debt and I can tell you in
just a minute about the despair
these people experience the
suffering it causes distress in
the family dynamics that it
creates with drinking beating
one another and just to.
Spare and I ask you to really
think about your constituents
and very least among us the poor
think about them please thank
you.
Thank you Mr hungry now we will
hear from Christina Fisher
Christina.
One more time Kristina Fisher.
Okay moving on Mr Nicholas
accent.
Mr chairman committee members my
name is Nick Madison of consumer
protection attorney and I
represented Mrs PED whose
consumer number two on your hand
out and she really shows you
what it actually means to have a
triple digit interest rate loan
this is B. lived in Santa Fe
issues disable getting by on
just about a thousand dollars a
month from social security she
ended up getting trapped in a
series of car title loans she
borrowed about six thousand
dollars in the end she was
required by contract to pay back
thirty four thousand dollars
those payments were seven
hundred ten dollars per month
for four years at seventy
percent of her total income over
this over four years it was a
crushing.
We've heard from the industry
about access to credit don't
believe it for a minute these
loans are designed to take
advantage of the vulnerable and
we have an opportunity to fix it
it's time to do that.
Thank you we will now hear from
Mary Hampton Mary.
Good afternoon Mr chairman and
committee members my name is
Mari canton and the managing
attorney at the statewide
consumer law protection group at
New Mexico legal aid we strongly
support the passage of Senate
bill sixty six Mr G. identified
as customer number three on your
example sheet was the New Mexico
legally client she was also
disabled woman living on
disability benefits of seven
hundred seventy dollars per
month because she could not
afford her own rent food and
utilities she took out her first
mall loan then she had to borrow
more to make the payments on
that loan she was stuck in the
refinance debt cycle for ten
years lenders kept calling to
offer more money now as you can
see from the chart she was
offered loans at rates of a
hundred seventy four point nine
six percent for example this is
just one example of a very
familiar K. pattern amylase
genes for years without strong
protections in place the poorest
New Mexicans will continue to be
targeted far more money than
they can ever afford to repay.
Thank you Mr.
We will now hear from Austin
what she.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Austin
we actually I'm here on behalf
of N. M. native fo and we stand
today in strong support of SB
sixty six for all the reasons
already stated and because we
understand this as an issue of
equity we know that these
lenders will centralized around
communities of color or
communities border towns in
areas with less access to good
financial literacy we want the
committee noted that we never
made an agreement to stop our
work in exchange for compromise
and have always stood in support
of a thirty six percent APR cap
because this is proven to work
because this is what our
neighbors have seen fit to pass
and now more than ever our
communities need access to real
capital not recurring debt we
urge members of the committee
bill and want to thank the
sponsors for bringing this
forward.
Thank you all we will now hear
from miss Lindsay Cutler twenty.
You need thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee my name
is Lindsay Cutler and I an
attorney The New Mexico Center
on Law and Poverty also in in in
the hand that you have in your
folders and that's it's as
examples of loans under the one
seventy five cap I'd like to
talk about consumer number five
Mr P. was an elderly New Mexican
he's a veteran like so many
people in our state he lived in
a small fixed income you having
an emergency medical procedure
are needed to pay the bill so it
took hard title under to get a
hundred dollars he got the
hundred dollars and a hundred
and sixty four percent a PR it
they took the title to the car
and at that interest rate is
going to end up paying close to
four hundred dollars but less
than a week later he could
afford it within the multi roll
over the loan wise.
The payments are so expensive he
ended up buying more than a
thousand dollars we hope to get
his car title back in within the
month we are able to get him
back in part it and house to
safely again the story is not
unusual and happens to far too
many New Mexicans we sent a
strong supporter of this bill
thank you so much.
Thank you Mr Cutler we will now
hear from Mister Rogers career.
Mr chair and members of the
committee my name is Roger Greer
I'm here is the volunteer state
president with A. R. P. New
Mexico and the co chair of
AARP's consumer committee A. R.
T. isn't strong support Senate
bill sixty six because of help
seniors and others we're going
to get with fees they can't
afford this bill is one of A. R.
P. New Mexico's main priorities
for twenty twenty one we would
like to thank the sponsors for
bringing it forward thank you.
Thank you Mr Greer.
We we moving on to Mr dog very
Mr ferry are you available.
One more time for Mr dog very.
Moving on we'll be hearing from
Mister Bill Jordan Mister Jordan
available.
One more time to Mr Bill Jordan.
Moving on Mr Kurt right here are
you available.
Yes good afternoon Mister
chairman and members of the
committee my name is Kirk record
on the director of Lucerne
advocacy ministry New Mexico we
speak on behalf of the New
Mexico conference of churches as
well we are here today to
support SB sixty six we believe
there is simply no justifiable
reason to condone triple digit
interest rates nor the business
model the depends on continually
refines it refinancing such
loans we do not take lightly the
fact that the industry employees
New Mexicans and that some jobs
may be lost of this bill
successfully passed but we
believe that that possibility is
Dr outlay nor justify the proven
harm being done to come to our
communities in deep to our most
financially vulnerable
neighborhoods that are targeted
by the major players in this
industry I will close by saying
that if such a cap was destined
Seri and the right thing to do
for active duty military and
their families it is the right
thing to do for vulnerable New
Mexicans as well thank you and
urged support for SB sixty six.
Thank you we will now be hearing
from Mister Richard Weiner.
Richard are you available.
One more time for Mister Richard
Weiner.
Moving we'll be hearing from
surge Martínez surge.
One more time Mr Suresh
Martinez.
Okay is Mr read don George.
One more time Mr read don
George.
Is Barbara Chatterjee available.
Barbara.
One more time for miss Barbara
Chatterjee.
Okay now we will hear from Mr
Paul Gibson Mr Gibson.
Thank you Mr chairman committee
members especially want to thank
our bill sponsor for introducing
this important legislation my
name is Paul Gibson co founder
recheck Our Democracy an all
volunteer organization with
twenty five hundred member
statewide.
I have personally sat in
hearings on small loan reform
many many times and listen to
lobbyists and industry
representatives agency represent
their business practices over
and over and over and over and
over again I don't need to
articulate all that is wrong
with their messaging the expert
witnesses expressed very clearly
why this committee should give
this bill of two passed laid out
all that is disingenuous about
industry testimony industry
preys upon our most vulnerable
New Mexicans are essential
workers we take our democracy in
this twenty five hundred well
informed very engaged a second
members strongly support SB
sixty six and hope you send a
signal to our students or
critters that we really
appreciate how essential they
are thank you very much for your
service.
Thank you Mr we will now hear
from through Saturday Mr sadr.
I already spoke.
Okay okay.
We will hear from Diane Santa.
Okay.
Yes we can.
Mr chairman and committee
meeting stands out of all Griego
and I'm the chief financial
empowerment officer Guadalupe
the credit union which is a low
income designated community
financial institution my primary
focus is financial counseling
and financial education which
covers seven counties in
northern New Mexico and I stand
in support of this bill of what
a little bit credit union offers
high risk loans starting at
three hundred dollars so we are
a player in the field that is
willing to lead to this
demographic we went to people
with no credit scores challenged
credit and we don't charge
exorbitant fees or rates it is
possible to make affordable
loans to low income citizens
on interest rates and fees the
result of this people could not
afford to pay the rates and
terms at a hundred and seventy
five percent twitch damages of
credit even more in case of an a
borrowing cycle
you know The New Mexico
constitution says having access
to basic enough that a national
of services is inherent right
according to possessing and
protecting personal property I
stepped.
Thank you very much I and will
now be hearing from Mister Fred
Nathan.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee on the front
Nathan I'm executive director
thank you Mexico which is a
bipartisan think tank serving
New Mexicans we spent all of
last year studying the issue of
predatory lending in New Mexico
and we sent to our findings in
this report in October I just
want to emphasize today that by
passing Senate bill sixty six
you will benefit not just low
income consumers in New Mexico
but also local businesses in New
Mexico which is especially
urgent right now let me explain
if you passed Senate bill sixty
six and the interest cap goes
from one seventy five to sixty
six to thirty six percent
savings will go back into the
pockets of low income New
Mexicans and won't stay there
long because those people live
paycheck to paycheck and it will
be spent on local businesses
like restaurants which are
struggling right now so think of
this bill is not just help for
the most powerless among us but
think of Senate bill sixty six
as a part.
Thank you Mr need we will now go
back to Shirish Martinez I see
that he joined us Mr Martinez.
Hi thank you sorry I'm video
issues Mr chair members of the
committee my name is search
Martinez I'm an attorney and I'm
a faculty member at University
of New Mexico school of law but
of course I'm here today
speaking only as myself the
legislature eliminated payday
loans a few years ago because
they were debt traps for the
poorest Mexicans since then
those of my colleagues and I
have been attention to this have
seen the industry pivot away
from payday loans to a new model
of installment loans that can
still track New Mexicans in a
ruinous cycle of that that's why
there's a need for an all
inclusive cap that prevents
workarounds all the evidence
suggests that there's
effectively no impact on access
to credit when reasonable rates
are imposed and multiple
studies.
Cap rate suggests that the
overwhelming majority of folks
trying to other strategies to
resolve their financial problems
in non religious ways nonprofits
credit unions and others who are
not focused on profits stand at
the ready to meet the needs of
New Mexicans thank you.
Thank you Mr Martinez will now
hear from Carla Kerr hope I
apologize if I mispronounce that
currently.
Thank you that was perfect Mr
chair members of the committee
my name is Carla creating how
for and on behalf of the center
for civic policy we stand in
support of SB sixty six there
has been ample testimony that
has provided example to the
atrocity of triple digit
interest rates on poor and
desperate families we commend
this bill in making sure
ensuring that communities are
victims to a cycle of debt and
we believe that this legislation
and enables responsible and
equitable loans thank you to the
sponsor and expert witnesses
thank you.
Thank you Carla we will now hear
from Jacob Vigil check out.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee my
name's Jacob Vigil from New
Mexico voices for children we
stand strong support of the bill
there's no shortage of data and
anecdotes about how kids have
suffered during the economic
shock of this pandemic with
parents loss of income housing
instability food insecurity and
other financial stress COVID
relief aid is not been enough
and even the aid that has been
passed has not made it to those
who are eligible particularly
those in immigrant communities
and communities of color so
working families need access to
credit and tax refunds but too
often have to resort to options
that leave them and cycles that
making it harder for them to
escape poverty and you know high
interest loans like this make
things worse including ending
racial disparities so trapping
families in cycles of poverty is
the last thing that we need
right now in our state for this
reason I New Mexico voices for
children stands in strong
support of the sensible
legislation thank you.
Thank you Mr we will now move on
to Mr Allen Sanchez Mr Sanchez
are you available.
Yes I thank you Allen's son just
executive director of the New
Mexico conference of Catholic
bishops other **** want to thank
the Senator souls for bringing
this forward we've been working
on this issue for twenty years
it's time that we actually have
a solution of the heartbreaking
stories have not gone away it's
time to do that thirty six
percent of Russ this is a issue
of social justice are to protect
the most vulnerable and because
of the reasons all given by the
supporters of the bishops urge
the committee to do it two
passed please vote pass thank
you so much.
Thank you we will now be hearing
from Rheon spaniel.
Hello my name is Rhiannon Samuel
and I am the executive director
of the anti New Mexico the
economy is a grassroots
nonpartisan nonprofit that seeks
common ground solutions to New
Mexico's challenges within
education crime and economic
opportunity for all the reasons
previously stated the on to New
Mexico stands in support of
Senate bill sixty six.
Thank you very much miss
Hamilton we will now we hearing
from Michael more.
Mr more.
One more time Mr Michael more
you.
We'll be moving on to Mr brand
more.
Mr chair members of the
committee on one more New Mexico
counties as a sponsor said New
Mexico County stand and support
Senate bill sixty six thank you.
Thank you Mr Moore and finally
we'll hear from Allen let's Sir
hello the level.
Yes can you hear me yes we can.
So my name is Ellen right Sir in
line up Representative senior
citizens law office that I co
founded in nineteen eighty three
and served as the executive
director for numbers years on
this bill will profoundly
benefit low income borrowers
especially seniors I'm by the
way small loan companies always
threatened as they have for the
last twenty years they will
close their businesses if you
are a state it tends to lower
the CAC they never do and there
are police lobby against the
capitals thank you they will
lose their jobs they won't on.
I just wanted to add to the
testimony today that we see a
lot of seniors
year after year at our office
and research central New Mexico
seniors who have actually been
effected because they choose to
pay their loan payments that
they can't.
Sorry.
There are looking to move on to
share correct chair.
Yes hi Care Shendo members of
the committee my name is Shannon
Corona senior policy and
government affairs associate
with the center for responsible
lending and I'm thank you for
the opportunity to voice my
support for SD six six which
would put an end to a piece of
the predatory interest rates I'm
and thank you to sponsors for
bringing this important
legislation forward I'm here
today to tell you the sky
doesn't fall when interest rates
are capped New Mexico can looks
other states such as South
Dakota as an example of this in
two thousand sixteen thought the
Kotak happened small dollar
interest loan interest rates at
thirty six percent inclusive of
all fees and charges since then
research has shown that credit
is available in the credit for
it individuals in South Dakota
stable New South Dakota pay
alternative loans and unsecured
consumer loans are made
available by credit unions and
community based organizations
maybe it was community
development institutions have
provided twelve million in loan
the creator eighteen eight
hundred jobs people say without
these high cost that traps are
better off.
Thank you.
Are there any other members of
the public who wish to speak to
support Senate bill sixty six
that did not make it on my list
features your hand at this time
just reminder the reactions at
the bottom is how you raise your
hand in order to contribute are
there any other members of the
public who wish to speak who
were not provided an
opportunity.
Thank you and that concludes all
of our public comments for
Senate bill sixty six.
Thank you Micaela of so now
we'll go to the.
Reporter questions.
Mr chair public comments after
public testimony very short I
promise okay.
First I want to thank you for
allowing everyone to testify
even though people in a short
amount of time allowed everyone
to testify out and just want to
point out if you look at who
testified on the one side with
the people in opposition that
have money interest owner should
be addressed and are getting
money off of this on the other
side of the people who truly are
trying to take care of the low
interest people I've been for a
long time and and recognize that
there are no troops police that
people can say anything they
want to public testimony and
it's not all true I know one of
my experts has information to
about some of the things that
were said but I'm sure some of
that will come out and questions
that we'll wait for that time
thank you Sir.
Okay thank you Senator so now
we'll go to committee Senator a
Padilla.
Thank you Mr Chairman can you
hear me yes we can thank you
thank you Mr chairman and
senator souls I know that you've
been working on this for several
years I I feel your pain I've
had sent several bills that I've
had to work on for several years
and.
you know I'm trying to get my
hands around some of the The
presentation that was made
originally it was very detailed
very lengthy.
When you take a look at the
state that reduced to thirty six
percent first of all can you
give us some states that are
like New Mexico the did that
first of all and second one of
the statements made was that the
access to credit did not shrink
and and dollars that may be
needed did not shrink can you
give us a little more.
Detail to that I A. M..
Have been contacted almost more
than any other piece of
legislation.
Ask appears including some of my
own that are very controversial
on this very topic and so I'm
I'm I'm I'm wanting to hear
everything so can you give us
some of that information yes Mr
chair and senator up first is it
would indicated some states like
South Dakota South Dakota is
relatively similar they have a
large native population they are
out energy dependent they have a
relatively small population I
think there will smaller than we
are when they lowered it they
have not seen a problem like
that many states have lowered
their maximum interest rates to
thirty six percent and as I
indicated before no state has
found that to be a problem where
they wanted to go back the other
direction but people with more
expertise if I could that
elector Myers answer she
probably has some of the details
and specifics.
Thank you I love that in a very
succinct way that would be
wonderful thank you.
Thank you Senator Mr chairman
Senator Padilla nice to see you
again
this I think you're right that
the evidence from other states
is really important as a basis
to think about this there have
been reports from the consumer
provide financial protection
bureau the national consumer law
center pew charitable trusts the
center for responsible lending
you just heard of and in and
then studies conducted in the
various states and those are
pretty consistent they are
consistent that the this guy
doesn't fall in that reading
continues of at the lower rate
they are also had study groups
or focus groups I guess you
could call them where they've
interviewed people who used to
use these loans and they report
that they're doing better
financially one of the things
that they also report is that
they're finding alternative ways
to whether financial and
security some people reported I
had a credit card but I want to
was of high cost lenders now
either using a credit card at a
much lower rate some people
report that their families came
forward and help them some
people report that they want to
credit unions some people report
that they change their of
spending habits so it varies the
whole story that comes out when
you look at other states is that
there is credit that continues
and people.
To financially much better.
Well thank you Mr chairman and
and senator souls and miss more
it's good to see you also
occurring
So we need to have for breakfast
to Garcia's again sometime you
got it so the the the next
question that I have really is a
long we're we're just the credit
then come from Senator souls
where we're which organizations
you alluded to a few of them in
your presentation your opening
remarks.
Where is where these loans going
to come from now because folks
are the need and the desire and
and and the you know it's not
going to go away anytime soon.
Mr chair and senator As
indicated this is not an
experiment that New Mexico is
doing other states have already
done this there are several of
the organization and trying to
find that the danger to get my
my experts probably could tell
you some of them each true
connect is one there are several
that operate just rates that are
making a profit at thirty six
percent and allow the credit
unions as you heard from one of
the the main people associated
with all of the credit that they
make these loads they look
forward to having more people
come in and do that it also
establishes very specific
industry recognized kinds of
credit there also are some
communities that I think it's
Dona Ana County that employees
can get a small low interest
rate from the county that is
supported with their job
essentially because they have a
job they can get a low interest
rate well below thirty six
percent to whether through some
of the difficulties that may
come along in life and so there
is credit available other states
have done this we are not
inventing something new in New
Mexico.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator souls so and I don't
know that you'll have the state
at the top of your your tongue
and able to tell me but I'm just
curious.
So in states that you know.
With that.
Work in New Mexico two weeks do
we have any data that tells us
those same companies work in the
states that are now thirty six
percent because what I keep
hearing from this from the
industry is well it's just we're
not gonna be able to do this
anymore we're not gonna be able
to be in New Mexico anymore to
do we have any data that tells
us that you know of the
several companies that we heard
from to date are operating in
those thirty six percent states
now and and and I know that's
probably an unfair question but
I get those all the time and I
just want to know.
And Mr chair and senator I'd
have to defer to my experts they
have heard that there are some
companies that offer thirty six
percent in the state to have a
cap that that but they love New
Mexico where they can charge
much higher rates the secretary
for the of the the wealth out of
the state but if my experts can
give a specifics.
Thank you senator souls Senator
Padilla Mr Chairman
there are companies who operate
in states with thirty six
percent less a couple of them
are one main opportune they may
not be supporting this bill for
other reasons but they do
operate and what we have found
is that that many companies just
adjust their lending practices
when rates are reduced
just to true connect just to add
a little more data to that to
connect came into New Mexico in
twenty seventeen and has been
DFA's has of working with
prosperity works the facilitated
the enrollment of twenty one
participating employers
throughout the state in that's
across multiple counties private
employers and in cities and they
offer rates at twenty four point
ninety nine percent on loans
from a thousand to three
thousand.
And they have in essence saved
New Mexicans the estimate is
eight million dollars with the
default rate of less than two
percent so that is a viable
entity it's operating in Santa
Fe Rio Arriba to tells more of
Colfax in McGill and Torrance
counties as well as in the
communities of the M. this
cities and counties that have
participated with them
and that they are operating in
those counties the to connect is
being offered to the Guadalupe
credit you so there are
a number of the existing
companies that continue to do
business many companies also
report in their public
statements that they adjust
their lending practices when
rates go down and they make
assessment of whether or not
they want to continue clearly
they don't adjusted down when
the rates go up.
And and thank you Mr chairman
and and Senator souls and and
Karen Myers so but if you have
an example of anyone that we
heard from today that is
operating in a state with a
thirty six percent cap.
I have a spreadsheet with some
of that information if you want
to go on to another question I
will see if I can find it
Senator if that's acceptable
sure thank you and I'd love to
see that and I don't know Mr
Chairman center if you if you
know of any that you'd want to
call out.
Mr chair and senator I have that
at my fingertips but I think I
know which that information is
available I understand I and I
was a little over a little
detail question there what what
about changed behavior when the
interest rates become lower do
you have any solid data or facts
and figures on that where this
happened and and some of the
state's a change behavior on the
consumers part.
And Mr chair and senator there
certainly is some of there's
lots of national research is
been done on this very issue
again this is not an experiment
New Mexico is embarking upon
where they have found that
people get their loans other
places they are not going to
online ones they are going to
friends and families they are
reevaluating whether they really
the money there are a number of
different ways they are are
talking to our credit unions and
picking up loads in that way but
again my experts may be able to
tell more about the national
studies on that.
Senator schools Mr chair and
Senator Padilla that's actually
absolutely correct
the the very the reports from
consumers actually is that they
do change their behavior and
that has been reflected pulls in
the studies around satisfaction
around the rates going down
around how they're getting
access to credit and other
things.
Us so that that is confirmed.
Mr Chairman better if I might I
just got some information that
first made an opportune our
examples of companies that loan
here in New Mexico and also loan
at thirty six percent in other
states.
Yes and I would say that are of
I believe that one of the people
who spoke in opposition
represents is a lobbyist for one
main and opportune so those are
two examples.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator souls and in Karen
Myers.
You know I'm a I hear often and
I think we all hear often will
gosh we just need to study it
more our gosh you know we
weren't included in the
discussion our in our or our
what why what we part of this
you know putting this thing
together I'm you know.
I I don't like hearing that I
like you know with I think you
all know you my so young could
or if my office I talked
actually every single person
wants to talk to me I mean I
might be on the complete
opposite spectrum of what your
app up to but I listen to
everybody can you tell us
Senator souls who all you've
listened to when you were
putting this together I mean who
all that you work with I I get
the sense knowing you that you
did work with some people but
but I'd like to to just give us
a quick rundown please.
Mr chairman and senator I
actually been working on this
since about two thousand and
fifteen I was one of the main
spell Sanchez on two thousand
seventeen at thirty six percent
and so we work with everyone
that and at that point there was
the grand compromise was made
sponsorship is you know between
the house and Senate can change
when it was moved from thirty
six percent two hundred seventy
five percent with the bill
essentially written by the
industry when it moved to that I
pulled off of it because I did
not feel conscience we that I
could participate in that and I
tell people that that vote on
the Senate floor was the
toughest vote I've ever had to
make because there was no way I
could vote for under seventy
five percent.
But I urge my colleagues to do
so because it was so much better
than the four hundred plus
percent that we had at the time.
As we came up here are you
probably got more calls about
this bill that any of the other
bills and many of the calls have
been very critical of me because
it was so hot how could I
possibly carry a bill such high
interest rate that's devastating
for people and so the industry
people been trying to work with
them for ever and every time the
tactics are delay stall talk
that we have been compromised
with thirty six percent is a
compromise you're just right or
usury laws should be lower than
that I believe this already is a
compromise the industries that
listen to for years that's why
we are currently at a hundred
seventy five and not already at
thirty six percent.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator I I may have additional
questions Mr Chairman San to
stop at this point but I
appreciate you allowing me to go
first thank you.
Thank you Senator Tallman.
Senator Tallman.
Senator Tallman you're still
muted if you could be in the.
You disappear from the screen as
well.
Oh there you are.
Use your your muted Senator.
There you go okay sorry.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator so serving as forward.
Last year I sponsored the Senate
bill ninety which were provided
low interest small loans for
state employees.
through a program called to
connect which is seven already
mentioned several times.
for the water is a great benefit
for state employees there was us
Hey will reduction.
Which is one of the reasons why
was the maximum interest rate of
twenty five percent go through
public affairs in a died in the
Senate five to six.
These loans.
Are they all of payroll
deduction.
The answer that.
Senator schools you want me to
take that.
Your your muted.
no set Mr chair senator Tom and
they are not all payroll
reductions that is a particular
lending model that to connect
uses other lenders use other
models and they are typically a
debit authorization with the
loan documents where the
borrower agrees to allow the
lender to debit their bank
account when the payment is due
is that why the interest rate is
so much lower because it's
payroll deduction it is one of
the factors yes but what you
also find when a lender has of
the ability to take the payment
on a regular basis that allows
security as well clearly car
title loans have security
because you're taking a lien
against the car and some of the
most egregious practices are the
card title installment lenders
who make a loan not based on the
income of the person as you
heard in some of these stories
of what happened to consumers in
New Mexico they make it based on
the value of the collateral and
inevitably loan money that the
borrower cannot afford based on
their income resulting in the
repossession rates that have
been cited.
Thank you for that and so why do
of folks go to install the loner
when they go through a credit
union or community bank.
Which is already been stated
that they up these community
banks and credit unions have no
problem loaning for with people
with the very low credit rating
so why would they go to install
alone when they have that option
Mr chair should continue service
schools yes I was just to make a
very quick one are the bears
very aggressive marketing of
some of that extra money that
they bring in from high interest
rates goes directly to marketing
and marketing is effective as
any business will tell you the
other is convenience they are
right there next to him they see
it all the time they go in they
have a very difficult personal
situation and they feel they
just need money and they really
are paying close attention to
what they are signing up for an
agreed to do of this would would
slow things down a little bit so
that they are more conscious
about their decisions but please
Karen if you would like to add
other pieces.
Yes Mr chair senator Tom and I
had that question when I started
learning many many years ago at
the attorney general's office
about this industry and at that
time it was payday car title and
installment and at that time
what what I learned in and this
was admitted to us very freely
by the lenders that didn't
compete on price the computer
relationships they make you feel
good they ask about your family
they're the person next door and
so it's easy as it's convenient
it's fast and they are New
Mexico has one of the highest
percentages of unbanked
individuals and families in the
country and this is one of the
things that is part of the
problem is trying to segue
people into those banking
relations but obviously the
credit unions have done an
incredible job as they've talked
about today in starting to do
that.
Thank you some have a hard time
getting at the truth years
opposition says the.
The.
People with poor credit ratings
or be able to get loans and then
the proponents are telling us
that that's not going to be a
problem so.
Well the opposition folks are
lying to me and actually there's
three lobbyists who testified
and the opposition who have a
lot of credibility with me so
I'd hate to think.
They're lying to me so what is
the truth thank you.
Loans are cantik.
This Mr chair and senator out I
also I have several very good
friends who are part of the
lobbyists that some of their
clients I don't agree with and
we had a discussion about that I
think the best place to look for
where the truth is is look at
other states that have done this
in those other states are they
better off.
Are you people still have access
to capital yes there are
economics of their communities
are falling apart because the
payday lenders the installment
loan the title loans whether
those of all gone and quite
frankly the answer is no they
have not they actually report
that they are better off
financially and the money is not
being sucked out of the bottom
of the economic pyramid that's
providing a stronger base for
the entire community and the
economics within.
And senator may I add to that I
just found my data point which
is seven of the thirteen of the
largest national store front
loan companies who do business
in New Mexico.
Do business in lower in states
with lower rate caps so a major
so what each there's there's
multiple companies and they each
have to have a license for each
store front when they're a
storefront lender but for the
companies that are the highest
number of storefronts and doing
the most business major them
also accommodate lower interest
rate caps and continue to offer
loans.
Thank you for that also.
Is it.
Four thirty six percent to.
Right is that true.
I believe so but I would have to
double check.
It's my understanding that they
make exceptions to that is that
true.
Senator I'm not familiar with
the details what I can tell you
is each state has developed it's
very complicated statutory
scheme across the country each
state has developed different
approaches where you find
consistency is in the general
APR rates that people are
adopting the fact that in covers
installment loans installment
states and covers installment
payday and car title
and that that is being
successful in of the impact on
front the financial security of
the families in those states.
Agree with the senator.
Diem or I'm a little troubled by
the fact.
That doesn't seem to have been
that.
Discussion is that true with the
opposition.
Now I'm a person who's always
like Senator Padilla always
willing to talk to somebody even
though I mean I agree with them
but I'm not going to shut him
out Isabelle.
to go she should've been
discussion between the with the
opposition or not.
Mr chair and senator I have
talked with people who are very
lobbyist called me about this
particular bill I have discussed
it with them I work very closely
with some of the advocates on
this particular bill who worked
in this field on an everyday
basis we also hear from
consumers on an everyday basis
of people who have lost their
car have lost their whole of
lost their accumulated wealth
and have to start over again
this is also going to build that
is not new to the New Mexico
you're twenty twenty one it is
been debated it is that
discussed it is been worked with
with the industry for years and
years of when we thought we had
some of the things fixed with a
hundred seventy five percent the
industry pivoted to a different
model they got around some of
that this particular bill is
designed specifically to close
all of those loopholes.
Thank you.
Senator.
And I want final question you
know there's bad actors in every
business so this business.
Have a higher percentage of bad
actors.
Then other industries I mean
even the.
lawyers serve some of our very
abusive corrupt and immoral.
But does this business have a
higher percentage of the a bad
actors.
Mr chair and senator
I'm not sure there's a good way
of answering that because bad
actors implies that they are
going around the law and not
following the law that I know we
what we're saying with this bill
they are absolutely following
the law but the law allows them
to have what many people
consider to be unconscionably
high interest rates that they
use within their business model
and it is fully allowed by us as
the legislators in the state of
New Mexico we have set up the
law that allows people to be
taken advantage of and they say
completely within the law in
their ability to do so I
wouldn't call that bad actors
they are following the law but
we are the ones that set up that
wall.
Thank you Senator so that was a.
Good answer.
Thank you.
One final question so you can be
assured with absolutely.
No exceptions.
That everyone is going to be
able to receive a loan even
people with bad credit.
In a very hello.
Credit rating.
Mr chair and senator I would be
lying if I told you that
absolutely everyone could get
get that has full access to that
that is not at all what we are
saying and actually that is not
the case today that anybody can
get a low and so so that that is
not necessarily the case what
we're saying is people are
better off if they do or do not
have loans available to them
that are at these exorbitantly
high interest.
Thank you thank you senator
thank you Mr chair that's all I
have thank you thank you senator
Clemente representative Brendan
Senator Wirth.
Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman appreciate
the opportunity to have a few
questions
That maybe the
expert witness or Center souls
give us Mr Chairman Senator is
there any law on our books
currently against offering loans
below thirty six percent.
Mr chairman and senator no not
at all this would be a thirty
six percent people are allowed
to offer loans and I think I'd
there are some foods instances
where people can get runs down
your prime which last I checked
with somewhere around eighty two
percent at this point.
Chairman Sir maybe if you're
doing a mortgage you might be
able to do that the.
Available for all.
Currently going through that
process so but yeah
okay so there's nothing in our
laws that says you can't.
We just don't mean.
Your your argument is that
Businesses can be successful and
can make money I think that's
your argument at thirty six
percent cap.
But we don't have that.
Except we're like Sir told and
brought up in a does a really
good point on the
Payroll deduction loans by this
one group that came in a couple
years ago I remember on public
affairs that particular bill on
that particular cycle
and but they only offer that
slow over rate because a payroll
deduction they're getting paid
first even before the employee
is getting paid that loan is
being paid in that correct.
Mr chair and senator and I'd
have to defer to the specifics
about to connect but that's part
of how they are able to offer
very low interest rates of but
to your earlier point anybody
can offer below thirty six
percent but if they can get the
same what we get somebody to
take it at a hundred percent
they're not going to say no
that's what I I know we would
need to pay this much also there
isn't any brought to what they
charge but there certainly is a
pop up I could defer to Karen.
Yes Senator schools Mr chair
Senator Brandt what the right
the lenders report themselves
isn't in their public documents
like ten ten K. that they file
Is that they charge at the
highest rate they can get away
with.
So for example world's
acceptance charges the different
rates in different states but in
New Mexico they've target New
Mexico one of their largest
locations across the country and
the charger you know as higher
rate as they can do but they're
they're model is pretty
interesting many of their loans
are and hundred and seventy five
percent because they get their
profit from refinancing the loan
and re enrolling at over
repeatedly so it's a combination
of the right and the refinancing
and then the extension of the
loan term.
And the increase in the debt
load that both makes the profit
but also creates the financial
crisis for the family in each of
these lenders have a slightly
different model it's true.
So the policy and and and there
are some blow who are already
making loans at thirty six
percent or less in many many
other states as we've already
noted I won't repeat that.
Thank you Mr chairman
Senator and the.
The caring
Are they required.
To be up front about what the
lowest costing I think we
usually call the truth in
lending statement is not
required of anyone making a
giving alone in the state.
Madam chair and senator I was
part of the two thousand
seventeen was it clarified and
cleaned up some of that the
requirement and it had to be in
the language the person
understood and some things of
that that nature and so yes they
have to give that to them yeah
there's a bit of yeah you can
have a person a piece of paper
but you can't make a read
but you might be have better
information about the tales with
with how that is working within
the the HSD Senator souls Mr
chairman Senator Brandt they do
by federal law have to disclose
that they also have to disclose
that by state law
I've interviewed.
A lot of consumers who've taken
out installment loans and they
often will tell you this story
which is I go in they make it
fast they tell me how much I'm
gonna pay per month or bi weekly
and I didn't really notice or
understand how much I was going
to pay overtime until I walked
out after I signed it went home
and sat down and realized how
much in trouble I was and then
it was too late.
And so then they go back and
they refinance because they
can't pay the loan and it just
escalates from there until the
default.
Missy Mr
chairman and senator
so where the government we're
here to help and we can save you
from your own bad decisions I I
get it I understand
so with with that you said they
go home and then they finally
read the paperwork every time I
buy a car by the way that all
they want to tell me about is
the the amount of the car
payment per month same thing
they don't want me to read the
paper work I happen to be one of
those people that read the
paperwork drive some nuts
because now the the financing
questions that usually takes
them thirty minutes is going to
take them over an hour because I
read the paper work it's called
being a responsible person.
I'm sorry I don't think the
government should make laws for
people who I frankly are doing
what they should do by reading
the paper work it is their
responsibility maybe we need to.
You'll put out some public
service announcements to tell
them it's your responsibility to
read what you sign and I don't
know I was taught that my my
parents
so.
You also brought up.
and and and I and maybe this is
something we could look at you
so they go home and read the
paperwork and then realize their
trouble now what I was doing
sales.
in the home.
They had seventy two hours to
rescind the contract is there
nothing in there were if they
read the contract when they got
home that they couldn't return
so here's all the money I
borrowed we're within the first
seventy two hours so there's
nothing charged is there is
there a way we could do
something like that Mr Chairman
Senator Brandt there's no risk
of right of recision it applies
to door to door sales are in
home sales where you're like you
just described it doesn't apply
to these kind of loans and you
have to put that question I
think with respect in the
framework of people who are at
that point
in dire straits some people are
borrowing money to pay to
payment necessities because
there are they don't have enough
income one of the points that
was made was that in a pandemic
we shouldn't be restricting
credit in a pandemic is exactly
when people are most at risk for
financial crisis and to help to
allow them to be put into long
term debt the committee can get
out of one they're already
struggling just exponentially
makes that worse it doesn't make
it better.
And I and I understand I
understand Mr chairman care and
and Sir soldier you're coming
for at this you're kind of from
the opposite position of me I
believe in free markets you
believe in government controlled
markets that's fine you know
there's there's just a
difference of opinion
you want the government to be
able to lay out everything and
control everything and regulate
everything when it comes to
everything I just don't this is
something I don't believe I
believe people need to.
Act responsibly I do understand.
Yeah we talked about and being
in in you know situations that
you can't you know maybe you
don't have any food in the house
been there done that
yeah maybe you you know you've
got to have a car you got a car
which get for the car insurance
to get back and forth to work
and so you're trying to figure
out a way to keep your car
insured those are the kind of
things that happens but if
you're at.
Three hundred fifty or four
hundred credit score who's going
to loan you that money if this
passes who's going to give you
that money tell me the agency or
the bank that's going to loan
you that money I don't think
they exist.
Mr chair Senator Brandt my
answer that my I don't want to
usurp six hundred missiles
answer is that if someone does
not have the disposable income
to pay a loan back they should
not be put into a loan that's
going to put them into further
debt where they ultimately
default because that is not
access to credit it is access to
debt and financial and security
so if someone has three of the
credit score of three hundred
and no disposable income because
everything's going to pay basic
necessities that then the
alternatives we've talked about
the nonprofits that exist in the
community rental assistance
that's that's flowing other kind
of options need to be developed
and are being developed as an
alternative putting someone into
debt at that point is just.
Not helpful.
Mr Chairman care and that's a
really good point thank you I
think I actually really like
your answer on that one yeah
that's that's where we they need
to be seeking somewhere else
they need to be looking for
help.
Outside of that you know I was I
was able to run the salvation
army's a.
Help program like he put all
that in Oklahoma for several
years and so I helped and worked
with a lot of people in that
exact situation I think
sometimes that's the issue is
more of getting the information
to people.
To where they know where they
can go and get that help
and and so that's not something
we need to be doing more as a
society is letting people know
where those those programs are
because they exist here we go
lots of non profits to do a lot
of really great work to help
people and we need to be telling
where those are a lot of times
unfortunately some of these
loans are being taken out
because they want a new game
system where they wanted to gain
for their system and they're not
really thinking it through.
By requiring of truth in lending
statement we are saying here is
up front what it cost you take
out the slow.
At some point people have to
learn to be responsible for
their own actions
and that's why I've always
really struggle with these you
you mentioned care that with if
we do this the that businesses
will just have to adjust their
lending practices what did you
mean by that because you didn't
really expand on that you just
said well that does have to
adjust their lending practices
what what it what does that
mean.
Mr chair Senator Brandt
there are companies who reduce
their rates based on the state
cap when they desire to stay and
continue to do business that
would be adjusting their
business practices.
I thought maybe you meant they
would change their fee structure
or something like that to still
be able to live in that state
some of the some of them that's
exactly what I do need some of
them change their fee structure.
In terms of the the finance
charge they can charge it cetera
so yes is this bill treat
because there's there's fees and
there's finance charges right
there's interest rate in their
cities absolutely right so is
this a combined thirty six
percent or does this treat them
differently can I do an
application for the can I do a
re application for the yeah how
does that how is that treated in
the bill is that part of the
thirty six percent it is
sorry again Mr chair and senator
if you read through the people
most of the bill is this is all
in there are no exception it's
the total costs these interest
everything.
Thank you I appreciate it
appreciate the the answers I
think we just have a
philosophical difference and
that's okay
and thank you very much for
should.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator bring of senator Wirth
and Senator Hickey.
Thank you Mr chair I
Perhaps an exhibit a is to the
person who's been dealing with
this the longest in two thousand
nine I carried Senate bill three
thirty one Karen Myers was
working for then Attorney
General king and we were trying
to set the rate at thirty six
percent just for Santo Thomas
center Padilla I spent hours and
hours trying to negotiate and
ultimately the answer was you
need to go to the Senate then
corporations committee and take
a vote and we did that in the
bill did not move forward I do
think it's a philosophical issue
Senator Brandt and I you know I
agree with what the federal
government did with setting a
cap for our military bases I do
think there's a role for the
government to step in and
certainly if we're concerned
about our military families we
should be concerned about our
poor and working families that
are getting taken advantage of
I just really the pandemic
arguments I hear it being made
as a reason for these loans are
quite frankly it's also a very
scary situation that people are
and I really appreciate agency
Santa Griego on the credit
unions that are making drugs
available for this constituency
that are really hurting for have
a great debate tomorrow on
Senate bill one a little preview
it's a six hundred dollar
tax rebate for working families
that make less than fifteen
dollars an hour to help exactly
those that need it most so Mr
chair I'm ready to make a motion
I think it this is one of those
bills that we just need to it's
a philosophical fundamental
difference and we take the vote
so I don't know if you're ready
for the motion and no Senator
he's got some questions but when
you're ready I'm ready to make a
motion okay Senator Hickey.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you senator selves and Karen
Myers very very informative I
think we probably have a five
o'clock.
The deadline and
I don't know that I can get all
of my questions answered I like
Senator Padilla I I the phone
has been off of a.
And
I also
Want to know apparently I I keep
hearing looking at data but no
one's actually probably what
that that is and what it would
tell us from from either side
and and I would would like to
know that and I guess the other
thing is that I haven't heard a
good answer to the question
yes people talk to people that
have they negotiate I'm working
on Senate bill seventy one
trying to bring together two
very polar opposites.
And that's for medical bad debt
and the impositions that would
create the reporting the where
where to find I I think it's a
very good built that the
practicalities have to be worked
out and we're negotiating I mean
I'm celebrating but we're
negotiating and I guess I
haven't heard anyone say our
Senator souls have you sat down
and negotiated I hear this is
been going on for ever as
Senator Wirth is pointing out
but I've been in the middle of
health care for forty years and
that's been going on forever we
haven't figured out yet
universal access we're still
trying and I know my census is
that I just don't know the
credit unions are going to come
in and out what Senator Brandt
what you're pointing out and
there is a a big need the other
everywhere I have confusion this
be compared to other states
South Dakota I know South Dakota
very well I live that just south
of that in Nebraska South Dakota
is a very well off state it's
not like New Mexico New Mexico
about six hundred thousand the.
So I don't know that I would
call that a comparison gavel
rural so it's just I have so
many questions that I'm
uncomfortable at this point
taking a vote and I I know I
hate to postpone thing but I
don't know Mr Chairman if we're
able to roll this or in the
meantime if care and and I don't
know who speaks for the
opposition but I am concerned
that some people really do need
this in in in our.
Senate bill seventy one
we're basically stopping
hospital systems from taking
anybody to collection.
And because bankruptcy sixty
percent bankruptcies of you to
help.
And is there a provision in here
where you might not be able to
take someone to court or what
amend the bankruptcy I'd like to
get answers that and I have one
of the thing I'd like to point
out I I understand the passion
and there is a lot of passion
but I don't know if any of you
been looking more of maybe
Senator Brandt you haven't read
the fine language and verifying
that you can now finance up to
seven years and when you finance
up to seven years you are seven
people up to continuously
rollover in the bad loans
increase in that and I think
that's part of this discussion
as well so I I know time is
short and that.
All I think I've got both email
and through the phones
I'm I'm not right there of this
one where the other and I would
like to see if we can well it
all over again I'm not
experienced enough know exactly
how that asset question but I
think that there there still
some answers and they're still
actually some middle ground if
the if possible thank you.
Thank you Senator Hickey I have
a Senator department for the
second time but I just want to
make a comment I know we have a
Senate democratic caucus is
supposed to start at five so
Senator Tallman.
Thank.
Thank you Mr chair.
I agree with the Senator Hickey
and Senator Padilla that we need
to.
The morning Goshen ations when I
very well on to the boat yes
what what does this go next this
bill.
Senator goes to a Judiciary.
Yeah I'd be willing to vote yes
if I get the assurance that
there's gonna be some
negotiation between now and
Judiciary.
I missed like okay my make sure
not needed Mr chair I'm I'd be
happy to negotiate with any one
of the things that I won't go
sheet away our of profits over
people people matter and it's
time that we have the
legislature stand up for people
and and the people among us who
are most in need that are being
taken advantage of of when.
Hold on just of.
It is not a fair playing ground
when you have people that are in
need of money and are going in
and they're dealing with people
that are financially
sophisticated it is not an open
and fair market of the open
markets do not work in that
situation they only work when it
is a level playing field with
both sides on the amount of
information and other things and
so I am always willing and as
many of the lobbyist will tell
you yeah they don't have any
trouble getting in touch with
the but I also not going to go
straight away any of my
principles on how this takes up
ruins people's lives with people
with that and puts our
communities at risk but
certainly I am willing to talk
with anybody it would
potentially life ending with the
senators that they have out get
any of your additional questions
answered.
Okay.
Thank you.
Senator for that and thank you
Mr chair I'm
Ready to vote.
Mr chair I I move into plans.
We have a motion for to pass in
incentive of Senate bill six to
six.
Do we have a second I second Mr
chair we have a second of we
have a roll call please a link.
Senator.
Well.
Senator Hamblen yes.
Yes.
Senator huh
yes.
Senator Sanchez.
No.
Senator
yes.
Senator Wirth.
Yes.
Senator.
Yes I'd like to explain my boat.
Yes.
The one on the Senator Padilla.
that season yes.
Yes in addition.
Yeah.
Senator huh.
Yes.
You had already recorded Mr
chairman.
Center this vote I think no he
has he did okay art thank us
three times no no I said yes
three times.
Sorry that's okay that's what I
thought I heard Mr chairman
sorry.
For news.
Seven years.
A so of we have a seven or do
pass me seven four yes and no
for no so Senator you have a a
do pass motion that.
You explain to vote.
Thank you Mr chairman I
appreciate that
I am still trouble I don't think
questions have been answered
I and and and all of the the
greatest respect Senator souls
and and I and I believe in you
in terms of principles and so
forth and I'm sure I'll all have
that moment somewhere as well
but I also know that if red
lines get drawn immediately in
the negotiations them why are
you bothering so I I we're
hoping that as senator Clemente
said there will be a good faith
effort to actually meet in
trying to negotiate out I really
do like the provision for no
bankruptcy I think there
absolutely the interest rate
needs to come down but
I I know that a lot of people
are going to have a very
difficult time and this is a
different state yeah a lot of
other states and I'm interested
in the exception to California
and so forth I just.
Of.
Hasn't settled but I I'm hoping
that the rate to go through the
negotiations so far thank you
for allowing me Mr chair to the
state level.
Mr chair thank you Senator and
the Senator of Kernan.
Yes thank you very much and I
know you all are anxious to get
your caucus that I believe
senator Neville he he has this
year the next bill up.
Yes he was next in the I was
hoping that the we could get him
on I know it's over time but I
know he's been very patient he
did request to put this on early
I didn't realize I didn't.
You know of I probably said no
but the.
is it is senator bill so long
well you know Mr chair I think
that waited all day and and
probably can you assure us that
no be number one on on Thursday
yes we will put him on on
Thursday it's that's put in
number one so they don't want
all day thank you thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you committee.
And you do have a word I will
listen to anyone in any
proposals for things to get
additional information that that
you need.
Thank you senator so of this
Senator Neville I know you still
on will put your number one on
Thursday.
Very good I'll just stop at your
house of the weight of Santa Fe
and sleep over fence are if you
Mr chairman that that's good.
Thank you thank you all right so
that that concludes our
community thank you all members
for for being on I just want to
also say the committee members I
know we we of it so we've got a
lot of bills to take care of of
I know Thursday we have a floor
session we're going to try and
start at two o'clock but who
knows that dependent on the
whole part of the floor debate
goes but I also want to caution
to if you guys can also be
available beyond I I know that
we're we're in session we
usually work through to get to
all the bills I know that
previously we said you know
people make other cuts other
commitments that for I I get
taxed and so forth so I just
want you guys to from now on be
open and so we can get through
all the bills we can appreciate
that thank you committee
members.
With that the we're we're done.
Richard thank you.
