Five twenty three if not will
so what we'll go ahead and take
care of that.
Already so couple.
Committees of the house bill one
forty one.
Mr chairman members thank you
all very much house bill one
forty one will add a new section
to the motor vehicle code and
it'll stabilization the concerns
of police survivors otherwise
known as cops special
registration plates.
This is the national logo plate
that has been used by various
other states to honor the family
and friends of law enforcement
officers that have been killed
in the line of duty there will
be a ten dollar fee for the
registration for the
registration fee of the total
forty five dollars the remaining
money will be used by V. D. to
defray the cost of producing an
issue issuing the new plates.
And thirty five dollars will go
to the enforcement protection
fund agency just chairman and
members I stand for questions
okay thank you anybody here in
support of a committee
substitute for house bill one
forty one.
Anybody in opposition.
Mr chairman I'd do this but this
is a great deal and I can tell
you right now but.
Fifteen years ago the pathway
house taxation committee
chairman Philip when we went
over there to the Senate he came
if we put all the license plates
bill on the floor it right there
in front of us and he sat there
and he's passed every house bill
over there and put all our
Senate bills in one big package
and threw me in the class and Mr
silvers here today answer is
here to support.
you Senator remember what he did
fifty years ago.
Thank you for the history of
New.
Okay nobody opposition the
questions of the committee
members Senator Coleman.
Details.
Sorry could need the details.
No Sir it is a special place
this is a nationally recognized
like this is brought to me by
some constituents of mine their
son Damon tell but was killed in
the helicopter crash on the LFC
in the rules will area and they
got involved with this
organization several of them did
throughout the state and this is
a national logo that will be
used on this particular place.
This is the.
Senator senator Wirth also Mr
chair of the wasn't that that
the Santo Domingo six act.
Minors.
Creative details or replace that
one are for this one not one
I'm not sure exactly how that's
going to play this thing
Representative Ezzell when you
see that the liners played come
over there is a and D. Calumet
and on that okay take a single.
Thank you so.
Yeah.
What else.
The committee.
Would you put the present
current.
By Senator Hamblen.
Any opposition to do best
motion.
I
see none we have Senator Griggs.
Hamblen turning to work for me
in Thomond building building
affirmative seven zero.
Mr chairman and members thank
you very much I'll see after a
while.
Representative.
thank you Mr chairman and good
to see you all the committee
members.
This is a license plate that he
is intended to focus on
motorcycle safety I have my
constituent Richard sturgeon who
is the head of one of our most
motorcycle clubs that him as
riders who brought this proposal
to me and what it is intended to
do is alert people to the need
to look twice for motorcycles
while you're driving so the
plate would have a a logo that's
a picture of motorcycle and have
a you know little phrase look
twice it was well received on
our side of the house noting
that it's like a driving
Billboard reminding people that
their motorcycles on the road
with that Mr Mister chair and
other Committee and happy to
entertain questions.
All right here is here to answer
questions or you want to I think
we're just happy to answer
questions all right we'll go out
to the audience anybody here in
support of this bill.
Good afternoon.
Okay.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee
Franklin Garcia with the
department transportation our
office oversees the motorcycle
training program we're looking
forward to training some more
awareness for motorcycle riders
and also some awareness for
motorcycle training program so
we're we stand in support of
this bill thank you what else.
They also serve.
We were in opposition K. K.
double will.
Okay all right.
Okay before I go to the
committee Mr chair I believe
that one of the things that's
important to to let you know
though is that we reached out to
the Pueblo of the regarding the
use of the is sensible on this
plate and did it with the
intention of honoring both the
traditions of New Mexico and to
the Pueblo from which it came
and after reviewing the play
design the tribal administrator
Dr cken Cerro responded with the
problems blessings in their full
support of the place.
Appreciate that thank you.
All right we'll committee
senator Neville thank you Mr
chairman of Richard does a lot
for Los Alamos National
Laboratory also on motorcycle
safety and with that I'd give it
to them.
Thank.
By Senator Hermio second by
Senator Kernan.
Any opposition to the the past
motion.
I see none of the past.
So what do that.
Eight two zero.
Thank you.
The house bill two sixty seven.
Thank you chairman so house bill
two sixty seven is regards the
way the motor vehicle division
evaluates medical invasion
records to determine if the
driver should be granted a
license with that restrictions
and right now under current law
if you can employ medical
experts to review driver medical
records but the statute sets the
limits on what those folks can
be paid to fifty Bucks an hour
as you can imagine we're having
a hard time finding medical
professionals willing to do
that.
So what this does it also limits
and twenty hours a week so what
this bill does is allows ME to
rely on the medical records
submitted
by the driver's medical
professional.
and the second thing it does it
abolishes an obsolete Health
standard by record.
Miss Vigil supervisory board was
created to advise and we do on
overview of driver's license
medical records.
But at this day and age review
criteria are well established
right there there in and we do
rags and it would have been
provide physicians going to
become board members so the
board isn't even in operations
was really just streamlines the
process with that all the.
Ask the secretary of any
director division one
thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee and Stephanie
Schardin Clarke cabinet
secretary this is tech
consolidate the MPD director and
I will stand for questions okay
great we go out to the audience.
The ability to support this
bill.
In opposition.
And every room.
All right and it will committees
questions from committee
question Senator Kernan.
Four thank you very much chair
and and Representative Harper so
I am limiting the obsolete
advisory board what actually
makes a determination if you you
go after I'd say and then don't
do so well input what happens
now.
Mr chair and Senator Kernan so
basically the.
Who is who has the I. issue or
potentially a seizure ensuring
or logical issue or something
like that they have their own
medical records that they've
been having to bring forward all
along it's now that we will
compare those medical records
against the criteria established
in REC like for example certain
vision ranges you can't drive at
all certain vision ranges you
can drive just in daylight and
we'll just compare them simply
against the rex Mr they have to
that Representative.
Three.
Trying to answer.
Mr chair Senator up so it
depends on what the customer's
position states so if they say
it's a wreck it's good for one
year then they have to renew
early and they can go up to
eight years that they can
improve.
And this is a real challenge
because people don't want to
give up their lives.
I know.
This is a physician with
oftentimes S. five family
members at the losses when.
New Mexico senator really bad
position so I don't know if
there's anything from that
comment and then what actually
happens because sometimes
utilities the vaccine minutes
okay maybe there are other
reasons and I don't think this
is anything this bill is fifty
element we need to pass it that
just curious on how the city
that I I've been with the
gentleman that I helped to get a
license
last year in we work through
everything department is just
wonderful help and help to and
then the.
State and lost I.
It that of course.
We did I last use that but where
you put your phone that you
think you've done that lately.
I don't know if that's really
the best way to participate that
expected price.
Not going to pay for them so
that's just a comment well I
have an opportunity to talk
about progress licenses yes but
it is a good bill but I am.
Help our positions in the office
the the bad guys.
Thank you thank you Mr Senator
Brandt.
Chairman and the Representative
is there any way that me as a
child can have my parents
license removed.
Please.
The
revenue vehicles.
Mr chair Senator there is a way
you can submit a letter of
concern to the motor vehicle
division we just would need to
know the name the date of birth
and then at that point the
customer that's been revoked we
will suspend them temporarily
and if an opportunity being in
the medical to report and a
vision part and we test and then
get reinstated in that sense we
kids to the doctor if they
recommend the.
My mother in law was literally
hitting everything.
The rest resources pass now but
we could not take your license
away and there was nothing
legally we could do we couldn't
so you couldn't drive job
without a license I can drive.
Well so my father lost thank god
is being a little bit more
amenable on that one he's agreed
not to drive anymore but the the
one initiative and driving thank
you.
Thank you Senator X..
Thank you for sure.
Representative expertise or way
the project from Canada one.
Chair representative will
actually or on page three where
we all live.
Seven two.
For the general if we provided
confidential.
They can call for any reason or
used as evidence
Mr chair of which we have sure
work here for that account with
in that right here we have
Representative languages and
languages and particularly in
the discovery process in that
stress and fifty seven.
The
staff there which is the truth.
chairman and senator thank you
for the great question actually
if you look on page.
four yield learning.
this language that you're
referring to is actually
existing law it's currently in
that section sixty six dash five
dot six dash six four is
bringing over here so that that
is actually existing law.
We are.
Shows.
Right.
Right.
Yeah so.
So so so chairman Senator you
are right that is new material
in this statute but we are
carrying it from the stature
here we repeal was consolidating
that information so that is not
new law.
I share.
In terms
of.
That would be a the chairman
Senator I take great offense at
that I'm here.
But the.
Representative.
The problem.
Questions.
Vision have and because.
This is my.
We're not.
Read the other right thank you
for your project for
Representative.
induced.
Because what if you're self
employed for.
You.
So are.
Support.
And I just.
Right for more than a few issues
with great about Verizon
locations after that.
For in the.
to table the eighty four major
or.
So be sure to provide your
challenges in
order that I think is.
Right
wise.
Thank you Mr thank you for.
Thank you the gentleman.
Anybody else the questions from
the committee.
I
see none please bear.
To the best pass sentiment
second by Senator current.
Any opposition to the the past
motion.
I see none of the bass line.
Thank.
Thank you.
We will now go to the house bill
three sixty six.
Ferrary he had been surprised in
the face.
Thank you Mr cherry Committee
this is not a new license plate
this is just asking for disabled
veterans to be able to purchase
extruded
plates that they already get two
free that are issued
to qualified disabled veterans.
And so that's all that we're
asking that they be able to
purchase further license plates
beyond the two that they get
free.
Right it will go to the audience
anybody your support of this
bill.
We are.
But in opposition.
It was for okay that's but I.
Already.
Okay will not go to committee.
Those who for the past.
Lopez members and government.
The opposition to do pass
motion.
You know you have to pass eight
two zero thank you very much
thank you.
The.
To.
House Bill three sixty four.
Thank you Mr chairman honorable
members House Bill three sixty
four is just a modern further
modernization of the of the
controller as it relates to
delivery as you recall Mr
chairman
Two fifty five couple years back
allow delivery which actually
takes folks off of the road and
keeps us safer we try to be fair
to everybody and we put of
bureaucratic process for stores
ten thousand feet or greater but
it created more problems than it
solved and and so some grocery
stores can deliver some can and
so what this does is essentially
just make it.
the same for everybody that that
everybody could deliver provided
they you know are properly
licensed and properly trained.
Mr upset so this is basically
just a pair to go for classic
counties so right now you know
Smith's and Farmington for
example can't do delivery but
it's missing Roswell can and
then the the exact same size
store so just bring parity to
classic counties is really what
this does.
All right I will to the audience
anybody here in support of this
bill.
Members of the committee
discussed as of president and
CEO The New Mexico retell
Association stand instructs for
the legislation process just
treat all the recalls across all
the retail stores across the
state the same problem thank
you.
What else will the.
It would in opposition.
Questions the committee.
Bricks.
For the past.
Second by center for census.
The question was a section.
Seven seven three seven seconds
okay all right we have the best
motion second any opposition to
the the past most.
You know you do pass zero thank
you you.
Okay all right.
To the house bill of seventy
five eight.
That's when we hear when we're.
Look up.
Representative Nelson four forty
nine.
Okay right go ahead
Representative.
Thank you Mr chair.
Representative T. today is the
house bill four four nine.
And the it is revising the
eligibility for assistance to
displaced workers the clearing
an emergency.
my expert witnesses of to read
Nair and.
The energy transition act was
passed in twenty nineteen and
created which created three
funds to help communities after
power plant closes one for
displaced workers one for
economic development the one for
his shoes and tribal communities
the closer of PNM San Juan
generating station and
Westmoreland money improvement
was the first those are covered
by the act workforce solutions
department is in charge of the
displaced worker assistance fund
our bill expands eligibility for
the displace workers assistance
funds by taking out the
requirement that limits it to
workers who have been laid off
in the past two years this is
important because there were
layoffs is currently has twenty
twenty associated with the
closure but the funds were not
available at that time we don't
want those workers to miss out
on any assistance.
The creek creek at.
Right.
Stewart and Mr chair members of
the committee and thank you for
hearing this bill Representative
Allison covered it well but we
have now gotten the data from
both PNM in Westmoreland and it
looks like there were indeed
lately offices early is a twenty
twenty the total number of laid
off individuals is now up to
about three hundred and said
that we've identified and so
this bill would just allow us to
make sure that all of those
workers get the benefit of this
funds thank you very thank you
will this anybody here support
of this bill.
Just go ahead in do you guys
manage.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Joseph
Hernandez I am with NM nativo.
And I'm from Shiprock New Mexico
I also serve on the energy
transition out community
advisory committee as a
representative for Indian
Affairs Committee any affairs
department and we.
ensure at one of the things that
we we work really hard to make
sure that.
The process of the Energy
transitioned Act.
Did include the engagement from
the tribal from the from the
Navajo Nation as well as the
workers from from power plants
and I think that's a critical
import with this legislation is
a those language here that's
going to
we move you know the the twelve
month requirement to ensure that
workers who were laid off ito
going as far back as pre comment
that they are included in
coverage of of of of of the
funding that's available to the
ETA and and that that's part
here as well as the opportunity
that that's available to them to
transition away to a
to to clean energy jobs that are
coming to San Juan County thank
you very much Mr.
Good afternoon Mister chair and
members of the committee sure
grow Norris registered lobbyists
with PNM we support this bill we
think it's important it creates
it creates needed flexibility
for many of the workers that did
lot of good work over the past
few years and San Juan
generating station as well the
mines we stand and support thank
you.
Thank you Mr chairman members
the committee is Brian Condit
executive director New Mexico
building trades council we stand
in full support this measure it
is been far too long since the
last started committing and it's
about time we started to
addressing some of the need to
up in San Juan County we stand
in full support and would
appreciate your to pass on this
bill thank you.
thank thank you all very much my
name is Jason Sandell I am a
convener for the energy
transition community advisory
commission the community
advisory commission has met on
four occasions discussing the
use of these funds and for
clarity at our last meeting
there was strong support for
ensuring that this place workers
were taking care of also
understanding that the twelve
point five million dollars
that's allocated for the
department of workforce
solutions what has been
discussed to be expended for
workforce retraining and so with
this the enactment of this
legislation we would be seeking
to discuss with the legislature
the potential of a special
appropriation to replenish those
funds that would then be going
directly to workers rather than
being spent on re training in
the community for preparation
for next career so with that
thank you all very much and
appreciate the opportunity to
discuss today thank you.
Mr chair members of the
committee Joan Baker with you a
local for twelve common
pipefitters union we just want
to echo everything already said
in need to
I do pass on this legislation
thank you.
Thank you Mr chair members of
Canadian journalist youth with
The New Mexico federation of
labor on behalf of all of our
thirty six thousand plus you
members we stand in strong
solidarity with the displace
workers here and we believe that
this was a promise made to them
during the Energy translation
Act and we encourage you to
approve this measure thank you.
Revenue Mr.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
committee members order those
going to go on with the
international brotherhood of
electrical workers on behalf of
our members especially the ones
they have been displaced due to
the closure the power path we we
we ask that you support this
legislation and give it a
unanimous to pass thank you.
Great.
Go ahead the woman at.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee I'm Camilla I am
and director of the Rio Grande
chapter of the Sierra Club we're
so thankful to the sponsor and
the secretary for bringing this
legislation part of our
commitment in the energy
transition act was ensuring that
workers were fairly compensated
and could move forward into the
energy transition so with HB to
including an appropriation of
these funds and possible
additional junior money we hope
to be part of the solution for
workers and the path forward we
thank you so much for supporting
this legislation and ask for
your.
You.
But in opposition.
The committee.
S. S. program.
Much Senator have.
The opposition to do best
motion.
I
see none of the past ten years.
Relations.
The Committee who.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee more hearing house
bill seventy five which of which
amend sections of the health
care purchasing Act The New
Mexico entrance Mexico the
health maintenance organization
law nonprofit health care plan
to require the cost of copayment
coinsurance of chiropractic
visit to be the same as those
charged for primary care
physicians visit that will stand
for questions.
I'm sorry I needed and my
experts here.
It's been one of those kind of
days chairman.
I want to introduce Michael part
of Mr chair members of the
committee my name is with Dr
Michael pritom and the car
practice physician in private
practice in Albuquerque I work
within a federally qualified
health center in Albuquerque as
well as the clinical
neurosciences center and this is
a bill to help improve patient
access to non pharmacological
pain management options it's
Recommended by us organizations
such as the American college of
physicians and CDC and others
and it's passed the Senate twice
in the past and I will keep my
comments brief and stand for
questions thank you about the
audience anybody here support of
the bill.
The leading opposition we'll.
Committee.
Share comment.
Mr chairman committee thank you
so much for bringing this you
know I've been a long time
supporter of chiropractic care
field you know I was terrified
when I first started considering
it because I knew I would my
body would be twisted in ways
that would never naturally be
twisted in
but the first time I went to a
chiropractor I just had just
hope the like an epiphany it was
it was an amazing experience
something that I strongly
encourage for anybody who is is
is needing that care and so I
appreciate you bringing this
bill forward and I I love my
chiropractor so thank you for
doing that.
Thank you for this man sitting
right here to save my life I
more than one occasion
especially during the session
so.
The best motion to dismiss your.
Red is already set.
Committees of.
Did you make this morning okay.
Motion by Senator Hamblen to
second by Senator.
Any opposition to the defense
motion.
In the past motion tens of thank
you.
To
House Bill three seventy six.
Thank you Mr chairman House Bill
three seventy six deals with the
New Mexico medical insurance
pool and we're basically making
three changes to its authorizing
statute one is to give the board
the authority to participate in
any health insurance related
initiatives or programs of the
state.
Secondly we are making a
technical change to update the
pool statute so that it it
synchronizes better we can
affordable Care Act so we're
changing the basis on which the
pool determines its premium
right so that we can be sure
that we're not indifferently
creating an incentive to join
the pool
the public health coverage plans
and then thirdly allows the
board to decide design a low
income premium discount program
rather than following the
previously mandated formula and
that's also for the same reason
to align the pool statute with
the affordable Care Act and they
have with me my experts former
state representative Debbie
Armstrong who's also a former
executive director of the
medical insurance pool and also
Mr John Ringo who is a member of
the school board of directors
and with that I would stand for
questions and make comments or
questions
Mr chair and and and members of
the committee based on what
you've been doing all so I'll
just be quiet and let.
You you already nobody is
support of this bill.
It.
This Mr chairman Jim Jennings
and I was probably one of the
original spot from the
these changes I think you're
very apropos I think they help
us a lot get a lot of people get
them to chair if you're better
and I think this will be go
along way towards expanding the
use of the pool right now
there's forty four hundred
people of the school year next
it's really rulal out all of you
have any kind of the ability
injury or for end up in the pool
it's a it's a very useful tool I
think it's only improves it
thank you very much thank you.
A good.
We.
Senator is my creative side.
Mr chairman colleagues in my
prior life to the Senate I sat
on this board for about seven
years they do incredible work
they're picking up advances in
care management and making such
a difference in people's lives
this will give them more
flexibility and I highly
recommend that you pass thank
you.
Mr chairman members of the
committee again Jason Sandel I
was a former member of the
medical insurance pool board of
directors and to feel like this
language change is necessary for
the pool to continue providing
critical health care services in
the state of New Mexico the so
much needed and just appreciate
the sponsor for bringing these
changes for thank you Mr
chairman you.
And you know anybody in
opposition.
The
question Senator Kernan thank
you very much and there's a long
history to this and and you've
done a great job in Mr chair and
and Preciado the work you've
done throughout the years and
I'm I remember when the
affordable Care Act came in.
Question was what do we do need
to just ask supported that that
that yes we did because you're
always going to miss some time
and I think
I think it's been proven that
there are still individuals that
need to be on and hi I
appreciate the fact in just I
guess trying to get a second
with the changes here state it's
about premium right so you have
the affordable Care Act and and
then you have people on this and
so it's going to kind of let it
is that kind of what the status
of the way just a quick
explanation is that yeah madam
chair and representative the one
change about standard risk great
management market right that's
purely a technical change yeah
it's just that's just cleanup
and the lowincome range is so
that we can track more closely
with what the subsidies are in
the health insurance exchange
and make sure we stay just about
that.
After their so that's all I have
thank you.
Representative.
Process through this.
That we're trying to do
So on page three.
The the underlying for into the
is.
What does that mean we're summit
in the health insurance related
program.
Mr chair and senator
the the pool is not an insurance
company it's a created by let
the statute as an insurance
program to serve those who have
difficulty getting insurance or
who are high risk conditions
there's been
this is just to allow us if
there's initiative of the state
to participate because we have a
skill set of
working with high risk
individuals in particular.
I'll give you a couple of
examples of how we've had to
kind of because of what we offer
in in health coverage is pretty
prescriptive fire statute and
this gives us the authority to
kind of molded around what's the
state might need I'll give you a
couple of examples
hepatitis C. the state has an
initiative to eradicate
hepatitis C. in in the state and
they've got a variety of
different initiatives going on
and one is to pay for premiums
in the pool for persons who
can't otherwise get a chair to
have Habsi but they have to
prove they have to
Do the full comprehensive health
care coverage and not just focus
on what the Habsi needed as
because we can't tailor the
program to something that
discreet.
So the state is probably paying
higher premiums and then we need
to if we were just focusing on
that
another one is during the COVID
the
the early childhood department
wanted to provide coverage for
uninsured day care workers and
their families who contracted
COVID.
And
again in order to do that we
couldn't focus on the COVID we
had to sell a full insurance
comprehensive policy and so this
Just give us a little bit more
flexibility when there's a
priority of the state like that
that we could tailor something
specific to what they're looking
for we also do a very
comprehensive care management
program with some of our of
particular high risk folks that
we could for a particular in
need of the state offer that or
or or do something with that but
this just gives the board
there's nothing in the works
there's been those couple had to
go with the full comprehensive
coverage in order to me to
discriminate and it's just given
the opportunity to maybe
tailored a little different if
that were to come up.
Thank you Mr of.
Chairman and
Representative appreciate the
the information.
So in the in the first example
you gave on the Habsi.
with that person have other
insurance because you said that
you would be able to provide
just insurance for the Habsi.
Mr chair and representative
those are individuals that don't
have other coverage or at least
not other coverage that covers
what they need perhaps even but
I guess what I'm asking is you
were saying you were you would
be able to put them into a
program that just cover the help
see what you would cover their
other.
Health needs
Mr chair and representative
that's what the state so on it
that's fine yes but right now
we're doing the full coverage
for some Pepsi patients but
that's that's what I was
wondering what you would we
actually when you have something
like that you have more than
just have see is a medically.
And then how do you how does the
pool pay for all the insurance
that funded through the state is
out of the it goes down from all
the insurances have settled paid
for Mr chair and senator the
first is paid with premiums so
there's there's premiums and and
costsharing the premiums are
always set higher than the
market right but we do discount
for low income.
but that because these folks are
really high risk are they cost a
lot more than the premium.
And so then are the losses are
assessed to every carrier in the
state This sells any health or
life insurance and there's over
three hundred carriers actually
they get assessed based on their
market share.
including the Medicaid NCOs
and then they get a tax credit
for part of the a premium tax
credit part of it there's no
appropriations.
So.
The
school itself is not an
insurance are you sure.
We offered in we offer insurance
comparable to what's offered in
the market but we are not are
not a licensed insurance company
in the usual sense the.
Agence other insurance companies
now chairman Sir then Mr chair
and senator no we can't offer on
those are just on the market
Asians that can't yes right so
there's is that what we used to
call the high risk pool yes it
is a high risk pool
Previous youth pastor their
daughter had cancer and they
couldn't get insurance anywhere
for her and so she was part of
the pool that that's the same
okay thank you thank you.
Thank you very much.
Thank you.
Questions the committee members.
The best current second Senator
Lopez.
Any opposition to the do pass
motion.
The non the over the past ten
zero thank thank you Mr chair I
believe we have all the experts
in the rooms so we will now go
on to Senate bill five twenty
three.
Do not pass Senator I twenty
three yes.
When we move the so.
This so Mister chair I think the
substitute is been remembered in
here and we're going to go ahead
and hear it so I don't think we
need a motion to put it in place
yeah I think it's here.
So I'm happy to jump in
Senate tax business and
transportation committee set up
to percent of Bill five twenty
three
Senator Baca and I are the two
Senate Sanchez I know
Representative Lane is here he's
going to be one of the house
Sanchez along with the speaker
of the house this is a
compromise bill and what what
I'll do is give a little
overview and then Senator Baca
will do the same and then will
kind of give a couple bullets in
the bill and stand for questions
also I should introduce
for the trial lawyers said Lopez
is here as an expert witness and
Nick audio is here for the
medical society as an expert
witness this is a compromise
between the medical society in
the trial lawyers who have
agreed on a long term solution
that allows independent clinics
to obtain malpractice insurance
it's a compromise that provides
stability for current practices
it also creates more certainty
for new outpatient facilities
working to vote in New Mexico
and for patients who've been
harmed the protections contained
our state patient compensation
fund remain this this compromise
will continue to be under the
state patient compensation fund
which is a big part of the
overall resolution and I yield
to senator blockages for some
comments and I will get into the
specifics of thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee I think a senator
Wirth laid it out pretty well
I'm not really good at anything
to that I think go for will go
next is a all just a we'll we'll
head off into a summary of the
bill and and Sir Senator give a
couple bullets so what this bill
does starting in twenty twenty
four it establishes a permanent
one million dollar cap for
medical malpractice claims
brought against an independent
palpation Health Care facility
that participates in the patient
compensation fund so it's a new
cap and starting in twenty
twenty five.
There we have three year rolling
average of CPI added to the cap
each year just like independent
providers independent outpatient
health care facilities will be
limited to three occurrences in
one year patients will still
have access to lifetime medical
expenses that will be paid out
of the funding in the event that
there aren't ideal Center Baca.
Thank you Mister chair of
additionally the bill will
change the insurance
requirements for independent
outpatient facilities to require
that each facility secure five
hundred thousand dollars of
underlying coverage with the PCS
then covering the cost of the
next five hundred thousand up to
that million dollar cap by
making this change in underlying
coverage the independent
outpatient facilities will be
able to secure appropriate
insurance so they're fully
insured under the medical
malpractice at additionally
facilities are protected by the
state or federal tort claims act
will be exempted from the
medical malpractice act this was
some something of concern to a
couple of the members of this
very committee when I last
presented this will not change
our state facilities are treated
since they're currently covered
by the tort claims act this does
however mean that all federal
facilities will be completely
unregulated by this act.
The bill also budget independent
outpatient health care
facilities that are insured
outside of the patient
compensation fund by insuring
your adequately insured with the
million dollar industry standard
policy so some of the highlights
here we have a permanent one
million dollar cap for
independent outpatient health
care facilities inside the
payment come the the patient
compensation fund up to three
occurrences this adjust their
insurance requirements to be
five hundred thousand underlying
and PCF will cover the next five
hundred thousand up to million
dollar cap by making this change
the facilities can secure
appropriate insurance to be
fully insured inside of the act.
And with that we can move on to
our next order.
Right.
Right so anybody here in support
of this built in the.
The.
Yes Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Julie on a
coop and I represent the New
Mexico trial lawyers association
sacri Keelin who many of you met
he's an attorney he taught us
that in this process an
important aspect of the
compromise has to be protecting
tribal sovereignty I thank the
sponsors and Zachary for
insisting that this language
remain in this bill that states
clearly that patients harmed by
federal clinics on in Indian
country or at clinics or and
serving veterans should not have
these lower caps imposed upon
them another protection in this
compromise that we fought for is
transparency knowing how many
medical malpractice claims are
made within the system will help
us protect patients in the
future thank you all so much.
Good afternoon Mister chair
members of the committee my name
is muddy and I and I and I am
here on behalf of fairness for
New Mexico patients and I want
to start a tough topic off with
a little bit of gratitude
I really want to thank the
senators and representatives who
stood by patients despite an
immense amount of pressure to
cave to an insurance company
agenda so thank you for putting
patients first
second I want to thank the
patients lawyers who fought for
the transparency language at the
table for more equitable
outcomes for patients harmed in
clinics in Indian country it was
really the least that could have
come from these negotiations
after limiting justice for
patients by lowering the caps
the transparency language is a
big win for patients doctors and
the public because data shows
that transparency laws result in
less accounts of medical
malpractice which of course
lowers the risk and the low it's
lowers insurance rates so to be
clear patients do not whole
heartedly support this
legislation but we do understand
that a solution needed to become
to but burdening patients who've
already been harmed by medical
malpractice should have never
been the answer.
Patients are not at the table
but hope to be so in the future
fighting alongside doctors and
legislators to finally hold
insurance companies accountable
thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Dan
Weaks and I represent the New
Mexico hospital association what
thank the senators for their
hard work on this also want to
thank the governor's office for
convening a workgroup on this
and negotiating this so balanced
approach to the medical
malpractice act
I'm really glad that we're going
to be able to get this moving on
it's been a very contentious
issue statewide sends a bad
message out to providers when we
have that situation with medical
malpractice so appreciate the
efforts of the committee hope it
passes quickly
we need to get our doctors back
they've all been up here.
Thank you.
Screener and.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee Linda Siegel for
the greater Albuquerque medical
association and for the nurse
practitioner counselor nurse
midwives both her within the
action we appreciate all the
negotiations to reach this
compromise thank you.
Good afternoon members of the
committee Mr chairman my name is
Kim again I am the registered
lobbyists for south west Castro
on behalf of southwest Castro
would like to think Senator Baca
Senator Moores Senator Hickey
senator Wirth the governor staff
and governor Michelle Lujan
Grisham they have worked for the
last seven weeks with the
impacted parties towards a
resolution that you have before
you today and I ask for your
support thank you.
Under on the rostrum lobbyist
for the New Mexico Medical
Society thank you to everybody
this bill is really monumental
and making sure that our
independent outpatient
facilities cannot just stay open
but we can have increased access
to health care and positions by
allowing new independent
facilities to come online and
making sure that we're having
adequate protections for those
three even insured outside of
the funds so that they are not
under insured we share the
sentiment we want to thank
Senator Baca Center were center
more Senator Hickey the house
members who are here who have
supported us from the very
beginning and we've just really
urge the passage and we would
also very much like to St
governor Michelle Lujan Grisham
who really threw her staff and
herself forced everybody to the
table in the last seventy two
hours to make sure that we got
this done before the session
ended thank you so much.
Representative Jennings from
Roswell mayor Rosalynn we're
opening a surgery center in in
the third part in September and
Rosalyn this will go a long ways
towards happen by thank you I
appreciate the governor and and
all you all get together and and
really come to meet the needs of
what we have to keep our rural
health care doctors in their we
have a huge shortage of doctors
that we need every help we can
get to get doctors in New Mexico
and they don't all have to work
for a hospital this some of the
surgery centers allow them to
have their own practice and and
well placed to work outside of a
building owned by a physicians
or by a hospital so this keep
some gives drive some autonomy
and I appreciate that thank you.
One okay go ahead.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee to recall president
and CEO of the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce.
Without an adequate number of
positions what does not try they
want to track companies
residents or workers that's why
we're support this compromise
legislation we're hopeful it
would be found in the kind of
predictability and fair trade
and our doctors me just
residents need.
In order to be able to throw a
number of positions practicing
in our state we have to compete
for talent and not put it very
years to the recruitment of
skilled professionals like
physicians we're so grateful to
all of you who want to work and
arrive at the solution thank you
Mr chairman members of the
committee.
Thank you.
Good enough position.
The members of the government.
Thank you Mr chairman of the
responses I want to thank you
for C..
These are for tribal members of
the that I represent to close of
the Indian nation the chairman
and I have the concerns of us
working.
One of the things that you use
order to protect the legislature
just.
Senator and look.
Thank you Mr chair I have my top
five reasons why I am very
grateful for this and I'll make
it quick because I can I can
speak a little bit faster from
my days in radio
you know this is just a comment
this is not actually question
what you know this is my third
session and and along with
Senator how to me and there are
lessons that we've learned that
our our folks in the centre
Sanchez as well that our
colleagues here who have been
here for a while probably known
and it's been a of an amazing
incredible experience for us you
know I think all of us try to do
what we believe is to be good
for the residents of New Mexico
when we're here when we're
serving and when we're here for
you the thirty days or sixty
days and sometimes we have to
make difficult votes and it
doesn't matter the political
party doesn't matter the issue
that sometimes we have to make
this difficult votes and many
times it's because we see areas
that need more discussion and
thought and bring sides together
and these discussions are hard
and you know I I have such mad
respect for everybody who's been
continuing on with these
conversations throughout this
time and my second reason is
knowing that people are not
going to be very happy with us.
One where the other sometimes
because of those decisions but
again we are here because we are
trying to do the right thing for
New Mexicans and number three
sometimes the bills even if you
think they are great they need
work I have two bills that are
held that need work in many
conversations and they need
revisions and is heartbroken as
I am because I thought they were
good bills I also realize that
they needed work.
And so I'm grateful for that.
A number for and and senator Tom
I hope you're okay with me
following your list your your
list format that you do
the the the thing that I
appreciated and I've seen so
much in our case because the
session is kind of as close to
normal as those of us who are
freshmen have had since we
started in those of us those
colleagues here on the on the
committee no but really
appreciate the bi partisan
dedication to making such a
committed effort effort to be at
this point today
you know we haven't been able to
see that those of us are
freshmen haven't been able to
see that experience that nurture
that until really the session
and I'm grateful for that and
lastly number five is that our
constituents care the email the
call they come by they let us
know how they're feeling and I
feel that this was an
opportunity to connect with them
to share with them their
concerns and their fears and to
let them know that we're not
giving up none of us gave up.
And I'm grateful for the
sponsors to do that because I
know they were long nights and a
lot of meetings and all the
participants in this so my
comment is really thank you for
doing this there was a concern
that we would run out of time
but apparently naturally we can
move the bill through really
quickly.
Imagine that and so Mister chair
I am grateful for that and
grateful for the work that's
being done with that and all the
people who are here in this room
today who help make that happen
supporters of except for my
bills is not so okay I get it
they're going to be better bills
next time just like this one was
the minister for.
Thank you very much and she said
everything I mean I need to go
through realistic and that if.
Some expressed projection to
everyone's hearing and how
different it is to see so many
people stand up in support of
this bill and that sort of makes
me so proud of this legislature
and how people have come
together and work together on
this I have a couple questions
so not to rock the boat I love
to do that help me understand Mr
chair and either Senator with
regard to the PCS in New Mexico
and I think it's states in the
bill that the out patient
clinics must be part of the PCS
to participate in that the way
this is set up is that correct.
That's correct yes thank you and
I think that's a good thing
because I think we need to PCS
and I think that I was concerned
going through this whole thing
that we might not have that PCS
down the road that is a really
important piece that maybe
people don't recognize right off
the bat and then Mr chair I
think it's very program I think
the million dollars is what a
good place I think that's good
in the outpatient clinics it's
my understanding that the five
hundred five hundred threshold
but not the independent doctors
who are so low independent
practitioners they're starting
the scent of her place that
correct Mr chairman Senator
Kernan that is correct that
stays the same we're creating a
new category here within the
fund and that was one of the
things that at some point
yesterday or the night for in
the morning we really had to
work hard to make that to make
that happen and I will tell you
that again huge kudos to to the
governor who convened us all and
we were on the phone with
insurance companies.
Absolutely last night and so and
and again I I just tremendous
appreciation to the Dominican
Medical Society for again there
were offers that went back and
forth and their offers that you
know you that that you see as as
a lawyer's practice more than
thirty years
that that there was an
understanding that it wasn't
good enough and so coming back
late last night we have an
insurance company that that
moved and for the first time we
had some positive movement that
did make sure this was under the
cap had a million dollars and
had three occurrences which was
a key piece that we had to get
ironed out and I just think
that's also consistent with the
other.
Doctors under the different at
seven fifty with three losses
thank you Mr chair because I
think it's important we focus a
lot on the outpatient clinics
are very friendly but also
during the physicians that are
hoping.
And and not be swept up in a
hospital or physician group.
Need ducks and my concern was
that is that and so I think this
is a great compromise often
doctors another question if
you're on the that the medical
claims that are paid for life.
Was there any change in how
that is yes both manage are we
for the first yeah.
Of those patients so over a lot.
Don't forget to point out that.
I am.
from my understanding Mr chair
and senator that will remain the
same they will be paid through
their lifetime and that was a I
really appreciated a of the
negotiation on on that
particular point which is
essentially being inside the
fund and and the willingness of
I I I want to give kudos to the
trial attorneys to for as
advocates for patients I myself
and and I am an attorney and so
I see the need for compensation
when things go wrong and they
had a willingness to the to
listen and to have some
flexibility along with the with
the medical side of society and
the others and and that was
really the thought in mind when
you're addressing there so thank
you.
Terraces on.
So no.
Chair and senator that's new
language line eighteen through
twenty five and then line wanted
to on page fifteen I think you
heard some testimony about kind
of the transparency in the fund
and one of the issues over the
years as I've.
Been around and and I know we
had the whole challenge of
hospitals being in the fund to
try to figure out one of the
hard part is been getting the
data.
So I really appreciate this is
another area where I mean
literally this morning and early
afternoon the lawyers were in
the conference room in my office
kind of working on this language
to come up with something that
they could be agreed to and so
this is new language.
This.
That that.
Overall.
This is not.
Background
That.
Sign.
On.
Jobs I.
You're not.
His office.
The.
Yeah not everybody else.
Analysts on.
Yes it is.
All.
Of the issues.
I'm
just so proud.
That is that.
The.
Of the issues that the.
get together the table.
As far away these
To
reduce.
Your.
The state the reason.
State.
The needs of the service there
is a little more system.
Basically we will.
your.
Whether.
The Senators well.
So
The past year.
Just.
Was.
Our.
Thank you thank you.
And.
Thank you for your.
Your you know what to health
forty six.
The.
He's.
Thank you Mr chairman of
pleasure to see this after the
dozens of white coated people
here Saturday.
I'm here to represent house bill
forty six the public works
project contributions as amended
it actually has to Senate
committees in twenty twenty one
but time ran out and go to the
floor of the bill amends the
public works apprentice and
training act to remove the
exclusion of street highway
Bridge Road utility or
maintenance contracts that's
tied Bacon tractors from public
works projects that require
everybody else to make
contributions to apprentice and
training programs this means
that all public works
construction contractors would
be required to do one of three
things they either contribute
the established apprentice
contribution to the apprentice
and training fund popularly
called P. what for each hour
labor provided not sixty cents
an hour that goes to the
department of workforce
solutions or number two they pay
a contribution to a registered
apprenticeship program if
they're billion with one or
three if a contractor has four
starts its own registered
apprenticeship program they
would not have to pay into P.
what at all and there's no
additional costs if they do that
the state let me make a few
points about the state
apprenticeship program it's free
to register your program the
state apprenticeship council
reviews all applications for new
or revised programs and it has
representatives from employers
labor organizations and the
public currently we have fifty
four as the end of twenty twenty
two we had fifty four public
private and you registered
apprenticeship programs
including for recognize trades
in the city of Farmington that's
two thousand one hundred and
seventeen apprentices up twenty
percent from twenty twenty one
what happens to the P. what
contribution.
Ms at the end of the year
they're split among the
registered apprenticeship
program who has qualified
apprentices a qualified
apprentice is a thousand plus
hours on the job training and
almost a hundred hours of
related technical instruction
and I want to point out that
just to
That in this case last year the
central New Mexico electric coop
in mountain air got almost ten
thousand dollars Farmington got
almost more than ten thousand
continental electric divide and
grant Scott almost five thousand
in Los crucis the independent
electric coal contractors got
eighty three thousand so the
money is distributed around the
state finally something new
since twenty twenty one when I
presented this bill is that the
US department of transportation
through the bipartisan
instruction infrastructure law
gives greater flexibility to
fund workforce development
activities specific related to
transportation and roads an area
previously not opened so states
can use potential funding for
workforce development including
apprenticeships pre
apprenticeships and on the job
training so this is something
new since twenty twenty one and
with that my expert witnesses
Steven Curtis who practices law
in the area of labor to want to
add anything before we open for
questions I know thank you very
much for consideration I'm happy
to answer any questions if there
are.
Thank you Mr chair open for
questions thank you go to
audience and with your support
of the bill.
Okay if you guys can more and
make your statement.
Minute or less.
And.
Mr chair three denier add.
Secretary of the work force
solutions department just here
to to think Representative
Garrett and I'm aware of that
cut coming out for sponsoring
this bill with the influx of
infrastructure money that we're
expecting over the next few
years this will be a valuable
source of not just funding for
the program but also workers for
those infrastructure projects
everywhere I go in the state I
hear we can't find enough
workers we can't find enough
workers in the construction
industry is no exception to that
this will enable the pipeline of
workers to road projects and all
other infrastructure projects in
the state thank you.
Mr chairman members of the
committee is black on the New
Mexico building trades council
with Paul we stand in full
support of this legislation this
is a very small investment and
workforce development in New
Mexico it is less it is right
around one million dollars in
the grand scheme of everything
and what it does it allow us to
current and existing
apprenticeship programs to grow
a little bit and it also
stimulates other entities that
are contemplating developing an
apprenticeship program to be
able to draw on some of these
resources that will not be
available to you all it is a
very small investment
considering the challenges we
face with
Qualified construction workforce
throughout the states throughout
the country so we urge you to
pass this legislation thank you.
Staff member Mr chair members
the committee means Mattis water
some of the corporation here in
New Mexico we stand in full
support this bill this is it not
a union or nonunion bill this is
a workers bill this is for
partnership in training for all
workers state New Mexico this is
to create and train a new
generation trace men and women
in the infrastructure area of
roads and grounds that districts
the needs across the state and
the commercial mystery SB noted
that the agency's sibling of
chapter New Mexico commercial
does have an official program so
it would behoove the agency and
then to have a similar program
thank you.
You.
Good afternoon chairman
committee members thank you so
much for having us today and I
just want to get back on some of
the comments from my other
colleagues my name is Matthew
Capello I'm here on behalf of
the southwest states regional
council of carpenters union.
And the we funding this
exemption
in the apprenticeship training
program in P. what a bit off
that only applies to to highway
construction are there exempt
from participating in training
and workforce development in
within the state of.
Our mantra is New Mexico jobs
for New Mexico workers right now
with the problem is was
previously stated in a tracking
in training the workers which we
know we're here we can do that
but given that we need to get
them trained and it into the
field and right now from an
economic development standpoint
we're actually working with some
of your the agency's national
members to get hi we companies
to come to New Mexico and and
and locate so that's a big issue
for us is getting those
companies here in New Mexico to
stay put so thank you very much
for having us today.
You.
Thank you Mr chair members the
committee John with kids with
The New Mexico federation of
labor we believe in a very well
trained while taking care of
workforce and anything that
helps create more jobs and and
as I said a better trained
workforce we are of our self for
those measures work for those
reasons we appreciate your
support thank you.
Mr chair members the committee
Joan Baker would you a local for
twelve that's a plumber
pipefitters union
so the United States department
of economics and commerce has
done studies on the return on
public benefit for
apprenticeship and the state
that that's twenty eight dollars
for every dollar spent so when
we have these billions of
dollars coming into our state
for infrastructure federal
dollars and we need to maximize
those this bill will help us
maximize those federal dollars
coming in to re invest in that
work force get that twenty eight
dollars per dollar return
that's.
That's better than the than the
stock market these days Mr chair
members of the committee so I do
hope for your support thank you.
Madam chair members the
committee Jason Espinoza
registered lobbyists with the
New Mexico chapter of the
national electrical contractors
association but we do stand in
support of the legislation this
bill is really about creating
parity amongst all the
contractors are contractors and
every other contractor except
for the highway contractors are
already paying into this fund on
public programs on public works
projects so we really do believe
that we all understand there is
a workforce issue in our state
we really do believe all
contract all types of
contractors need to pitch in to
be part of the solution thank
you.
Good afternoon Mister chair
committee members my name is the
most for you in with I. B. W.
six eleven.
One of the things about HB forty
six is more especially with the
amendment directly affects
the premises that are gonna be
working across our state in New
Mexico bill and a workforce
covers all demographics you know
anybody that served in the U. S.
military they can be able to
save their budget to get to
their spouse or to give to their
state to get to the children
so that's another benefit that
we might wanna you know look at
because you know that's another
aspect that HB forty six we'll
be able to help out appreciate
thank you.
Mr chairman and committee
members Senator Griego I. B. W.
seven of fifty forty six is an
investment in our workers
With the amount of construction
all types of construction with
the New Mexico that is upon us
let's let's uh sees on the
moment of momentum and continue
the hard work of efforts of
building our workforce with our
with our with our people with
our New Mexicans thank you.
One of those okay thank.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
and honorable members of the
committee my name is Rhonda
Gilliland Lopez I am the
executive director of the
mechanical and sheet metal
contractors association of New
Mexico we stand in strong
support of house bill forty six
this still holds all contractors
working on public works.
To the same standards and
expectations and we honor and we
respectfully ask that you please
pass this bill thank you.
Ready.
The leading opposition of house
bill.
Your.
Live anybody in.
It will give you the same on
time if you didn't think about
ten minutes so if you want to
use the equipment thank you Mr
chairman I think I and the
official spokesperson for the
people online so I I promise I
won't take the full ten minutes
so my name is Mike Santa and I'm
the consultant for the associate
contractors of New Mexico it's
really covers all the highway
contractors and subcontractors I
don't think this bill is really
an issue about whether
apprentice programs are good or
not because we agree that they
are good we agree that they can
serve a good purpose and we had
to really think this bill is
about fairness and how to fund
these programs
will give you a few things as to
why we oppose this bill number
one it's not needed for the
highway construction industry we
already have our own training
program we have a program that
has over sixty classes anyone
wants to come and work in
highway construction can take a
class learn how to do that job
and get hired by the industry
and so we're not in need of this
program at this particular time
and all that is already funded
secondly this program basically
makes all construction projects
more expensive because what this
does is it requires every
contractor subcontractor sixty
cents for every man our worked
to pay into this fund so your
employees from a general
contractor from a subcontractor
to striping contractors
surveyors everyone on the
project their employees are
going to have to pay sixty cents
per hour into this fund that
goes for all state DOT projects
goes from a local projects ago
trial County projects and
utility projects and so it trust
me from coming from a secretary
of transportation understanding
how inflation has impacted
everybody but none the less the
construction industry and how
expensive construction projects
have gotten over the last few
years this is exactly what we
don't need is something that to
add to the cost of our
construction projects both at
the state and local level.
The current approach you know
they talk about parity and while
the the but construction is
doing it however pours on on
needs to pitch in the apprentice
program itself is not Karia is
not equitable right now of the
fifty four printers programs at
that are there are now approved
there's only about seven or
eight that actually have the
chance to budget on
transportation construction a
lot of those are carpenters
electricians and plumbers and
those type of things when the
construction industry doesn't
need or use those type of
industry or or expertise and
I'll give you an example Mr
chairman the traffic control
people to people hold the signs
of people to set up the cones
you don't need to be an
apprentice to do that job there
never did not participate in
this program when you look at
the striping crews that do all
the yellow lines white lines you
don't need to be an apprentice
to do that however they're going
to have to pay into this fund
each and everyone of their
employees with little or no
benefit from this program.
Same thing for truck drivers a
lot of construction relies on
truck drivers bringing in
material in asphalt bring in mix
bringing in sand you don't need
to be an apprentice to be a
truck driver you need a CDL
license and so although the
apprentice program is good it
doesn't necessarily apply to
transportation construction the
same way it does but
construction which is probably
why they're simple way back
when.
The other thing I want to
mention is Representative
Garrett did mention this the new
bill bipartisan infrastructure
law actually provides funding to
DOT's to fund programs like this
one of the approved programs is
pre apprenticeships
apprenticeships and career
opportunities for on the job
training that's exactly what
this program does that's exactly
how it should be funded with the
federal money from this this
legislative not through the
highway construction on partners
who don't you are not an have
benefit from this program.
The last thing Mr chairman is
there was a scholarship piece
added to this and there's no
clue of equity in that it says
are gonna be providing books and
all those things it doesn't say
exactly to to what industry we
estimate that this is in the
find two to three million
dollars a funding for this
program currently in the fund
there's just over a million
dollars so by including high we
can construction contractors in
a triple the fund yet they're
not gonna have the same benefits
as the people that are currently
using that
So if the scholarship program is
enacted with there's no proof or
language in there this and allow
them to promulgate a rule so
it's really unclear about how
that's in the decided and we're
really concerned that's not in
the be provided equitably.
So Mister chairman I will say
this so from someone who as
cabinet secretary had a very
good relationship with the
unions I don't see this as a
union issue what do you like
that you don't like the unions
are indifferent to the unions
it's really a fairness issue
what's the right way to fund
this program that's a good
program for but construction we
don't think it's a high week
contractors because we don't
benefit from and we already have
our own training program so with
that Mr chairman I'd be happy to
answer any questions I went
through this pretty fast but I'd
be happy to go into more detail
on any of the many points that I
brought up so thank you thank
you.
If you had a.
Mr Chairman
Mr Santa Fe district chairman
committee members Mr Mike
explained what their problem is
with this bill we've been
fighting this bill for several
years and every two years it
comes back and but there there's
a good reason why our home
governor's for many years have
not agreed with the this type of
legislation and legislators
either perform last ceremony
many years have not have
exam please contact us so we
could I feel that this and this
budget probably the larger
corporations I worked in and and
Sandia and handle solemn most
and that's understandable but
we have a problem because I
think it would.
That would benefit at the
expense of the small contractors
and all parts of our state so
for that we stand in opposition
Mr chairman committee members
thank you.
Basically
At the Michael speaking we have
a body else we're good to go to
committee Senator Kernan.
Thank you very much Mr Chairman
representative and you know I
I'm thinking about the
contractors that are down in my
part of the the state in
southeast New Mexico we have a
lot of projects that are going
on basically to to try and
strengthen improve the roads
down there so that the industry
that basically we know that
contribute such a great deal to
the state of New Mexico we've
got to get those roads going in
we have to spend additional
dollars that really don't
benefit contractors because they
are the data training they don't
they don't need to despite those
are extra dollars that could be
spent to add another model of
two or three and so I really
have concerned about having to
pay into something that you
don't get a benefit from and so
can you tell me that percent of
when you talk about contracting
about all across the state
we spend an awful lot of money
on roads in the state maybe
somebody could help me
understand the percent of dollar
spent on this particular kind of
contracting.
That will benefit from this time
to the other contracts that are
let friends stay do you have any
right now on that Mr chair and
Senator thank you for the
question I just wanna remind
everybody that contractors who
have apprenticeship programs or
join another one don't pay into
this fund and there are many for
example operating engineers work
on contracts on roads and they
do have a pretty sure programs
in our state and there's other
trades that work on a horizontal
as opposed to but which would be
you know buildings
the amount of money that we
spend on roads I will do for to
the former transportation
secretary that's okay there are
a number I just okay point is
this is not something that fits
the contractor should build our
roads would benefit from the
ring and so that's really and I.
Insurance my experts make a
comment on that that is
certainly in that chair Shendo
at Senator Kernan the
contractors the we're
contractors to benefit from a
prisoner programs and that they
do have traits that they hire
from the tend to hire only at
the journeyman level so they're
not developing their own
workforce but they are relying
upon other apprenticeship
programs to develop workers to
get to the journeyman license
the benefit to the road
contractors for developing their
own apprenticeship programs for
the various aspects of the
business that they're involved
in comes from the way that the
public works minimum wage act
works in that since the these
are set at a prevailing wage
which is set at the journeyman
wage
if you have a premises that are
working for you on the project
then you get to pay a percentage
based on their level of
completion of the apprenticeship
program so it is actually
cheaper on a for the contractors
to utilize apprentices it
because they are paying a
certain percentage them anywhere
between eighty and eighty
percent of the journeymen wage
for the same work for.
Thank you Mr chairman I wasn't
here at the beginning of the.
Bill interests Representative so
all caught your eye on this bill
to pass all contractors that.
participate in public works to
opt into this.
Yes
Mr chair and senator that is
correct.
So not just the ones that are
doing high where the any public
works when you work at a school
that's public works we work at
this building that's public
works laying carpet in any state
building or any.
The school
Anyway that's all public works.
Yet Mr chairman surveillance for
that I think chairman should a
senator Sanchez the current law
requires all but the road
contractors to contribute to
this fund if you take a look at
that section to the of the bill
the operative language is the
strike through of except for St
highway Bridge Road utility or
maintenance contracts so current
law is that most
of the contractors which is you
heard from several of them in
support of this legislation to
participate and by contributing
either to the Pequot fund or to
their own
their own apprenticeship program
so the the the affected the
change in this law isn't to add
everybody and it's to remove an
exclusion from one particular
class of public works
contractors.
All.
Yes Sierra.
Thank you.
To.
The state.
Years and years
Mr chair Senator great question
I think the fairness issue is
that all of the public works
participants it's fair for
everybody to participate any
they're having their own
programs.
affiliate with the existing
program or P. the P. what as
everybody else does.
If you.
That sure.
The
The.
Bill
The.
Mr Chairman expert will consent
that chairman Shendo senator Tom
in the original bill remove the
exclusion that was originally on
page three lines one through
three of the the original
version that was the X. current
law exempted the highway
contractors from the either
developing apprenticeship
programs or contributing to the
pub the P. what the regional
version of the bill at a part
from making technical changes
correcting Department secretary
and that's our thing this
primary focus was removing that
exemption however the the the
amendment in the house and the
first committee added the
scholarship fund which is a
separate fund which currently
doesn't have an appropriation
but is a sort of a vessel for
the department of workforce
solutions to assist people who
can't afford perhaps the books
or the other component cost
components of of the information
program so it it it's and and I
as as as the representative
indicated we're anticipating a
fair amount of federal funds
coming and that could help that
could to help populate that
frontier and Mister chairman
Senator the regional statues
from Canada to.
The original statute Mr chairman
Senator was written in nineteen
ninety two.
Thank you.
The phone's always.
Section.
This
Chairman expert responded that
as secretary I'm sorry attention
to the long day sorry it senator
Tom and the the estimates are
based on the total number of man
hours for projects
we looked at
through a request all of the
projects for single year totaled
up the man hours and multiply
the sixty cents and came up
somewhere north of nine hundred
thousand I noted in the at the
new FIR the DOT has similar
numbers between nine hundred
eighty thousand and one point
two million is the anticipated
extra contribution that would be
coming from the previously
exempted highway contractors if
and that isn't that that assumes
that none of them are going to
elect to develop their own
apprenticeship programs but are
instead going to just simply pay
the sixty cents per man hour
into the people Fund.
The scholarship program implies
to.
Three regions.
R. Mr chair and senator would
apply to everybody.
The.
The.
Mr chair Senator why this bill
wasn't an act.
Yes.
Mr chair and senator this is the
third time I've brought it if
passed the house twice it passed
in twenty twenty one it passed
the two Senate committees I'm
not sure I think this is one of
them see that was the other but
the session ended that was our
so my comment session and it it
didn't make it to the Senate
floor because of time.
Sure because the.
Mr chair and senator in twenty
twenty one it passed its two
Senate committees after passing
the house floor.
Thank you Senator Griggs.
Thank you Mr chair and and thank
you Representative and and
actually.
We I guess right now is the is
the funded exist.
Using.
Under utilized over utilized
does having money in what.
What is happening with yes.
chairmanship does Senator Griggs
the fund gets distributed to
registered apprenticeship
programs every year
my sayings apartment workforce
solutions permitted to withhold
up to fifteen percent for
administrative costs but don't
historically has not roof held
anything rather the full amount
of the Pequot fund each year is
distributed to each of the
reference approach programs that
have qualified apprentices which
mean that they've done a certain
number of on the job training
hours in the year and to a
certain number of classroom
instruction in the year
the funds that go to those
apprenticeship programs from the
P. what provide are not
sufficient for the pizza those
funds the they have other
sources of revenue as well
but my understanding is pretty
much every year the full amount
is distributed to the printer
programs to grow
to help them grow into an
increasing number of apprentices
in the past ten years
the number of apprentices
qualified apprentices that
have that form the basis for the
calculation for how much each of
the programs receive has grown
from the five hundred up to the
low nine hundred so the need is
definitely there I can tell you
from my experience as a as an
attorney look on the outside I
see a lot of industries that are
in desperate need of tournament
in that particular in the
building trades in the
construction industry and so the
need is absolutely there to grow
the apprenticeship programs so
for sure representatives are how
much money does the funds
collect every year.
Has it that in the past two
years is and one million ninety
two thousand six hundred dollars
it in twenty twelve it was as
low as six hundred thirty four
thousand it depends as you know
on the number of person hours
spent on public works project in
that year
Mr chairman and and
Representative Jennifer it looks
like.
Now kind of from the outside
looking in a little bit the
we've got a we've got a cash
caroling in road construction
project show if we if we include
them.
The the ability to raise money
gets quite a bit more because
right now we've got a bucket
load of construction road
construction project sure we're
gonna grow the fund while we've
got all the money money come in
our.
Mr chair and and and
Representative talked to Senator
Hamblen earlier today about a
particular building that she ran
we talked about well maybe this
thing is just funding.
And in in some of theirs maybe
that's the thing we usually do
I.
And it may be that we need to
put half a million dollars and
or million dollars but we don't
need trouble to get the get the
money in this other way so thank
you Mr president and and thank
you Representative.
Thank you senator Graham.
The.
Mr Mr chairman and members of
the committee thank you for
bringing this bill forward
outside of the legislature I
would chief of staff or perhaps
management we've seen a huge gap
in the number of craft to come
into force on.
And reducing the need for a
project programs to ensure that
we get that rate wide point
again now the possibility then
finish some jobs because we just
don't have enough trained.
In these types of jobs to get.
The ship programs are key to
build a pipeline to ensure that
we can continue to enroll about
five point two or four point
that's beneficial to northern
New Mexico that was my only
comment.
The difference is.
Yes.
you know.
Senator yes.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator yeah.
In addition.
This is the.
The use of.
The the the face to all that
level of the roads and that the.
The.
For yes.
The.
Representative of.
Senator.
Senator huh yes.
Two zero yes yes.
Senator.
To.
Is.
One is.
Passionate yes.
Thank you for being to the
Senate.
Is it.
Thank you for Marcus in the
state.
Thank you Mr chair
This bill is is about updating
the names of departments the
titles of department head to
clarifying the the authorizing
authority to appoint members of
the council the apprenticeship
council.
I am presenting it for
Representative Christine and I'm
with Trujillo and should should
we be lucky enough to pass this
committee I will be presenting
it on the floor I have with me
Mr Marcos Martinez who is a
deputy sheriff deputy secretary
of workforce my workforce
solution this is an agency bill
who needs is clarifying language
to make sure that they don't
have any problems with applying
for for funds and and for
clarity so I we are ready to
would you like to speak with you
thought that was enough
so we're ready for questions.
To support this bill.
Then the.
What else is.
I have to answer to the question
Senator Sanchez.
thank you for your center you
have a problem now applying for
funds within the course.
Actually the name here that what
is being used and what's clarify
what's confusing is of we're
getting rid of director of the
labor industrial division and so
not using the correct title
which is secretary of workforce
solutions and so when you're
playing for dress up for jobs
and the law is not concerned
with the title the plan for jobs
that's an interesting Freudian
slip applying for for grants and
the law is not consistent with
the title it's just it's just
messy a but I will turn it over
to Mr Martinez the CPS anything
else to add Sir Mr chairman
members of the committee and
basically it's still the loss
still talks about department of
labor we have been department
for really long time so we're
just trying to get these titles
correct we do get funds from the
US department of labor and we do
get audited and we do get
written up for the lan of being
consistent with the names here.
There.
That.
It was a little bit.
Best with.
The that the.
Thank you Mr chair.
Nine.
The.
Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you very much
for here in this very important
fields for the New Mexico our
breeders association the only
change in this particular field
is on page two.
Line twenty and we're changing
disincentive for the stallion
owners.
From seven percent to twelve
percent on the fees that they
would earn whenever their babies
either placed first second or
third in New Mexico bred races
or in open race we stand for
questions and joining me today
is Mr Jessop's good afternoon
chairman.
Yes Sir I was.
Or two years ago.
if I may.
And.
Of course I get.
And.
I just want to come in but.
Chairman I would like to ask the
Representative what makes Joe
Thompson the next for.
Mr Mr chairman and senator Brent
he's a very fast learner and he
is up to speed now.
I've tried everything that he
knows last four words.
Good.
Mr chair money just a comment
because I've had the wonderful
experience of speaking to the
representative about a bill that
I had about forces and so I I do
appreciate the love that you
call them babies
you know you're you remind me of
of of some fun folks in my life
that I was referred to bodies
babies and so but it's in an
area term of endearment I
appreciate that
and and thank you for your
bills.
The.
All.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you very much.
The only option that thank you.
So the
I.
Yeah.
The back of the of the forever
yeah he'll.
my goodness it's only recently
of a vote we.
It's a performance at.
Of the.
Thank you Mr chairman house
doing the resolution by.
Is a.
Okay it it allows constitution
to extend the property the
current property tax exemption
for hundred percent disabled
veterans and their spouses.
Orderly to the right there
the disability at this time if
you are a hundred percent
disabled veteran you don't pay
any taxes on the house if you
have fifty percent disabled
veteran you get no break so what
we're doing is we're trying to
bring this down to where it.
we discount total forty two
there
The disability rating and would
just sit by the VA.
And the this bill is needed.
Three years ago two years ago
with all the way to the Senate
floor and it died for lack of
time.
So with that Mr chair I will
stand for questions.
That Mr Chairman the of the the
Representative virus both
hundred percent disabled veteran
of this a plus to our brother in
but not us because we already
have we just think that if
someone has a lesser disability
rating they should also receive
your very good our veterans in
the state they're always taking
care very well it's one of the
reasons why we have a lot of
veterans we just want to make
sure that those that maybe don't
have that hundred percent can
can receive benefit on the tax.
Right Sierra.
The questions okay I'm sorry no
of the two hundred senators
support of house joint
resolution I.
Okay go ahead in a minute.
Hello Mister chair and members
of the committee my name is
Dorothy Seton I'm here speaking
for the veterans military
families caucus with four
hundred fifty members are so
statewide.
I myself am retired military
veterans I'm not disabled
however and systems chairman
clone stated.
In and senator grant stated we
do care about our brothers and
sisters who have some sort of
disability in the caucus
completely supports this one
reason we do this because it
extends to the sponsor of the
surviving spouse of the veteran
should die so I thank you for
hearing me and I urge you to
support the the resolution thank
you.
Right thank you.
But in opposition.
Senator called.
The.
The last sentence of those.
Our.
Louis.
Lows rating is ten percent ten
percent is the lowest.
The.
We are is this your disabled
veteran Mr chair us in
development and you benefit
percent disability rating
negative percent discount on
your taxes you had twenty
percent discount to the three
percent rating you get a twenty
percent discount disability
rating is not just you know.
So I I I injured my shoulder
that is account because I was in
the military time.
that you have to be service
connected disability so it has
to be something happened while
you were on active duty to
receive a disability rating from
the VA for it's not like social
security where is your whole
life.
Services.
Yeah.
You should Mr chair is the
property that that the value of
your of your house.
So.
A. as of right now regardless of
disabilities.
This.
Mr speaker Mr chair from ten
percent to a hundred.
Chairman a Representative
refused to Mr Chairman
representative senator Clemente
utility just because you're a
veteran doesn't mean you get
disability.
You have to.
The service connected.
To have a disability.
You have to have a service
connected disability in order to
be considered disabled by the
VA.
Thank
you Senator how to be a point
just comment about points Mr
chairman getting disability
ratings is really we are not
something that just happens.
Sometimes.
Possible to navigate.
right I see that with reference
to the account of the yeah.
I just could I add to that Mr
chair as a it took me almost
thirty years to get to one
hundred percent.
Thirty years after I got out of
the Jerry.
The us to pass.
Investors center and then the
second by Senator mu.
The opposition to do pass
motion.
You know what we do best seven
zero.
Move on to host what resolution.
Six six thank you a moment to
lead on this one or.
Mr chairman this one the those
applied to all veterans right
now we we do a the.
He
right and I'm sorry that was
eight zero does.
So right now we and we allow for
these four four thousand four
thousand four thousand this will
take you to ten thousand on your
value of your home.
Value of your property so if if
you're just a veteran in the
state you don't have a
disability rating currently you
take that into your.
Assessors office the.
But in their file and they give
you that four for four thousand
dollars off the value of your
home and then you're taxed on
the rest of the value this would
increase that to ten thousand
dollars those are all done
through the constitution so that
to be amended through station
that I get the right insurance
the only thing that you didn't
that is that we added Mr
chairman senator please we that
we added the to be adjusted for
inflation afterwards so we don't
have to come back as of in the
we don't have to come back now
is more.
All right in support of the
bill.
Okay good.
Mr chairman members of the
committee North Sea in for their
parents military families caucus
once more.
The four thousand dollar amount
set back in two thousand six the
nation no housing values and
housing prices and taxes have
changed a lot since then so we
feel that this is a necessary
great to the original four
thousand dollar mail in having
the indexing in there will
prevent us from having to come
back and eat up a lot of your
time in the future years so once
again we ask for your support
and thank you for your very.
Thank you we were in opposition.
Rick's.
Thank you for sharing Senator
Representative or the staff of.
Mr chair and senator I know the
fact is the assessor will the
decide which one to the budget
the that are in the best.
Another word to okay you're
let's say your ten percent the
the sable veteran like we were
talking about every year
budgeted in thousand dollars is
how it gives you a a a better
tax break the you'll go for the
one that is that gives you the
best.
Senator and and Representative
right I think I would understand
that but if a guy age disability
rating is thirty percent.
And then he's got he's been
honorably discharged he gets
something as well.
It doesn't say that so the the
Mr chair and chair
representative the the only
concern that I've got about both
to is.
If you've got that staff is
you're going to be an argument
is you're going to be is going
to be difficult the trying to
come up with what the ultimate
exemption the guy would
potentially get to the Mister
Mister chairman Senator just
like I explained to you earlier
we talked it over the assessors
departments and that's what they
figure it out themselves that
that would that that are in
comes in they will run the
numbers and see which one works
best for the for that veteran
and that's the way it works.
Here Representative right I
thought is what any given both
of.
It's forty percent on one he can
give you know X. amount of
dollars on the other and that.
That's what I'm not sure Senator
are doing for you show I just.
Think about a little bit and see
if there's if there might be a
way that makes it better if if
I'm right I mean I might be but
I just want to you know if a guy
comes in and ask for is this
because you sh thirty percent
disabled but he also gets
committees.
Honorably discharged he could
get there we might be able to
get him both and living white
any but I don't I don't know
that Representative you should
buy is marking sure Joe thank
you Mr chairman and and
representation.
Thank you.
And then the office this.
Yes Representative centers
second by Senator bricks eight
opposition to the depend motion.
You know it would just.
Eight two zero Mr Chairman
centers of the going Senator
Griggs said these have to be in
the constitution but because it
doesn't for bid that we could
actually come back and do it.
The bill that would allow them
to because the constitutional
amendment and so for that.
But it doesn't allow it either
but we could do that legislation
that would.
This is my sixth year running
this one okay.
This.
I go to the floor I've never
been able to get into the
Senate.
Three hundred years all along
and we to get into here.
Okay
Is that impose it.
By the just for your information
we have the Tax faxes come over.
Of will probably be I'm gonna
confirm would work either nine
or ten tomorrow of but let's say
nine o'clock for now.
What.
Thanks tax package is that.
The committee.
What's that committees will
community Education Committee
you're on your own education.
Yes you.
Okay what's the story line.
Okay because we need everybody
there so
Woods going together I don't
know but well you know to take a
loss of.
forces eleven nine.
Very very well I will.
I'm
already so
Do you have a cell phone.
You might see is on the for
what will be back on the floor
tonight at seven honestly it
still comes here than those of
four.
Do we need to need to water
systems are set.
