to get moving on our bills
today, um, just as a preface, we
do have some bills that are
ranking member has shared with
us that our bills that won't
require a whole lot of debate,
um, and so what we will do on
that, uh, just for time purposes
is we will register who is in
support and who is in
opposition, but not necessarily
have actual testimony. Um, and
there, it's not gonna be on
every single bill, um, but I'll,
I'll announce that as we get to
those bills, but just for time's
sake.
Um, we are gonna move forward on
that. So we have Senate Bill
183, starting off with Senator
Stephanics, and then you'll do
39, uh, after that.
And then we will continue to
move on. So Senator Stephanics,
we are starting as a
subcommittee, which means we
don't take role until the rest
of the the folks get here, um,
but.
Pardon?
Or any other actions, so we will
not be voting on this bill, uh,
as well. So Senator Stephanics,
it is all yours. Uh, Senate Bill
183, uh, Madam Chair, members of
the committee was brought to me
by a constituent, and it, it is
an appropriations request for
$100,000 to promote economic
development in the lower
Estancia Valley, and uh Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
um,
The uh stancia Valley Economic
Development District went away
when we changed Lita and other
such things in the economic
development uh department. So
now it's, it determined that
instead of regional.
Uh, economic development areas,
there should be localized, and
that is this is requested for a
localized.
Uh, economic development
activity for $100,000. That's
it.
Uh, I show audience, uh.
On you.
Thank you. Um, Madam Chair and
sponsor, I like economic
development bills, um, and can
appreciate the need and
lowerania Valley, but there are
some pieces that seem to be
missing, Madam Chair, um.
There's no measure for success.
What are we expecting to get out
of this $100,000 like Lita has,
it's gonna make this many jobs
or it's going to.
Um, this many new businesses
will open, is at least our
target for this many people will
be trained in small business
procedures, something.
Um, and there's no
accountability or report out
requirement of what was done
with the money.
So I think for me, Madam Chair,
and sponsor you are free to
respond. It isn't really a
question. It seems like this
bill is just not quite done.
So Madam Chair, Senator, um, the
economic development department
would receive the funds.
They would RP it out and if the
um respondent requested and met
the requirements of the RFP,
they would get the funds, and if
not, they would not.
OK, Madam chair, thank you,
sponsor, that's good, we could
hope the economic development
department would.
Require those pieces, um, I
think.
There are regions all over New
Mexico that would benefit from
the same thing. So I guess I
question why we do this one for
this place rather than a grant
that everybody could compete
for.
Um, but I definitely don't argue
the need, Madam Chair, I'll
leave it at that.
Thank you, Senator Figueroa.
Senator O'Malley,
thank you. Thank you Madam
Chair. Um, I don't want to say
what she said, but it's kind of
like that, um, I, I also, I feel
like to be in more equitable
that they probably should be,
uh, you know, a request for an
allocation we're many groups
could, you know, many, um,
Areas within the state could
apply uh and you know, they meet
the criteria that that's set out
um that they have an opportunity
to, to get funds, uh, to further
their program.
And so that that would also be
my concern. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator O'Malley,
then Senator Bergman's and then
Senator Jaramillo.
Thank you, man, um, just a quick
question.
Do you think the fiscal year of
only 2026 is enough time for.
The department to spend this
appropriation. So, uh, Madam
Chair, Senator, thank you for
the question. If the uh bill
goes on to Senate Finance, I
believe Senate Finance would
adjust the uh year, and I think
that many people requested
funds, Madam Chair, members of
the committee thinking that
there were grow funds this year.
And uh this was the type of
amount that might have gone into
a grow request and it was hard
to explain to a constituents
that were in the middle of a two
year for grow and so this uh
this request might need to come
back as well.
Thank you. And then my only
other question was, is
This amount enough, but that
you, you sort of answered that
in the first. Well, I'm sure, I
think the, the requester did
contact me for and about 200,000
might be better suited, but
again, the money goes to the
economic development department
to put out an RFP.
OK, thank you, that's all.
Senator Jaramillo and uh for our
minority members, we are on the
first bill, Senate Bill 183. Uh,
we've already shown that, uh, in
the audience, uh, there's no
record of support or opposition
both in uh online or uh in the,
in the house. So the uh sponsor
is uh talking about this, and we
are at the point of committee
questions for your, to catch you
up. Um, so, Senator, had a meal.
Thank you, Madam Chair, I also
represent rural New Mexico and
understand the importance of
economic development, Senator.
But who did you coordinate this
with? Was it with the county,
how did this bill come about?
Um, thank you, Madam Chair,
Senator for the question. This
was brought to me by an
individual, a former county
commissioner from uh from uh
Torrance County. He um currently
owns a hardware store in two
communities. He also has other
Economic interests in the area,
but I couldn't speak to what
groups um and individuals he
brought along on this request.
Madam Chair, Senator, the reason
why I asked is, is because I
know that the county, Riariba
County, let's take that as an
example, would definitely, in my
case, if they ask for something
like this and they see a bill
move forward for economic
development, they're going to
wonder if I turned my back on
them as rural New Mexicans and
didn't do my due diligence I'm
trying to get money into my
county.
for economic development. Now I
see the reason why behind the
bill. It's just, I might have
some concerns, not knowing that
it was coordinated with the
current city and county
commissioners. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Senator Hatamilo.
Ranking chair member, we are on
bill 183. We've already
registered that there's no
opposition, no support, both in
the audience and on Zoom and so
we are at committee questions.
At this point.
Are there questions elsewhere
from the committee.
Um, if I may, uh, make a, a, a
comment that's been along the
same lines. I'm thinking of
rural parts of my district as
well that would probably benefit
from an economic development
office because ours is located,
uh, strictly in the city of Las
Cruces, and I'm thinking of La
Union and Mesquite and
Chamberrio and, and I'm
wondering if this is really more
of a, of a nugget of a bigger
bill, you know, of something
that has much more impact
because this is very specific to
one area.
Um, and along with Senator
Jaramillo's concerns, um, you
know, I, uh, I, I think it's,
it's a great idea, but I, I
think there might be
opportunities.
For this to come back.
With the intent to support
economic development offices in
rural parts of the state.
Uh, because of, uh,
opportunities that I've talked
about with catastrophic uh
relief for businesses, um, that
they don't have an economic
development office in Reserve
New Mexico or, uh, you know, in,
uh, any of the rural parts I'm
thinking of that, um, you know,
and any of, of our
representative communities and
so
For me, what I think, uh,
Senator Stephanics is that this
is an opportunity, this idea is
a good idea, but it might be
something that would have a
greater impact statewide, uh,
that might have a much more
traction.
And, uh, and that's really just
my comment, and I don't know if,
um, if any of our other members
who are now here have any
questions about this.
No
OK, so, uh, at this point, what
is the will of the committee?
Moved to table.
So we have a table that is a
non-debatable motion. And so if
you will, uh, Rebecca, before we
actually take the table motion,
you do need to take roll.
So that we have a listing of who
else's here, so if you will do
that first and then we will uh
take a vote on the, the tabling
motion.
Senator Figueroa.
This is is whether or not you're
here.
So
Senator had a meal.
Senator O'Malley, Senator Paul.
Senator Ramos.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator share.
Excuse, Senator Wirth is
excused. Senator Bergmann's.
Senator Hamlin. We have 7
present earworm. All right. So,
now, on that note, we do have a
quorum, so if you will please
take uh the uh vote for a table,
a vote of yes means to table the
bill, a vote of no means to not
table the bill.
Senator Figueroa.
Yes.
Senator had a meal. Yes, and to
explain my vote.
Senator O'Malley, yes.
Senator Paul
Senator Ramos.
San Sanchez.
Send your share is excused, send
itor is excused Senator
Bergman's.
Yes.
Senator Hamlin
Yes, and I'd like to explain my
vote as well, just because as
I've I've mentioned, I do think
it's a, it's a really good
nugget that we can like expand
on, uh, and I think this might
be an opportunity for all of us
here. So, Senator Sanchez, going
back to you.
No a table, OK.
We have 7 yeses and 1 no.
Oh
Explain your vote. Madam Chair,
Senator, I can understand the
concept of the bill, and I'm
hopeful that during the interim,
maybe you and I and those of us
who represent rural New Mexico
can come together so we can
better organize and think how we
can collectively come together
to work about fostering economic
development in rural New Mexico.
It's a great idea. I just feel
that by isolating just one
community or one county, we
could have a a bigger impact in
the state if we come together as
rural New Mexicans to think of
the bigger
picture and how we can get
something more solid for rural
New Mexicans. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you.
Rarely have I been accused of
having a quiet voice, but I need
to.
Oh, I know on the web. I'll make
sure I use my mic. Rebecca will
make sure. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee on that
particular bill, but I have
another bill as well. Yes, we're
ready now for Senate Bill 39,
um, there is an amendment on
that bill. So would you like to
talk, would you like us to move
on the amendment first or you go
ahead and present the bill and
then we'll move the amount and
members of the committee, first
of all, this is a governor's
bill.
Um, on page, the amendment is on
page 4.
Line one.
Um
The original bill said that
off-label meant a medication.
Meant a medication that was not
FDA approved. The amendment
basically says off label only
means a, a medication that would
be approved. It's inserts, it
takes out medication or dosage
of a medication that is not
approved by the Federal Food and
Drug Administration as a
treatment and inserts a federal
Food and Drug Administration
approved medication that does
not have a federal food and
drug.
administration approved
indication.
For
A specific condition. So we want
to say that the off label is
still an FDA approved
medication. It's not.
An herbal medication. It is um
Not something that comes over
the border to try. It is
something that RUS FDA has
approved somewhere in the realm
of prescription drugs.
That is what the amendment says.
All right, can I have a motion
to move the amendment?
So moved. All right, do we have
a second?
The nurse Sanchez 2.
Uh, is there anybody in
opposition of the amendment.
Seeing none, if you will please,
after you launch it live.
If you will register that no
opposition everybody seated here
is in favor of the amendment.
All right, Senator Sanix, go
ahead and continue on, please.
So back on the bill, um, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
this bill, um, I have been
involved in carrying prior
authorization bills and step
therapy bills for certain
conditions to say that um an
insurance company cannot say you
cannot have the medication that
your healthcare provider
says you need for a very
specific uh illness or disease.
The very first step therapy bill
that we passed, had to do with
21 different conditions that had
to do with MS. It had to do with
rheumatoid arthritis, etc. etc.
The next bill that we looked at
had to do with immunologic
diseases, so that biologics
would be covered.
This particular pre-auth bill
that takes away
pre-authorization is for
somebody with a rare disease.
The National Institute of Health
under the FDA.
Interprets rare disease to be a
certain percentage of the
population of a country.
In the US, a person with a rare
disease is one of less than
200,000 people in the entire
country.
So this is usually a condition
that is hard to uh identify.
It's usually a condition that
can be passed on, uh,
genetically to the individual. I
do have an expert witness with
me, and I would be, uh, her name
is Debbie Armstrong, and she is
a former state representative,
and she is on, um, the web or
the Zoom. I also have members of
the Office of the Superintendent
of Insurance with me today, uh,
doctor.
Alejandro, who is a pharmacist
and Viera, who is the director
of the Life and Health Insurance
Division, but Debbie Armstrong
would like to speak. All right,
let's go ahead and give uh
former Representative Armstrong,
you, uh, nice to see your, your
name, uh, go ahead and you, uh,
can go ahead and make your
statement in support of Senator
Stephanix.
Oh thank you, Madam Chair, uh,
and it's, um, it's good to join
you. Um, I thought, and Senator
Stefaniks did a great, uh,
intro. And first, I should say,
um this is a governor's bill,
and I am authorized by the
governor's office to um to speak
on behalf of this bill and I uh
worked with um offices
superintendent of insurance as
well as the healthcare authority
and Medicaid on the crafting,
but I thought my personal story
would really demonstrate um for
the committee what the issues
are.
And so if you will um indulge me
to tell my personal story and,
and first, for those who don't
know me, I've been in
healthcare, um, uh, going on 50
years and I've been, uh, the
executive director of a
legislatively created health
insurance program or largely for
high-risk individuals for more
than 15 years and was chair of
the health, House Health and
Human Services Committee for a
number of years. So I know
health insurance works. I know
how the appeal process works,
and I know who to call. I know
how to call the
The government relations person
at the carrier, the CEO, I, I
know, and so I've got an
advantage over um almost anybody
else, um, that would be faced
with the same uh circumstances
that I experienced.
So, last year, I began to get
weak, um, and blamed it on being
old and lazy, and, but I kept
getting weaker and began to lose
the ability to do normal
everyday activities.
I was lucky, um, in that I was
able to get into a neuromuscular
neurologist at UNM, the only one
in the state, and was diagnosed
with a rare um autoimmune
disease called necrotizing
myopathy.
And it is as bad as it sounds,
my own body is, is destroying my
muscle cells.
And um,
And so, uh, it, it is rare and
uh and we've defined that in
here, which is defined in, in
several places in federal laws
being under 200,000 cases in the
United States for this
particular um
Uh, uh, disease, it is uh under
10,000.
That are, um,
Um, known in the United States.
So, I, um, uh, there is no
approved FDA drugs specific to
the disease and that's the
problem with rare diseases is
there aren't enough people to do
the clinical trials that would
move you towards FDA approval
because you can't have FDA
approval specific for something
unless there's been clinical
trials specific to those
diseases.
And there's just not enough of
us.
There are uh clinical uh case
studies and clinical practices
of persons, um, providers with
expertise. There's centers of
excellence around um myositis
and myopathies, uh, so there is
known treatment that, that has
uh shown um good results, but
it's not the same as a clinical
trial.
So, um, I was denied. um, for
immunoglobulin infusion.
And, uh, through, um, and, and I
pulled every string I knew, uh,
and went through multiple
appeals, so multiple denials,
multiple appeals, and it took
me, um, a month.
Before I was approved to receive
the treatment.
And by the time I uh was
approved for treatment.
I was almost completely
dependent.
I, uh, could not rise out of a
chair. I couldn't get up out of
bed, um, by myself, I could
barely dress dress and feed
myself. I could not raise my
arms or legs. I, um, I was
walking with a walker. I had to
get
A power chair in order to get up
out of a chair or someone had to
help me, I had to get up.
Um, uh, a power adjusting bed
and uh to be able to get out of
bed and still needed a strap to
lift my legs into bed. I
couldn't roll over.
Um, I could, I had to have all
kinds of adaptations in the
house. I couldn't stand in the
kitchen and do any cooking.
Obviously couldn't drive and
every day that I waited,
Um, and, and through those
appeal processes, I was um um
objectively worse.
And um,
The treatment has been
miraculous. Um, it may take me
years to fully recover my
strengths and uh if I ever do,
but I'm functionally
independent, uh, at this point,
and
Uh, so the, the purpose of this
Uh, Bill is, is really to
recognize that you will never
have an FDA approved drug for a
rare condition.
And, and so it, but off-label
use, and we wanted to clarify,
um, uh, that, uh, um, it, it
also uh includes off label. So
we had added autoimmune, you had
added autoimmune last year to
the list of conditions, and mine
is autoimmune, but it still
wasn't the carrier still
interpreted it as FDA approved
specific for the condition.
So, uh, which wasn't gonna
happen. So, um, that's why the
um
Um, uh, off label.
Uh, definition in here as and uh
still recognizing that medical
necessity is required and still,
um, but it also imposing some
timelines uh for um
Um, for that medical necessity
determination of 7 days
ordinarily or under certain um
conditions 24 hours and in my
case, it would have been a 24
hour turnaround, not a one
month, and multiple, um,
appeals, and uh again, that's
with someone who knows exactly
how this works, how the system
works, how appeal system works,
and I was sick and somebody else
Who was sick and overwhelmed.
Um, I don't know how they would
have gotten through the process.
So, um, with that, um, Madam
Chair, I stand for questions.
Thank you so much and it's
lovely to hear your voice. We
miss you here at the Roundhouse.
Thank you. um, we have the
amendment on here, and we have
moved further, so we're
discussing on the amendment, so
at this point.
We did stop it, yeah, you're
right. Just reminding myself
cause it's been a very long day.
Um, so just, uh, by show of
hands, how many in the audience
are in support of this bill?
123
Or
OK. Uh, anybody online? OK, is
there anybody online in
opposition?
Or anybody in this audience in
opposition?
All right. Let's get to
There are 2 of you to come up
and um if you will, you can use
the microphone right next to
Senator Stephanic.
Yeah, you don't need to touch
it, just go ahead and speak.
Man
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I'm Alice Kane. I'm
superintendent of insurance, uh,
my staff and I uh support this
bill. We actually helped in the
drafting. We think it's.
Needed rare diseases will never
be FDA approved because there
aren't enough people as uh as
Debbie said, and uh I, I have a
child with a similar situation,
so, uh, uh, I'm more than
sympathetic and it has to happen
or else these people.
Are, are not gonna get what they
need.
Just to uh survive or to
operate.
Thank you, Superintendent.
Right. We'll let you go and
just, uh, I didn't clarify
before, just, uh, is, uh, as
close to a minute as you can
get.
Senator, members of the
committee, I'mmala dances, I'm
the chief medical officer from
the Medicaid program, so I'm
speaking here as a member of the
healthcare authority that we
support this bill and we were
also part of um
Giving some revisions and
drafting.
All right, thank you very much.
Uh, now I'm going to the
committee. I have Senator
Jaramillo so far. Uh, anybody
else? Ramos got you next.
Madam Chair, Senator, I just
want to thank you for bringing
this bill forward. My brother
was born with a rare bleeding
disorder, hemophilia, and he
championed and lobbied this bill
when it first came out, and so
did members of the bleeding
disorder community. Madam Chair,
there's 33,000 current known
hemophiliacs in the United
States, and it's a disease that
would be covered by this bill
with medication and on behalf of
the Jaramillo family, I want to
thank you and in honor of my
brother, I wanted to thank you,
thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator Hadamio,
Senator Ramos, again I,
I, uh.
exactly the way Senator
Jaramillo feels here. We thank
you for bringing this in front
of us. I think it's very
important, especially with the
new, uh, diseases and sicknesses
coming out nowadays, we, we
thank you for bringing it up.
And that being said, I move to
pass.
Senator Ramos with a due pass,
we have a 2nd.
Second,
Uh, anybody else want to make a
comment or you want to move on
this quickly? All right, if you
will, please call the roll.
Senator Figueroa, yes.
Senator had a meal. Yes, Senator
O'Malley. Yes, Senator Paul.
Senator Ramos, Senator Sanchez.
Senator share is excused Senator
Wirth is excused Senator
Bergman's. Yes.
Senator Hamblin.
We have 8 yeses and 0 now. So in
8 to 0 you have due pass.
Thank you very much, Madam Chair
and members of the committee and
Debbie and everybody else.
Thanks you as well.
Thank you very much.
Uh, we are going to bring in
Senator Wirth and then following
that, Senator Gonzalez, you have
a trifecta.
The pills? All right.
No rest for the weary.
So we have Senate Bill 186 with
an amendment. It's multi-family
housing valuation.
2 amendments, Senator Wirth, you
want to go ahead and go over
those and then we'll move on the
amendments and we'll do the bill
first and then have you move on
the amendments.
The First Amendment is 0.230.
230303.1.
And this is a technical
amendments.
That makes the bill more
succinct by deleting some
unnecessary language, and we can
certainly go through it
specifically if you would like
to, Madam Chair.
Yes, please.
Uh, let me pull the bill here.
On page 4.
Line 7.
After the semicolon inserts.
Or
On page 4 line 8, strike per
unit.
And on page 4 lines 10 and 11
straight divided by the number
of units in the multi-family
housing.
age
And what I will do, Madam Chair,
is yield to my two experts.
Uh, Josh Rogers with Titan
Development and Billy Eagle with
CBE, uh, was the largest, um,
brokerage is in, in like in
like.
World. They said it before you
go to your your experts. Do you
mind going over the bill just
since now we have the amendment.
And then then we know what we're
asking questions about the, the
first, yeah, the first is a
technical one, the second one
addresses some of the issues in
the FIR, uh, basically, this
bill deals with valuation of
multi-family housing, which are
currently considered
residential.
So this is a classic um
situation with tax lightning.
There's a 3% cap on
multi-family.
Um, units.
Um
Which basically means for those
that are tapped in, they're
rising up at 3%. Uh, the
challenge, uh, is with units.
That transfer, uh, which come up
to current and correct or when a
new unit has is built, what's
been happening is the assessor
has not
Proactively gone and brought
values up, so the outdated cost
valuation methods that are used
for multi-family uh housing
means that many of these are now
valued at 25% of the tax base.
And so this the difference when
it's brought current and
correct, uh, so an Albuquerque
multi-family unit.
could go from a $750 per unit
valuation to a 3600.
Dollar valuation at the sale,
which basically has the effect
of
A massive rent increase if it's
passed along to tennis, $241 a
month increase in rent, uh, but
it also has the effect of making
New construction of multifamily.
Right on the edge of even being
doable.
And so what this is trying to do
is phase in a less
Don't bring it current and
correct when there's a sale, put
in a 40% cap, which is still a
significant increase from the
25% that's there, but I think is
more reasonable, uh, in the
market, uh, which again is going
to have a huge impact on, on
housing and those folks that are
are tenants in these units, and
I can certainly have my experts
say a few words about why this
is important from the business
side of things. OK.
Madam Chair Hamblin and
senators.
Thank you for the opportunity to
speak with you today about SB
186.
Uh, the multi-family tax
evaluation bill.
Bill is straightforward yet
critically important for the
future of New Mexico's housing
market to allow us to keep
delivering units to combat the
housing shortage.
Right now, multi-family
properties across the state are
assessed at around 25% of their
actual value.
SB 186 seeks to address this
discrepancy.
By ensuring that newly assessed
properties are brought up to
their true current value. To
prevent overwhelming tax hikes
that will stifle our industry.
The taxable value will be based
on 40% of that corrected value.
The math is simple. Properties
are currently valued at around
25% of their true value. This
bill aims to increase that
figure to 40%, which will ensure
property tax revenues remain
stable.
This issue has been festering
for over 30 years as previous
assessors have failed to keep
values in line with real market.
Conditions.
We have thoroughly analyzed
multi-family communities of
every type and quality and
consistently they're assessed at
about 25% of their true value.
SB 186 will fix this problem,
ensuring that property
assessments reflect their actual
worth and eliminating the risk
of tax lightning.
Under this bill, property owners
will be required to disclose
costs for new construction or
sales.
Allowing assessors to base the
taxable value on 40% of that
true value.
This approach will ensure fair,
transparent property taxation
across the.
So that's the gist of what the
bill does. And again, there's a
technical amendment and then
there's a 2nd amendment to
address an issue that was
flagged in the FIR.
OK.
We have a motion to move the
amendment.
Some of the First Amendment.
For discussion, discussion. Do I
have a second?
Second Senator Sanchez.
Any debate on the amendment.
Showing none, let's go ahead
and.
Natalie. Question on the
amendment. I wondered what the
amendment.
Changes
I see the language changes, but
what is the effect of this
change? So I think we we should
do the best thing to do is just
read through it with the, with
the amended language. Um, so
basically under this change
multi under on page 4, line 2.
Section a multi-family housing
shall be valued in its current
and correct value in accordance
with the provisions of the
property tax code except as
provided in subsection B of this
section, provided that one, any
increase in value over the prior
years shall be limited as
provided in section 733621-2.
Uh, or the, the value of a multi
So, so the, the real change here
is we're going from a per unit
value to the total value of the
multi-family housing complex and
we're taking out this
Division. So it was a formula
that was built in, and I think
it's cleaning that up, so it's
just starting with the total
versus doing it per per unit.
That's really what this does.
OK, so that answered your
question on the amendment. So at
this point,
Are there any other, is there
any other opposition to the
amendment.
showing no opposition if you
can.
Register that
9 in favor of the amendment.
So ma'am chair, let me do the
2nd amendment.
Uh, 0.231084.1.
And this adds a new subsection
on the top of page 5.
So
The current, uh,
C is going to become.
E, and we're gonna add a new C
and I'll just read it and this
is to address an issue within
the FIR within 90 days,
basically, it's going to require
an affidavit from the owner of a
multi-family housing and the
indexing of that submitted
affidavit from the assessor. So
within 90 days of the date of
the applicable local government.
Issues the final certificate of
occupancy, so this one is when a
new multifamily unit is built
for the multi-family housing,
the owner of the multi-family
housing valued pursuant to this
section shall file with the
county assessor an affidavit and
a form approved by the
department and signed by the
owner of the multi-family
housing. The affidavit shall
include the following
information, which shall only be
used for analytical and
statistical purposes in the
application of appraisal
methods. One, the complete name
of the owner to the legal
description of the real
property.
Which the multi-family housing
is located and 3, the full cost
of development of the property,
including the cost of the land.
And then new paragraph D upon
receipt of the affidavit, the
county assessors shall place the
date of receipt of on the
original affidavit and on a copy
of the affidavit, the assessor
shall retain the original as a
confidential record and as proof
of compliance and shall return
the copy marked with the date of
receipt to the person presenting
the affidavit, the county
assessor shall index the
affidavit in a manner that
permits cross-referencing to
other records in these sensor's
office pertaining to specific
property described in the
affidavit. The affidavit and its
content.
shall not be part of the
valuation record of the county
assessor.
Uh, that's there. So again,
there was an issue that was
flagged about disclosure. That's
what this amendment does.
I'll move the amendment for
discussion.
Right, we have a movement for
the 2nd Amendment, which is
230303.1 uh for discussion, we
have a second from Senator
Ramos.
It's that one. My apologies. I
read the wrong one. It's for
actually 231-084-11. Wanna make
sure for the record. Thank you
for that clarification. So we
have a movement, we have a
second from Senator Ramos.
Is anybody in opposition to the
2nd Amendment.
For discussion.
All right, see then, let's go
ahead and register that there's
no opposition, all in favor.
In attendance.
All right.
So man, I think this is the
first of, and you may see
another bill coming through as
well with commercial, uh,
properties. I know there's a
bill over in the house I think
Senator Padilla is going to
introduce one here that I'm
going to sign on to.
You know, again, it's, it's
important that um.
You know, we have a set of rules
that are followed, and I think
I'm not not in any way arguing
that shouldn't happen.
But at the same time, I think
we've got to be really careful
with how we address this tax
lightening issue, which we have
struggled with in this building
over the years with residential.
And, and the reason this carries
over is because these
multi-family units are treated
as residential, and so there is
a 3% cap there, but because
they've been so dramatically
undervalued.
The difference between the
property that's been there with
a 3% cap at 26% or 25% value and
a new property next door, it's
just.
It's, it's, it's apples and
ours, not even close. So we're
trying to level this playing
field, and this would bring in
even 40 going from 25 to 40% is
going to bring in substantial
revenue uh for the local
government. So that's what the
bill does, and we're happy to
stand for questions. Thank you,
Senator Wirth. And so at this
point, um, by a show of hands,
we will have public testimony by
a show of hands. How many in the
audience are in favor of this
bill.
All right, so we've got you're
counting.
Keep your arms up, please.
But we know you two guys are.
That's a given, yeah, yeah, you
too.
So we have 9.
We, uh, how many online are
showing in support. We have 2.
All right. That's right. And
then, uh, by a show of hands,
how many in the audience are in
opposition of this bill.
See none in the audience. We do
have, we want to make sure that
Joseph is in opposition of this
bill. Is that clarified?
he
OK, so we do have that. So what
we're gonna do is we're gonna
have 4 of you in the audience.
We're gonna give you one minute
apiece if you wanna go ahead and
line up behind the sponsor, and
then we'll do 2 online, the top
2, so we'll do Ali and Kathleen.
Joseph, we do have it registered
that you are in support of this
bill. For those of you that are
here in the audience, you'll
have one minute. Vice chair will
give you a 32nd warning for
those of you online, you will
see the 32nd warning typed in
the chat box if you go over one
minute online, we will cut.
you off as we will here in, in
the audience here as well. So,
JD, uh, you are first to go. You
have one minute. Thank you,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, JD Bullington,
speaking on behalf of the
greater Albuquerque Chamber of
Commerce. The bottom line is
that without the passage of this
bill, construction or renovation
of multi-family housing will be
stalled in large spikes in
monthly rent are likely. If
multi-family property valuation
is immediately brought to
current and correct levels.
There's gonna be tax lightning
all over the state with the
costs appearing.
Monthly rents and negatively
affecting the economics of
constructing new units. We must
have a lot more units in order
to track and house workers.
Senate Bill 186 resolves this
dilemma without taking away
revenue from local governments.
In fact, local revenues are
likely to increase and the
chamber urges your support.
Thank you.
Madam Chair and committee, my
name is Alan Lesek, and I'm the
executive director of the
apartment Association of New
Mexico. Uh, you know, housing's
been a big topic, obviously, uh,
rightfully so. I know many of
you have bills that involve
housing. One of the pieces,
though, that's missing is the
creation of housing, and that's
what this bill does. This
continues to create multi-family
housing. This is a good bill for
New Mexico, for New Mexicans, a
great bill for economic
development. Um, this also
encourages the remodeling of
aging stock. Um, once again, I
urge you to, uh,
To pass this bill. Thank you.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, senators, my name
is Eric Olson. I'm a resident of
New Mexico. Um, I work in the
multi-family industry.
Uh, and over the last year and a
half, we've seen, um, virtually
all new construction projects
never get to the permit phase,
and we have seen scores of
multifamily transactions that
have never gotten to the uh
closing table because of the
fear of anywhere from 30 to 500%
increase in real estate taxes,
these deals just don't pencil
any anymore for fear.
Of, of the tax increases, so the
this bill will introduce
transparency to the assessors
and it will allow them to bring
their uh values up to the
current correct values. And what
I'm really excited about is it
will provide predictability for
the owners and the developers
and the investors, uh, for what
the future tax rates are going
to be and for all the
stakeholders who are involved in
multifamily.
Um,
it will allow them to help
continue to provide clean and
safe and cost effective housing
to our New Mexico residents. I
urge your support for the bill.
Thank you.
Thank you so much.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Brent
Moore. Excuse me. I'm a
registered lobbyist for
that's OK. Um
register registered lobbyist for
the New Mexico Association of
Realtors, we stand in support of
the bill. We believe that this
bill is an appropriate fix to a
real problem that is out there
in the context of these
particular types of properties
and tax lighting is a real
issue. We urge you to pass the
bill. Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, thank you for
allowing me to uh stand and
support on behalf of Neop New
Mexico, with a commercial real
estate developers and uh Marla
Schultz, registered lobbyist.
Thank you. We stand in support
for the reasons stated.
Thank you so much. So we're
going to now go online, we'll
have Ali go first and then
Kathleen, if you will, Aileen,
please unmute yourself.
Kathleen, get ready. Joseph, we
have registered your support. We
also have an email from a Mr.
Bill Fox out of Albuquerque and
his support as well. So Ali, go
ahead. You have one minute,
please.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of this honorable
committee. Good evening. I am
pathetically urge you to support
Senate Bill 86, 186. This isn't
just a bill, it's absolutely
critical for addressing New
Mexico's housing crisis. My
development with 240+ units in
phase one sits completely
stalled right now, along with
countless others because current
property tax structure.
Makes multi-family financially
impossible. Let me be crystal
clear. Albuquerque faces a
catastrophic 20,000+ unit
shortage, something say 30 and
some say more.
That represents thousands of
families unable to find
affordable homes. This bill
directly tackles the emergency
by ensuring multi-family
properties are based on actual
construction, not speculative.
Without this particular bill.
My projection doesn't others
remain indefinitely frozen. The
mat simply doesn't work. Senate
Bill 186 isn't optional, it's
essential. Every day we delay
means more projects are stalled,
fewer units built. I implore you
to pass this bill immediately
and unlock the thousands of
units our communities
desperately, desperately need.
Thank you.
Thank you so much, Kathleen, if
you will, please unmute
yourself. You have one minute.
Kathleen, you're welcome to
start speaking.
Can you hear me now? Yes, we
can. OK, great. So sorry about
that. I, uh, I represent the
property management side of
multi-family housing and I've
seen my clients suffer from
having this inflated tax where
it's actually cut back on what
they can do after they've
purchased a property and, you
know, taxes are an
uncontrollable expense. So what
we have to do is
you have to go back and we have
to pull things from what we
would normally spend money on,
which we've had to lay people
off. We've had to cut back on uh
upgrading the apartments and
even delaying preventative
maintenance. So we also have
several clients that are
Wanting to build new
developments everything from
conventional to affordable
senior affordable and all of
those projects are on hold.
So we're not gonna see any new
development until this gets
Figure it out.
Thank you.
Thank you so much. Now I go to
the committee.
That are worth, do you want to
respond to any of that, or would
you like to just have the
committee let it roll.
Let it roll. All right. Senator
O'Malley.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, it's
just really surprising. Well,
maybe it isn't surprising
actually.
That
Some of these bills are really
cloaked in
And, uh, basically saying, well,
this is a, this is about
affordable housing, and that's
why we need to pass these things
because of a shortage of
affordable housing. We all know
we have a shortage of affordable
housing, and this is the reason
behind it.
And I have to argue that point
and I have some comments about
that. Um, this is my concern is
that this is a big hit, um, my
understanding is this bill would
affect
Uh, it would be a hit for about
300 million, the net impact that
was going to be borne by Burnley
County is about $33 million.
The people that are that
actually uh the uh.
Our single family units are the
ones that people who own
single-family houses are the
ones that pay the most tax,
property tax in in cities.
They're the ones that have to
pay the largest percent, they're
the ones that are responsible
for the largest percentage of,
of paying houses of paying the
taxes and
Um, there's not a big break,
quite frankly.
Uh, if you have a single family
rental, this doesn't include
you.
Uh, however, I, I, I do wanna
talk about just the whole issue
of, of building affordable
housing and developing
affordable housing.
Uh, cause I've been involved in
it and I was looking actually at
a project for myself. It was a
4-unit project.
Uh, I was, you know, going
forward with it, looking at uh
getting a loan, etc. What
changed it was the interest
rate. That changed the project.
You can't build something if the
interest rate goes up 3 or 4%.
It wasn't the taxes. OK, so I
think that, and then this whole
person was this person was
talking about permitting.
Um, we have a real problem with
permitting in the city of
Albuquerque. you happen to know
that. It's slow. It's, it's, you
know, it doesn't move fast
enough. We don't have enough
staff. That's one of the reasons
we're not getting permits
through.
This is a big break for
multi-family housing and got
this money's got to be made up
from somewhere, and that's my
concern.
The way
The county's work and I just
don't want to go, I don't want
to.
circumvent the county processes
for determining um
Tax abatement to units.
If we look at, if, if, if we are
gonna move forward with an
affordable housing project, and
then, and I'll say the county.
It's typically subsidized, there
is a commitment by the developer
to ensure that that housing is
affordable.
Or at least 30 years.
So those rents
You know, they are, I guess,
controlled, if you want to say
rent controlled, and it's
because we put money into it.
Upwards sometimes of just up
front built millions of dollars
and then we abate the taxes on
top of that so that we can
secure affordable housing in the
long term.
That this is nothing to do with
affordable housing.
This is about
Reducing the tax burden, if you
want to call it a multi-family
housing.
There's no
Uh
Indication that that will create
affordable housing. There's
nothing that says that in this
bill.
Uh, so that's my concern, the
loss of, of, of, uh
Uh tax income to a county, cause
it's gonna get made up by
someone, and it's probably gonna
get made up by those of us who
own single-family house cause
we've been, we've been carrying
that for the longest time.
Um, so that's my concern. Um,
And
And again, I, I, you know, I
keep hearing about this whole
thing about affordable housing,
why we're not getting it built.
Um, there's a lot of factors
involved there.
But, uh, to say that it's taxes,
I don't think that's, that's
fair. And, and also, again, this
is an end run around counties.
Counties need to need to make
that determination. They have to
have local control over this,
and so that's my concern, Madam
Chair, and that's why I have a
real problem with this bill.
Right.
Thank you, Senator O'Malley.
Senator Figuero.
Madam Chair, I think um the
senator got to the core of some
of my concerns.
We have a 3% property tax cap to
make it predictable, reliable.
Um, and the trade-off is when
property changes hands.
Property value is upgraded.
brought up to date and there's a
huge change in the tax paid by
the new owner.
And this bill, if I understand
it right and correct me if I'm
wrong, is
Adjusting that, fixing that
problem, not for residential
folks.
Who
sell or purchase a home.
Which is the vast majority, this
is only dealing with
multi-family housing valuations,
so we're fixing a problem that
I've heard about from
constituents that I've heard
about from realtors in my
district for years.
But we're only fixing this
problem for a small
You, and I think we need to look
at it in a bigger picture,
because
Our community is gonna take a
tax hit, ma'am chair, and
there's no, I can't see anywhere
in the bill where it produces
affordable housing.
So if I'm missing it in the
bill, please point me to it.
Thanks, Madam Chair. Senator
Wirth, if you'd like to respond.
So, Madam Chair and Senator, I
think section 73621.2 is the
famous 3% cap and I like you
have absolutely torn my hair out
because I've got constituents
and we have the same situation
in Santa Fe.
In 2003 when that bill, I think
it was 2003 when it went in.
The assessors were supposed to
bring everything to current and
correct.
And they didn't.
And so I see in my law practice,
to this day, even with 3%
corrections, we've got
situations where you've got
neighbors that are paying 5
times as much as their next door
neighbor.
And I do think
You know, it's an interesting,
you're correct. This is just
multi-family.
But there's a huge problem with.
Residential and tax lightning as
well. It's just how do you
justify neighbors living next to
each other with, with a
disparity like that in taxes.
And so maybe this is a solution
that we look at there with
respect to the revenues, I mean,
I think actually this right now,
it's at 25%. This is bringing it
up to 40. Yes, it's not bringing
it up to 100.
And I think that's a policy
choice, you know, we're
proposing doing something that's
in between, which will bring in
more revenue, but as both you
and Senator O'Malley say
You know, it's not gonna, if
it's brought to current and
correct, just like if we brought
residential all to current and
correct, there would be a
massive amount of money coming
into our local governments, but
we made a policy decision not to
do that. We've got this weird
situation where these
multi-family units are treated
as residential, and that's an
interesting categorization to
begin with. They get the 3% cap,
but they're frozen.
Because they go and start doing
improvements or if they sell it.
The valuation goes up
dramatically under the current
status quo. That's what we're
trying to mitigate here, but
there's nothing, you're correct.
There's not a specific
requirement in here that it
Has to be
quote unquote affordable and
locking that in and that's
Again, I'm, I'm not gonna sit
and argue that that's there. The
difference without this bill
though is a whole bunch of the
units are never going to get
built.
And
B, you're gonna be in a
situation where.
A unit does get built and the
rents are gonna be so much
higher than the next door
neighbor that is not gonna work,
they're just not going to build
them. And that's, that's, that's
the struggle. That's the place
we're right now and so I do
think this is a timely
discussion and, and one of a
number, there's another bill
coming with commercial to try
and phase in.
Up to current, correct.
Thank you, Senator Wirth. Madam
Chair and sponsor.
Um, I think that's all true, I
think um this is a bigger
problem that we need to address
in a bigger view.
My problem with this bill in
particular is that it's gonna
incentivize it set up.
Probably not intentionally to
incentivize.
Luxury
High end
Building and construction
because that's where you're
gonna get the bigger tax break.
The the break is going to be
more substantial, the more
costly the units are that you
built.
Um, so, and I don't think that's
the intent. But if we're gonna
lose tax dollars, I think we
need to um look at grants, look
at loans, look at incentives.
To incentivize and give a tax
break, which we do for economic
development purposes. Give a tax
break to build affordable
housing. Let's use the funds to
target that need, um,
Instead of this broad purpose
that's going to incentivize the
wrong kind of, not the wrong
kind, we need all kinds of, of
homes, but that's going to
incentivize high-end.
Um, apartments more than the
affordable, and I'll, I'll leave
it at that. Thanks, madam.
I do think it would be good to
have my experts who are the ones
that are doing this, address
that.
Sure thing.
Not in, figure out, uh, a couple
things. So, um, you know, in
general, what we find with
market rate housing that's newly
constructed, as we've seen
recently across the United
States, the downward pressure on
luxury housing, as we call it,
right, is putting downward
pressure on rents. So we're
actually seeing stuff in the C
and D space is the cheapest
rents, the affordable rents
actually being pushed down
across the United States because
of the incredible supply that
we've seen throughout the United
States. This is also happening
in Albuquerque as we speak.
Luxury housing, we call it Class
A, you know, we're seeing about
0.5% rent growth right now,
which is nothing, it's basically
zero, and we've seen BNCD
properties actually hit 0
because of the new supply that's
been entered into the market. It
provides that downward pressure
on rents, and there's plenty of
statistics out there that we, we
could share with the group, but
it, but it
It's a proven thing to address
the comment about the
affordability component, while
it doesn't specifically say
anything about affordable
housing in here. It does address
C and D and B and A properties.
So we do have rents ranging from
$500 a month to $1500 or $1800 a
month that will be impacted by
this bill passing or not
passing.
And so if we talk about the C
and D space where the rents are
much lower and would be
considered affordable, uh,
housing.
Those properties without this
property tax bill, run the risk
of deteriorating over time
because investments won't
happen. We won't have new
owners. We won't have new
investments in those properties
that are going to keep up.
The maintenance, the roofing,
you know, everything, putting
new flooring, new cabinets and
just keeping those buildings
going because the housing stock,
uh, is over 35 years old in
Vernalo County today alone. So,
this bill does address
affordable housing because it'll
prevent the tax lightning from
occurring on those CND
properties as well, so that even
though they may be paying $500
per unit annually right now, if
they went and sold that
property, it had jumped to 1500
to 200
dollars a unit, which needs to
be passed on to the tenant and
that won't happen. And so,
therefore, we won't sell and
therefore there won't be an
investment in that property, and
we just get into this really
kind of downward spiral cycle.
That's kind of scary.
But Madam Chair, if this bill
were directed towards C and D,
tears and targeting affordable
housing. I think I could support
it. Thank you, Madam Chair. All
right, thank you. I have Senator
Jaramillo, then Senator Paul,
then back to Senator O'Malley
for a second time. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Now I
I appreciate the discussion, but
if you think about us in Los
Alamos County, this bill has a
direct impact, a positive one
for us, because 15% of housing
or units in Los Alamos are 5 or
more units. We've increased the
number of people the laboratory
has hired with no housing for
these people, but this tax break
would help Los Alamos County, an
area that's landlocked and it's
not luxury homes, we're even
looking at those homes that were
brought in in the
late 50s, early 60s. This bill
would make sense for a district
like mine in Los Alamos, that is
landlocked and is working on
trying to ensure that we get
done with this bill is trying to
do. And that was my only
comment, but I appreciate the
comments from uh my two senators
from Bernalillo County.
Thank you, Senator Jaramilo,
Senator Paul.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator Wirth for bringing
this bill before us in this
committee today, um, I, I think
it's a great opportunity for New
Mexico to address the housing
issue. I, you know, I understand
the, the affordable housing
aspect of it, but I think like
the expert touched on, and those
were going to be some of my
questions. It, it's a, it's a
trickle down effect as you have
new development come on the
market, it frees up other supply
for others to move into and rent
that it's at a more affordable
rate, so it.
We see people move from, you
know, uh, a development that's
1015 years old into something
that was newly built because
they want those amenities and
luxuries, it continues to free
up the housing supply down the
quality of the asset, uh, down
the road, so I just wanted to to
say number one, I'm in support
of the bill and, and for, you
know, I live in Alamogordo, and
I don't know how much of a
direct impact it'll have right
off the bat, but I know that
we've been pressed and haven't
had a new, uh, multi.
Family development and Almogordo
for 30 years because the numbers
don't work for developers to
come in there and do that, or
for some of these developments
to to trade hands, the, the
implications they face, you
know, of that increasing
property taxes, I mean, that's,
you know, could be 50 $100
200,000 dollars, and it just it
doesn't work for for people that
are willing to invest, so you
get.
You know
Developments or or existing
projects that are sitting there
and they continue to age year
after year. Nobody wants to put
any money back into them, so
anyways.
All I have. Thank you. Thank
you, Senator Paul and Senator
O'Malley for a second time, I do
want to remind the committee to
make sure that the questions and
comments are focusing on the
bill given the time of day that
we are here.
Thank you, Charlie brief, um, so
I just I know where this uh unit
is for $500. I think that'd be
interesting, um, since you
mentioned that there's a unit
for $500 I think that's pretty
surprising. Um,
I, I think it's important to, to
obviously have high quality
projects, high quality
multi-family housing. I, you
know, I'm supportive of all of
that, uh, I, I guess I just, you
know, one of the things is just
I, to be sort of forthright
about this, you know, we keep
saying that this is about
affordable housing and for me,
affordable housing is, it means
something totally different.
It's, it's, it's really, you
know, to me it's a commitment.
It's, you know, it's a version,
I guess, of rent control, but
it's subsidized.
That means that the public has a
has a um stake in it, um, and
You know, so I, I'm hoping that,
you know, we'll have more of it.
Uh, you know, one of the things
that's kind of frustrating too
is the industry is here, right?
It's, it's, it's so, it's very
seems very self-serving, to be
honest. The industry is here,
you're the ones who are
promoting it, the lobbyists are
here, the association is, the
real estate people are here, uh,
and I have a concern about that.
I mean, we don't have, I mean,
unfortunately, I don't know
where our lobbyist for the
Burling Hill County is, but I
would think that that would be a
concern if we're going to lose
income, and so, um,
You know, I think that's the
biggest problem I have too, and
then I am concerned that
If we, if we don't get the, the
revenue that revenue loss is
gonna be, it's gonna be placed
on, on folks, um, single family
housing, and that's a concern.
That's all I have to say. Thank
you, ma'am. Thank you so much,
Senator Bergman, to finish off
the questions unless there's
anything else from me.
OK.
You want to go ahead and
respond? Thank you.
Madam Jason O'Malley, uh, I want
to address something, uh, and
that's the FIR report. I think
that's Senator O'Malley's
getting her numbers from.
The FIR report is incomplete. It
doesn't have the information
that we in the private sector
have multi-family has acted as a
non-disclosure, uh, situation
for the last 30 years, and
that's created this problem. So
when you look at the analysis
that was done, it's not that
it's inaccurate from a pure mass
standpoint. If you have a $10
million property and it gets 40%
of value, now you're down to 4
and then you base the math is
absolutely correct. But the
reality is that property is not
worth $10 million. It's worth
$30 or $40 million.
So the math and the analysis is
absolutely incorrect because it
doesn't have the information
that this bill is going to
disclose. So when we go and sell
an asset or uh Billy trades an
asset. That information will be
disclosed and that's what this
whole discussion is that we're
at 25% of value, and we're
taking it up to 40% and Senator
Mal you're absolutely right.
This is a complicated issue for
the tenants. So it'd be really
strange to try and explain this
to them. It's like, hey, your
rent's gonna go up if this
happens or we're not going to be
able to build units in
Albuquerque or Santa Fe or Los
Alamos because of this bill,
like, you gotta, it's a really
complicated issue for a tenant
to understand. But that being
said, um,
This will impact the tenants, if
it doesn't go through. We tried
to put ourselves into the
tenants shoe into their shoes,
and we are negotiating with
ourselves. If we were being
honest, we should have asked for
30% of value because that's
where most of the average is.
It's 25 to 30% of value. But we
said, because, you know, this is
a political issue. It's like,
well, if we go in there and ask
for 30% of value, how's that
going to be received? It's gonna
sound like a developer or an
owner is getting a handout.
That's not the reality. This is
A way to keep the status quo on
property taxes for multi-family.
It's not a revenue grab for
developers. It's not a revenue
grab for, for existing owners or
owners looking to sell. It's a
way for us to continue to do
what the multi-family industry
does.
And without it, it's gonna grind
to an absolute halt like it has
in the last year. Titan
Development, who I work for, I'm
a partner. We have 1000 units
ready to go. We can't do them.
We can't do them today because
of this problem. This is the
problem. This is why I'm here.
I've been pouring my life and
soul into this issue for the
last year and a half trying to
figure out what to do.
And owners that Billy represents
as a broker. He has not had
transactions occur because of
this singular issue because the
tax lightning that would occur
from the old owner to the new
owner is so catastrophic that
all of our projects are
underwater.
Meaning we have lost value
because of this issue.
And so without it,
Multi-family industry is gone
for the foreseeable future, and
the implications of that is that
we don't build for 5 to 10
years.
We don't have transactions for 5
to 10 years. And from that,
We have deteriorating housing
stock.
And we have rent growth,
astronomical rent growth because
we're not providing housing in
the state of New Mexico. So
that's the implication of this
bill. I can't stress it enough.
It's a huge problem.
Thank you.
Thank you so much, Senator
Burns. Thank you, Madam Chair,
and I'm not sure if I missed
this.
But
Did you say, and could you
clarify again that the county's
technically should have been
changing these rates, and they
just simply are not.
So man, I think.
The assessors
Definitely, you know, the fact
that you're at 25% of value
means that they've not been
doing the increases that should
have happened. And it's the same
issue that quite frankly
happened and I described in
Santa Fe with the tax lightning
issue, there was a, when we
passed the 2003 statute that was
challenged that went up and
down. Everything was supposed to
be brought up to current and
correct, and I think what
happened is a lot of assessors
made a decision to not do that,
which would have been another
huge.
Jump right then. So then these
lower rates got locked in.
And I think that's what's
creating the.
Challenge.
Senator, if you will, please
kind of keep your comments.
I'll just say.
That has benefited the tenants
of New Mexico.
Just by keeping the property
taxes low, it's keep their
housing costs low. We are lower
than Texas, Arizona.
Colorado, Utah, California.
We are, I last I looked, we are
18th.
Lowest on housing. So, that's a
good place to be. And so let's,
let's try and keep it there.
Thank you so much.
Senator Ramos, Madam Chair I
move would do past.
All right, we have a due pass
from Senator Ramos. Do we have a
second?
Sorry, 2nd from Senator Paul.
If you will, go ahead and
up.
Senator Figueroa.
Pa.
Senator had a meal.
Senator O'Malley.
The explanation.
I guess I'll say yes.
Senator Paul, yes, Senator
Ramos, yes, Senator Sanchez.
Senator.
Senator Worth
Senator Bergmann's.
Yes, Senator Hamblin. Yes.
In the Figueroa.
Madam Terne and explained.
All right, if you will go ahead
and please explain your vote. It
was a good explanation. It was a
good defense. I need more and
you have the chance to win my
vote on the floor, come and talk
to me.
Thank you.
Sounds like the price is right.
Thank you, ma'am. So you have a
9 to 1 do pass.
Right, so, um, committee, just
to let you know, we've got 9
more bills on our agenda, and I
would like us to have a hard
stop at 7:30, if not sooner.
So that also goes to
loses a
What time am I losing you?
Pretty soon?
Yeah.
All right, so we've got Senator
Gonzalez. So let's, uh, I know I
have the commitment from the
committee. We do have several of
our members that are going to be
leaving for a leadership dinner
that they need to have.
So we have 202, 213, 289, uh,
Senator Gonzalez, just for your
reference, 289 because it is a
tax, it is a, um, hold, so we
will hear it, but we will not
vote on it. Your first two
though, 202 and 213, we will be
voting on that. So if you will
start with 202, you do have an
amendment, so if you can please,
um, discuss the bill and then
discuss the amendment and then
we'll move the amendment.
Very well, uh, Madam Chair, and
Understanding the time of the
day, and you know your agenda.
Uh, with, uh, Senate Bill 202,
uh, this is a physical cleanup
bill, the result of a year-long
effort by the Legislative
Finance Committee to streamline
the state financial
administrative and with that I
can also have my expert witness
if he wants to add any more
besides.
Madam Chair, just that this is
LFC sponsored legislation.
Hold on just a second.
Sorry.
We do have an amendment, so if
you will please discuss the
amendment before we move on it.
Go ahead.
Madam Chair, the amendments very
simple. It strikes uh section, I
believe it might be 13 on
Page 22 and 23, there was
confusion in the drafting of
this that the uh cannabis fees
should be included in this
section, but in fact they have
their own fund that they are
currently being distributed to.
Section 12, excuse me, on
online, on page 22. So it just
strikes that.
Mistake.
All right. On that, do I have
any questions on the amendment
or a motion.
We would do pass on the
amendment. Do I have a second?
2nd.
Some Senator Figueroa. Anybody
in opposition of the amendment?
See none if you will, record
that everybody is in support of
the amendment, right, Senator
Gonzalez, continue, please, if
there's anything else
stand for any questions.
I know.
Yeah, we're gonna roll your
bill.
OK.
All right, so we, uh, uh, just
by show of hands, anybody in
support of this bill in the
audience?
We know that Senator Munoz,
anybody in opposition?
Anybody online in support?
Anybody in opposition? No. All
right, we do have a motion for a
due pass unless there are any
comments or questions from the
committee.
Seeing none, we have a motion to
do pass from Senator Sher. Do I
have a second?
We have a second, if you will.
I know we're moving fast.
committees like that.
Rebecca, if you will please take
a vote. Senator Figueroa.
Yes, Senator had a meal.
Senator O'Malley. Yes.
Senator Paul, Senator Ramos,
yes, Senator Sanchez.
Us.
Senator Sheriff.
Senator Wirth is excused.
Senator Bergmann's.
Senator Hamlin.
We have 8 yeses and 0. Yeah, but
you pass an 8 to 0 on the Senate
Bill 202 as amended.
Yeah,
we have questions about
Ismaelen, uh, so Senate Bill 213
now, yielding to transit buses,
Senator Gonzalez, you're welcome
to go ahead and
uh.
Senator Gonzalez, please go
ahead.
Madam Senate Bill 213 uh this uh
state motor vehicle code to
require vehicle drivers to yield
the right of way to transit
buses with the exception of a
passenger van when an
illuminated eel sign is this.
Displayed in the rear of the bus
and the bus is merging into
traffic lane from the designated
stop. Madame, this is a a very
just a safety.
Piece of legislation, we have
had it before, but you know, for
one reason or another, you know,
it has not made it to the full
cycle of being uh approved,
let's say, but I, as I
mentioned, it's a, it's a safety
measure, and I do have an expert
witness and if you can just very
highlight uh provide some
information if you don't mind,
as brief as you can,
Executive board member of the
New Mexico Transit Association
past president and I'm also
executive director of the NCRTD
and the Blue Buss.
And as uh
Senator indicated.
Um, this law, uh,
Requires uh when the uh sign is
illuminated that uh motors
sealed the right way to transit
buses that are.
Uh, merging into traffic.
And has indicated, it's mainly
uh traffic safety issues.
Uh, for the buses and I'll leave
my comments to that, uh, other
than.
Uh, this is an optional program
transit agencies are not
required.
To, uh
But these yield signs on the
buses, uh.
And mainly it'll probably be
utilized extensively by those
systems that are in urban areas
in the state, more so than.
Uh, rural areas.
And I'll leave my comments to
there. Thank you so much Mat
will stand for any questions.
All right. Um, so on Senate Bill
213.
Uh, by a show of hands, how many
in the audience are in support
of this bill?
You have the two boys in the
back.
How many in the audience in
opposition of the bill?
Not anybody online? No.
Alright, at this point, we're
just gonna go ahead, we're gonna
take your, your support. You
don't have to speak, JD. We
know. I just keep having the
wheels on the bus go round and
round in my head. You're all
welcome.
Uh, and so are there any
questions from the committee? We
haven't recorded that you are in
support and we have 2 in support
in the audience. Are there any
questions from the the
committee?
We have a due pass from Senator
Shed. I think we have a second
from Senator Ramos.
If you will go ahead and take
the roll. Senator.
Senator Figueroa.
Yes.
Senator Hara.
Senator O'Malley.
Accused
Senator Paul.
Senator Ramos. Senator Sanchez.
Yes.
Senator to share.
Senator Worth is excused.
Senator Bergman's.
Senator Hamblin, we have 8 yeses
and 0 noes.
Your last one, which is your
motor vehicle excise tax. This
is a bill committee that we will
not vote on because it can be
considered for a possible tax
package. So if you will, Senator
Gonzalez, go ahead, uh, and, uh,
and if you will present the
bill.
Maie, thank you, uh, members.
I'll just right away to my
expert witness.
Thank you, Secretary, if you
don't mind sharing with us what
this bill is about. Absolutely.
Um, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh, this bill, which
has been introduced, um, a
handful of times before will
essentially shift.
The current distributions of the
motor excise tax fund. Very
quickly, and you likely have
this information in your FIR.
Currently, um, the fund is
projected to generate about
$286.7 million in FY 26 in the
current distributions, the state
road fund would receive 22,
about 22% of that, or about 62.6
million. The transportation
project fund would receive 53.
3.7 million or about 19%, and
the general fund currently
receives 59.3% or about 170
million of that projected. This
bill would shift those percent
distributions.
Um, the State Road fund would
move to 65%, a difference of
about 123.6 million, the
transportation project fund
would shift 25% by about $18
million more, and the general
fund would decrease from 59% to
10%. The general fund impact
would be about 141.6 million.
The increased distribution,
which has been proposed for is
more important now than it has
been in the past, uh, for
a few reasons, the most
paramount, um, this year, um,
when comparing to other years is
NMDOT and the governor's support
for House Bill 145, which would
provide the state transportation
commission with 1.5 billion in
bonding authority over several
years.
The aggregate debt ceiling limit
for the State Transportation
commission is 1.1 billion, and
the annual debt service on 1.1
billion is about 108 million, so
this increased revenue would
offset that annual debt service
for those transportation bonds.
And that's it in a nutshell,
manure.
Thank you very much, Senator
Gonzalez.
We'll stand for questions. Thank
you. All right, so, uh, a
reminder, this is a bill that we
will not vote on because it has
an opportunity to be considered
in a tax package. At this point,
just by a show of hands, how
many in the audience are in
support of this bill?
Two different. OK. JD's smiling
all cheesy in the back, got you
here in the front. Anybody in
opposition of this bill?
See no anybody online?
Everybody's home having dinner.
All right, so we're gonna go
ahead and, and, uh, and record
that they're too and support in
here, um, at this point, I'm
gonna go ahead and go to the
committee. Remember, we do not
vote on this, but we are hearing
this, uh, and we'll be able to
talk about it later, uh, uh, if
we are able to have a tax
package.
Any comments or questions from
the committee.
Senator Bergman. Thank you,
Madam Chair, I have all the
transportation questions. Um,
this just made me double glance
at it, uh, because I felt like
we've seen this something like
it, like this, and I feel like
we have in this committee once
already, so, which is Senate
Bill 27 from Senator Woods.
Amending the exact same part,
increasing the rates as well.
Is which, which bills better,
which bill do you prefer? Why
are there two? Sure. Um, if I
recall and we were present with
Senator Woods that he is taking
100% of the distribution and
moving it into the state road
fund.
And so we're being a little um
methodical about the increase
here to cover the debt service,
and so this bill uh leaves 10%.
Of the total motor excise tax
collected in the general fund.
And this bill also creates some
additional revenue for the
transportation project but. So
Senator Wood's bill sends it all
straight to State Road fund.
This is an agency bill, um, and
so to answer your second
question.
OK, thank you. I'm just looking
at 27.
Which is also only 2 pages and
amends the exact same section
without the language adding it
to the fund.
Uh, Madam Chair, Vice Chair, if
you'll see the edits to the
bill, this and Senator Woods is
changing the num the percents.
And so I believe in Senate Bill
27 here in section A, it's um
zeroing out the distribution to
the general fund.
It's leaving the transportation
project fund, um, at 18%, and
it's on section Ccreasing, um,
I'm sorry, it'd be section B.
It's increasing that number to
100%. If I recall correctly.
OK, thank you. Yes. Yes. OK.
Basically.
Oh I think you, that's all.
Sorry, yeah. Are you sure? OK.
It is late. Thank you very much.
Any other questions or comments
from the committee?
OK, at this point, um, we are
holding this. Uh, thank you very
much. We appreciate that and uh
we are hoping to have a tax
package that we can have this in
under consideration. Senator
Ramos, I think you are next,
sir.
And then we will go with Munoz
just for records. Um, we have
rolled Senate Bill 206.
Um, there, uh, one of the things
that I'm very proud about this
committee is that there's a lot
of conversation. And so you'll
notice that some bills are
working rather quickly and other
bills are up for debate, and
that is uh an agreement between
uh the ranking member and uh
and, and in our, um, in our
caucus, uh, and so that
conversation, those
collaborations and cooperation
on that. If you're wondering why
bills are moving fast, it's
because we have those
conversations, uh, in advance
just to make sure.
We're using our time
effectively, so Senator Ramos.
Is this your first bill
presentation? Um, no, ma'am. I
know not your first one, but.
This session at all, no, you've
already, you've already ripped
through a couple, OK. All right.
So we are on Senate Bill 221,
uh, go ahead and, and let its of
the committee, thank you so
much. We bring to you Senate
Bill 221, uh, which prevents
delays in claims processing, the
bill ensures that insurance
companies handle claims in a
timely manner, reducing the risk
of unnecessary delays that could
financially burden
policyholders. It clarifies
claims procedures by outlining
clear standards for how claims.
should be processed, the bill
provides policyholders with a
sense of security that their
claims will be evaluated fairly
and promptly. I do have two
expert witnesses. You're with me
today and I'll let them go ahead
and introduce themselves. OK, go
ahead.
Hi, Madam Chair. My name is
Elizabeth Johnson and I'm an
associate general counsel at the
Superintendent of Insurance.
Good evening, Madam Chair. I'm
Melissa Robertson. I'm the
property and casualty bureau
chief at the Office of
Superintendent of Insurance.
OK, so you here just in case
there are any questions or you
wanna make a statement at all?
We're here just in case there
are any questions. Great. Thank
you so much. All right, by a
show of hands, uh, how many in
the audience are in support of
this bill?
That one way down there in the
back but here, well, we know, we
know you are.
Thank you. Uh, anybody in
opposition of this bill?
Uh, anybody online. Still radio
silence online. All right, so we
have recorded that we have got
2
And a half with the sponsor.
Uh, in favor, um, uh, so we're
just gonna go ahead and record
that just because of the time.
Um, at this point, I go ahead
and go to the committee.
There are any questions from the
committee?
Given the questions, do I have a
motion?
We have a due pass from Senator
Paul. We have a second one. I'm
sorry. You got, you know, you
got to be quick with me. I'm
sorry, Senator Figuero, you have
a question?
Oh, you wanted the 2nd?
All right, so sometimes we're
just gonna have to like throw
stuff in the in the middle. Um,
we've got several people taking
credit for seconds. So if you
will, please take the role.
Senator Figueroa, yes, Senator
had a meal.
Senator O'Malley is excused
Senator Paul.
Senator Ramos, yes, Senator
Sanchez.
Send it to share is excuse.
Senator Wirth is excused Senator
Bergman's? Yes.
Senator Hamlin. Yes.
We have 7 yeses and 0 no. 70 do
pass. And so, Senator Jaramillo,
you have to go to that
leadership dinner as well, am I
correct? I do this,
I can stay. OK.
Thank
So we have Senator Munoz.
Thank you, Madam Chair, which
one are we gonna do first? 2:26,
we'll do them in order.
Do you want, you want to sit
down withers all this bill does
is increase the fine for $250
for uh trucks and they have to
drive at 65 miles an hour now.
Johnson, Senator Sanchez, you're
smiling.
Me and my son will both be
pissed at me.
So this is a uh
a family Senate Bill 226 just
says it's $250 fine for you, uh,
and you can only drive 65 miles
an hour in a semi truck.
All right.
There, you don't have an expert
witness, is that you? You're the
expert, I don't never been
cited. He could be my expert
witness. I don't know if that'll
help you. Well, he's got a CBL.
Uh, just by show of hands,
anybody in the audience in
support of this bill.
Record shows none. JD's
twitching in the back. Uh,
anybody in the audience in
opposition of this bill.
See none. Nobody online. All
right. Do we have any questions
or comments from the committee?
We have a question from Senator
Bergman's, and we've got a
question from Senator Sanchez.
So Senator Berg, let's go first.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'm just
curious, Senator.
Why the 65 miles an hour.
And why are you doing this bill?
Well, a couple of years ago, I
did semis in the left hand or
the right-hand lane, right? And
they apparently don't get the
gist of that. I'll show you
pictures on my phone. The former
secretary is sitting right here,
and I used to text him every
single time I was behind 5 semis
during 55 miles an hour or 60
miles an hour, well, 8 of them
were trying to pass each other.
Um
It's just safer for the roads
that they're not gonna slow
down. I mean, truck drivers now
and maybe not our local ones,
but other ones across the nation
that we passed one this summer
when he had his feet out the
window, driving 75 miles an
hour.
And and so, if you ever drive by
40.
You will enjoy the semi truck
traffic, it tries to pass one
another going up a hill at 55
miles an hour, and they line up
for traffic lines up for 10
miles.
And it just
It's a real safety factor. I
mean in other states, Arizona
from Flagstaff to Phoenix.
Uh, you're 65 miles an hour in
the right line. You hit the
California border, it's 55 miles
an hour in the right-hand lane.
You had Oklahoma, it's 55 miles
an hour in the right hand lane
for any truck pulling a trailer,
this is just for semi tractors.
OK, thank you.
Thank you, Senator Bergmans.
I've been in that and I've
thought of you, Senator Munhoz,
when I've been stuck behind.
18 wheelers, Senator Sanchez,
Madam Chair, Senator, so we do
pass
18 wheelers, Senator Sanchez,
Madam Chair, Senator, so will we
do?
No, not yet.
So.
We already passed the one we
have to stay in the right lane,
so now in the right lane, it's
65 miles an hour, how are they
gonna pass?
Well, they don't need to pass,
we'll pass them.
That's the problem we can't pass
because they are, they're
clogging up the traffic, I mean,
maybe not your truck drivers.
They probably drive faster than
that, um.
But the problem is you can
drive, you can it it allows you
to pass, but you cannot drive
greater than 65 miles an hour.
Doesn't stop you from passing.
The other cars are doing 60, you
can still pass it as long as you
so madam chair senator for the
semi to pass at 65 is.
That's their problem.
I don't get it. I don't know how
you, I drive a lot of semis.
All right, Madam, I'm good.
All right, thank you. Any other
questions from the committee?
Well Senator Sanchez.
Gros in the sea.
working all weekend in in Los
Lunas they're they're driving
semis.
What is the will of the
committee?
I move it too fast. We have it
too pass from Senator Bergman's.
Do we have a second?
OK.
OK, we have 2 from Senator
Jaramio, if you will, please
take the role. Senator Figueroa.
Yes, Senator had a meal. Yes,
Senator O'Malley is excused
Senator Paul Senator Ramos.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator Scher is excused,
Senator Wirth is excused Senator
Bergmans.
Senator Hamblin.
Mhm
Yes.
Uh, Senator Sanchez, you want to
explain your vote. Madam chair,
Senator, explain my. I know the,
the issue is with the
The big corporate trucks, we got
Swift and Warner and all those
that are governed at like 6265.
So independent truckers.
That
You know
They run 75, so that's, those
are the guys that clog it up and
it, it, it is a mess. I don't
know how to solve it, Senator,
Madam Chair, but.
That's why I wrote a no for the
Independent Truckers.
Don't get caught speeding.
That's how you solve it.
Start working your law
enforcement.
Connections there in that area
and we know you have a a due
pass 4 to 3. Thank you. Mhm. Now
we're on to Senate Bill 227.
we know that the state's
reserves currently are at
31.something is House Bill 2 is
coming over, uh, the growth fund
and everybody got grow money
last year, new members did not
and Senator Ramos did not, but
we created this new fund, uh, we
currently have about $520
million in the fund, uh, what
we're asking to do is to count
that as part of.
our reserves every 110 million
and sometimes 108 at LFC is 1%
of reserves. So currently, if we
would put that in right now in
our reserves, our reserves would
be at 35%.
It's interesting that that
Moody's is gonna give us an
upgrade in our bonding, because
they did not realize how much,
how many funds we have created
in New Mexico.
If we would take the early
childhood trust fund at 11
billion.
We'd almost be at 150% reserves
in the state of New Mexico. And
and so what we're signaling to
people is we have money, and we
have money in these funds, um,
buckets, whatever we wanna call
them. And now we need to start
adding them into our reserves,
so we look like we are more
financially stable than we ever
have been. The other key thing
that Moody saw when they saw us
is that.
We took our now money and
non-reoccurring money, and by
2030, if the market holds and
everything is corrected in
Wesley, that will spin off more
than we received from oil and
gas, and we did the same thing
with capital.
We've created funds, um, this is
the first year of the fund that
we put in there, it generated 25
million. And so as we create
these, we need to account for
them at a certain level.
We don't we, we need cash in the
bank too, but this is the same
thing as cash in the bank, but
we have never counted them as
our reserves until now we're,
we're asking to count as a
reserves.
Thank you, Senator Munoz. Um,
before I go to committee
questions, anybody in the
audience in support of this
bill?
See not anybody in opposition.
See no. I'm gonna have you just
yell when we get somebody like
a.
We got him. OK, so, so we're
showing nobody online. Uh, so
now I go to the committee. Madam
Chair, Senator, and this, this
quick question, were the
legislators aware that these
were 2 year of.
made it worth that these were
for 2 years. OK, good. Just,
that's all the question I had.
Thank you, Senator Ramos.
Senator Figueroa.
Yeah, Madam Chair, clarification
of cash and bank, um.
This is a, a name change of
something.
To um to show Moody's.
And get what we need out of our
bond rating.
But
Do we consider the grow fund
cash in the bank, if there were
a catastrophe, that's where we
would go to get money to spend,
or do we consider that allocated
money.
Madam Chair. Madam Chair and
Senator, there's no restrictions
on growth, so if there's a
downturn in the economy, we
could come in and just pull the
money, the early childhood trust
fund is set up where it requires
a 2/3 vote to tap that fund, uh,
to get to it, and so today we
lost behavioral health bill in
the emergency clause because two
people were not in the room and
so.
When you come into financial
situation, they don't want to
tap a fund when you need to.
They may not vote the way the
state needs you to, and so we're
creating these, so these are
none, you don't have to tap
them. Governor would have to
call us in, we'd have to
appropriate the money out of
them, um, but they'd count as
our reserves, so.
And we could wipe out
everybody's grow if we hit that
point. I mean, you guys haven't
experienced that yet.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I think
that was my confusion we're
calling different things
reserves that we have to access
differently, but we're just
gonna label all of them
reserves. This is only the
growth fund. This is not the
early childhood trust fund. This
is only the growth fund that was
appropriated last year.
And so when we created that
fund, we appropriated all our
grow money into that fund. It's
been set aside and not accounted
for it, but we have 522 million
still sitting in the growth
fund, and so.
Thank you, Madam Chair, we
should definitely get credit for
putting that money aside. Thank
you.
Thank you. Any other questions
from the committee
move pass pass from Senator
Ramos. We have a second from
Senator Figueroa.
How about if we make this easy?
Every, is that all right? Uh,
anybody in opposition of this
bill?
Let's show that you have uh
given that there's no
opposition, you have a 7 to 0.
Thank you. Thank you for your
vote, Senator Sanchez.
All right, so we've got the last
two bills from Senator
Jaramillo.
We're actually doing better than
I thought.
So committee, thank you very
much for your cooperation.
We have Senate Bill 199
administration of local DWI
grant programs, Senator
Jaramillo, thank you very much.
You're welcome to start. Thank
you, madam. Cheers to the local
DWA grant program's mission is
to reduce the incidence of DWI
alcoholism, alcohol abuse, and
alcohol-related domestic
violence across the state,
utilizing current tax revenue.
Now every one of your counties,
every 33 counties throughout the
state of New Mexico benefits
from this program. And it does
so in 3 ways. There's a
distribution of funds which are
provided quarterly, uh,
competitive grants awarded
through application processes.
that work is reimbursable. In
Rio Reba, we use something
called Rockstop where they go
into the schools to talk about
the dangers of alcohol and other
community events that they host
to talk about the dangers. And
the third, Madam Chair, is
alcohol detoxification grants,
which also operate on a
reimbursable basis. Now, Madam
Chair, with this bill would do
would it would allow the
reallocation of these tax
dollars to serve as indirect
support to counties by the LDWI.
programs at DFA resulting in
roughly what we're estimating is
637% possible return on
investment by providing
technical assistance and grant
support directly in lieu of
placing the administrative
burden on every single one of
our counties. Now the
redistribution available from
the DFA would provide our
communities with funds to assist
in community wellness and
outreach programs such as
prevention, um, activities such
as team court programs and law
enforcement and with that we're
willing to hear any questions.
hear from those who might
support or oppose the bill.
OK, Senator Jaramillo, do you
want your expert to say a few
words? Not at this time. OK. Uh,
just by a show of hands, is
there anybody in the audience in
support of this legislation?
Anybody in opposition?
OK, we do have one person.
Oh, it feels like we're like,
you know.
Is that my mom in support of the
bill. It's, I don't think it's
your mom.
But it is Kelly Livingston. Why
don't we, we're gonna go ahead
and record that Kelly is in
support, but um we're gonna go
ahead and move on to the
committee, um, if that's all
right with you, Senator Hatame.
All right, so at this point, um,
do we have any questions or
comments from the committee?
I'm sure I just want to say it's
a great, great programs out
there and I know we definitely
need help in Grant County, Luna
and Hidalgo, so thank you for
bringing this bill to us and I
move to do pass.
OK, before we go for a second,
uh, are there any other
questions or comments from the
committee?
We have a motion from Senator,
Senator Ramos, do we have a
motion? The 2nd 2nd from Senator
Figueroa.
To make it
With a se, uh, anybody in
opposition of this.
Seeing none, if you will, just
record that all those in
attendance are voting in the
affirmative for Senate Bill 215,
so you have a 7 to 0.
OK. Last but not least, and I do
want to commend this committee.
Will you all in the audience
give this committee a big round
of applause. They're so good.
Because I have to tell you
churning out and Rebecca as well
and our staff churning out 12.
Reports, uh, from almost an
average of 12 reports from every
committee meeting, um, is really
showing the collaboration and
cooperation from this committee,
so I'm very grateful for that.
So Senator Jaramilo, you've got
your last one is coverage for
certain insurance risks. Senate
Bill 215. Uh, you are welcome to
start
this conversation before that
fires completely tear up the
terrain and change the
landscape. Now what the Senate
Bill 215 does is it aims to help
communities that have been
impacted by fires and then faced
mudslides.
For example, if a fire was
covered, risk and mudslide was
excluded from that risk. The
mudslide damage would be covered
as long as the damage was
proximity caused by the fire. So
this looks at how the terrain
has changed and ensuring that
these homeowners have a have the
protection that they need
because of those new flood zones
that happened, combination of
wildfire followed by rainfall
can increase the risk of flash
floods, mudslides, and erosion
in fire.
affected areas. And so flooding
can occur within minutes and the
onset of a rainstorm. Now when
that rain comes, which we saw in
Mota County, um, areas well
below the fire scar are in
complete danger, which changed
the whole.
Conversation about just the fire
to become fire and flood, flood
water caused by fire scars are
likely to travel through areas
that were not considered to be
in the flood plain, and some
homes lost are completely gone
and are unable to rebuild on.
And so a lot of planes are the
major concern.
If enacted property insurance
industry would be prevented from
denying policyholders, claims
and damages to covered
properties due to a combination
of covered and excluded risks.
So in this case, when you think
about fire, it'd be the change
of terrain, which would then
mean that the mudslides and the
the fear of water because it
becomes now an area that has
completely changed from when
that policy was first enacted.
OK. Thank you, Senator Jarami.
You have 2 folks with you. Do
you want to introduce them or
have them say anything? Not at
this time. All right. Thank you
very much.
All right, by a show of hands.
Is there anybody in the audience
in support of this bill?
All right, we got some people
who are still awake.
Thank you very much. We have 4
people that have shown in
support. Anybody in the
audience, uh, in opposition, we
do have one person online who is
in support, Taylor Atkins, we've
got that registered that you are
in support, um, at this point,
um, I will go to the committee
if there are any comments or
questions from the committee.
Senator Ramos, Madam Chair, um.
So after the fire.
This is going to make sure that
insurance companies.
Cover of blood loss.
But I'm sure I'm going to defer
to my expert witness who is Lou
Macias. She's the bureau chief
with the financial fraud and
consumer protection.
Madam Chair, Senator, um,
They would if
Due to the fire, the mud would
be covered if there's not a
proximate cause of the fire,
then it would not. So, Madam
Chair, um, senator.
Would flood insurance still be
needed in those areas and with
the federal government cover
these losses or would insurance
companies have to cover these
losses.
The
Coverage, uh, is
OK. Give me one second. Um,
The insurance company would
cover it.
If there was the proximate cause
if uh the there is not a
proximate cause the insurance
company won't cover it, and um
Sorry, just got confused.
Senator Ramos to ask the
question again? Yes, please. OK,
so, madam chair, Senator, if the
insurance company, will the
insurance company have to cover
the flood?
Or would the federal government
have to cover this for them?
OK. The insurance company would
have to cover the flood flood
because it is the proximate
cause if
But I'm sure I have the
secretary of insurance here.
Uh, Madam Chair, committee, uh,
flood insurance is still gonna
be needed if the cause of the
loss is just the flood.
If the cause of the loss is
because the land has been so has
been destroyed by the fire, and
when the flood comes, it causes
mud to fall down into your home.
The insurance company would have
to cover the mud loss.
We also had a similar question.
Uh, summit, there was a large.
A boulder that went into the
house because the the uh fire
had softened the land, so it was
mud, so if the if that rock that
boulder went into the house, the
insurance company would have to
cover it, but, but just flood
loss would still be a FEMA
issue.
Madam Chair, Senator, so.
Who determine whether it's
whether the mud is the blood
loss or a uh
Or uh water loss, I mean,
because if it's mud, it's got
water and it's gonna be hard to
determine.
Whether it is a blood or a
claim.
Uh, Madam Chair, committee,
Senator Ray Mills, I think the
claims adjusters will
Dissect that.
And uh, but, but if it's a
straight.
I don't think it's gonna be as
difficult as you think, but
maybe I'm wrong, which happens
often, but I do think that if
it's a straight flood loss.
And it's not what we found in
Rio Delso is there like the
homes were filled halfway filled
with mud. That wasn't covered by
the insurance company, it wasn't
covered by flood. So what we
said the pro, what we're coming
in other states have this if
it's approximate cause of the
land being
so the of the wildfire causing
the change in the topography and
then the mud comes down or a
boulder comes down, that would
be covered by the insurance
company. straight flood would,
would
be FEMA.
Madam Chair and senator, I think
my just my biggest concern is
it's already hard enough to get
insurance in the.
The fire mountainous areas.
And to me, this would drive up
the cost of insurance, even more
than what it already has. And
I'm not saying we shouldn't have
to cover that loss.
I'm just saying, where are we
going to find the happy medium
there because.
Insurance rates will be driven
up if they're gonna have to add
uh another portion to the actual
policy.
Or these types of coverages
because I can't see this being
added on as a as a added
coverage, but it as a surplus
coverage, maybe.
Madam Chair, uh, committee,
Senator, I, I think this will
be, I don't think it'll be
called an added coverage in
other states.
The proximate cause is covered,
it is covered. I think you're
right because there'll be more
claims, the cost of insurance
will go up, but right now we
have people, I, I don't know how
many homes had the mud, uh, in
Riodoso that have no coverage,
they're not covered by FEMA and
they're not covered by their
insurance, so we think we're
filling a gap that, that should
be covered. And yes, you're
right, whenever you add, you
know, a risk, it does increase
the cost, but uh,
And again, other states have it
and.
And insurance companies pay it.
Senator, if I may, nearly 200
homes were affected by the
flooding in Rio from the fire.
Um, Madam Chair and center, I, I
totally see where you're coming
from. I, I'm an insurance agent.
I've lost, I've had to cover
fire fires I've had to cover
flood, um, I'm just, I'm just
worried that we're gonna price
our insurance out of the market
and we're gonna have to depend
on the fair plan that we're
developing now.
And uh you know, it's, it's
just, it, there's no winning in
this in this uh in this uh bill
here for anybody, um, but I know
that we do need the coverage
and, and I do thank you for
bringing this bill up to us
today, because it is super
important for us, but uh
I'm just, I'm just struggling to
wrap my head around this and uh
it's, it's gonna be rough for
every resident in the state of
New Mexico because when
insurance, when when the
insurance company start looking
at the total cost, that's going
to be spread amongst everyone,
not just the peoples in the
mountain mountainous areas, so
that that's just my biggest
concern that we I insurance out
of the market and we have to
depend on the fair plan for a
very long time and I know the
third plan isn't developed for,
for longevity. It's, it's for
emergencies, so.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair,
and thank you so much, Mr.
Senator.
Thank you very much, Senator
Ramos.
Any other questions or comments
from the committee.
What is the will of the
committee?
I'm overdue. We have a pass from
Senator Brickman's have a
second?
Second from Senator Figueroa. I
have a feeling we're going to
need to take a vote on this one,
so.
Senator Figueroa.
Yes.
Senator had a meal.
Senator O'Malley is excused
Senator Paul.
Senator Ramos. Yes, ma'am.
Senator Sanchez.
Yes
Senator share is excused,
Senator Wirth is excused Senator
Bergmans.
Senator Hamlin.
7 yeses.
So you have a 7 to 0.
do pass, and I know that that is
a challenging vote given all of
the different factors, but thank
you very much for being here.
Thank you, Madam Chair of the
All right, so, um, it is 6:45.
We are going to wrap. I do wanna
go ahead and plant a seed with
the committee that given the
number of house bills that we're
getting now, uh, and still the
166 bills that are still in our
plus,
um, we, that's excluding the tax
bills, um, we will start meeting
on Saturdays.
Next week.
So not 2 days from now, but I
just wanna make sure that we
prepared, but I do appreciate
the cooperation and
collaboration it's making this
committee very efficient. So
thank you very much on that
note, we are adjourned.
