The.
There is here.
Here's.
There.
Already who will go ahead and
get started of Senate bill
eighty three Tolman diamond.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee thank
you for scheduling this bill in
a timely manner.
I have with the as you know as
senator representing the
southern half of the state line.
Representing the northern half
of the state.
So very I get very pleased to
present this bill to you the
introduce this bill because our
statue and telephone billing
practices needs to be modernized
to make sure New Mexico
consumers can benefit from all
the convenience choices and
lower prices that are available
in other states the statue with
an act of nineteen ninety nine.
Wireless telephone service was
still in its early stages.
That was back during the so
called second generation of
wireless service to G. as it was
known when people use flip
phones there were used
exclusively to make telephone
calls.
So we'll know if the numbers.
The dial up phone and with the.
With the party system of the.
We A. lifted up the phone and
you.
Couldn't higher girlfriend
because is somebody already
talking to go for entities
to listen in on the
conversation.
Also.
So the progress one way since
then Mr chair
we're now in the fifth
generation of wireless service I
need and most of us have
smartphones with screen displays
and lots of apps today voice is
just one of many services to
which our phones give us access
we also use them to watch videos
listen to music play video games
and much more.
Our telephone bill and said she
was not kept pace with the
changes in wireless technology
under our nineteen ninety nine
statute customers cannot choose
to have services like video
streaming from third parties
charged on their telephone bills
that robs customers a convenient
and can even mean that New
Mexico consumers miss out and
lower prices that are available
in all other states.
So Mister chair this bill
modernizes a statue by enabling
consumers to authorize charges
for non telecommunication
services on their telephone
bills.
One authorise charges would
continue to be illegal and
subject to enforcement hi the
PRC.
The some of you may recall this
bill passed the house
unanimously in nineteen in two
thousand twenty one in the two
twenty one long session but
unfortunately ran out of time
before it could pass the Senate
that happens to a lot of my
bills.
I urge you to complete the job
and passed Senate bill eighty
three the session thank you Mr
chair and members of the
committee.
Thank you for all of us are done
thank you Mr chairman happy
Valentine's day members of the
committee the current telephone
billing statute New Mexico is
twenty four years old has not
been updated since as we know
that industry has changed
rapidly over the last twenty
four years and continues to
change the statute it currently
provides important protections
to consumers because it prevents
charges on a telephone bill
service that were not authorized
by consumers this bill still
protects those protections but
the billing statute also
prevents charges on a phone bill
for non telecommunications even
when a customer is authorizing
those charges that may have been
the case in nineteen ninety nine
for that wasn't necessary but we
know that time to changed so
this bill is going to allow for
non telecommunication services
to be added to your phone bill
only authorized by the consumer
course if it's added it's not
authorized the PRC still has the
authority to come in and and
investigate and penalize those
by the violations before we move
on to our export I did want to
draw attention to the fiscal
impact report we're pleased that
we had responses from both the
public regulation commission and
the Attorney General to both
recognize the importance and
supported
the changes of the statute doing
so we're joined here today I Mr
do or work if we have any
specific questions I think we'll
go ahead just stand for
questions if you're ready thank
you the senators before we go to
committee for questions will to
the audience anybody here in
support of Senate bill eighty
three.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is mark with also New Mexico
registered lobbyists for the
rising but I wanted to because I
don't know if it's the weather
about.
The New Mexico chamber of
commerce does support this bill
and was authorized to see that
of the four hundred jobs she's
around but want to mention that
thank you Mr chair members of
the thank you we have anybody
on.
Four six.
Your.
That I.
What.
Senator.
Six
good afternoon chair members of
the committee.
My name is Lisa McCabe and I'm
here on behalf of C. T. I. eight
the trade association for the
wireless communications industry
in support of Senate bill eighty
three which of thanks New
Mexicans nineteen ninety nine
telephone billing statute this
bill seeks to modernize the
statute to take account of the
major changes in the telephone
technology over the past twenty
four years while continuing to
protect consumers this bill
amends New Mexico statutes to
allow consumers to put charges
on the total bills for services
like streaming video consumers
have a choice do this in forty
nine other states in the country
today consumers expect you want
the option to use the telephone
bills for services they can
receive using their devices.
The amended statute will
continue to protect consumers
from the billing of unauthorized
charges known as cramming a
practice the wireless industry
continues its work against.
As was stated the legislative
finance committees fiscal impact
report notes that the office of
the Attorney General stated that
it is common for
telecommunications providers to
offer subscriptions to non
telecommunications services and
that Senate bill eighty three
just clarifies that this
practice is not contrary to the
cramming and slamming Act the
wireless industry supports
passage of SB eighty three
comments New Mexico's efforts to
update the statute to allow
consumers to make choices
regarding their wireless bills.
And we also sent a letter in
support of the committees.
Thank you thank you.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee Rikki
Lee Chavez because eighteen T.
we also stand in strong support
of SB eighty three we agree with
all of that has been said by CTA
and the experts we also
appreciate this bodies work to
modernize are statutes and thank
you for your support and passage
of this important bill.
Thank you all right anybody in
opposition to the Senate bill
eighty three.
None.
Okay.
Right now of the committee.
So we would do that.
Most of for the past.
Second second.
To grow opposition to.
Senator Brandt yes Senator
Griggs.
Senator how to meal.
Senator Kernan.
Senator Lopez senator Sanchez.
Tallman.
Yes.
His.
Senator Wirth.
Senator Hamblen yes and Senator
Shendo yes we have unanimous.
I was just if you're thank you
members of the committee for
your support thank you thank you
for the.
Thank you so to one diamond and
have built.
No Sir we only get one help pass
the Senate finance at a time
okay all right.
That's right.
Do not just.
All right go ahead Senator thank
you Mr chairman Senator qureia
Hempel and I are bringing this
SB one ninety three forward
together we pass the rule on
budgets then bill and since then
we were up to twenty one yes Sir
we are.
The state one sorry you're
right.
Together we passed the rule
ombudsman bill which with this
time was one nine two three I
apologize and since and together
we've been committed to finding
ways to build on economic and
quality of life opportunities in
rural New Mexico this bill is a
three point five million dollars
annual credit for short line
rail lines which we use for
track we have an enhancement and
strategic industrial development
and enhancements there are
currently six short line
railroad companies in New Mexico
this incentive will not only
encourage their improvements to
the current railroad track new
businesses and potential winds
to the region the tax credit
requires investment by the
railroads first before any kind
of incentive is provided so for
every two dollars worth of
private investments there will
be a one dollar tax credit these
incentives will help promote
economic development
diversification drive drop
creation promote safe efficient
and cost effective
transportation.
I want to summarize before we
get started with the bill does
it's really two part series I
have an expert witness with ME
TJ Trujillo is going to speak to
the specifics of this but in
this two part there's a fifty
percent tax credit.
Have a five thousand dollars a
mile one million dollar cap per
year per project and that would
be offset by corporate tax or
personal income tax and then the
second part of the bill is a
credit for new rail lines so
that would care for any project
on any real road we can't
address specifics of the FIR
before we get started on on the
very last page on page nine of
the F. I. R. we try to visit
with the director of this to
kind of clear some things up
but.
On the policy principles of
course we know the program is
vetted it specifically talks
about how this is targeted and
none stated but I want to be
specific to the goals of the
bill missing crease capacity of
rail lines in New Mexico and to
drive economic opportunities in
rural New Mexico course it's
transparent and accountability
portion of that it is
quantifiable because there are
caps in place in this bill and
there is also a sunset clause
that isn't included in the bill
as far as effectiveness it it
does not duplicate federal
incentives in on on the
efficient part of this it says
allows for private into the into
the unlimited opportunities to
decrease state revenues which is
actually inaccurate because the
cap that's included in the bill
would prevent that so to get
into further details if you have
any question TJ treat Trujillo
is here to explain some more
specifics of this for a wind tax
credit.
Mr chairman members the
committee would actually on zoom
we have a couple of short line
people that are pre to serve
also as an expert for and in
particular the it's Laurie
McNichol and she's online and
she can answer some additional
questions I don't have much to
say here to answer questions I
want to make sure you knew that
we did have an expert online
Lauren McNichol.
Yeah.
Laura and other person I there's
another I think trouble tracking
to join us I think for right now
it's more of a treat more join
us but
We'll we'll have lower.
Okay great all right so with
that I will go to the audience
anybody here in support of
Senate bill two twenty one.
Sorry.
I wanted to be on the rostrum
this.
That or the services
this relative short row is a
critical component of our
operations down there Grant
County as you've heard me say
before one of the largest
employer in southwest New Mexico
this well it right here the we
have to offer Federal Trade
appropriations you know with the
biggest operation they come
everyday injection operation of
bring in for a million
appropriations within.
Ball so that we can choose their
operations bringing asset for
each
the US the the take a
concentrated electors sure you
are still for a tire on
operations are also bringing
products there so it's a and
they they do that four times I I
know the we've continued to
operation this is the real
crucial.
Rhumbline appropriations for
operation of this sort of thing
we can do to help.
improve or keep operations going
is reported to us so that's what
we said this the full support of
this bill.
Good luck.
Mr chairman members of the
committee rather religion love
is for being the center of you
know this a tax incentive
applied to be an SF does a
pleasure than partners to feed
our our system so for those
reasons we support this bill.
Representative images that's the
law.
For the.
economic development
professional.
This data from support will
provide relevant for.
Economic diversification in this
part of the state.
Thank you.
There anybody on all items okay
all right anybody no opposition
to a Senate bill two twenty one.
I
see no body on them okay we'll
go to committee.
One directs.
Thank you Richard.
The deal with this ammendment
for.
Having finished
okay but.
The question on page six of the
of the bill lines thirteen and
fifteen Mr chair
Percent.
If it's not the railroad.
Who's the owner or lessee of a
rail side impact is that a
common occurrence we're only
gash may be it could be the
mine mine's property who who
would that who would that be
repairs you know when you're the
railroad is.
You know they like to believe
the ranking of things is the
railroad dinners guide and use
some of the phone.
but is in this particular this
particular are there are there
introduce you actually own the
societies or the industrial for.
Mr chairman and senator grades
yes the money is another good
example there's also been some
conversation out at spaceport
America for for certain
expansion so in that case you
would have to either private
ownership or state ownership but
they would have to go through
but yes side rails on the side
yards are not necessarily owned
by a railroad company a short
one company.
Thank you Mr in center thank
thank you for that because I was
just one of those things that to
me.
You're usually it's it's
gestural roadshow.
I can see I guess where that
would be would be a deal and
then they would qualify for this
for the staff for coaches thank
you Mr thanks of.
Mr Chairman there was an
amendment that was brought to
your committee yesterday that is
before you it makes it makes
very minor changes both their on
page six right Senator Griggs
said mentioned and also won the
very first page it says before
you.
Can I get a motion to approve
the minutes of the.
K. almost for a the amendment
Senator Kernan.
Second by Senator Griggs.
Any opposition to that.
Question on the amendment okay
good thank you Mr chair so.
Yes basically now all the files
and folders.
S. C. rail siding adjacent any
railroad the state to qualify
for the current.
What what what because of this
what what is that I'm just
trying to make sure I understand
what.
Mister chairman Senator worth a
minute I'm gonna defer to the
expert witnesses onerous to why
this language is necessary to
expand the bill.
Mr chairman members of the
committees are worth
in conversations some of the
analysts that that two things
one.
To one of the questions earlier
as you as you're drawing in a a
new rail do not poverty some
checkerboard going into a
particular industrial facility
like a money that's where you
may have a cell property in
there that you may be leasing as
a shoreline or depends on the
business arrangement as you go
into it
for this this particular
amendment the analysts thought
that we should make sure that we
were specific that in order for
a role in the state is affected
we
so.
make sure they have operations
in the state of New Mexico was
what the concern was that was
raised we decided to address
with the amendment you have Mr
Chairman the concern about this
basically says that any owner of
a rail siding on any road in any
place in the state now gets a
tax deduction I don't think that
has anything there's no
limitations a class two or class
three the way this is Matt
rafted as I'm reading.
Because if there's two clauses
under the compatibility
requirements.
Twenty three I think there is a
real road classified by the
federal surface transportation
board's request last three road
located in St and then this
clause at an additional warrant
owner or less citing adjacent to
such Rowe limited the class two
and three by this ammendment now
saying if you're the owner of a
rail siding.
Adjacent to any real road in the
state.
You're basically being granted
tax exempt I don't know that
that's what you.
What do you do want to that but
that seems to be but.
Mr chairman of Senator Wirth the
my understanding is they may
have been certain properties
adjacent they may have switching
are other factors so these were
the bill temporary rail we'll go
through to be able to adjust
four eight it's not as part of
the main rail goes through so
it's meant to essentially a
group incorporate the we had
explained to me different limbs
of the tree that come off as
you're going into a particular
facility this chart get all that
but the way you got drafted I
think that D. N. S. up I mean.
If they've got is the early want
to fix and get a tax credit for
it.
This prevents this allows them
to do so I just think this goes
too far then I see what you're
trying to do we are trying to
make sure it was for those.
Two or three but that's not what
this the way this is worded I
think you're creating tax credit
for any.
And maybe someone else reason
differently but it just looks to
me like that's that's a much
broader.
So I'm yeah.
Mr chairman Center were perhaps
after online twenty four.
On page one
The city such Rowe wrote of a
class two or three maybe that's
the additional then that we can
put to clarify see what you're
saying are ari was up up up on
top the card because this is
intended to deal with class two
or three New Mexico doesn't have
actually class to we just have
class three of roads in New
Mexico and that's that's were
intending to to get to so much I
think I think you don't need the
amendment because of the chase
into such a real world I think
that does it limited the glass
to agree I think this is just me
looks like it creates.
Much bigger deal so
Mister chairman Senator.
Again I was trying to
accommodate the analyst in red
and I don't necessarily disagree
with use of the equipment not
needed I see your point on.
Senator Griggs.
The floor.
I have
would.
The.
Okay.
Okay we're still amendment I'm
sorry.
All righty any discussion for
the discussion on the amendment.
I know that that we have a
recommendation of not.
No.
Include the amendment Senator
Candace Gould the amendment.
Well that was a recommendation I
don't know the sponsor with the.
Yes yes Sir we we we were trying
to be amenable to the analyst of
this committee fight by agreeing
to those changes the way the
senator Wirth read this back I
would agree that we need further
language to clarify care it's
class two or class three or just
don't make the amendment at all
and so we support Corning
Senator Sanchez.
Mr Chairman up Senator Wirth has
a lot more years of parsing
through built in house judiciary
and Senate Judiciary.
Zero.
Well I'm
through.
Okay so so.
Page one and six or no longer
on the amendment okay with all
that okay so okay the enrollment
has been withdrawn so we're back
on the bill as presented without
the amendment okay so there will
be committee on the bill any
questions.
I know this is a tax credit so
what we've done here is here the
bill but we don't take any
action of see what's coming over
from the house in terms of our
credits and so forth so.
But we do have a question
Senator.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
for.
This for.
I try to find a reason to that.
this.
Trying to restrict the number of
track tax credits in this.
There's another one that's why
we.
Read the situation we are.
To.
The tax reform on this thing
that so what's the problem the
second you don't have to answer
that was just a rhetorical
question.
So what's the problem we're
trying to solve here.
So Mr chairman and senator Tom
and I think that overall it's
the expansion incentivizing it
railroad lines I think it's
really unique in my district
that I'm coach for both railroad
companies Senator Hemphill I
both I railroad companies and
then also entities that have a
interest in spaceport America
because we had like the newest
the new wave of technology
transportation and yet we still
go back to to some of the oldest
rail lines here that are older
than statehood in New Mexico and
I think it's amazing they still
use that the mines there and
Silvercity I will oil and gas
industry that still dependent on
realligned and and to
incentivize expansions and and
also renovations on existing
lines that have not been kept up
it's it's a tax credit for them
to still invest in the oldest
rail system we have you know
here here in New Mexico thank
you for that is.
Mr chair
This is.
These rural lines are under
construction of the people how
should say if you get this tax
credit we're not constructs new
member.
Mr chairman and senator Tom
windows and there's been several
entities that expressed an
interest I need you know some
kind of financial X. incentive
to do so and did you want to
elaborate on that TJ or.
There's two primary existing
ones right now Senator the one
your bonds office New Mexico
dealing with Texas and New
Mexico right away comes down
from the two minds goes down
into to having that goes up and
around kind of connects to the
class ones there's one in Santa
Fe actually short one that
actually qualifies it and for
this particular rebuild
there's one in the east far
eastern southeast part of the
state the Texas in New Mexico
right away so the three existing
ones that capture those your
existing ones and then there has
been talk a there's some over on
the western part of the state
our goal Escalante project was
been talk of trying to expand
rail from Farmington down into
Gallup for grants and and those
are so yes there's been some
talk in different areas that
we're talking about a class
three the reason class one class
two class three or based on the
economics of the real system
class ones BNSF U. P. R. the big
guys these are the ones that do
the the short spurs that come
out from there there are not
those class won't necessarily do
for our smaller projects through
Folks have and and and I would
have this actually this is a
bill is going on in different
states that we're looking to try
to match what other states are
doing to be able to be
competitive to get the dollars
sure to New Mexico for the short
line spurs a come off thank you
for your answer that's all I
have Mister chairman thank you
again for bringing this bill
for.
All right so thank you thank you
Mr chairman we appreciate the
current yes thank you thank.
Thank you all right Senate bill
ninety seven.
Yeah.
Well actually will.
The June.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee
The store the.
Get myself organized here and
across the hall to the wrong
room I was on this committee was
in three eleven for like ten
years so.
Why can't get in my head that
you are meeting in this room so
thank you very much of here with
you on Senate bill ninety seven
you do have a committee
substitute that we would like
for you to maybe allow us to
talk about today I do have an
expert witness with me here.
Sorry.
And I can introduce and whenever
you're ready me to get rolling
here.
Just on Senate bill ninety seven
to pass on committee said
percent will not.
Session purposes thank you have
a motion of second.
Seven but unable.
All right.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee thank you Senator
Kernan so essentially what the
bill does is it authorizes the
state transportation department
there was some a lot of
discussion before we arrived in
front of you today with the land
office and a few others just to
make sure that we knew what what
direction we're trying to move
this and this is a broadband
bills that's related easements
but it's to allow the
transportation commission to
make a set of rules or to set
some rules that are going to
dictate the conditions under
which the installment of
broadband internet fiber lines
microwave towers and other
infrastructure can be placed on
under over or across public
highways in the bill would waive
the fees for leasing costs for
infrastructure that might be to
areas that are on the unserved
or underserved the actions we
took Mr chairman and members of
the committee and several years
of the.
Say this is a two thousand
twenty one to create the officer
broadband access expansion and
the connect New Mexico
Action Act excuse me defined
under served and unserved by
going to those if you'd like me
to but but I think I would
probably on the with those are
generally I do have to level is
here with me today and a few
others in the audience I can
have come up if we need some
additional expert help on some
of the stuff drew is with the
office of broadband access and
expansion he's the operations
manager in that office that he
has twenty years of private
sector business experience and
he has spent the last four years
working with the state of New
Mexico at the state personnel
office in labor relations and
the New Mexico department
transportation as a project
manager so great combination
there the whole to be As an
English literature and history
from universities of Colorado in
boulder an MBA from university
of New Mexico very very well
qualified I worked very closely
with this office a couple of
times already Mr Chairman
they're working very very hard
to get this work done and
they're the ones that brought
this bill forward in the
audience I do have the director
of the office of broadband
access and expansion Kelly
Slagle then directors here and
we have some folks from the
department transportation if we
need to talk to them so since
that's what the bill does and
I'm gonna ask them I expect to
see a few things before we get
started.
Mr chair members of the
committee under level is
operations manager for a ovaj
duties right of way or key
corridors of access for
utilities and for ISPs to bring
broadband not just to
communities along interstates
but also the communities across
New Mexico as such buying due to
work closely together on
broadband issues one of the by
goals is to provide universal
access for all New Mexicans
DOT's ability to waive rights
way fees for projects that
provide broadband services to
unserved and underserved
communities removes barriers for
ISPs to build broadband across
the state as many of the
committee members may no one of
five New Mexicans are unserved
or unserved underserved these
communities are often role which
includes many tribal sovereign
nations however there are still
many communities even within
urban areas or close to urban
areas that also meet these
definitions of unserved and
underserved by three or
broadband us the cost personal
access across New Mexico's two
point five billion to five point
five billion lift is a big lift
and passage of SB ninety seven
will provide buying
collaboration with department
transportation other tool to
make that lived a little easier.
Thanks so thank you Mr love us
and so Mister chairman last
thing that I mention here before
we send it back to you as in no
way does is give the state
transportation department for
these purposes power of eminent
domain or anything like that and
it does not affect private
property also want to make that
real clear and there's no
appropriation the requesting
here to simply just give them
the ability to do this.
Thank you.
Okay
We have of anybody in the
audience support of Senate bill
ninety seven.
Well done.
The committee John from.
Important.
Patience
just a the the so
I would we stand for.
This.
Similar passcode five six years
ago.
Company a lot of a lot of calls
to.
I
you.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is captain
Kirk Sheila and I am here in the
past we of the connect New
Mexico broadband council I serve
on the council as a member and
we are supporting this bill
because it will go a long way
for the reasons that you've
already heard especially in the
harder to reach areas in
communities they really want to
live fares and get broadband out
throughout the entire state for
access for all thank you.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee my name is the of work
Legislative Council for Verizon
also registered lobbyist we
support the legislation
sponsored by major
Representative the and thank you
for bringing four for the
reasons already described the
bill will facilitate and
expedite the expansion broadband
service in New Mexico the bill
represents an important step in
bringing more broadband services
to New Mexico consumers for
these reasons we support the
bill passed a committee vote yes
thanks again to the sponsor.
Thank.
Mr chair members of the
committee good afternoon of our
internal from the State Land
Office we support the substitute
to just be ninety seven I want
to thank Senator Padilla
Representative Chandler on the
house side for listening to be
responsive to our concerns we
look forward to working with L.
B. A. T. director Schlegel on
expanding broadband access as it
as it needs to costs because the
thank you.
Presentation I chairman members
of the committee to assess
Espinoza right so this is the
New Mexico technology council
and stand as far as part of the
legislation this is just helping
remove barriers us that we can
increase investment property
thank you.
Mr Chairman rubber of the half
of can cause allergic Mexico
the question serves twelve
thousand customers in their
service area we strongly support
this bill.
Photos of products within the
legislature goes.
All right William the assume.
Go ahead.
Yes my name is Bob Caroline I'm
a member of veterans and
military families office we
support Senate bill ninety seven
largely because it facilitates
the expansion broadband service
is a many veterans that we have
living in rural communities so
our office recommended you do
have to termination from the
committee on SB ninety seven
thank you.
Give.
Good afternoon again Mr chairman
members of the committee
Rikki Lee Chavez on behalf of
eighteen T. we also stand in
strong support we support the
initiative to expand rural
broadband access and we
appreciate the collaboration of
the agencies and archer support
thank you so much.
The representative yes okay
thank you anybody in opposition
of Senate bill ninety seven.
And will soon also okay now we
go to committee.
Wirth thank you Mr chair so I
just want to understand.
So the substitute takes out a
section and previously granted
land commissioner in the right
reasons walk us through why.
That ability thank you it was
something that we thank you Mr
chairman and and Mr for leader
we we actually started that way
we file the bill that we got a
lot of feedback from the land
office I know that they have
some folks here today I think
you probably address this a
little bit better on the he is
going to come up in the other
room with me in the other room
that we were in the office thank
you very much for coming up.
And if you introduce yourself
and.
Mr chair members of the
committee similarly Stewart
deputy commissioner of
operations at the Land Office so
our concern was were controlled
by the enabling act.
We gonna make this.
Our concern was that we were
controlled by the enabling act
which requires us to generate
money so although he was
conferring.
discretion for us to waive fees
that was something that legally
we could not do so that's why we
work with this one.
To be removed but I would point
out that all right we have a
rural rate of five dollars five
cents per ride it's about fifty
two dollars per year for a mile
and we already have a discounted
rate and the commissioners
instructed the agency to
expedite broadband applications
and work with applicants are
excellent so we're strong in
support of the.
The purpose of the bill but that
provision was legally
challenging for us so Mr
Chairman and Mr leader so while
the land office is doing a great
job of supporting the work of
helping us to move broadband
long it just made more sense to
do it this way.
That makes sense.
I did the next question just
we're.
The transportation commission.
Nor do I control.
So it's a different requests of
previously the last look at the
original bills and granted.
Again the land.
Commission the right to.
Rant easements which of course
is now we're saying that they
can prescribe it by rule so that
give them the ability to grant
easements way that strappedwith
a wood for this purpose Mr
chairman leader they would for
this purpose you will I got an
expert here also comes.
Good afternoon chair and senator
Munoz Thomas Wyman deputy
general counsel for the
department transportation I was
helpful in drafting some of the
changes that we did in this bill
that we wouldn't actually be
granting easements this just
gives us the ability to waive
the fees that we would charge
for letting the broadband
companies into the department's
rights of way or other property.
So again just make sure so.
You are getting an easement
before now you're not getting
these that's what you're getting
the fees waived but that's
sufficient I guess it would Mr
chairman and senator Wirth the
the work that it would be in
this instance of other things
that they do they would charge
then we had a huge debate with
the department transportation
about a year to ago with the
fees they were wanting to charge
this would just you know for
these purposes especially to
underserved areas it'll get it
out there it'll make the
investment
a lot more palatable if we go
out down this road this
represents Mr chairman again
these are you know I think
you're going to yes you are you
coming over Judiciary order all
our grind is too much but I
guess it's an interesting
question so you so you've got
the right to have your lines.
And I'll.
Put into their infrastructure
you're not being granted decent.
So so again but that that's got
to be that's that's a decision
for all the companies that want
to use it yep and what and what
the Mr chairman and senator what
they would be allowed to use
that particular line for they
have to work all that out the
agreement they would put
together headed the agency you
are facing Mr chair Senator
that's correct this is a right
of way use agreement it is not
an easement easements imply it
the statutory real or legal or
illegal right to property and
we're not giving that to these
private companies this public
rights of way remain under the
control of the department
transportation so it is not an
easement it is strictly a right
of way use agreement area and
they enter that at their own
risk if if they don't like our
terms the going private land
somewhere else Mr chairman Mr
leader are you heard several of
them stand today rarely do I
come to see you and have so many
people in agreement on one thing
and so it was it was very
interesting that they were
comfortable with with already
reviewing the substitutes that
and if you're not no I think
that's great I mean again this
is this is obviously from the
state's perspective
again they've got to make sure
that this works for the state it
sounds like to get us and it's
not a legal right to be in there
so private companies could get
removed it for some reason
something needs to get moved all
those different.
Things that come when you have a
legal easement versus just I use
it.
Just like the Mr chairman Mr
leader just like the companies
making it big business decision
to do this or not state will
have to make in in in their
agreement I'm system it'll have
to be laid out what happens when
something is to happen to that
line so that everyone's on the
same page and there isn't
service interruptions during.
Thank you Mr senator Sanchez.
Thank you Mr chair I just have a
question and I like to build
stuff with the I was gonna ask
Mr chair Senator so all the fees
are where the deal to be waving
the fees and the land commission
we waving the fees.
Mr chairman and senator the D.
O. T. would have the ability to
waive the fees.
So Mister chair center I'm just
of all I mean is this like a
huge number of fees were waving
with some dollar amount
ballpark.
You know Mister chairman
Senator.
Maybe.
We'll learn more about that as
we start should this make it get
it get a signature from the
governor we will we will figure
out you know if we don't know
exactly who want to partake in
this in this activity just yet.
Thank you Mr chair Senator.
Regis.
Thank you Mr chair Senators DOT
right now charge fees for
pipelines telephone telegraph
and all the other the other
things that can be placed in the
in the right way additional Mr
Chairman.
In the Mister chairman Senator
we did not for pipelines and for
for PRC regulated utilities
which which can include like New
Mexico gas company we do not
charge fees and even for most
oil and gas industry
participants we do not charge
fees currently and we don't have
we don't have very solid
agreements in place with those
companies that generally if it's
public utility regulated
consumer rate regulated we do
not charge fees.
And make sure and Senator
But they're required to charge
fees for use of the right away
if it's not a public utility or
is that to find anywhere.
Mr Chairman Mr chairman and then
Senator previously to passage of
the amendment to the
constitution enabling under the
anti donation clause you
chapters new section eight which
allows for household services to
be exempt the state may expend
resources for let companies use
our rights of way now without
charging fair market value so by
the passage of the
constitutional amendment last
fall we now can let private
companies whatever there are
songs they're serving Council
services and for the community
benefit we can with the rights
of way for free.
We can waive the fees Mr
Chairman this is in the swelling
of broadband all the other stuff
I don't want to open that can
of.
Mr chair Senator I think they
should this was a big store and
bought the dish the show more
about the fact that
you were trying to expand
broadband but to put it in
lights away they were looking at
charging
Going right sure I can reject we
work with that ladies definition
is which would be a a dramatic
slowdown to the expansion of of
broadband in the in the state
so what we're what we're doing
here is is important
I'd like to to ask Miss Mister
chairman Senator you on on page
three we talk about may waive
the fee.
For which we may raise the fees
for just underserved for
function for locations is that
is it really.
What we what we need to do or do
we need to do do we need to
require on the way to use
anywhere for broadband expansion
the cares with you know without
that we don't we may not get to
what we're we're doing still we
may go we may go help some from
remote locations but we may not
help some locations that are
you know smaller communities but
not not remote.
And and Mr chair Senator maybe
you could to tell me hello
heather gonna make the
determination on when they may
raise the fee when the state
So I would say you know a market
or market conditions and returns
of it on investment are going to
be how these companies will make
decisions if they want to play
in this environment or not there
is probably no zero rate of
return on investment with
underserved areas right now it's
unfortunate just that's reality
and so if we don't make a change
like this it would probably be
we would probably be talking
about this very same subject for
underserved areas in two years
now again hopefully we've seen
some progress
and in the second portion of
your comments what was the
second question Mr she urged
it's the the NMAA way have had
told so may or may not around
as a goal so Mister chairman
Senator that there's going to be
publicly and like any other rule
making process there will be a
rulemaking activity that will
occur public feedback and
comments from both consumers and
you know companies that might
want to operate in this
environment other government
agencies whether putting this
together so I think you'll see
rules come very quickly on this
matter and that's how those will
more likely be determined.
And Mr chairman and ensure you
know I'm.
When this first started popping
up here we got a lot to lecture
called lots of of text messages
from communities like Tularosa
basin telephone down and then
Alamogordo and you know we're
talking and we're not talking
about
under sure sure much down there
maybe those communities are you
know some of the in the top ten
largest in the state Alamogordo
and stuff that the cost to try
to do what needed to be
was going to be excessive to
where some of the stuff could
happen if D. O. T. was going to
charge the numbers that they
were talking about charging at
the time.
And so that it's it's this part
that worries me a little bit Mr
chair Senator not that that that
I don't believe we need to do
something to help support the
bill I just I'm I'm concerned
about that and how to get past
that and Mr chair Senator I hold
we can we can figure that out
because we can't apparently the
broadband guys don't want to be
treated like utilities show if
they were regulated utilities
and they could be they get
access right away for nothing
but without without that they
have to be charged fees that
are.
You know.
Really I think we we too much
for what we're trying to
accomplish because we're.
We're we're stopping.
Through the charging.
What Senator pretty is been
working so hard for for years on
on broadband expansion and if we
can put those lines in the right
away it's very difficult to get
where you need to be be going
show
Mr insurer there's kind of a
little rattle around the world
but we need to be we need to be
doing there's a little different
than this.
But this may be the only thing
we have a so thank you Mr
chairman thank center Mr
chairman and sent this at one
small little thing to to your
comments and that is that that
the rural telephone companies
have other supports that they
receive in order to to to
provide the services that they
provide they have to report on
it and and that's the real
telecommunications act and it's
the rule universal service fund
that helps to sort of help
balance some of the costs that
they have that might not right
away be affected by which you
called out in the legislation so
there's a number of ways to help
them succeed as well.
Sure sure sure work from prone
to motion.
Show some of those.
To hold program discussion for
Your available for thank you.
Right.
I have a couple.
Right of the questions
We're talking about rural
underserved areas this is more
of a question FOR D. O. T. of.
Senator.
When deal to get to right away
from tribes.
And is there.
You know what was the value of
that how does that work and now
we're us deal T..
You know to waive those fees on
public highways which most of
them if you go to rural areas
going to be to tribal lands how
is that going to work or how is
that.
Thank you Mr chairman of just my
DOT expert in Mr chairman of so
the way the tribal properties
have the way to with the
department has roads on tribal
properties right now is by
easement.
So we do not have control over
state interstate forty across
the Laguna pueblo or out on the
Navajo Nation we only have our
right to be there for
transportation purposes within
the tribal easement so so this
will this will not apply to any
of our any of our land it's not
in our jurisdiction which is
ultra sovereign tribal property
so we of course if if we're post
I tried.
Want to get on to the rights of
way we first if it involves to
sovereign nations we go to them
and say Hey just hear something
was going to cost you your land
in our right of way on the
easement and that you know
what's your take on it we we
stay completely out of that
other than we get their
authority commission first and
then if they if they waive off
on it and we we agree
all right I appreciate that he
said that the.
So that.
Two passed to promote motion for
the past Senator Kernan second
by Senator Tallman.
Go ahead and take growth.
Senator Brandt yes Senator
Griggs.
Senator Hotmail.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Lopez.
Senator Sanchez yes Senator
Tallman yes Senator Wirth yeah
Senator Hamblen
Senator Shendo yes we have
unanimous vote.
The past thank you very much Mr
chairman members of the
committee I'm looking forward to
my next this this bill yes.
Thank you the one fourteen
senator Neville.
This these.
Server and.
Senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr chairman Mr
chairman give you a little story
Senator Griggs decided one day
he's going to get in as Aston
Martin and cruising around
Alamogordo and he's going to
forgo his golf game one day and
he had his Walther PPK on these
bills and he's wandering around
and he does these things planted
a little bit the two sides to go
have lunch to address back in
elem rotary knows he can't go to
the outback restaurant because
they have a full liquor license
but he knows a little truck stop
down the road there they serve
great hamburger she's not going
to drink you Senator anything
illegal but he goes in there and
get use hamburger as is checking
out to go back in these last get
back in the session peoples's
code up to get his wallet and
the deputy sheriff over there
notices that he's carrying a gun
in this restaurant and Senator
Griggs has been a big advocate
and work in the liquor laws
didn't realize that these guys
have just added a provision in
the law that says that for what
five hundred dollars or
something like that they can now
sell New Mexico spirits there
now not just they have a beer
and wine license it was legal
before twenty one nineteen
twenty one for two thousand
twenty one get a ten years of
etcetera he realizes all of a
sudden that he has now committed
if you look at the last line of
the bill a fourth degree felony
and he didn't realize wages into
so this is just to try to
rectify the situation so that
Senator Griggs not to jail the
necessarily for doing something
that he didn't realize was wrong
and that's all or part of the
story that's a true story.
This is yes.
But as it is one of the
advocates of the liquor law
changes he's he's which should
have been very well aware of
that you look a last line of on
page three of the bill for three
felony
and that was unintended because
he thought he was going to
appear in one stroke so that's
what I'm trying to do is make it
by adding three words on page
whatever it is
It's two
ninety two yes it by adding
those three words owe money
eighteen page three of and
scratch scratching only he would
now be legal to walk in this
restaurant and the follow the
other rules and so forth and
would not be guilty of fourth
degree felony so that's all Mr
thank you senator Senator is one
of the few distort.
Mr chair and in Centerville may
be you know we may be
embellishing things a little bit
but all in all the direction of
of liquor laws in the discussion
about that which created the the
type B. libations and then the
New Mexico spirits license.
Fit the the criteria he's he's
discussing these changes tie
in to the establishment of that
that license which is a sixty
forty food alcohol.
Ratio.
So he's actually pretty right
those are the.
He doesn't have any owner Martin
of and that's pretty.
Okay all right thank you the
board center that's all Mr K. so
we're going to audience the body
here in support of Senate bill
one fourteen.
Zoom also.
Okay anybody in opposition of
Senate bill one fourteen.
early.
Some of them I can introduce
yourself to the.
Chairman and members of the
committee my name is Paula
McLean I'm a resident Santa Fe
a retired teacher and vice
president New Mexico it's to
prevent gun violence.
And I'm looking at the other
side Senator Griggs.
In my testimony
Let me see if I'm correct this
bill will allow.
Lethal weapons in an
establishment that sells liquor.
Wicker contains the highest
alcohol content forty percent by
volume more than wine or beer.
Researchers from UC Davis and I
have a research if you'd like.
States that in any given month
an estimated eight point nine to
eleven point seven million fire
alarms owners.
Binge drink.
This drinking and drugs drinking
are more common among far our
owners than the general
population for then there is
many alcohol associated this
from far or violence as is.
As in motor vehicle accidents
a two thousand eleven study
found that excessive consumption
of alcohol was associated with
eighty six fold increase in the
risk of fire arms suicide rates.
I have family and friends that
visit me often on all year and
they come because of the law the
love of the art in the shopping
in Santa Fe they also come
because of their love the
restaurant scene here.
If guns are allowed in bars and
I will not be putting my friends
and family in harm's way where
loaded guns.
And alcohol are prevalent I
think we need a checkup from the
neck up This Is Your insanity
New Mexico is ranked eighteenth
in gun violence in my opinion
this bill if it passes may move
this up to not Alaska the first
place.
New Mexico I'm sorry if the
governor is truly interested in
making New Mexico state for
state passing bills yes there
why creative potential of our
situation keep guns out of
liquor establishments we really
want to put patrons and
employees in the system is.
At this point yes for.
Thank you thank you.
What else.
Four percent.
What.
Can you hear me yes.
My name is far profanity I'm a
retired engineer in Alice's work
for ten years at the NMDOH and
also work with New Mexicans to
prevent them I
was just the one fourteen
because it is down a slippery
slope of allowing more
opportunities for firearms
include offerings in this case
out of all to be in the same
place bars and restaurants
selling spirits.
This.
Hello okay so the risks.
any public was fear that they
might shooter when they come to
enjoy themselves at these
establishments.
Right now is the time to look
for ways to reduce that here.
Ample research as you see FIR
supports that position.
I urge you to vote no on this
bill I think that this is the
time we might want to provide
resources to help inform the
public better to the so that
situations why the senator
reduces account will be
happening to any thank you.
Thank you.
More.
Yes Representative committee
members can you hear me yes.
Yes it is Albuquerque resident
and night stand support of this
bill thank you.
All right that it okay we are to
go to committee.
In the questions of the
committee.
Percent of bill one fourteen.
I would just talking
to and
So I mean again this is a policy
decision obviously and I I do
think.
You know in this particular
case.
I actually like the unintended
cut you and I disagree on the
unintended consequence that
happened here because I do think
I I I certainly know that I
wasn't thinking about this bill
when we were asked to look a
reform bill having said that I
was in this room sitting in that
chair we passed funds and
restaurants and I know how that
you were both there I think it
was I think no it wasn't your
bill's sentiments Center money
else's bill in two thousand and
nine and I didn't support that
bill and I've and again realize
that there's an an opt out in
their and many restaurants in
Santa Fe use the opt out of the
opt out because of some I mean
it just it's hard for
restaurants to to take that
position so.
Again I personally don't think
we should have guns in
restaurants that have beer and
wine but that's what's the
current law I see this and I I
hear what you're saying about
the the.
The person that walks in and
doesn't realize that the law
changed seems to me that we have
to do exactly what we did we
change the law to allow guns and
restaurants we need to educate
people and that would be the
federal way so that they
understand that.
They can go to the restaurant
but it's got spiritus.
Workers are cider in the
restaurant they just can't.
Through the care itself and
again I understand it's just a
we've got a different
philosophical.
Kind of underpinning and why you
support doing the bill and I
understand that the logic for
you bringing this bill but it's
just one of those things where I
just got a state for me this is
actually a positive unintended
consequence and obviously the
the the the establishment could
make the decision well I'm not
gonna bring in that because of
the clientele that I have here
I'm gonna leave things where
they are not going to and sell
spirits liquor or cider that
forget that new license I mean
it's another business owners yet
so I just want to lay that out I
mean I don't really have a
question I understand I
understand why you're bringing
in I'm just from from for me one
of those unintended consequences
I think.
You know it's all the change
that was made that I actually
think move this in a positive
direction but that's the policy
choice that we have to make vote
on the bill thank you Mr
chairman effective that we live
in different communities with
different cultural values and
that's the that's the issue and
it's not something that bothers
me personally but it is a
concern that was brought to me
actually but some of the law
enforcement folks that they said
will all of a sudden we have a
situation where we might be
seeing some unintended
consequences by virtue of this
bill and what we do to read nor
nor do we whatever so they said
let's get clarification if you
want to strike beer and wine out
that's one option that's not
what I would want to on the
other hand I wanted to try to
make it work
we don't inadvertently throw
somebody in jail that really
didn't necessarily intend to be
doing anything wrong.
So.
Senator right from the start.
Thank you Mr chairman you know
again as a search engine it is
to consequence we do that long
Graham do you have to Mexico
clean it up and you know I
appreciate the testimony of
those in opposition and
recognize that we do have some
issues and I don't bills that
for me I don't think this is
this is that particular issue
that's creating something the
problems the other Grumman bills
are trying to address and I
think that's where the focus on
the I have not heard of.
Where site I'm sure maybe there
are examples of something long
is that is created a major
problem in a and establishment
that I think if you look at are
they talk a lot about
you know the other areas
communities where where the
really issues are with related.
Dance and I don't think it's in
our restaurants I maybe wrong
that and again I think seems a
bit unfair that you know just
legislators we're creating
balance and tentatively without
to.
And education is nice but.
I I think it would be really a
something we are consider that
we've made that a problem and I
think that we're fixing that
that's just not.
Senator of bricks.
Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman yeah I
think it's interesting that the
you know you're on willing to
make a felony out of threatening
to shoot up the school.
But we're gonna make a felon out
of someone who goes into a
restaurant never touches a drop
of alcohol they just happen to
service because my understanding
service will threaten for wrong
is that if you are carrying
concealed or otherwise and you
for taking an alcoholic
beverages that's already illegal
that's illegal it is correct so
and actually the of our talks
about that thanks very clear
that the it is illegal to area
I.
And have a drink so you've got
someone that's going into a
restaurant
it's very dangerous to leave
your firearm in your vehicle
because most firearms that get
into the hands of people
illegally are stolen from
vehicles is that correct Mr
grant as more police officers
that's the number one way to get
on the street.
So if you're actually caring we
have to accord .
you want to keep the fire on
your person because otherwise
it's the as a higher like with
the school from the.
and so what we go in there you
meet at the restaurant of
touching alcohol because you
know as a concealed carry over
and when you go through that
class the the pretty much found
that into your brain you can
also job always very inspiring.
And so we're returning to
fellow.
But it called and threatened to
the school and one.
That's not a valid option so I
think our that that common
sense.
I would say that Commission make
felon of someone.
Still cared for me.
Who's gone through all the
training doesn't touch the
alcohol.
He wants to go use the restroom.
So that is
But I think this makes a lot of
sense were the ones to change
the law to allow.
Restaurants to add these other
lookers
we're the ones in the fifties of
aligned with for our lives.
Are
there that's that's my opinion
I think the the FIR.
I read through this actually
close on the eight.
Because of my office on the
computer and the studies are
actually very inconclusive.
Just to.
Whether there's an issue at all.
Hello a lot of states have
started doing could still carry.
partly because the spring forest
holes we have to.
and
A lot of these studies it's very
inclusive communities.
Allowing people to carry
restaurants is not the role
model have a seat in the
increasing for our.
I know that when I look at
caring securing conceal carry
bills.
Ten years ago it's not one
through loans for one more
census to step outside if you
member that because our work.
But
News and so.
Just looking at some of the
through but you know.
When I look at that there wasn't
a single folder in New Mexico
the governments are.
So.
Background check to make sure
that the folks who have to carry
licenses good to go if you don't
have one sorry I.
So I I think it's already
covered by our law the concern
for a while I understand
people's personal feelings about
is just on just thank you Mr
chairman thank you Senate bill
for.
You Senator X..
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator one want to be clear
what what the Senator is bring
in is a bill dealing with what
we classified as type B.
restaurant licensure.
And in tight the restaurant
licenses have.
Senator restrictions on the home
page there's sixty forty food
alcohol
it closes at eleven o'clock
there's a certain number of
drinks an individual can
actually be sure that believe in
the in laws will show this
season this is not the
relationship saying as you're
used to for rush Roch this
licensed workers were set up
show.
New gas change mom and pops
could compete against apple.
Could compete against Chiles
could can compete against.
Big time national change but H.
it's not Mr chair and and
senator and and
You know those listening it's
not a our relations it's not a
location where you're you're
gonna be able to come in and
shipped and drank and drove
it it's not it's not set up to
be that
show I I think some of that the
age is unfounded but obviously
it seems you can't you can't
drink it anyway according to
have an the licensure Senator
mission Brandt
Stage with the but I don't I
don't believe there's a there's
an issue with you know with
passing the bill in the you're
you're talking about someone
going into a ball conventional
with the selection choose years
it's not a bar locations show
were sure thank you Mr Mr
chairman shin.
Thank you.
They don't have any what else on
the list so who's in charge of
the committee committee tassel
to for the past by Senator
Kernan subsection second by
Senator Brandt.
Going to grow.
Senator Brandt yes Senator
Griggs yeah Senator had a meal.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Lopez.
Senator Sanchez yes.
Senator Tallman.
No.
Senator Wirth no.
Senator Hamblen the.
Senator Shendo yes.
So we have I talked with.
We have five yes I know this is.
Judiciary is that.
Right after you make need to
make another motion of.
To to be able to
also go head to grow.
Senator Brandt no.
Senator Griggs level.
Senator Hotmail.
Senator Kernan up.
Senator Lopez yes.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator Tallman yes.
Senator Wirth yes.
Senator Hamblen yes.
Senator Shendo no.
Hi.
I.
Have you read can let it go the
Judiciary thousand the would you
like me to be beat up twice.
Okay.
Pro have to pick a new character
of if you.
Of
aspen rec.
We have a motion for the yes or
NO record.
Second Senator Griggs.
All right or login.
Okay.
Senator Browne yes.
Senator Griggs yes.
Senator Hotmail.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Lopez.
Sanchez yes Senator Tallman.
Senator Wirth no.
Senator Hamblen.
And Senator Shendo yes I okay so
we have six yess and one of
those.
Thank you Mr.
Looking to distribute that I.
You might get a new.
It's a.
flags are so.
Of
the you have another bill
Senator a do this to this one
might be a little more favorable
I don't know I an expert or not
supposed to Charlie mark is my
experts yes and medical issues
sorry to
submit a name the Duke yes he
was going to have some of those
I think we have somebody those
cases are on the experts in this
area all right go ahead Senator
this this is a simple bill that
repeals one section it's of one
two or three line bill.
That section is in the county I
are the statute.
On the municipal I. R. B.
statute does not have this in
here so they're not consistent
if you want an I. R. B. in the
city you don't have to worry
about competition if you want to
hire be the county if there's
somebody in cities and like you
then they can file of and have
this hearing is spelled out in
sections that's for fifty nine
fifteen and I can read it to you
if you want if you want to be
bored for a minute or two and if
I have an expert witness on
allow him to our current it is
to speak.
So.
Go ahead and have that
individual citizens of those
big.
Mr chairman members of the
committee can you hear me yes
okay.
My name is Gerry to check for a
hundred in the Santa creation of
from the secure all along the US
Mexico border we were creating
companies into the national
based L. give you specific
examples of.
Hello in the.
We're seeing municipal staff for
I'll give you an example I have
we have plastic injections
company here in the federation
of the they
came in and did not realize fire
when we establish themselves
twelve years ago if we recruit
another plastic injection
company to put any where in
going out of town after Santa
Theresa anywhere the the already
existing public in protest the
company getting an RV now
contrast that with the the city
man the city man to the can
issue an honor be within fifteen
miles of its municipal border so
the company coming in is getting
the sense that they're going to
be protest against and when the
protest like that reserve those
and from the state for finance
that's the judge and the
executioner in terms of deciding
what if the new company gets the
I realize that the lady in the
project and the drugs as we do
on the border you don't want to
be delays and you don't want to
scheduling the you don't want to
be rolling the dice and we don't
want to be if you are B. as we
access even to a potential
company that come in and
creating hundreds of jobs we
will simply go to the city of
Anthony and do the are we there
is a Santa Theresa most of the
celebration of leases within
fifty miles of the of the
municipal boundaries of the city
that now when we do that we've
got to yield like that in the
last few years what happens is
this the TV Methoni gets the
benefit but I do the paperwork
you receive the payment in lieu
of taxes which is the negotiated
Tax essentially that he to the
if you were of the army and the
this case is the the map
of one the county would receive
nothing the company would come
up to what's County species
Senator leases and not in the
me.
About sitting at I mean the the
greater County the council
within the we left holding the
bag to provide the moved to that
firm security Services via you
know the law enforcement and
also fire suppression and it
would not be collecting any of
the taxes to do that so well I
love working with the city of
after the the wonderful I think
it's been somewhat unfair to the
Dona Ana County to the self on
on a deal that we would be
getting a tax revenue from for
the next twenty years so that's
the nature of of of of this bill
and we certainly support it down
on the Senator region of the
state.
Right thank you.
And if I could add something
else Mr chairman of.
I don't think it's fair that the
state board of finance gets to
make judgments on competition
thank you for if a company wants
to locate the that's it more or
less what this does besides the.
The situation is to Mr project
was talking about so with that
all stand for questions thank
you for one of the committee
we'll go to the audience anybody
in support of Senate bill one
fifty two.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is
Katherine strum this for the New
Mexico counties we stand in
strong support of this
legislation would thank the
sponsor for bringing forward
this just puts the counties on a
level playing field with
municipalities allows for
predictability and economic
development and we ask for your
support thank you.
With the five chairman for the
J. Smith of the rest what is
Mexico radio the statewide
economic development
professional association based
industry exported legislation
one of these and and this
project about predictability
support when we're looking at
these deals of these projects
for expansion this specifically
one of the things that this
really prohibits when we look at
our so we're looking at faster
developed developed so we want
to bring clusters of similar
companies to New Mexico this
occurrence protest clause does
because
your prohibits laughing because
of the problems is in support.
Thank you.
All right anybody opposition.
Seventy one fifty two.
Okay all right we'll go the
committee Senator Hamblen.
Thank you Mr chair and and the
it's nice to hear the jury's
voice and Senator Neville thank
you very much for this because I
know the work that is happening
at the border of industrial
project park out there in the
work that they've done
including compare factory
there's now because of the
railroad system we had that
conversation earlier in this
committee union Pacific has
created an industrial training
academy to create jobs that will
address the issues that are
muted out there because it's
such a huge rail hub there's
also the the storage of solar of
of wind turbine blade it's been
absolutely incredible site
but I I I see where they're
they're kind of some
restrictions there and it really
hinders that I'm wondering Mr
chair Senator are there other
parts of the state where what we
are experiencing down in
southern New Mexico this could
help encourage because I'm
thinking especially like in
eastern New Mexico and if there
is a long the border where there
are access to railroad lines and
I'm thinking of master New
Mexico and how this could help
promote more
examples of what we're seeing
down where Jerry.
Of Mr chairman and senator I
think we probably would have the
potential I can't hear Jack I
don't know the facts but I think
we could have the potential in
Los Lunas for we've got Facebook
and all of the various things
going on there you certainly
could even have in Farmington
where we've got to a lot of
industrial activity particularly
we've got Tesco's company that
built a lot of industrial type
things for oil and gas as well
as hydrogen and all our friends
so conceivably there could be
these kind of situations all
over the state depending on what
the activities within your
community are able thank you
very much Mr chairman sponsor I
I really appreciate this bill
and I think it eliminates some
of the challenges that this kind
of development that we we do
need I mean I I have to
economics I try to support local
businesses as much as possible
but also I'm going to support
local jobs and opportunities for
job creation so I do appreciate
this and and thank you Mr chair
thank you Sierra.
S. okay do I have a second okay
so if Senator Griggs and we'll
go to the motion.
Thanks for sharing that and
that's great the
the issues with all of the staff
is that if the if the county of
San Juan County will Terrel you
know if they want to do
something like this they've got
the local guys right there in
your face if it's not good for
their community there right
there in your face each so I
think the issues this is
reasonable this is fair and I
support the national debate
thank you so we have a of the
best movies Center almond second
by Senator for.
To grow Senator Brandt yes ma'am
Senator Griggs yes Senator how
the meal.
Senator Kernan yes Senator Lopez
yes senator Sanchez Senator
Tallman yes.
Senator Wirth yes your hand yet
and Senator Shendo yes
unanimous.
Committed to.
This year.
All righty last but not least we
have Senate bill one thirty five
stop look and.
Trains which sounds like a
public service announcement that
we see in grade school we have
Senator Shendo and senator Bob
as the Sanchez Senator Shendo
that is all yours all right
thank you madam chair members of
the committee is a simple bill
all we're doing is to the statue
adding other own tractor
equipment Mimi any kind of
maintenance of
because that may be on the track
will and so forth so with me is
Frank thank Frank from a unique
Pacific go ahead and have a so
if yours.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee thank you for the
opportunity to us by testify
before you today on board public
safety issue for motorists
pedestrians and the men and
women who work on the railroad
tracks in New Mexico and
throughout the country I am
Frank Frank.
New Mexico legislative director
for the brotherhood of
maintenance of way employees
division of the teamsters.
I am here to offer my strong
support.
For Senate bill one thirty five
that would amend chapter fifty
one section eight to include or
other contract agreement.
Under current New Mexico law
maybe it's a way Representative
contractors and other
contractors equipment are not
included concerning a motorist
responsibilities when
approaching a crossing.
It is critically important when
the gates are down or when there
is a train approaching or
flagman or stop sign exit for a
present.
That motor vehicle stop at a
safe distance from the crossing.
Senate bill one thirty five one
of the existing railroad
crossing laws pertain to motors
responsibilities at revenue
process.
Making for a safe workplace for
our members and the motors on
New Mexico roads.
The issue is on track equipment
has evolved into train like
machines that present the same
dangers of training are of a
trade.
Nothing will stop on a dime
through modernization of
railroad on track equipment our
members now operates state of
the art equipment on the tracks
in New Mexico with that comes
out of this we're we are long
gone from the days with
pushcarts ran up and down the
tracks.
Well most of the public
understands the trains occupying
the tracks in the respective
neighborhoods and to avoid them
at all costs not everyone is
aware of on track maintenance
and construction machines that
travel on the track
infrastructure in New Mexico and
around the country this is a
true safety bill telehealth New
Mexico's motors and our members
that work in the if you're in
New Mexico similar legislation
has already passed in over
thirty six states including
Alabama Arkansas California
Colorado Connecticut Delaware
Georgia Idaho Illinois is
Indiana Iowa Kansas Kentucky
Louisiana Massachusetts.
Maryland Minnesota Michigan
Mississippi Montana Nebraska New
Jersey Nevada North Carolina
North Dakota Oklahoma Oregon
South Carolina South Dakota
Tennessee Texas Utah Virginia
Wisconsin Washington state and
Wyoming.
Except for us there is the
active or pending legislation in
six states Arizona Florida Ohio
Missouri Pennsylvania plus this
bill in New Mexico.
Okay this legislation is
supported by rail labor the
representative selves
Representative contractors and
in fact have found no public
opposition it will help to
clarify that there are other
pieces of equipment that travel
on track that present the same
dangers to motorists as trans
also we will help educate the
public of this fact after the
state statute was amended
working with the New Mexico
operation lifesaver and the
railroad look listen and if PSA
programs in closing I would like
to stress again this legislation
will save lives both on and off
the tracks here in New Mexico
thank you for the opportunity to
testify you yes I before you
today I'm happy to answer any
questions you may have on the
issue road safety in general.
Thank you I keep thinking of
live laugh and love when the
state was.
is there anybody in the audience
of that is in favor of this
bill.
Okay want to go ahead and get up
and speak you don't mind madam
chair Mister chairman members of
the committee Senator Stewart
will be have to be the Senator
of the safety is our number one
priority is to support this
bill.
Thank you anybody else in the
audience.
Anybody in the audience opposed
to this bill.
Seidler who just walked in and
getting anybody online who is in
support of this so.
Nobody on zoom they're all done
for the day to.
All right any questions from the
committee.
Given the questions what is the
what's the.
In the past second second all
right if you will please take
the.
Senator Brandt yes ma'am.
Yes.
Senator had a meal.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Lopez.
Senator Sanchez Senator Tallman
Senator Wirth yes Senator have
one yes Senator Shendo yes.
Yes
nine zero thank you very much
you're good to go into next
minute congratulations in the
past few amount here usually
that the there's going to be in
addition for this public
announcements we might look out
for
that level as say that one more
time until it might be going to
be this public service
announcement a politician for
