this, but we're hoping that the
room will be a little bit
clearer at that time, so she
feels physically safe to be in
this room.
So we will start in just a
moment. Y'all don't have to be
quiet. We're gonna start off
with the consent calendar first.
Yeah, and my
my mind is not.
All right. Let's go ahead. I'm
gonna
Learned not to do that while the
mic is on because you hate me.
All right, so if you will,
please take the roll.
Senator Figueroa is excused
Senator had a meal.
Senator O'Malley is excused.
Senator Paul. Senator Ramos.
Senator Sanchez,
Senator share.
Senator,
Senator Bergmans, Senator
Hamlin. Here we have 8
presidents thank you thank you
everybody for your patience as
we do the committee shuffle
today, which is typical of the
end of the session, what we're
going to
do first is go through the
consent calendar, just a
reminder that that consent
calendar has been something that
has been shared with the
minority and the majority, um,
and there's been an agreement
that these bills will go through
on consent. There will be no
public testimony on these bills.
What we will do is I will ask if
there is opposition, if there is
any opposition from anybody on
the committee, that bill will be
pulled given the dates, uh,
today, it will go to the end of
the line today, if that is
indeed going to happen. Um,
however, if there isn't any
opposition,
Uh, both of the two bills on
consent will go to the floor,
and we still have a day and a
half left to go. Uh, so at this
point, we are going to go to the
consent calendar and then we
will start off with, uh, House
Bill 295 after that, Senator
Bergman's, uh, and
representative Parajon are here
for that. So, here we go,
consent calendar.
Uh, we are on House Bill 159 as
amended. Energy projects citing
and military bases from
Representative Stararana, thank
you.
I got onion no new, I can do
that one, but I'm still working
on Serena, uh, and Senator Pope,
uh, is there any opposition to
House Bill 159 as amended.
say none. House Bill 159 as
amended. Energy project citing
and military bases, uh, receives
a due pass with
8 to 0, and now heads to the
floor.
Next we have House Bill 456. The
architect and engineering
services and construction. Um, I
believe is that why you're your
son again? OK. Uh, Senator
Gallegos and Representative
Baca, is there any opposition to
House Bill 456.
See none.
Uh, see no opposition House Bill
456, the architect and
engineering Services and
construction with Senator
Gallegos and Representative Baca
receives a due pass vote of 8 to
0, and now heads to the floor.
Thank you very much.
That is the last of our consent
calendars for legislative
session 2025. All right, now, we
are going to um House Bill 295,
the tax on property owned by an
Arita.
We have representative Parajon
and
Bricklin, you're gonna go join
him? All right.
subcommittee, just for your
reference, this is a bill that
we are voting on.
So representative Clarajon, this
is your first time here.
And so, uh, what we do, uh, it's
nice to see you. What we do is
we allow you 10 minutes to go
ahead and present your bill.
That includes your expert
testimony, then what we will do
is we will go to public
testimony, um, and we will do,
uh, support and opposition. We
will do the same thing online,
uh, and then you will have
5 minutes to respond to that
public testimony.
And then you will go to the
committee.
Does that sound good,
Representative? That sounds
good. All right. It's all yours.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, I'm
here to present House Bill 295,
which clarifies a portion of the
property tax code to align with
the actual practice and
expectations around New Mexico
renewable energy Transmission
Authority standing as a
governmental entity.
Since 2007 when Rita was
created, uh, the renewable
energy trend uh transmission
Authority. It was intended and
represented to all project
partners that property used for
the renewable energy projects
was tax exempt, not only as to
Rita, but also as to project
partners. Since that time,
billions of dollars of
investment, 13 billion, and jobs
have been created on this
assumption and commitment by
Rita to its project partners.
This bill is critical to
continue New Mexico on course
for meeting its renewable energy
objectives, and it would be a
serious impediment to the
development of these projects to
send the message um to existing
perspective project partners
into the larger transmission
development ecosystem that New
Mexico.
will not honor long-standing and
settled commitments.
This bill to be very clear, it
does not impact existing
revenues that the counties are
receiving.
Rather, the counties along the
lines are receiving payments
under Community benefit
agreements and our state are
receiving.
Payments um on the fractional
interests that they are renting
of those transmission lines.
The taxation and Revenue
Department has confirmed that
property tax obligations are the
responsibility of the owner,
which in this case for the
transmission lines is Rita.
They further confirmed that any
enforcement or collection
actions would be brought up
against would be brought up to
Rita, who is exempt.
So this bill is really a cleanup
and as a clarification, this is,
the counties are not losing any
extra revenue. I'd like to
introduce, uh, well, first if,
um, my co-sponsor would like to
say anything, um, uh, Nathan
Small is also our co-sponsor,
and then I'll turn it to our
experts.
The representative did a great
job, so all the experts go
ahead.
Uh, Cheer Hamlin and members of
the committee. Uh, good
afternoon. I'm here as Rita's
executive director. My name's
Lynn Mostaller, and I'm here to
speak in favor of HB 295, a
technical fix to the property
tax code for Rita-owned
projects.
This clarification is based on
the constitutional and other
statutory provisions that exempt
Rita-owned properties from
property tax.
In 2007, the Rita Act was passed
to incentivize private
investment in transmission lines
to unlock renewable energy
projects.
Rita has been incredibly
successful in the last several
years and other Western states
regularly seek our advice as
they design their own reed type
programs.
Rita serves as a key part of
putting together comprehensive
public-private structures to
enable tens of billions of
dollars of renewable energy
investments in New Mexico, along
with the jobs and local grocery
receipts tax that come from
these projects.
Rita is a state entity has
tax-exempt status under the New
Mexico Constitution.
Reed is able to leverage that
status with developers to lower
the cost of transmission
operations through an
acquisition leaseback structure.
This structure allows tax
exemption just for Rita-owned
properties, including the
transmission lines and related
structures, not the wind farms
that use the transmission.
For New Mexico, these
developments mean hundreds of
millions of dollars in
pill-payments, that's the
Generation projects.
thousands of construction jobs.
hundreds of millions of dollars
in grocery receipts, taxes, and
hundreds of ongoing operation
jobs.
Not passing this bill, however,
has some risk of having a
chilling effect on new
investment. We are bringing this
forward to avoid these
consequences.
In prior committee hearings on
this bill, we received questions
on the constitutionality of the
bill.
Uh, the concern is that the
legislature cannot create a
property tax exemption.
It can, however, enact law that
clarifies an existing
constitutionally created
property tax exemption. Rita has
such a constitutional exemption
for free to own real property
and improvements, and our bill
is
parallel and very similar to the
uh SB 112 bill that this
committee in the Senate has
passed through.
IRBs have a similar statutory
clarification of the same
constitutionally based property
tax exemption. If the statutory
clarification for HB 295.
unconstitutional then, so 2 is
the IRB structure as noted in
texts and Rhodes analysis.
We have also heard concerns
about counties losing revenue.
This is not the case. Counties
are not losing any revenue. They
have counted on or budgeted for,
because the real property for
transmission is predominantly
right of way, an underlying
property remains on the property
tax rolls, it is taxed the same
way it always has been.
More importantly, tax and Rev
has confirmed that because the
property tax code makes property
taxes. The personal obligation
of the owner.
Property tax on the new
transmission improvements could
not be collected from a less sea
because it's not the owner or
from Rita, the owner, because
it's exempt.
Again, passing this bill.
When I change anything in terms
of what all parties, including
counties have expected to happen
with these projects.
With the bill will do is remove
ambiguity that may discourage
future use of Rita's programs
for private developers and allow
New Mexico to continue to lead
the Western United States and
renewable energy development.
Thank you and I'll answer
questions. All right, thank you
very much.
So now we go to the audience. By
a show of hands, how many in the
audience are in support of this
legislation. Please keep your
hands up.
1234.
56
9, I got 9.
How much did you get? 9. All
right, thank you very much. How
many in the audience in
opposition of this legislation,
seeing none, we do have one
online, Carlos Santech. We'll
go, we'll get to her in just a
minute. Let's just go ahead and
we'll do 5 people.
Um, in support of this, Dan will
have the microphone. You will
please line up behind the bill
sponsors.
Uh, Dan will be holding the
microphone at a certain level,
if you please try not to uh move
his arm. He's doing this so that
there's no distortion on the
webcast.
saw that the other day somebody
was trying to wrestle Dan and
Dan wasn't having anything of
it. So you will have one minute,
and you will get a thirty-second
warning.
Go ahead. Thank you, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
Rickie Lee Chavez on behalf of
the Inner West Energy Alliance.
We are a multi-state alliance
that covers renewable energy
development at the utility
scale, we do stand in strong
support of this bill. We
appreciate the work of the
sponsors, transmission is very
important to our energy
transition and we appreciate
your consideration. Thank you.
Thanks, Madam Chair, members of
the committee, Camila with the
Sierra Club, a state can't tax
itself and this fixes that.
Thanks.
Good afternoon, uh, Madam
Chairman and members of the
committee, Jim Desjardin with
renewable Energy Industries
Association of New Mexico, it's
essential that as we add more
generation, we need additional
transmission to move electricity
from the point of generation to
the point of usage, and Rita has
been instrumental in the
development of numerous
successful projects, and there's
others, they have uh ongoing.
The project brought are provide
significant economic development
to communities, they are also
including.
Or providing thousands of jobs.
This bill clarifies the
tax-exempt status of NMrita to
enable it to continue its vital
mission. We urge a Dupaz.
Yeah.
Thank you, Madam Chair, uh, John
Ryan, um, former senator, in
fact, I was here in 2007 when we
passed the uh um Rita Bell, um,
there's only 3 of us here that,
that voted on that bill, um, I,
I, I, however, uh, have also uh
been the exe I am the executive
director of the Southwestern
Power Group, which is a
developer of high, high voltage
transmission lines, uh, for the
past 2025 years.
Um
I, I just would like to say that
uh uh this bill is critical, uh,
Rita's, uh, incentives are, are
helping developers like
Southwestern Power Group and
others, uh, do some really good
things they're, they're helping
the utilities meet the energy
transition Act, and I could go
on and on, Madam Chair, but I'm
not, thank you.
Thank you, Senator.
All right, now we're going to,
uh, Carlos Santag online. She is
registered in opposition, Carla,
I know you've been here before.
You're gonna get a 32nd warning
in your chest.
I'm gonna go ahead and unmute
and you have one minute.
Go ahead, Carla.
All right.
Carla, what we're gonna do is
we're, uh, it seems like there
might be a mic, uh, issue on
your end. We have registered
that you are in opposition of
this bill. Now we're going to go
ahead and do is we're gonna go
back to the sponsor, and you
have 5 minutes if you'd like to
respond to the the public
testimony, or we can go ahead
and go right to committee. We'll
go straight to. Thank you so
much. Are there questions or
comments from the committee.
You know, I'm gonna look at you.
I'll ask a question.
So the tax that you're looking
for, the RRB's you're looking
for, all of that belongs to the
county or the school district,
right?
As opposed to the state, state
revenue.
Um, Madam Chair and Senator
Sheer, uh, no, the, the property
that these uh transmission lines
are on is
Throughout the counties and the
experts want to add.
Um, uh, chair Hamlin and, and
Senator share, um, this, this
doesn't have really anything to
do with IRBs other than the
transmission enables the
generation projects to do the
IRB financing and
the IRBs and the payments go to
the counties where the
generation is.
Madam Chair, the counties aren't
losing any property tax in any
of this?
For the school districts aren't
losing anything in any of this.
Madam Chair and um Senator Sher,
no.
The senator.
I can't remember his name over
there now.
He said, I voted for him.
That he's given me the evil eye,
thank you.
where, uh, thank you, Madam
Chair. Um, I think Senator
Sheer.
and I were the other two that
were here when we did Rita,
I think Jeremy, I'm not sure
whether you were the director
when it first came out of the
gate, but I know you did a lot
of work on it, and I do think it
was a fantastic idea that
resulted in these types of
public, private partnerships.
Second thing, I think it was
mentioned I did carry the bill
with UNM again entered into a
contractual relationship in a P3
to build some student dorms, and
you're correct, that did pass
the Senate. We went through
this, um, analysis. I'll just
say this, so we talk a lot
about, you know, industry not
wanting the rules changed in the
middle of the game.
This whole platform was built
under an understanding of how
this tax would be applied, and
there's no loss of revenues
because all we're doing is
status quo. This is, this is the
exact same argument that I made
on the floor with you and him.
Unfortunately, there's been a
decision to try and interpret
something differently.
And I just putting on my pro
business hats. I mean, is this
the signal we might be sending
to New Mexico that we're gonna
have these folks investing
billions of dollars in projects
that have huge benefits to all
these rural counties, and we're
going to tell them in the middle
of the game that we're changing
the rules.
I'm not there, so I, I know this
bill has had a, a journey to get
here. Uh, I just appreciate
representative, you being
willing to take it on, it's not
easy. I had the same arguments,
you know, on the bill I did,
which is a much smaller deal,
but, uh, again, I appreciate uh
the bill and we'll certainly
support it.
Thank you, Senator. Other
comments or questions from the
committee.
Then figure out.
Yeah, Madam Chair, I just wanted
to thank the sponsors for the
amendments that they put in
today.
I'm assuming they passed and
part of the bill, and I can say
that.
Is that accurate or not?
That
senator there are amendments
we're on 295.
Well, we are not looking at the
wrong one.
Everybody was like, probably
some expletives in somebody's
head. I, OK, well then I'm glad
you didn't bring any amendments
today.
That's all right, Senator
Figuero. Any other questions?
I'm moving to. We have to pass
from Senator Wirth. We have a
second from Senator Jadaillo. If
you will, please take the vote.
Senator Figueroa.
Yes, without an amendment 295.
Senator had a meal. Yes. Senator
O'Malley.
The
Senator Paul.
I excused, Senator Ramos.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator Sheriff.
Senator Wirth,
Senator Bergman's.
Senator Hamblin. Yes.
We have 7 yeses and 1 no. You
have a 7 to 12 pass.
Congratulations. Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
All right, so,
Senator Bergman's, we were going
to do House Bill 7 next.
You want to jump to a
We can.
Um, but we don't have anybody.
Well, no, we do, you wanna go
ahead and share?
All right. So I am gonna give uh
our ranking chair member an
opportunity to uh share Senate
Bill 398, the Citizens' tax
rebate. Uh, this is one of the
two bills that we are hearing
because we want uh our new
freshman, even though Senator
Thornton is then freshman light,
um, cause you've been here
before as well. But we're giving
them an opportunity to have
their bill hurt, so we apologize
for jumping around. Um, it's
just we are having the, uh, the
committee shuffled.
And so,
That's being held. It's not
gonna be voted on, yeah.
I am gonna move chairs. I'm
gonna go sit over in Josh's
comfy chair.
Mr. Chair, point of privilege,
Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair, point of privilege.
Yes, Senator Ramos.
Senator Hamlet, you look awesome
on the
Dream of
Well, I'd like to thank Madam
Chair for giving me the
opportunity. It's a great honor.
It's a great committee. Always
good to be here. And I know I
can't mess up because I have the
vice chair right here to my left
to help me, so I don't have to
worry. Uh, moving on with the
398, right? Tax rebate.
Uh, senators, I don't think
you've been here to the
committee before, the way we run
this is you will have 5 10
minutes.
To introduce your bill that
includes your expert witnesses,
then we'll go to opposition or
uh for the bill, and then you'll
have 5 minutes to debate that or
come to the committee, whichever
you choose. With that, senators,
we're ready to hear your bill.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I
appreciate you guys taking uh
allowing us to how our bill be
heard, uh, so we have an
opportunity here to, to be
heroes to millions of New
Mexicans, um.
Senate Bill 398 is a citizen
income tax rebate. Um, this
would be eligible for every New
Mexican citizen, and, uh, and
the rebate is for seven-year
period from 2025 to 2032. So our
intent here is to create a
rebate for every citizen, uh
that is in New Mexico, all they
have to do is file their normal
individual uh income tax return,
and it cannot be a dependent of
another individual.
But, uh, essentially what would
happen is this rebate is for
$500 for each and every man,
woman, and child in New Mexico
who who fits these requirements.
And um, and then that means
forever sort of a family of four
would receive a $2000 check at
the end of the day. And, uh, and
this would be uh recurring for
at least 7 years as we believe
with the state has more than
enough money to do this. We
recognize now that latent late
in this session that we've
already passed the, the House
Bill 2, and so the budget's
already been in fast and we also
know today that the um income
tax has already been done as
well. I have with me the
co-sponsor, uh, Jay Block.
And, uh, and we have an expert
witness as well. The
One of the things that this does
is not only does it allow folks
and citizens to be able to, to
get some income back from the
state. This is of the state that
is everyone says we're a poor
state.
We're not.
Not only are we not a poor
state, we are probably one of
the richest states when it comes
to permanent funds. Uh, we have
approximately
I think as of today, $55 billion
in permanent funds reserved, and
we have an additional 3 billion
that go into each, each in those
funds every year.
And so, and with the addition
that we've been having because
we've had such a resource of oil
and gas. We've had another 2
billion come in above that 3
billion. So what we're asking
here essentially is to give a
billion dollars back to the
people of New Mexico, and then
that would go through the
economy and actually help
everyone. And so that's the
intent of this, and, uh, I, I'm
gonna yield to uh my co-sponsor
Jay Block.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, Madam
Chair and committee members, um,
honored to be here today with uh
my good friend Senator Thornton
to do this, you know, sitting in
um rules committee, uh, we've
been hearing a lot of um issues
with para and our state workers
fighting just for 2% para rays
which comes out to almost $20 a
month is what they're fighting
for.
This bill right here, uh, like
Senator Thornton said, this is
$500 per New Mexico resident.
And it's very easy to get the
qualifications are not that
difficult. We've made it that
way for a purpose.
But we, you know, there was a
lot of, there was a lot of
support for the state workers to
get their 2% raise. This is
roughly $41 a month for New
Mexican.
And we can afford it. We're
getting billions and billions of
dollars in making billions of
dollars, uh, on the market with
the money that we have in the
state coffers and different
permanent funds.
One of the things that we talked
about in the budget yesterday
was the average salary in New
Mexico is roughly $43,000.
If you take a look at that,
that's about $3900 a month, $908
a week, $181 a day.
This will help families in this
economy to help get gas to help
pay utilities, to help pay rent
or mortgages or clothes for
their school kids, and also, I
mean, the oil and gas and so
another way that the oil and gas
industry is supporting those,
especially at the low income who
need that money.
So I, I, this is, uh, should be
a nonpartisan bill, um, because
money really should not be
nonpartisan when it's coming
from the oil and gas industry
and helping the low-income uh
New Mexicans who quite frankly,
really, really need it. And with
that, I just wanna um introduce
our uh other expert witness, um,
who is a tax expert.
Hi, Richard Ankle with the New
Mexico Tax Research Institute. I
was asked to sit here today to
be a technical expert, so I will
uh I will remain silent unless
you all have a hard question, in
which case I probably won't be
able to answer it, but we'll do
our best. Thank you.
Uh, with that, um, Mr. Chair,
uh, Madam Chair, uh, we stand
for questions. Uh, thank you,
senators for that. At this time,
we will go to the audience. Is
anybody for the bill.
Seeing none.
Is anybody in opposition of this
bill?
Holy most
see none.
We have uh one online that is uh
in support.
Um, I guess we can go ahead and
hear Carla.
Yes, Mr. Chair, can you hear me
this time? Yes, and you will
have a 32nd warning pop up in
your chat. Uh, you have one
minute. Go ahead, Carla.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, Carlos Santag,
President and CEO of the New
Mexico Business Coalition. We
support this bill. We think it's
a great idea to give back to the
people in New Mexico.
Thank you for your consideration
and thank the sponsors for
bringing it.
Thank you for that.
Uh, centers with that, you guys
can either respond or you can go
to committee if you want.
Thank you, senators with that.
Is there any comments or
questions from the committee.
Uh, Senator Hamilton.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Um, and so, um, uh, can you give
us a little bit of background
about how this idea came to you,
especially since, I mean,
Senator Thornton, you've been
here, I've seen you sitting off
on the side as an analyst and
Senator Block, this is, this is
your, your first time here in,
in the legislature. So I'm
wondering how did the idea come
to you to come up with this
idea? And, and what, what work
did you put into it?
You, you wanna go first or?
Well, madam chair, I can, let me
tell you, I've been talking
about this when I was
campaigning, I talked about the
fact that the state of New
Mexico has a considerable amount
of money, uh, and that we've
been putting it into these
permanent funds or severance
fund, our tobacco trust funds,
and our water trust funds, we
have amount of putting a lot of,
a lot of money away for that
rainy day.
And um my stance is because of
all the money we have, we just
seem to not want to give our
citizens, um, to experience what
Other, other states have done,
for instance, Alaska does a
similar thing with their oil and
gas. They give a tax should be
every year, I think, right
around $2000.
And so, um, so that's a
significant amount of money that
each of the individuals and and
Alaska again and I go, why can't
we do the same? We have a
tremendous amount of surplus
here. We're either overtaxing
our people.
Uh, and I, and I believe that,
and that's why I thought this
would be a good idea, and
that's, that's where it came
from. And so I've been
campaigning on this for quite a
bit, a bit of time, uh, and
we'll probably hopefully work
very closely with the uh finance
group next year to get this in
the, on the front end as opposed
to the tail end.
Um, Madam Chair, uh, pretty much
the same thing. I've been, uh,
campaigning for several years on
my successful run for govern,
I'm sorry, unsuccessful run for
governor. Um, this was an idea
that also I've talked to Senator
Thornton about, about just the
success in Alaska.
And here in New Mexico, I mean,
this is the 2nd highest
energy-producing state in the
United States, with oil and gas.
It's impressive.
And we, and the, and the reason
why we also had a sunset on this
is we want to take a look at it
and then reevaluate it at a
certain point to see if it's
still successful for the people
of New Mexico.
How is this uh helping the
low-income people that are
having uh trouble uh with uh
trouble meeting their needs. In
fact,
In Albuquerque yesterday, the
city council and uh um Mayor
Keller signed this $750 a month.
Um, income bill for about 80
families.
This is for 2.1, 2.2 million New
Mexicans.
And this is huge. This is a
really easy straightforward
program, which, by the way, if
you have a tax bill from the
state, this can go towards your
tax bill as well, and if there's
a remainder over, it goes to
you, or you can decide, I'll
just take the check and spend it
the way I want. This is a way
for really the oil and gas
industry to thank the people of
New Mexico for supporting them.
I think it's a fair, it's a fair
program, it's an easy program to
manage and uh we, and again,
like I
said, I think it's important
what we implement these programs
to really measure it and get a
lot of data back.
So we can decide if we have to
tweak it, if we want to keep it
going, or if we want to stop the
program because we don't wanna
be throwing government money,
taxpayer money away. This money
belongs back to the taxpayers.
This is a great way to say,
here, because as, as I talked
about yesterday on the, on the
floor, uh, the Senate for the
budget, Madam Chair, our
population has grown less than
1% in the past 15 years, but our
state budget has increased 75%,
and our people
They're, they're not getting any
richer.
The state government's getting
richer based on the taxpayer
money that's coming into the
state government, and I think
it's, I think it's uh a good
idea to give the people back
some of their hard earned money.
Thank you. Thank you so much for
that. I appreciate that, Mr.
Chair and senators and, and, um,
and I'm wondering, you know,
because we've heard about like
uh universal basic income, is
this different?
Is there a difference between
this and universal basic income
because maybe it's kind of the
brand that we're talking about
because I saw your expert kind
of shake his head a little bit.
I'm wondering if it's the
branding that might also help.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I thought about that cause I've
always been against universal
basic income, but I actually
believe this could be considered
a part of that, and, and
If, uh, if that's a way of
getting the marketing across to
people to make them understand
that this is a way for the state
to give back to help with that
universal basic income, I'd be
OK with that because I really
believe this is taxpayer money
that's already been taken from
them and we're just giving it
back. And so, so it's a little
bit different than an income
stream because we were saying
we've already taken this money
from you and we're gonna get
some of it back. It's so I don't
see it quite, but I do
understand that it could be
marketed that way as as a
beginning of a universal basic
income.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I don't,
if, if someone wants to call it
universal basic income.
I, I don't really care. If
someone wants to call it a tax
rebate. I don't really care.
I just want to be able to give
the people back some of their
hard income money and since the
state is, is so wealthy, so
wealthy.
And our people, as you know, and
you talk about on the Senate
floor, many of you do, and I
know you all care about those
that are in need. This is a way
to give it back to them.
So, call it what you will. It
doesn't matter. I don't even
care who gets the credit granted
we had every single Republican
in the House and the Senate
signed on to this bill. We, we
would love Democrats to sign. I
don't care who signs on, I don't
really care who gets the credit,
but I'll tell you, when you see
what happens to the people of
New Mexico, when they get this
money back in their pocket as a
tax income, as a tax rebate or
as universal basic income, they
don't really care what you call
it.
They're like I can go to Smith's
and buy groceries. I can, I can
fill my car up. Hey, I can make,
you know, my, I can make it now
a couple of days toward the end
of the month for to pay my
utilities. So call it what you
will. It doesn't matter to me.
All that matters is getting
these people some help that they
desperately need from a state
government that is extremely
wealthy.
Thank you. I appreciate that and
Mr. Chair, and, and I'll, I'll
finish up. I think, you know, in
Las Cruces, we've uh had a test
program of universal basic
income. And what you're saying
is absolutely true, Mr. Chairs,
that people are not using it on
frivolous things. They are
paying for their utilities, they
are paying for their groceries,
they are trying to stretch
things until the end until they
get their next paycheck. And so,
um, I appreciate that
conversation because uh I, I
think that's really important
for us to recognize that, um,
yes, there are people who are
struggling, and um
Our job is to make sure that
people don't struggle.
And so I appreciate the
conversation, and I'm, and I'm
glad that you're, you're willing
to be here today. So that is all
I have, Mr. Chair.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. We
have further debate, senators,
we have Senator Jail.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, senators for bringing
this forward. I represent the
district that.
It has a large population that
lives at or below the poverty
line, and this money would
definitely help people in my
area, but in reading refundable
tax credits have been held to be
unconstitutional in violation of
the anti-Donation clause. Did
you by chance look into this and
see if it does indeed break the
anti-donation class.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair, Madam
Chair, uh, Senator, yes, and,
and the answer is no, it
doesn't, and we did polling in
Espanola specifically for you.
And it was 98% in favor of those
2% against.
That makes me happy, Mr. Cha.
But uh it's, it's a really good
legal question and, and the
answer is no, it doesn't because
this is the people's money
anyway. So it goes right back to
the people.
So, Mr. Chair, senators, with
this have needed to be built
into House Bill 2 with this.
It would, it would be a
standalone, uh, Mr. Chair, Madam
Chair, Senator, this would be a
standalone because it's taken
right out of a, a fund, um, one
of the permanent funds anyway.
Yeah, I'm not quite sure it it
it would have been better had it
been in the house too, and it
incorporated into the process,
um, and at this late date, it's,
it's, we know where it's going,
uh, but, but I think next year
we will try to incorporate it
into the house bill to, uh,
funding stream at the very
beginning, and so, uh, so that
people can then anticipate that
and as I said, it really doesn't
impact because the dollars we're
talking about are above and
beyond and all the other
obligations to that New Mexico
was already supporting.
And so this does not take away
anything from any of the funds
that are already in existence.
Thank you, madam, Mr. Chair and
thank you, senators.
Do we have any other debate?
Center for your role.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
If I can stop coughing long
enough. I want to thank you for
bringing the bill and appreciate
Mr. Terrence sponsors the
knowledge that
At this point, it's, it's kind
of moot, but we need to have
this discussion starting now in
preparation for the next. So in
that spirit, I will say it's,
it's a harder discussion than
you think of Mr. Chair and
sponsors. I mean, you recognize,
I suppose I should say that, you
know how hard it's gonna be
because we, we make choices.
This session, Mr. Terence
sponsors to put a billion toward
behavioral health.
To address our constituents'
concerns about public safety,
about access to public health
for people who are cycling
through the court systems and
our being able to go to trial.
Um, so we, we took a big chunk
for that. We keep 3 billion in
reserves. We have moved.
Our children from 50th in the
country in terms of child
poverty rates to 17th.
If you take into account all of
the supports we have built in
and funded with this money. So
when we start that debate, Mr.
Tarrant sponsors for this next
year, we're gonna have to think
about what pieces of those can
we reconsider and give up. Are
we willing to go down on our
reserves? Are we willing to, you
know, it's, it's a long
conversation. It's gonna be a
good conversation and Madam
Chair, oh sorry, Mr. Chair, I'm
looking at
Madam Chair, Mr. Cha and
sponsors, we don't need to have
it now, and I look forward to
doing this during interim. It's
going to be an important debate
because we do have a lot of
money coming in.
Thanks. I say pass.
Um,
Mr. Chair, Madam Chair, if I can
just respond, um, I appreciate,
uh, uh, Senator Figueroa's
remarks, because if you think
about uh the behavioral health,
I, listen, I, I'm a
conservative. I'm kind of a
libertarian, limited government
guy, but I sponsored SP1, SB2,
SP3 because I recognize
That mental health is a huge
issue in New Mexico that affects
poverty, crime,
I recognized that and the reason
why I supported SB 12, and 3,
it's related to this bill. The
reason why I supported that is
because there's finally guard
rails about the amount of money
that this state is spending, and
that billion dollars was taken
out of the fund to fund the uh
the behavioral health, which is
exactly what we want to do with
this.
You talked about child poverty
going from 50th to 17th. I, I,
I'll take your word for it.
But imagine what an extra $2000
a year can do for families.
To move us
Passed West Virginia, Arkansas,
Mississippi, or whatever.
And we have, we have the wealth
here. We have the, the
technology that is incredible in
exploiting the oil and gas that
we have right under our feet
that is so much that we're
exporting it.
So
Those are all tax dollars that
come in and like you said,
Senator, if we can take a
billion dollars for behavioral
health.
And we've had, we've had, you
know, many other permanent funds
as well to help move the needle
of New Mexico. Why can't we take
it with a funding stream that is
funding 45 to 55% of the state
budget.
And by the way, those funds are
growing incredibly, incredibly.
So this is money that like, like
the chair said.
And I believe that the families
need this money to
Buy food for their family.
Pay their utility rates, because
let's face it, inflation has
been a big problem, and this,
this will help them out because
when, when families, in my
opinion, I've been there, having
a hard time making ends meet. It
causes a lot of stress on the
family that can cause other
problems. So this is a great way
to help them out and if again,
if anyone is a liberal wants to
call it universal basic income,
fine.
The conservative wants to call
it a tax rebate.
I could really care less.
But when you see the effect that
this will have on millions of
New Mexicans based on the oil
and gas industry that is really
funded the state. This is a
win-win for everybody.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator. Do we have
any other debate? Senator
Schiff.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I wouldn't
have spoken except that Senator
Figueroa beat me to it, so I
have to respond.
Really.
Um
Mr. Chair.
You, you mentioned Alaska, and
uh at least when I was in the
army, if you could get assigned
to Texas, you became a Texan
because there was no personal
income tax, and you stayed a
Texan as long as you're in the
army, no matter where you were
in the world.
But if you could get assigned to
Alaska.
That was way better.
Because then you got a check
every year.
And um
I don't know what it's like in
the last 25 years or so.
But the amount of money went up
and down.
The better the revenues from
severance tax were, the more
money you got, and at a time
when I was making
40 or $50,000 a year in the
army, which
was pretty good at the time.
Um
$20,000 check from the state was
a lot of money.
And that happened.
It also happened that there was
no money.
So it depended on what oil and
gas was do, well, severance,
anything that was because they
also do gold and silver and I
don't know, they probably mine
peacocks, I don't know what they
do up there.
But uh
But that was
That was the difference between
universal basic income is when
extractive er uh uh.
businesses were doing well. The
people did well. When they
weren't doing well,
People probably still did well
enough, but they didn't get an
extra 200 or 200, so.
That that's the difference right
now we're doing well.
We should have done.
Thank you, Senator. Any other
debate?
So moving too fast.
We're gonna, we're gonna hold
this bill. It's like tax us
we're gonna hold this. If
there's no other debate, I thank
you, senators for bringing this.
Uh, one comment I would like to
make was, and I, and correct me
if I was wrong, on the $55
billion that the state is making
now on our investments that we
already have 55 billion. We do
make an additional $3 billion.
And with oil and gas on top of
that 3 billion, we have another
$2 billion that we are adding.
So as a committee, we got to
remember that I, uh, we have
that extra $2 billion in oil and
gas was put on top of the 3
billion that we're making on our
investments. So thank you guys
for bringing this. We hope next
year get this in and we can get
all of our new Mexicans money in
their pockets. Thank you,
senators.
Thank you for letting us, uh,
present this. appreciate it.
All right. Thank you very much.
Um, so we're gonna move on to uh
House Bill 7. I thought I saw
Representative Serrado in here.
She's in the hallway? OK. Uh,
while we get representative
Cerrado in here. Um, I do wanna
just, since this is our last
day, there's a little bit of
housekeeping I'd like to, uh,
take care of, um, and I'd just
like to thank everybody uh who
made the committee run so well,
um, from our attendants, Dan,
Susan, and Lucy, uh, who helped
us out. Thank you.
much.
We have our analysts, we have
Lisa over here, and we have John
and we have Monica and Kathleen,
uh, who helped make this work.
Uh, the person who processed
over 230 bills that were sent to
this committee, the one and only
Rebecca.
We have our Zoom folks. We have
Matt and, and Bonnie.
That made this all run very
easily.
Um, and I would like to thank,
um, our ranking chair who was uh
uh a ranking member, uh, Senator
Sanchez, minority leader,
Senator, uh, share, also Senator
Paul.
Right there, Senator Ramos
somewhere there.
Um, also, uh, Senator Figueroa,
very grateful. Senator O'Malley,
Senator Jaramillo,
Majority Leader work.
And then, uh, helping make
things run so smoothly is our
vice chair, uh, Senator
Burkemans, and so, um, thank
you, everybody.
We appreciate this.
And so,
why don't we go ahead, so
representative Hockman v.
Hillson, are you, do you need a
breath.
All right.
OK.
Um, and so, uh, to, to give a
little bit of uh background on
this, um, we've seen this bill.
I've seen this bill in Senate
conservation already once and we
know at this point that the bill
will move out of this committee,
uh, but we want to give
Representative Huffman V. Hill,
uh, uh, uh, the, the.
The meeting that we had before
was
All sorts of
Messiness. And so what we want
to do is give Representative
Huckman B. Hill, the full tax
business and transportation
Committee treatment, um, you've
heard this committee runs very
effectively and efficiently, and
so, um, out of respect for you,
we wanna go ahead and do that,
um, and this is a bill that we
will not vote on, but we will
hear.
Because there's also commitment
to do a lot of work on it during
the summer and during the
interim, and I'm looking forward
to that. Thank you very much,
Madam Chair, and we are too, and
we really appreciate the
Rolls-Royce Senate tax
treatment. So, madam chair, um,
I will leave it up to your
discretion. We have amendments
that we'd like to describe
first, if you wanna go to those
first and then we go to the bill
or the bill first. It's up to
you.
Why don't you describe the bill
first and then do the
amendments. I'm gonna read this
to keep the last day. I get it
right. Thank you very much. So,
Madam Chair, House Bill 13
insurers New Mexico's utility
customers receive reliable and
affordable electric service when
they need it. The bill requires
utilities to plan their
distribution system, which is
the local wires that serve homes
and businesses in a more
transparent manner, subject to
PRC oversight with tenure
planning horizons to prepare the
grid for low.
aligned with other state laws
and regulations, proactively
upgrading the grid to
accommodate future demand
yields, cost savings because
building it once the right size
is, is, it is costs because
building it wants the right
size, costs half as much as
multiple incremental upgrades.
HB 13 also directs utilities to
propose beneficial
electrification plans subject to
PRC review and approval that
helped customers adopt efficient
electric appliances such as heat
pumps. This.
This is a problem caused by the
fact existing energy efficiency
laws and regulations were
designed for technologies that
reduce electricity consumption,
which doesn't work for
appliances like heat pumps that
may use more electricity, but
still reduce overall energy
consumption, and importantly
reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
Dozens of public interest
industry and state government
officials participated in the
long process that informed
legislation. This legislation
that takes a comprehensive and
thoughtful approach to ensure
New Mexico has the
distributions.
Distribution grid needs to
deliver economic and public
health benefits. And with that,
Madam Chair, I'd like to
describe the amendments. So, um,
why don't we go ahead and, and
we'll, we'll give you the full
treatment. We'll move you, can I
get a motion to move the
amendment for discussion? I move
232015.1 for discussion, Madam
chair for amendment for
Whatever.
Oh please let that be the quote
of the day whatever we're on 13.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
So, uh, Madam Chair, amendments
145 and 8 of that uh proposed
amendment are from the PRC which
gives them more flexibility and
time to review the plans.
Amendment 6 and 7 are to ensure
New Mexico can still use
established state values for the
price of pollution, even if
current federal administration
takes the position that there is
no societal damage associated
with such pollution, and
amendments 2 and 3 are written
to address uh the Senate
Conservation Committee members'
questions in the last hearing.
They make it even more explicit
that the PRC retains the
discretion to reject or require
the revision of distribution
system plans and all associated
costs, and, uh, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, you
should have received some
handouts of the letter from the
PRC stating just that.
That the amendments as
requested, um, were from the PRC
and um does uh track language
that is associated with utility
law. And with that, madam chair,
we stand for questions.
So we did not receive that
letter from the PRC. Did not.
OK, then we'll forget about it.
so I'm gonna um introduce my
experts. So I'm sitting to my
left is Michael Kinney. He's
from uh Western Resource
Advocates, and then this is Mark
Truchio from IVEW.
Thank you so much. Um, you're
welcome to make a statement or
if you'd like, we can go ahead
and have public testimony, uh,
and then you can either respond
to the public testimony or we
can go ahead and go to the
committee.
OK. Ready for the public. All
right, so by show of hands, how
many in the audience are in
support of this legislation.
Hey, Keep your hands up.
To check.
There you go. 14.
OK, 14. Thank you. Um, how many
in opposition of this bill?
OK, 12345. OK. All right. So
what we're gonna do is we're
gonna do 5 and support and 5 in
opposition we'll get those
online. Thank you.
And so if I look, can I get the
5 who are in support, please
come on up. You will have one
minute to speak, um, several of
you are familiar faces, so you
kind of know the routine. You
will see a 32nd warning.
Um, and if, if, uh, if Dan or
sergeant at Arms, moves your arm
down, it's because we're worried
about distortion on the webcast.
Right, so go ahead and start.
You have one minute.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Mike D'Antonio, with
Xcel Energy. We serve
electricity to the eastern part
of the state, about 130,000
customers. We want to really
thank the sponsor for bringing
this bill to us and uh
incorporating such a large
stakeholder group, ah, we are in
full support of the bill, uh,
the the couple of things that we
really like about the bill.
Number one is it streamlines the
distribution planning portion of
this uh of of our work with the
PR.
see and it's so it's a little
bit more transparent too with
this with this bill at the
district distribution planning
portion. The other thing is that
we are on the beneficial
electrification section 2, we
have the opportunity to work
with our oil and gas customers
on specific tailored programs to
help them reduce emissions with
that beneficial program. So we
support the bill. Thank you.
Thank you so much.
Um, Madam Chair members of the
committee, my name is Jim
Desjardin. I'm the executive
director of the renewable energy
Industry Association of New
Mexico, uh, we want to thank the
sponsor for coordinating a large
stakeholder group that we worked
on this bill for a number of
months, we're very excited about
this bill because it
incorporates many best practices
that are used in other states to
um or electrical distribution
systems. I'm not going to list
all the features that we're
really excited about except for
one.
That is requiring utilities to
submit electrical distribution
plans to the public regulation
Committee.
However, I do also want to point
out that really, this is an
economic development bill, you
have a modern electrical
distribution system so we can
build new homes. We can have
electrical infrastructure for EV
charging, and we can be ready
for electrical hookups for new
businesses. Thank you very much.
It's
Oh, thank you. Uh, Madam Chair
and members of the committee,
I'm Marcos Gonzalez, executive
Development Officer for
Bernalilo County, and with I-40
trade port corridor, uh,
provisions within this bill and
modernizing energy distribution
and promoting electrification
are poised to bolster our
I-403port corridor project and
infrastructure sustainability
efforts and provide additional
economic development um.
Tents, uh, we've been working
with a sponsor for the drafting
of it as well as many of the
stakeholders as well and see
this as we build the uh clean
infrastructure um corridor for
pushing goods from our ports in
LA through the rest of the
country in our tradeport quarter
project.
And I'm sure, uh, members of the
committee, thank you for your
time this evening. My name is
Michael Barrio and I represent
Advanced Energy United, we two
worked uh with the sponsor and
um many stakeholders on uh this
bill and um strongly support uh
we believe that by requiring
forward-looking planning for
electric distribution system and
incentivizing well-managed
electrification that this bill
puts us ahead of the curve
rather than playing catch up
with growing demand, acting now
enables us to drive an economic
growth.
attract investments and maintain
reliable, affordable service for
all New Mexicans.
Uh, simply put, it's a common
sense approach to a modern
resilient future ready grid, and
we respectfully ask for your due
pass.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Victoria Larcon Masia
with the Samir Project and Samia
Action. I'm here today to
express our strong support for
HB 13 Power Up New Mexico, we
commend Whip Hochman Viheel for
leading a diverse stakeholder
process to craft.
HB 13, New Mexicans deserve a
reliable, modernized grid that
not only meets our current
energy demands, but also
prepares us for a future of
economic growth and opportunity
by investing in grid
modernization, this legislation
will drive economic development
across our state, create high
quality jobs, strengthen local
economies and support workforce
training opportunities in the
clean energy and infrastructure
sectors. A vote for HB 13 is a
vote for economic development.
job creation and a strong, more
resilient New Mexico. I urge
your support. Thank you.
Thank you so much. We do have
one person, um, Kara Lynch,
who's online. If you'll just let
Kara know that we have recorded
her support, um, as the only
person, and we appreciate that.
So we do have that she's
supported. So we do have some
folks in the audience who are in
opposition. So if you will,
let's get 5 folks listed, uh,
standing up here behind the bill
sponsor. You will also have one
minute.
Dad, you know you can't take a
drink break in this room. You
gotta
You're like, jeez, madam chair.
All right, so you'll have one
minute, you'll see a 32nd
warning, uh, and you'll, uh,
we'll have you wrap it up before
one minute. Go ahead, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
I'm Gerald Wassa. I'm a vice
president at New Mexico Gas
Company, uh, also a registered
lobbyist for the company and I'm
speaking in opposition to HB 13.
We do agree electric grid
modernization is a priority. I
note this committee last week
gave a due pass to HB 93, which,
which uh does set out a positive
approach to enabling those kinds
of investments. Our concern with
HB 13 is
Let's focus on mandating
beneficial electrification,
which is defined in section 2 as
converting the energy source of
a customer's end use from a
non-electric fuel source to a
high efficiency electric source.
Our concerns with this bill were
articulated in prior community
meetings, they do remain
unchanged. We believe as
drafted, it would increase both
electric bills and gas bills.
We appreciate this committee's
leadership on this topic and
look forward to a dialogue on it
going forward. Thank you.
OK, good, good afternoon, uh,
Madam Chair Hamblin, members of
the committee. Carlos Lucero
with the public service company
in New Mexico.
And we really appreciate the
sponsor bringing this bill
forward and being part of this
process. House Bill 13 is a
complicated bill with a few
moving parts and has had a
number of amendments during the
session.
We believe this legislation that
would be better suited to work
through more during the interim,
and we hope the sponsor is open
to that.
Thank you.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is TJ Treil I'm a
registered lobbyist for
Occidental Petroleum.
Um
We greatly appreciate the
sponsors work on this bill, and
much like the previous speaker
said, we really appreciate a
chance to review this during the
interim. Some of our concerns
still remain around some of the
definitions, the beneficial
electric electrification plans,
uh, and what all that involves
and how that deals with the
allocation to customer classes
continues to remain a concern,
not be as clear, um, obviously,
that can get kicked to the
regulatory process, but.
Um, that still remains a
concern. We think that's
something the legislature should
address first and foremost, uh,
with that, Madam Chair, members
of the committee at this point,
we still have concerns and we'll
we'll go from there. Thank you.
Thank you so much. And so, uh,
Representative Hackman Dehill,
you have an opportunity to
respond to the public testimony
if you'd like. Thank you, Madam
Chair, and um thanks, uh, I
wanna give a big shout out to
you and your committee members.
Thanks so much for, um, giving
us this opportunity to have this
hearing. It means a lot to us,
uh, to have the opportunity to
put on the bill, um, in a
simplified form and talk through
the amendments, um, uh, we had
some uh issues before and so
it's really refreshing to
be able to get back to the
substantive, uh, nature of the
bill very much looking forward
to um carrying the work forward
through in the interim, we know
that we have an incredible
opportunity here in the state of
New Mexico to uh to modernize
our grid and to um not only pass
a piece of legislation that will
help drive economic development,
but also responsible economic
development through carbon
emissions reductions and uh we
can't walk and chew gum at the
same time.
Madam Chair, and I'm very much
looking forward to continuing
the work with all of our
stakeholders and I look forward
to bringing you an even better
bill next year. So thank you so
much. Thank you so much,
Representative, and I do
appreciate I also extend my
gratitude to this committee, um,
for doing that. And so now what
we're gonna do is go to the
committee because these
questions are going to be very
helpful, especially given the
comments that you've heard here,
uh, in terms of moving toward
the interim, I do see Senator
Figueroa kind of leaning
forward, so I have to kind of go
on that body language, uh, of
that.
So Senator Figueroa. I could
just be falling on my face,
Madam Chair. Um, it, I need to
redeem myself. This is the
amendment I was immensely
grateful for when I ran in here
late, wanted to thank the
sponsors, Madam Chair, for
bringing this amendment to
addressing these issues and in
particular a couple just to make
sure you keep them in your
discussion.
During the interim, and that is
the timeline that is feasible,
the adjustment to the timeline
and the new section of that
clarifies that the PRC's
authority remains unchanged, and
their responsibility to do
reasonable ratemaking is still
in place because that is our
guardrail. It was part of a big
discussion on the Senate floor
today, the PRC has to have that
power to protect ratepayers. Um,
and so I appreciate all of that
work. That is.
From the substitive intent of
the bill, which is tremendously
important, Madam Chair, the
economic development
opportunity.
That depends on us modernizing
our grid is enormous, so I
appreciate taking this stab at
it, and that's about all the air
I have right now.
Thank you so much, Senator
Figaro. Other questions or
comments from the committee.
I always have to look at Senator
Sher just in case,
um, Senator Bergman.
Yeah
So I think, I think the comments
that will come from this
committee, the representative
will be very grateful for, so I
appreciate that. So go ahead,
Senator Bergman. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Representative. I
just want to say thank you for
organizing such a large group of
stakeholders to try and put this
together. Um, I'm sure that was
not easy at times, but I'm sure
everyone also appreciates the
work that went into it. Um, I'm
glad we get a chance to look at
this. It's definitely
comprehensive and
I think everyone will feel
better, the more chances they
get to see it, so I'm glad we
have that chance today.
Any other questions or comments
from the committee.
Uh, I would like to say just as
the floor sponsor for this, uh,
in the Senate. I am grateful for
this opportunity, um, because I,
I do see some really good
nuggets there, um, that I think,
and I think it's in part when
you've got somebody as dedicated
as you are who holds these
continuous meetings sometimes
that we have a tendency to get
really elbow deep into the
jargon, and just know the
minutia of it, whereas there's
somebody here who's sitting here
going, I have no idea what that
means. And so, um, I think this
is an opportunity for that, and,
um, you know, and I appreciate
your experts sitting here, uh,
through this, um, I, I think it
is evident that there are, there
are more conversations to have,
even though you've probably
maxed out at that, but um I look
forward to bringing this back in
this committee, um, and we'll
ask for this to be the first
referral for you, uh, next time
this bill comes back. And so, if
um there are no other comments
or questions from the committee,
we're gonna go ahead and release
you. Uh, we do have Senator
Figueroa.
Madam Chair, it's just
procedural. Do we need to adopt
the amendment or do we just
be kind of adopted the
amendment. We're not actually
doing anything with this bill at
this point. OK. Um, and so there
will not be a um a report that
is out on this, um, so.
I do appreciate that. So thank
you, Representative, and thank
you committee, and thank you
everybody who was here for this,
and I look forward to continued
conversations. Thank you, Madam
Chair, and I just have to say
I'm astounded that Senator
Scherer did not have anything to
say. Are you feeling OK, wait
till next year. I heard Senator
Ramos wait till next year.
Thank you very much. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you, everybody.
Thank you experts for your time
as well.
All right, now we're moving on
to House Bill 7.
As amended, I think it's one
amendment or 2 amendments? One?
OK
We have one for today. All
right.
Yeah
All right, so representative,
thank you very much for coming.
Um, this is your first time, uh,
in, in our committee. So what we
do is we um allow you to go
ahead and present the bill. You
have 10 minutes. That also
includes your expert testimony,
and then, uh, what we will do is
go to the public and get public
testimony, uh, after that, you
will do and supported in
opposition, we will also do the
thing online as our our Zoom
folks, uh, are managing that
right now. And then you will
have 5 minutes to respond to
that testimony, or you can go
ahead and just go straight.
to the committee. OK? So it's
all yours.
Thank you, chair. Thank you
committee for hearing us today.
I'm Representative Linda
Cerrado, uh, here with, uh, HB
7, the Future Fund. I also have
with me Teresa Madrid, who is
our partnership, who is our
expert, um, the executive
director of Partnership for
Community Action and of course a
wonderful Senate sponsor,
Heather Bergman as well. So what
this bill does is it creates
publicly held trust funds for
New Mexico's children, uh, as
often referred to as baby bonds
in much of the country, and it
does so in 3 ways. One, it sets
out the eligibility and what the
money.
to be used for. In this case, it
is for children who are born in
New Mexico have lived here
continuously, have graduated
from high school, or gotten an
equivalency and who have taken a
financial literacy course, um,
as early as when they take 18,
and the money can be used for
education, uh, buying a house,
investing in a business,
investing in general, um, or
retirement and uh and so that's
the eligibility at a minimum. 2,
it sets up the fund, as we know
New Mexico, um, when you invest
it today, it, it, it can blossom
into something wonderful.
So we've seen that a number of
different accounts that we have,
and we want to use that money
for the kids of New Mexico. Um,
it would allow babies born in
2025 to uh see that money grow
over 18 years and those first
kids would have access to those
funds in 18 years, so the the
the fund would have been growing
that entire time, um, and then
they can begin to benefit from
it. 3, it sets the task force up
so that we want to do the pro
essentially in a lot of ways of
rulemaking, but a lot of those
detailed forming pieces in a
public manner with input from an
appointee from the.
Governor, uh, 2 from the house
from each party majority and
minority leaders selected and
then two also from uh the
minority majority party as well,
and also the state treasurer as
well to contribute to the
conversation. LTS would be
overseeing that process. And so
this is the premise of the bill
overall. Um, we do have an
amendment, um, we can discuss it
at, uh, when you're ready. Uh,
I'm gonna hand it over to my
expert briefly, uh, because the
Partnership for Community Action
has actually been developing a
baby bonds program, uh, as I
mentioned, two other
States have it right now.
Connecticut and California and
Washington DC. Unlike what we're
proposing, uh, those are only
for children who receive
Medicaid or may have suffered
under COVID, depending on the
state, um, for what we're
looking at is for all New
Mexicans because as we know to
be middle class in New Mexico
can still be living month to
month and making ends meet. I'll
hand it to Teresa to talk about
more about what they've seen in
their programs so far.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair. So this is the groundwork
for a publicly funded trust
account that will support young
people as they transition to
adulthood. This initiative is a
direct response to the stark
economic disparities in our
state currently where we rank
forty-fifth in income inequality
and 25th, uh, 25% of children
live at or below poverty line.
The strength of this bill is
that it is strategic and forward
thinking rather than rushing
into implementation, it creates
that task force, uh.
To study the best methods for
financing and administrating
this program, and it ensures
that every dollar is invested
and is maximized for long-term
impact. It's important to note
that um as the representative
stated, this is not the first
time. 3 other states across the
nation have adopted baby bond
legislation, while 16 other
states, including New Mexico,
have proposed legislation.
Currently there are 9 pilot
programs or small scale programs
across the nation.
including the one in New Mexico
that has um uh of which
partnership for community action
has, uh, co-sponsored PCA
launched this program in August
of 2024 with Partners Prosperity
Works of guano Puertas and
Moneybird. At that time we
funded 15 families with a seed
amount of $6000 projected to
grow over time at the age of 18,
this amount, uh, a conservative
estimation will be valued at 22.
$22,0248 so an incredible amount
of um resources for a young
person to invest in wealth
building assets. The second part
that I'll highlight is the
importance of the task force
having the um representatives
from the state and the community
having a voice in the way in
which this publicly funded
account and program will be
determined.
Thank you with that, we'll stand
for questions. Great, thank you
so much. I don't know if Senator
Bergman's, if you want to say
anything or if you'd like to go
ahead and we'll go to, OK. All
right, so, um, we're now gonna
go to public testimony, uh, just
by a show of hands, and we will
go to the folks online as well.
Just by show of hands, how many
in the audience are in support
of this legislation?
12345. OK, great. How many in
the audience are in opposition
of this legislation?
Seeing none, and we have 3 folks
who are online, uh, who are in
support. So what we're gonna do
is we're gonna do 3 here in the
room, and we'll do the 3 online,
but we'll, we have it recorded
on how many people are here. So
3 of you want to get up and go
ahead and give your public
testimony. You do have one
minute.
You will get a 32nd reminder,
um, and then you'll want to go
ahead and wrap that up. So go
ahead, if you will say your name
uh for the record.
OK.
Buenos Aes mada uh madam Chair
and members of the committee. My
name is Lisette Vargas, and I
would like to ask you all to
support this bill. I am a parent
leader in my community in
Albuquerque and reducing the
financial gap is important
because it can improve our
economic and social well-being
and help achieve sustainable
development as a mother of two
young men, I can see that
financial stability benefits
young people when they know that
they have the money aside for
the education expenses.
entrepreneurship or investment,
and it would be amazing if this
opportunity of trust funds
accounts, um,
are offered to all of the
children in New Mexico. And so
please support the children's
Future Act, and let's create a
better New Mexico for all
children in New Mexico.
Thank you so much.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. I'm
Jacob Vihill. I'm Deputy policy
director in New Mexico Voices
for Children, we stand in strong
support of this. Our state has
led the country in investing in
young children, and baby bonds
will address the other side of
the poverty equation, and that's
the generational wealth gap.
It's an idea whose time has
come. This bill will set up a
framework by which those who
have a stake in improving the
lives of young children can
craft and design an innovative
and powerful policy.
that works for our state. So we
urge its passage so that the
scaffolding will be in place,
and children don't have to wait
any longer. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you so much. Is there
anybody else in the audience? I,
I know that we had more hands,
so I don't know if anybody else
wants to.
All right, then what we're gonna
do since we've only had 2 here
in the audience, we're gonna do
2 online, um, we will have, um,
I think it's, is it Sovereign
Hager? Um sovereign, and then
Jennifer, uh, Rafael Goetz. Uh,
if you will, go ahead, uh,
Siron, we're gonna go to you
first.
And if you will unmute yourself,
you'll get a 32nd warning in
your chat box if you will go.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um,
members of the committee. My
name is Sovereign Hager. I work
for the New Mexico Center on Law
and Poverty, and we want to
thank the sponsor and community
advocates for this bill. We
stand in strong support because
every child should have the
opportunity to pursue a
fulfilling productive,
prosperous, and self-directed
life.
And income inequality creates
gaps and opportunity, and New
Mexico ranks very high in income
inequality, and we grapple with
high child poverty rates. This
bill is a real opportunity to
close those gaps, foster
generational wealth with funds
growing over time and becoming
accessible, starting at age 18,
the fund would cover educational
expenses, it could provide home
ownership help. These
investments, um, in New Mexico's
children would alleviate racial
income gaps. So for these
reasons,
We stand in strong support of
this legislation and urge you
all to pass the bill. Thank you
so much.
Thank you so much, so. Now we
have, uh, Jennifer Raphael
Goetz. um, Jennifer, if you
will, go ahead and unmute
yourself, uh, you will get a
32nd warning in your chat box.
Go ahead, Jennifer.
Good evening, Chair Hamblin,
members of the committee. My
name is Jennifer Raphael Goetz,
and I'm the director of the New
Mexico Commission on the Status
of Women. I'm here to speak in
support of HP 71 of the
challenges that women in New
Mexico and around the country
face is unequal pay. Studies
show they will take Hispanic and
native women 400 years to reach
pay equity with their white male
counterparts. Unequal pay means
unequal retirement savings and
even unequal social security in
retirement. Why am I talking
about equal pay when we are
discussing baby bonds? It's
because we see that equal pay
laws are
not helping women build
generational wealth, but perhaps
an economic investment like baby
bonds can help this process. If
a small investment is made for a
baby girl at birth, that
investment can grow into a down
payment on a house or tuition
for college, helping to build
generational wealth for
themselves and their families.
Additionally, these investments
in our children can help keep
them living and working in New
Mexico and contribute to the
economic health of our state.
For this reason, and others
discussed today, I ask you to
stand with us in support of HB
7. Thank you and good evening.
Thank you so much. Um, so,
before we go to any response, we
do need to hear about the
amendment and move the amendment
for discussion. So if I may, uh,
have a, a motion to move the
amendment for discussion?
Don't jump at once. Thank you,
Natalie. Then Figaro.
Man and 0.232015.1 for
discussion.
Thank you.
So thank you, chair. Thank you
committee. Um, so, uh, this
amendment was just, um, uh, a
deletion that shouldn't have
happened, essentially clarifies
that they need to obtain a high
school diploma or a high school
equivalency credential. Uh, it
originally had just high school
equivalency credential, which
meant that if they went to high
school and got a degree, they
would not be included. We wanted
to make sure that they were
included here, so that's all
this does. OK. Any other
discussion on the amendment?
Is there any opposition to, can
I get a motion to move the
We already have that. See my
chairs down there. I was doing
so well. I did it once.
So at this point, we just
continue moving forward.
OK, so we do have to vote on it.
Thank you all.
Can you tell we're all like all
ready to be done.
adoption of the amendment. So we
have the adoption of the
amendment. Is there anybody in
opposition of the adoption of
the amendment. I see Senator
Ramos rub his eyes.
We're all there, man. Um, all
right, let's go ahead and show
all, uh, uh, in attendance and
support of the amendment. Uh,
now we will go to the committee,
uh, are there committee
questions?
Cut that, Senator Sher.
Oh,
thank you, Madam Chair. First, I
love the idea.
Sounds very pro-life.
I do have some questions here as
I, as I'm reading some of this.
Um, one of the questions that,
that came up here is the
anti-donation clause, and I know
that we have
We can do tax rebates. People
pay tax, we can give their give
them their money back.
How does this work in the
anti-donation clause, cause it
seems to me that, well it wasn't
their money to begin with.
Thank you, Chair. Thank you,
Senator for the question. Um,
yeah, so the biggest piece and
partially what the task force is
task to look at is making sure
that is in line with the Mexican
statute and laws and our
constitution. That's one of the
aspects. How we distribute these
baby bonds, um, it's gonna come
down to a number of factors. We
could uh create fun, we could
grow the fund and then they
could have essentially a Roth
IRA that goes from there. Uh, it
could be directly as scholarship
money for these, these children.
It could be a matching program
as well, which
is also an option. So I think
there are many ways depending on
how these young people decide to
use that money where this can
fit within the anti-donation
clause, but, um, and, and again,
not to say, not, not to
withstand the idea that there
will be a subsection of kids
that are that fit the indolent,
um, you know, exclusion from the
anti-donation clause and other
aspects as well. So I, I do see
there are many ways um to work
within the framework of the
anti-donation clause and the
exemptions that exist, but also
How we go about distributing it,
I think it's going to be a big
piece and I look forward to the
recommendations from the task
force for that. Very long
answer, I apologize.
So, Madam Chair and
Representative,
Well I guess senator too.
Um,
I, I'm just trying to figure out
exactly how this works in
reality on the ground, like I
said, I
I love the idea, but, but it's
I'm studying it or trying to
understand this like just like
tried to do my homework and
Um,
I'm, I'm struggling, but then I
see here in the FIR um
The state vestment council
actually brings up several
things here. Uh, the bill
requires 2/3 of any
appropriation of the fund be
invested by the State Investment
council for 18 years.
But then eventually it's moved
to the uh state treasurer's
office, and they have some
concerns about technically how
do they do that? How do they
make that happen?
And so do you see a
They're actually suggesting here
that uh uh be restructured to
create two separate and distinct
funds.
So
Thank you, sir. Thank you,
Senator. So, um, right at the
beginning for the 1st 18 years,
all of the fund will be invested
by the SIC um by themselves for
those 18 years. Then after that
point, when it becomes a
distribution account as well,
uh, then it'll be 1/3 by the SIC
and 2/3 by the state treasurer,
which is in line with our
prudent investor act and how we
want to make sure that at the
highest growth for as long as
possible and then change it and,
and then switch it over to short
term withdrawals to make sure
that that fits that.
The reason why we have a
structure like this right now is
because we won't have a
distribution account for 18
years, um, to and from my
perspective, I think a lot of
our conversations we've had to
have that account sit empty for
18 years isn't necessarily the
best use of an account per se,
um, and it, it isn't that that
doesn't necessarily help. After
18 years or even after 17 years,
100%, you will need a dis
distribution piece as well as an
investment piece, but for so
long, for nearly two decades,
um, there can be, there's really
only one account that's gonna be
necessary.
OK, thank you, ma'am, sure. Um,
What, how are we going to fund
it?
Where's the money gonna come
from? Thank you, chair. Thank
you, Senator. So, um, and I'm
gonna hand this also over to uh
Teresa who can kind of get
perspective on the growth. So
right now there's about a
million dollars, uh, that's in
the, the fund as it stands. Um,
all the distributions after 18
years will be handled by DFA.
DFA will request the amount and
they'll get distributed.
Part of what the task force is
going to also bring forward is
how much will need to be
invested. Um, I'll be honest
with you, and I think we all
know, uh, from my perspective,
it would make most sense to have
a larger amountcome right now as
opposed to every year having 100
million here or or or 10 million
here and partially we know that
$1 invested today after 20 years
is gonna be worth a heck of a
lot more. And so that is part of
it, but we also want the task
force to give us that
perspective. Um, that I said, do
you want to chat a little bit
about how you have seen
anticipated.
The ongoing uh that you guys are
dealing with and the size and
the structure there.
Uh, yes. Thank you, Madam Chair,
and, um, Senator, the private
fund that we have invested in is
uh is is uh excuse me.
We have estimated a projected
growth of 7%. That's a very
conservative and already it has
grown in less than 6 months at a
higher rate. And so we're
anticipating a much higher rate
of growth. What we did was
decided to see the fund at $6000
per child invested and then we
project a growth of about
$22,000 in 18 years. Um, what is
unique about the private fund is
that we are asking participants
to hold 1/3 of the account
through retirement.
Um, and so that's, that's a
unique perspective, but if they
were not to touch a single
dollar at all until the age of
65, we're projecting the growth
to be at $534,000 and so there
is opportunity for the funds to
grow in the long term in ways
that are meaningful. What we
also know is that of the 16
states that I've introduced
legislation and some of the
pilot programs across the
nation. There are conversations
about the best models for
investing in a baby bonds.
funded trust account. Some of
those models include front
loading, the fund in a way that
it's a one-time large fund
distribution that allows it to
grow in the trust over the 18
years. Um, there are some wins
with that model, which include
the potential of fewer fees,
fewer, um, fewer needs to come
and ask for funding, and then
you set the amount of
distribution based off of the
growth of the account over those
years. That's one, type of
model.
Another type of model is to set
the amount that you want to
distribute per child born, of
which for New Mexico, we would
estimate 22,000 children, and
then you estimate how much you
need to see the fund with to be
able to fund every child who
would be eligible, so there are
different approaches to this,
um, and what I think is critical
to this legislation in
particular is allowing the task
force to navigate those very
important details using the
national models.
Um, that we are um partnering
with and having discussion with
over time as community advocates
and also um bringing in other,
um, you know, representatives
from the state who can um
discuss those models and make,
uh, determination of best
practice for New Mexico and and
chair and senator just to point
to it in the bill in the
original bill on page 66, line
6. It explains that they're also
going to be tasked with putting
together a financial plan for
financing and implementing the
act with.
5 years if it's effective date.
So, so again that front loading
if you will, um, is going to be
a big piece of that as well.
Anything else, said Un share?
Yes, um, so
So it's for every
Every baby born in New Mexico.
Um
But there's a lot of, there's a
lot of people that are
Born and leave and there's
people that move in when they're
very young and uh how do we, how
do we figure out, so a baby is
born.
Um
Babies born as they're traveling
through the state, OK? So, not
really New Mexican, they're
going through and they keep on
moving, but they were born in
Albuquerque.
Um
Versus somebody that was born in
Texas, but really grew up here.
Uh, went to school here,
graduated from farm farmington
High School, yes, I did that.
Um, I think.
Oh.
But from a New Mexico high
school.
How does that work?
Thank you, Chair. Thank you,
Senator. So, um, that's the big
piece of, there's a big piece of
the conversation that we had,
especially on the house side for
this, and in the amendment that
we took in the house, it
specifies that we could because
we say continuously lives in New
Mexico. We want to clarify what
continuously means. What if a
kid spends every summer with
their grandma in the Arizona
side of Namo Nation. What if
they, you know, um, what if
their parents are divorced, you
know, what there's a, there's a
myriad of pieces. We do have
the, the, the requirement that
they're born in.
Mexico, that gives us a pool
that we know that we know that
we're dealing with in that
sense. But the definition of
continuously living in New
Mexico, we do want the task
force to chime in on, um, you
know, I, I joked and no one's
laughed, you know, we want
people that were have been born
here all their lives, right?
Like we want people who are New
Mexican to benefit from this
fund, um, and that I think is a
big piece of that too. So, yes,
you'll have to be born here, but
what constitutes continuously we
want input from the task force
to really help shape that.
So, Madam Chair,
Even though this, this
I was born in New Mexico. I went
to New Mexico High School.
I carried a New Mexico driver's
license for 20 years, even
though I didn't live in New
Mexico. It was an army.
granted
I don't qualify for this, but,
but my kids could have, my kids
could have been born in
Farmington, and then lived
somewhere else for 20 years.
For 18 years, whatever, and
still come back and graduated
from high school, but, but we
really didn't live here.
So I think that's one scenario
that I think it's just hard to
track.
I would love my kids to have
received money.
Yeah, that means that's much
less. I didn't have to give him.
But
I do see that there's
There's a lot here that that I,
I'd love and I want to figure it
out.
Because I think the idea of
helping somebody along and
investing and things like that
are good. I'm just, I'm, I'm
having a real struggle with
trying to figure out somebody
born here but doesn't live here,
somebody does live here but
wasn't born here.
Uh, just like, so you're born on
the wrong side of the, the line
on Navajo Nation, where you're
born in Navajo, but you just
happen to be born in Window
Rock, which is 20 miles from,
not even 20 miles from New
Mexico, but then you go to
Gallup.
Schools your whole life.
Um, are they a New Mexican? No.
I would think they were Mexican
with Gallup schools their whole
life. They're born window rock.
Um, I can see the same thing.
All over, at least the edges of
the state where that happened.
But I can also see it in
reverse.
So they were born in Gallup, but
they immediately went to school
somewhere else, um.
Maiden still on Navajo Nation
just not in New Mexico at that
point.
They never left home.
Oh
So I'm trying to think that
through and then how do you fund
it? Where does the money come
from, and how do you track all
of that?
That that's really
I want to sit with you and try
to figure this out, cause I like
the idea, but I, but I'm
struggling with this is a, is,
is how it really works on the
ground.
Um
But I do have another
Another question for you. So you
said you estimate 22,000 babies
born in New Mexico, uh, chair,
senator, yes, that's the best
one that we've seen, yes, and
then the growth of the fund
we're estimating would also be
$22,000 at the end, or did I get
those two senator, so that's,
uh, that's in their model as
well. You know, I've heard
different numbers. I've heard of
starter numbers that were
something like, uh, you know,
you started with 600 million
today. Let's just say it's a
number, big number, but a number
nonetheless, uh, and that grows
over 18 years, you know, you
would have a fund that was worth
nearly
billion at that point. And then
the interest is 5% of that, um,
they wouldn't go back to the
corpus after that would be able
to for 22,000 children, and
that's assuming all of them hit
this criteria at the same time.
Um, you know, that would, that
would be something like 63,
right, which is why we also want
the folks in the fund to check,
check this out as well. And, and
I do want to point out that this
is why the task force is such an
integral part of this bill right
now is to get it moving, um, to
include as many children as we
can, but also to your point
earlier, to really make sure we
shaking this out and
To our interns to make sure that
For any investments we're making
we're very clear about what does
continuously living in New
Mexico? I mean, what does, what
do all these aspects mean? So I
just want to add that also, um,
but yes, that, um, that, that's
the answer to your question as
well. And then, Madam Chair, I
know that we talked about this
with retirement, and I know
there's a defined benefit, which
you are always going to get your
$1000 a month or whatever, no
matter what what happens.
I can't remember what the other
side is where you have a defined
what you're putting in, uh, and
what you're putting in then to
determines where you get back. I
can't remember that term. I was
writing things down here, none
of them sounded right when I did
it.
Um
So in this case, um,
Is it a defined benefit? They
are going to get $1000 60,000
dollars, 20,000, whatever, or
they're gonna get whatever they
get when it gets there, uh,
chair, so if I may interrupt,
just, uh, uh, quickly, so, um,
we are supposed to go to the
floor at 6:30, so I'm gonna ask
for questions and answers to be
a little bit more concise. We'll
give that, and I know Senator
Ramos, you want to as well. We
do have one more bill to here,
so I'll let that conversation I
just wanted to go ahead and make
everybody aware of time. Uh,
Senator, you get what you get
when it's there.
Uh, yes.
OK. And then the uh financial
literacy piece, which I also
like because that's, that's our
number one problems, but it's,
but it's not math, and I know
we've heard about financial
literacy. Oh, we teach that math
class. No, financial literacy is
up here.
This is math, OK, at least
modern math.
Although I still use a pencil
and paper.
There's more,
but uh,
So, the financial literacy class
also isn't one hour.
It's
months
So what do you envision with
that?
Senator, so we know that, um,
you know, we literature literacy
is a part of high school
requirements now, we know that
credit unions also have those as
well, and it's also within there
that we want to make sure that
we are, um, that they're how
their understanding of the, you
know, the trade-offs, the
opportunity costs, etc. that you
know, we, we expect most things,
um, yeah, so, so again, we're
also looking at the task forces
to give us some of that, but we,
but to your point, we know that
financial literacy is not a
simple, you took this one class.
This is for people who are
serious about investing in the
future.
Thank you Senator Sheriff,
Senator Ramos, Madam Chair, I
have no more questions. I think
my partner over here, Asma.
Thank you so much.
Figaro. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, sponsors, and thank
you for, I want to thank the
sponsors for being so open to
talk with me about my concerns,
and I know we're pressed for
time, so I'll be brief. I'm not
comfortable with making a
promise that we're not
committing to keep that we're
not putting the money in now,
600 million is a big commitment,
and if that's what it's gonna
take to make this work.
Um, it's
We have to all be on board
before we pay a statute that
implies to the public, to my
constituents that this is
happening. I really, really like
the idea of baby bonds, love the
idea of the task force. I think
there's probably a way we can
work this out and make it work.
But um,
Not comfortable with the
Uh, fund at this point, creating
it. I'd like to make it, dump
the money in it, and say we're
moving forward all at the same
time.
But we've talked about that, the
positive aspects are
This is like the tax rebate bill
we talked about earlier, Mater,
this could be good. It does not
address inequality. It just
moves that inequality up a
notch. So we have to be careful
about how we talk about it and
the promises we're making. We
could commit.
to $132 million a year for the
next 18, and we could make it
work.
Um, those are my concerns, when
I'm chair of that and the
timeline. I think the task force
needs more than 6 months,
figured out.
Thank you. Oh, and with that
said, Madam Tay, I'm gonna,
because the concept that
I want to see. I'm gonna pass it
now, but you know what I need to
see on the floor.
Thank you. So is that emotion?
For now, uh, you don't have to.
You can, I mean, we've got other
people who can make a motion.
You don't have to always do that
in there.
Like, what's the world Senator
O'Malley. It's your last one.
This is what we've got one more
bill very quickly, so go ahead,
Senator O'Malley, but just
briefly, uh, I, I like the
concept too. I mean, it's, it's
almost like a fund that um
That if you have investments,
there's a certain, I, I forget
the name of it, it's got a, it's
a designation where you can put
aside um money for
grandchildren. It's only to be
used for education, but um is it
5:29 and um and that's, you
know, nice if you have the money
and you can, you can invest it
like that. Of course, you know,
that's, that's not the case for
a lot of people.
Um
I
Um, I do think that there's just
does need to be more thought
into this, but at the same time,
I think sometimes you want a
perfect situation and we're not
gonna get it.
So, uh, we have to be careful
about that. I, just in terms of
legislation period, uh, that we
want all the answers right away
and that somehow everybody's
gonna ride up into the sunset if
we put this money in there,
which is um not necessarily
true. Um, so,
And you know, just following up
with what um
Figueroa said, I think that we
You know, I'm, I, I don't, I
think we should, yeah, I'm, I'm
happy to move it forward, but I
think it needs work.
So I move to pass right. We have
a do pass from Senator O'Malley.
Do we have a second?
Second from Senator Harami, will
you please take the vote?
Senator Figueroa.
Yes.
Senator had a meal.
Senator O'Malley
Senator Paul.
Senator Ramos.
Senator Sanchez, Senator
Sheriff.
Senator Worth is excused,
Senator Bergman's. Yes. Senator
Hamblin.
Senator Ramos.
We have 7 yeses and 2 nos do
pass.
Thank you for your time. Thank
you very much. All right, we're
gonna let you clear out
committee, we just have one
more. I have a feeling this one
won't be uh too long of a
debate.
Thank you, Representative.
And then we have cheeseburgers
apparently waiting for us down
here. Um, Senator Lopez, do you
want to come up where it's
comfortable for you?
So Lopez, welcome to this
committee. I, I don't know if
you've, I know you've been
listening eagerly online, um,
we'll give you 10 minutes, um,
and you can go ahead and if that
includes your expert witness.
Um, we can go ahead and go to
public testimony if you'd like,
and then we'll go to the
committee. So, I will let you go
ahead and start Senator Lopez.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, I present to
you for your considerations
Senate Bill 510, 512. And what
we are doing at this point is
amendy has surprised Billing
protection Act.
Uh, to change the method for
calculating healthcare provider
reimbursements.
And if I could allow um my
expert witness from the Office
of Superintendent Insurance to
um add some a little bit more
explanation.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Piaria Akiva. Um, the life and
Health division director with
the Office of Superintendent of
Insurance. The surprise billing
Protection Act has been in place
since 2019, protecting hundreds
of New Mexicans from exorbitant
out of pocket costs associated
with out of network emergency
care. The current law requires
provider reimbursements to be
based on data from 2017.
Uh, which is outdated and will
require multiple statutory
changes to keep up with the
ever-changing healthcare costs.
SB 512 proposes to improve the
current law by ensuring the
provider reimbursements are
consistent with the current
market trends, and it also
removes the sunset that, uh, the
that uh.
Date from the law and with that
we answer questions. Thank you.
Great. Thank you so much. Um,
we've got two folks in the
audience, so I have a feeling,
are you here in support and
opposition. You're just here
because you like it.
They have nowhere else to be and
this is an entertaining
committee. All right, is there
anybody online? No? All right,
um, now we go to questions from
the committee.
See, no question.
He's a glutton for punishment
because he's been in this
committee so many times.
If there are no questions or
comments from the committee,
Senator Figueroa, move a do pass
on Senate Bill 52. We have a due
pass from Senator.
No, this one we, it's, you know,
the thing is, is that I, I, I
hope it gets out on the floor.
No, the other two that were the
ones that we were holding.
OK.
So we have a 2nd from Senator
Hatami.
So anybody in opposition of the
DuPass?
OK, so let's go ahead and take a
vote.
Senator Figueroa. Yes.
Senator Hami.
Senator O'Malley.
They
She's just as eager to get out
of here.
Senator Ramos. No. Senator
Sanchez.
Sheriff.
Senator Worth is excused Senator
Bergman's.
Senator Hamlin.
We have 5 yeses and 4 nos.
So you have to do pass on a 5 to
4 vote, um, thank you, thank you
very much.
And so, um, thank you for being
our very last bill of over 230
bills heard in this committee,
committee, I just want to say,
um, I'm going to, oh no, I don't
want that on there. It's a, the
song.
That
I'm so
we have this time together just
to have a laugh or sing a song,
seems we just get started and
before you know it comes the
time we have to say.
Oh
Is that you see? Oh gosh, no,
that's Carol Burnett. No, thank
you, everybody. Thank you
everybody who made this a big
