Present
Senator Sanchez, Senator share
is excused.
Senator.
Senator Bergman's Senator
Hamblin.
We have 8 present present we
have a quorum. All right, um, we
do have 2 holdovers from last
week, uh, from last meeting on
Tuesday. Um, if you look at the
agenda, for those of you who are
new to this committee, um, I'd
like to commend this committee.
We have a tendency of going, uh,
and discussing bills in a very
efficient and thorough manner,
um, but also with thought to
time and so we are going to
start off with Senate Bill 239
from Senator Stewart, then we'll
follow that with Senator
Maestas.
I see he is here already. So,
uh, Senator Stewart, if you'd
like to go ahead and start, um,
we'd love to uh hear from you.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair.
Uh, so over the years I have
done a a numerous HOA bills, uh,
help to craft better regulation,
um, what I've never been able to
do in any of those bills is to
give a a different remedy other
than just you can have to hire a
lawyer. We have over 2000 HOAs
in the state, the vast majority
of them are run well. There's no
issues, there's no problems.
And then we have, I don't know,
30 or so that are just breaking
the rules right and left.
And I hear from them all the
time, uh, they asked for help. I
don't know what to do. So I
tried in my earlier bill to put
HOAs under a kind of mandatory
mediation process. We don't have
any agency or even any private
group, uh, to do that with cause
we don't have an organized set
of mediators, so, uh, this, all
this does is that puts them
under the Attorney General.
Uh, giving the attorney General
the ability to commence a civil
action on behalf of a lot owner
to enforce the bylaws or the
rules. It's very simple. There's
about 4 other HOA bills. They're
all in the house, um, I think
this is the only one here. I
could be wrong. That's it.
Thank you, uh, Senator Protem,
uh, do you have anybody that you
would like to make a, a brief
comment at all? No. OK. All
right. So what we're gonna do is
we're gonna go to uh audience
testimony and just by a show of
hands, uh, who in the audience
is in support of this
legislation?
See none. Is there anybody in
opposition of this legislation?
done, but, OK, we have somebody
online.
I'm sorry?
I, well, we have enough sugar on
the floor. I would hope at
least.
Some of us are awake. We do
have, um, Nora, so Nora Beltran,
who is online, so we're gonna go
ahead and, and take, uh, let
Nora go ahead and give a
one-minute testimony, uh, to
this, but I have a feeling Nora
might be not for 2:39. I think
she's for a different bill. Will
you check?
Cause I think she's from my
belt.
Yes.
So I'm sorry to, sorry to tease
that to you, Senator Stewart,
um, but I'm pretty sure Norris,
uh, Norris from mine. Um, so, on
that point, uh, given that there
is no public testimony either
for or against, now I go to the
committee. So if there are
members of the committee who
would like to ask questions,
make comments.
All right, Senator O'Malley,
thank you. Sure.
Senator Stewart, um, I'm
assuming that you had a
conversation with the AG's
office about this.
Since they're the ones would be
required to.
But I'm sure I did not.
OK. Well, having dealt with,
same thing, associations, either
it's
Someone suing an association or
pushing back on association. I
was just wondering, I mean,
that's a lot of associations. I
know you're right, you're right
about 30 you're saying or being
very difficult, um.
It seems like it's a real tough
tough thing to negotiate or
mediate or whatever, but um.
That was my question. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you, thank
you, Senator O'Malley. Other
questions or comments from the
committee, Senator Wirth, thank
you, Madam Chair. So I think can
I?
Association member right now
file a complaint with the
consumer protection division at
the Attorney General's office.
Uh, Madam Chair, I don't think
so. They've tried to do that and
they won't help them. Um, so
it's really only a private
attorney. That's really the only
uh
They're only option.
And so, uh,
madam chair, but
some of them have told me
they've tried to do that and
have been dismissed. So, so and
wrote to him, I think when this,
assuming it moves forward, we've
got to get the Attorney General.
Because I'm, I'm pretty sure
they have a a consumer
protection division and it may
be that they're just not.
Doing and maybe this.
Bill will send a message to them
that they need to start doing
that. Um,
You know, there's a lot of
Judiciary type questions that we
can talk about there. I mean,
this,
It just says the Attorney
General may.
So of course, the Attorney
general.
I think right now can already.
do that, that's a question I've
got.
Um
You know, I think it's a, it's
typically it's a private
contractual when you sign up for
these things, no one ever reads
the small print, and there's a
lot of stuff in the small print,
and I know the frustration
because I've got a bunch of,
I've represented all sides of
these issues and it's.
And you know, when you go to
private attorney ro it gets
expensive really quick for both
the association and the members,
so I appreciate what you're
trying to do. I just do think
that we need to hear from
What are they doing?
What can they do now?
And then is there a way that
This just gives them the
discretion to.
commence a civil action. Um
but they may already be able to
do that, and they're just not
doing it. That's what I wanna
find out.
Madam Chair, I hope that's true,
but every one of my constituents
or the people that are not my
constituents that continue to
think I'm their savior for HOAs.
They say they try to go to the
AG and they're told no, we don't
deal with that.
So
Just haven't had time to uh uh.
They interface with the AG, so
through this in to see if they
would start doing this work.
I'm sure I think it should
certainly get their attention.
I'm surprised they're not here.
So, but I think they need to be
in the judiciary. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator Wirth.
Other questions from the
committee.
So there is a motion to table.
That, uh, you're serious about
the motion to table, OK, all
right.
OK. So, um, motion to table is
uh undisputable. So, uh, if you
will, please, uh, if you vote
yes, it is to table. Do we have
a second for the motion to
table?
Don't need a second, we don't
need a second. All right. So,
uh, if you vote yes, it is to
table. No, it is to not table,
so if you will.
Senator Figueroa noted table.
Senator Jaramillo is excused
Senator O'Malley.
Senator Paul
Senator Ramos.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator Scher.
Senator Wirth
Senator Bergman's.
Senator Hamlin, no.
We have 5 no's and 4 yes. So the
motion to table fails, uh, on
the 5 to 4.
Move a de pass a pass.
You'll have your second motion
to pass.
Alright, so we have a second for
Senator Sanchez.
Let you catch up.
All right. Uh, is there any
opposition to this, uh, due?
none
Let's have one of the weirdest
votes we've ever had.
Um, so showing, showing no
opposition. Let's show all those
and, uh, all those in attendance
and support of a due pass.
Senator Stewart. Thank you so
much. What a twilight. OK,
this is fun.
I'll try to come back.
I was just as taken back by
that. Thank you, Senator
Sanchez.
All right, now we are on Senate
Bill 233, uh, from Senator
Maestas. Senator Maestas, you're
welcome to go ahead and start.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Honorable members of, I'm joined
by Attorney Patrick Griebel.
This is a Senate Bill 233, and
it deals with distributed.
Generation Disclosure Act
dealing with home solar sales
and home solar systems. Um, it's
very complicated transaction. A
lot of the consumers are older
folks, so in 2017, we put in
this wonderful statute, 57-31-3.
And if you'll thumb through it,
it's, you know, 8 or 9 pages of
what needs to be disclosed, but
what we need is teeth to this
act, um, and so there's a couple
other bills floating around, uh,
dealing with this issue, but I
think this is the cleanest best
way to do it, and essential on
page 7,
Madam Chair, uh, a failure to
provide the written statement
required by this section.
Uh
Would be a violation of unfair
trade practices Act. And, uh,
with that, I will turn over to.
Mr. Patrick
Greeting.
OK.
Greetings, uh, Madam Chair,
committee, uh, my name is
Patrick Greebel. Uh, I'm a
practicing attorney in
Albuquerque.
Uh, but I took a little detour
about 10 years ago, uh, to start
a few solar companies. I see
some familiar faces in the
crowd, um, a lot of our flagship
companies here in New Mexico I
had something to do with, uh,
was the general manager at
Affordable Solar for 3 or 4
years. Um, and on my way out in
about 2015 or so. That's when we
had sort of an influx of
different business model, sort
of out of state, uh, we call
them door knockers.
I'm sure folks have had these,
these folks at your door, um,
I've had a few at my door, uh,
and the problem with that is
often they were.
Selling the contract on the
front end, but then they would
have nothing to do with the
installation.
And that is not a typical
business model for our in-state
companies. Usually when you do
business with an in-state
company, they're gonna be with
you from the initial sale all
the way through the installation
and in, in many cases many years
beyond, um.
I just called uh one of the
local companies the other day to
swap out an inverter that was 15
years old. Um, so,
Um, I guess the point I'd like
to make is that the feedback I
was getting from some of them
was that we have the statute.
And I have to admit it's a
wonderfully written, uh,
statute. I wish uh I could claim
some credit for it because it
clearly whoever.
Did the drafting knew what they
were doing, um.
But the, the feedback I get from
some of the local companies is
it doesn't have any teeth and
therefore, the door knockers, if
you will, don't have to abide by
it. Obviously, it would apply to
anyone and everyone who made uh
either a false disclosure or
failed to give a disclosure.
Because what happens is they'll
tell you whatever you want to
hear at the door, and then they
hand you a 75 page contract and
buried on and paragraph 37 sub
triple I.
Directly contradicts what they
told you at the door. And so 3
years later, when you figure
that out,
Good luck. That company's not
even around anymore. They were
just blowing through town, uh,
and so this, I believe this
statutory fix would put some
teeth into it and probably uh
caused the less scrupulous
vendors to just move on.
With that, I stand. Thank you so
much. Uh, we now go to the
audience, are there are those in
the audience who are in support
of this legislation just by a
show of hands.
Jim.
Anybody in this audience, uh, in
opposition of this legislation.
All right. We have 2 that are in
support. We have 1 online. Jim,
I'm gonna let you go ahead and
come on up, if you will, just
for one minute and then we'll
have Camilla online. She'll have
one minute as well. Um, vice
chair will show you, Jim, I
think you know the, the routine
is you'll get a 32nd warning.
Right. Thank you. Go ahead. Good
afternoon, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. My name is Jim
De Chardin. I'm the executive
director of the renewable Energy
Industries Association of New
Mexico. We have 60,
approximately 60 members and
we've been around since 2004,
and we were founded to bring
professionalism and integrity to
the solar industry.
In 2017, we worked with P&M and
the Attorney General on passing
the distributed generation
Disclosure Act to to address
deceptive deceptive marketing
practices in the solar industry.
This bill
Provides a small but important
tweak to that legislation to
pointing to the unfair trade
Practices Act as consequence for
not providing the required
disclosure form to the to a
solar customer.
This bill provides a
constructive, commonsense
approach to addressing predatory
marketing practices in the solar
industry, we urge it due pass.
Thank you.
Thank you, Jim. All right,
Camilla online, if you will go
ahead and unmute yourself. You
have one minute, you'll see a
32nd warning in the chat. Go
ahead, Camilla.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee just lending
our support as well to the
legislation and thanks to the
sponsor for bringing it.
Consumers need to understand the
full terms of what they're
agreeing to disclosures have
been required for several years,
and we need to make sure that
also solar companies are
providing them. This is a common
sense fix and we support it.
Thank you.
Thank you, Camilla, and there's
nobody online in opposition. All
right, at this point, I'm now
going to the committee. Are
there any questions or comments
from the committee, Senator
Scherer.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'm not
sure this is uh specific to this
bill.
But
Isn't it already unfair to do
this, I mean, unfair trade
practices law exists, that would
cover this?
Madam Chair, uh, Senator
Scherer, um, that's true, and I
guess I, I should have also
pointed out, uh, since returning
to private practice, I have
actually represented at this
point probably over 100 folks
affected by this. Um, so I see
the way it plays out in terms of
actually taking these companies
to task, uh, and in my case, it
has been 100%.
Out of state folks who were
flipping the contract, um, it,
it
It creates another step. It's,
you could certainly argue that
in an arbitration or in a court
of law, but by putting it right
here in the statute.
Look, it's, it's like you have
to give this disclosure and if
you don't, it is per se a
deceptive trade practice, I
think that would probably do one
of two things, either that
vendor would move on to a
different market or hopefully
they just decide to uh go to the
AG's website, download the form,
and comply with the law.
I hope that answered your
question, Senator.
Madam Chair.
Sort of.
So they download something that
the age you already wrote.
It's 700 pages long.
still not a disclosure.
Or however long it is.
Um, unless it's a sentence or
two, yeah, Madam Chair, uh.
Senator Scherer actually, uh, I
think it's
But me, Madam Chair and sheriff,
look on page 2.
lying to, uh, it's a 10 point
font, no more than 4 pages.
Is the uh standard form.
So
Um, Madam Chair, and I think
that
Goes back to my point. So if I
want to download an app on here,
it doesn't matter what it is,
OK, a calculator, something
simple, isn't it?
There's, you know, 0.04 font and
it's 20 pages long.
So you can't read it.
And even if you did read it, you
don't understand it.
And so I've come to the
conclusion that.
This.
The massive need for disclosure,
so everybody knows means that
nobody knows anything cause
nobody reads anything cause all
of the disclosures are too long.
And, and, and I use as an
example.
You can pick up almost anything
in any store, and it will say
the state of California has
found that this causes cancer.
And what happened in California
wasn't that everything in
California causes cancer. It was
easier for the people doing
this, doing business in
California to put that
disclosure on everything instead
of actually testing anything to
see if it was true.
It's on everything.
buy baseball glove, made out of
leather, and it will say the
state of California's determined
that this caused cancer, not
because the baseball glove
really causes cancer, but
because it's just too expensive
to test it.
So they put that warning on
everything, which means that
warning has zero value for
anything, because some of those
things really might cause
cancer.
But we don't know because
everything in California now
says that.
And, and that's my concern with
any of these disclosures, not
this one in particular.
But any of them, it just makes
the disclosures in general, less
valuable because there's more of
them.
people just quit reading them.
So, I don't know that that.
That's not a question, but that
is a legitimate concern I have
is that the more and more and
more and more means less and
less and less and less.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Sher. Anybody
else in the committee?
Before we go to emotion, I, I do
want to thank you for bringing
this and, and bringing just in
terms of in in my job, uh, I
deal with a lot of solar
companies as members of the Las
Cruces Green Chamber of
Commerce, and one of the things
that I there's a constant
question that I get asked, when
I have even people coming up to
my house when I have clearly
solar panels on my roof, uh, is
asking me if I like my solar
system and if I'm thinking about
something different. And, uh,
several years ago when we talk
about these predatory solar
companies coming in, especially
from El Paso down in Las Cruces,
they're knocking on.
and they're telling people this
is how we can save you money.
What they don't share, and this
is why I, I, I'm just as guilty
whenever there is an agreement
that comes up on my phone, I
scroll all the way to the end
and I don't read it. So you're
absolutely right, Senator Sher.
However, when we're talking
about people making a
significant investment in their
home, uh, with the idea that
they are going to receive
benefits from it, and these
predatory companies are
notorious for not sharing number
one.
If you decide to sell your
house, the person who buys your
house because they may want
solar on their roof, may not
qualify for the lease of that
solar system. So they may not
even get the benefit of the
solar system on their house or
um that's the wrecks that, you
know, if you get 6 cents per
kilowatt hour that's generated,
uh, those wouldn't actually go
to the homeowner, they go to the
company that just put that solar
system on your roof. Completely
misleading, which is why I
always stress to go local.
Right, Elizabeth, go local. Um,
but the thing is, is that not
everybody is, is able to ask
those questions or make those,
those assessments or do the
research. And so, and that's
what these predatory companies
are planning on is that people
aren't going to do the research
and just say this sounds like a
really good idea.
And then they are out thousands
of dollars when they thought
that they were going to benefit
from this system, so I want to
thank the sponsor for bringing
this forward, because we do need
to protect our consumers, um,
when they are hoping to try and
save money wherever by investing
in something, ah, that they,
they feel aligns with their
values. So I appreciate that.
Um, are there any other comments
or anything from the committee?
O'Malley,
he's ready for Ready for
emotion, Senator O'Malley. We
have a due pass from Senator
O'Malley. Do we have a second?
Second from Senator Ramos. Thank
you, Senator Ramos.
Is there anybody in opposition
of the Dupe?
Senator Sheriff, OK. So why
don't you go ahead and take the
vote.
Senator Figuero.
Yes.
Senator Jarami is excused
Senator O'Malley. Yes.
Senator Paul
Senator Ramos, yes, Senator
Sanchez.
Senator Scher
Oh
Senator, yes.
Senator Bergman's? Yes.
Senator Hamblin
we have.
8 yeses and 1 no. 8 to 1 do
pass.
Thank you very much thank you.
But I'm sure you're one of the
days.
Well, we had, we had
environmental growing yesterday
and now we have go Local today.
These, by the way, just in case
you're keeping bingo, uh, are,
are the quotes that you hear in
this legislature.
Uh, so now we're on to our new
business. We are on.
Senate Bill 369.
Yeah, we are pretty in church.
So, um, and thank you to my
co-sponsor, Senator Brantley. I
appreciate you being here to
present this bill. We both are
very passionate about this.
Um, in various ways.
I'm not necessarily a consumer
because wine gives me heartburn.
It's not just a red and white
though, it's a, it's a blue and
it's a bipartisan
just like the hamburger at
Salute de Mesa. All right, Madam
Chair, members of the committee
before US Senate Bill 369. New
Mexico's wine history dates back
almost 400 years, 629 when uh
1629, I'm sorry, when the
Spanish missionaries planted the
first grapes in the state of New
Mexico that tradition began.
with the sacramental lines for
mass, but today in New Mexico it
is a thriving wine region. We
know that Napa is the uh
self-proclaimed wine capital of
America and yet New Mexico has
certainly been planning, uh, uh,
wine and, and grapes much
longer. This bill before you is
a simple $3 million
appropriation to allow New
Mexico to begin preparation for
the 400th anniversary of New
Mexico's wine, uh, growing, and
I want to, before I turn it
over, uh, to, to Chris, our, our
Executive director of the New
Mexico Wine and Grapes
Association. I, I wanna make
this point in 2 years ago, the
New Mexico legislator allocated
$1 million to the route finding,
uh, what is it root stock, uh,
to encourage and incentivize and
expansion of grape growing, and
I am very proud to announce that
they're in uh in Senate Finance,
we always come back and want to
know if we had a return on that
investment within the first year
they had spent all 1 million
dollars of that money that has
included 7 new vineyards were
planted with that million
dollars. Wine sales are
estimated to be at $13 million
annually after those vineyards
reach maturity in just 2 more
years. They are great stewards
of uh our our investment in
them. I'm excited to help bring
this proposal forward, and I
will hand it over to Chris.
Thank you, Senator Brantley.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. I'm
Christopher Golay, the executive
director of the New Mexico Wine
and Grape Growers Association. I
represent our 50 wineries that
are in 70 locations across the
state. I'm sure some of you know
a local winery within your
district. As we approach the
this historic milestone, Senate
Bill 369 makes an appropriation
to leverage.
Uh, this once in a lifetime
opportunity. Imagine the impact
of thousands of visitors coming
to visit Farmington, Masa Dixon,
Riodoso, and of course, our
major cities to celebrate with
us in 2029.
These funds will be used to
build up the New Mexico wine
brand to create new destination
events and build partnerships
with hospitality and lodging
partners, and fully leverage
this opportunity.
The idea of a centennial
celebration is not new. Uh,
we've just enjoyed the 100th
burning of Zozobra. uh, and
thanks to Senator Scher. We have
a committee that's working on
the 100th anniversary of Route
66 and
Next year
Um
And there's no other place that
can say that it is the
birthplace of wine in America.
I brought one prop to share with
you today. It's the 52 places to
visit in 2025 by the New York
Times. I want to use this as a
way to demonstrate that
Centennial celebrations have
started to build tourism, uh,
interest across the country.
There's the 250th anniversary of
our country and
Uh, 2026, there's the 400th
anniversary of Manhattan in 2026
as well. And I believe that we
can do the same here in New
Mexico for the 400th vintage of
New Mexico wine.
Uh, make 2029 a banner year for
agriculture, tourism, and
economic development. This
one-time investment has the
power to propel our industry
forward into this and our state
into the limelight and leave a
lasting legacy for New Mexico as
a legitimate and respected wine
industry.
And with that, I y up for
questions.
Thank you so much. And so now we
go to audience support, uh, just
by a show of hands. Anybody in
the audience in support of this?
Wine drinkers, all of you.
Anybody in opposition.
See, and then we do have one
person online that says yeah.
um, I think just, uh, out of
time committee, are, uh, if
we're OK, we're just gonna go
ahead and record.
This visual image that we saw of
all your hands up, uh, and, uh,
Jasper, we do have it that you
are in support of this as well
online. But now if we can, we,
I'd like to go to the committee,
uh, to see if there's any
comments or, uh, Senator
Figueroa. Thank you, Madam
Chair, and thank you, sponsors,
I think branding, dealing with
hospitality, increasing tourism,
celebrating one of the many
fantastic things about New
Mexico. All good. My question
is, why is this?
An appropriation to NM state
instead of EDD because branding
hospitality and tourism are
their line of work.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee because
New Mexico State University,
within it is the New Mexico
Department of Agriculture. So
for us to get funding to the
Department of Agriculture, our
fiscal agent is actually New
Mexico State University and
within the Department of
Agriculture, they have a very
large um aro marketing uh
department in the agri-marketing
department has been identified.
There's been conversations and a
long history of working with New
Mexico wine growers.
Madame Terence sponsor, will
there be collaboration with EDD
because they do have contacts.
All over the country to help
promote this kind of thing.
Uh, Madam Chair and Senator
Figueroa, um, obviously I've had
long conversations with our
cabinet Secretary of Agriculture
and our cabinet secretary of
Tourism, uh, tomorrow I have
lunch with the marketing
director for the Department of
Tourism as well. And so we are
in extreme coordination with
our, our good friends over at
Tourism. We understand they know
best how to spend the money.
Uh, however, in my experience
working with the million dollar
grant for vine replanting. I
have built a great rapport and
an understanding with the uh the
folks who are at the Department
of Agriculture for managing the
funds. And so we will use the
Department of Agriculture as our
go to when it comes to looking
as to how we were going to split
up the funding to go to
different entities in terms of
trafficking, the media by, but
all of those purchases with the
media buy would be in
coordination with the tourism
department and various
Municipal DMOs that we're
working with in Santa Fe,
Albuquerque, and Las Cruces.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Those
are all my questions.
OK, Senator Ramos and then
Senator O'Malley. Madam Chair, I
just want to make a quick a
quick uh
Response to, first of all, thank
you, Senator Figueroa for, for
making those, having those
questions and getting those
answers because those are the
same questions I did, I did
have, but uh I just want to say,
I think we have some of the best
wine in southwest New Mexico
with less combs.
And I think we, I think everyone
needs to come down to damming
and and drink, although it's
spread out throughout the state
of New Mexico, but come down and
drink our wine, I wasn't much of
a wine drinker till I went to
Lescombs and and I love their
wine. But I just wanted to throw
that out there. I think this is
great for New Mexico. I think uh
we can do some great things with
this with this and uh hope it
just brings in more people into
the state of New Mexico. Thank
you so much.
Thank you, Senator Ramos.
Senator O'Malley.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I do
have some wineries along the
North Valley and um
I know someone who is um very
supportive of wineries.
Could be my friend sitting
there. Um, I just had a quick
question because I think it's
great that's going to, um, you
know, state university, uh, and
I don't know if this question
would be asked, but uh this is,
you know, and it, and of course,
I do want to acknowledge.
The, you know, the, the many,
many millions that that brings
to the state. Uh, but I don't
know if you were to ask this at
all, but what, what if any is
the, is the industry's
contribution to this particular,
um, uh, what is it?
yeah, request.
Madam Chair, uh, Senator
O'Malley, uh, New Mexico wine
and grape growers Organization,
uh, has been producing some of
the largest wine festivals in
the Southwest since 1991 when we
were founded. Every year we go
into Las Cruces and Albuquerque,
and we generate a $4 million
economic impact through these
festivals. There's over 50,000
people who attend these events.
We are the envy of all of my
colleagues who run wine
associations throughout the
country. So we are constantly
going to
be investing in these programs.
I, I don't have.
The capability to say that I
have matching dollars at this
moment, but part of the funding
strategy is to work with folks
at the federal level as well as
corporate sponsorship, so that
we can um compile the funds that
are allocated through this bill,
um, with other funds.
In order to broaden that impact.
Um,
So again, I don't have a
specific dollar amount, but we
certainly every year put on
these festivals and invest over
a million dollars in producing
them.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator Bergmans and then
Senator Sher. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Just a quick question,
did this end up in House Bill 2?
Madam Chair, Senator, it is not
currently in House Bill 2. That
is where we head next to Senate
Finance to discuss the capacity
of where this funding would
either to roll it into House
Bill 2 or to continue through
the, through the house just to
get it, get it passed that way.
Thank you. Thanks.
Thank you, Senator Bergman.
Senator share.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair. So,
First, my bottle is flat and
therefore,
does not appear to have anything
in it.
But since it was the Spanish
that brought this here. Why are
we calling it the 400 year. Why
isn't it uh rosientos.
I just think we ought to make
that amendment.
Madam, uh, Madam Scher and
Senator Scher, you are
absolutely right. Um, for many
years, New Mexico winegrowers
has not done an exceptional job
of promoting our, um, industry
and a bilingual capacity, and
just this year, in fact, very
late to the game, we translated
our website into Spanish for the
very first time.
So obviously we're playing catch
up.
But one of the things that we do
recognize is that down in Las
Cruces, 70% of the individuals
who attend our festivals are
crossing the border from Texas
and from Mexico.
And we are launching in March of
this year, a bilingual marketing
campaign in Spanish and in
English in El Paso and Juarez
and along the borderlands
because we realized that as you
look at the
State of wine drinking across
America. There's been a decrease
in overall consumption. But one
of the largest growing consumer,
um, segments is Hispanic
females. And so part of the
funding that we will be
allocating in the upfront
branding and marketing strategy
is how do we do everything as
we're doing our marketing in a
bilingual and a Spanish language
capacity. So, I think it's a
real good opportunity for us to
open the doors to new wine
drinkers and people who are
interested by using the Spanish
language throughout all of our
marketing materials.
Oh, Madam Chair.
I, I am
Even serious about this, uh, for
a variety of reasons.
Uh, so I'm not gonna make a
motion, probably cause I can't
spell it right, even though it
might come out of my mouth right
or maybe not. I don't know,
people out there going, oh, he
really missed.
We'll have to look at Twitter to
make sure whether or not you're
pronouncing it right. Well, I'm
sure we'll find out. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Scherer. Um,
any other questions from the
committee before we make a
motion, I would like to make a
comment, um, as, uh, myself and
Senator Jaramillo are also the
co-sponsors on this bill, um,
and I would like to, uh, thank
your graphic designer for those
from Las Cruces, the background
of these bottles is the glorious
Oregon mountains, and so I'm
very much looking forward to
having a poster of this, uh, in
my office. And for full
transparency for the committee,
I've met with Mr. Gola about
this, um, and one of the things
that we do is we talk about
tourism and ways to get people
out into our.
and ways to highlight our local
businesses. We have several
local wineries, um, in southern
New Mexico and uh and they are
constant sources of events, you
know, one of the things I'm
thinking of, Mr. Gola, that we
didn't talk about is, you know,
an outdoor weekend where
somebody can go ahead and and as
like, just like Outfitters, uh,
go riding their bikes amongst
the vineyards, uh, have paired
dinners, maybe even do grape
stomping, I'll uh Lucille Ball
and uh, you know, that whole
thing, I mean, we're all
thinking about that.
I mean, there are, there are
many opportunities that this
provides, uh, for different
communities to be able to
customize what they're
experiences are for the visitors
that they have, so I'm really
appreciative of this, proud to
sponsor this with Senator
Brantley and Senator Jaramillo,
um, and, uh, and looking forward
to this. And so if there are no
other questions.
Go ahead, Senator Jaramillo.
Madam Chair, Senator, I just
want to disagree with Senator
Ramos, that the best wine comes
from northern New Mexico.
In Dickson and Bill are there,
but the truth is, is I was happy
to sign on to this and Los
Luceros, which is in Ri Riba
County, is working with the
program with New Mexico State
University to try to get those,
um, vineyards that were here in
the past revitalized and
revamped in the northern Rio
Grande area, just so you know.
But I just want to tell you,
senators that there's so many
wineries from northern New
Mexico have reached out who were
happy to see this legislation.
Oh, and one last thing. Did you
know Anciano's older people, so
those of us here who have
hispanal lineage, will know that
our ancestors always talk about
making vino, and they still do
it in northern New Mexico with
choke cherry, although they're
not officially vineyards,
they've been using this uh
tradition and technique for
years to do their own wine with
harvested fruit from the valley.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you very much, Senator
Janamilo. So at this point, is
there a motion from the
committee.
Senator Ramos, with the Du Past,
do we have a second? Second
from, I'm hearing it in stereo,
so we'll just wrap paper
scissors.
All right.
And uh, is there anybody in
opposition to this, uh, Du pass.
see then, let's go ahead and
record that all, all in
attendance are in favor. You
have a 10 to 0 due pass. Thank
you guys. Thank you very much.
Right now we have Senate Bill
41, uh, I believe Senator
Charlie, there is an amendment.
So, you're gonna explain, you're
gonna explain the bill first and
then we will move the amendment
for discussion.
And I believe there is a
PowerPoint that
Am I right, there's a
PowerPoint? OK, so we'll get
that PowerPoint
I know you did, yeah.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and good
afternoon committee, um, I bring
before you Senate Bill 41, which
mandates the creation of the
turquoise alert system dedicated
to rapid dissemination of
information regarding missing
American Indian individuals in
New Mexico.
While our state is home to a
rich a rich tapestry of
indigenous cultures, um, we are
also home to the most
disproportionate rates of
murdered and missing indigenous
people in the nation. This
crisis has left families and
communities in anguish, often
feeling invisible and
unsupported.
Senate Bill 41 seeks to address
this crisis by establishing a
turquoise alert system, ensuring
a timely and effective
notification when an American
Indian person goes missing.
Modeled after existing alert
systems in our state like the
amber and silver alerts, the
turquoise alert will serve as a
specialized tool facilitating
swift collaboration between law
enforcement agencies, media
outlets, and the public.
By broadcasting critical
information urgently, we can
enhance the likelihood of
locating a missing individual
and reuniting them with their
loved ones.
In fact, similar alert systems
have been enacted in other
states and it's working in
Colorado, 17 were issued in
their first year in 17 cases
were solved, 16 of which the
individuals came home, one of
which was located deceased.
So the implementation of this
system is not merely a
procedural enhancement, it's a
moral imperative.
It signifies our commitment to
the safety and well-being of all
New Mexicans, acknowledging the
unique challenges faced by your
indigenous populations and by
passing this bill, we take a
decisive step toward rectifying
systemic disparities and
affirming that every community
in our state deserves equal
protection.
And attention.
So colleagues, I urge you to
support Senate Bill 41 and
joining me and establishing the
turquoise alert system, this
vital measure to safeguard
American Indian people in our
state, um, and just uh rectify
injustices and promote equity
throughout our state, the
murdered and missing indigenous
peoples crisis exists for three
primary reasons.
It's a combination of
jurisdictional complexity,
historic and chronic
underfunding and systemic
racism. This bill addresses each
one of these tenants.
It transcends jurisdiction
completely and it's one of the
first real solutions that we can
offer families, and we know it
will work.
Regarding historic and chronic
underfunding, we've been made
aware of the $2 million
appropriation as.
Um, for the implementation of
this, and while, um, the $2
million is not just for the
turquoise alert, it's actually
what in uh upgrade the Amber
Alert and the silver alert, it
would serve to protect all New
Mexicans and it is an investment
in all of us. Um, I believe that
when we protect our most
vulnerable, we protect everyone.
And then regarding systemic
racism, the bureaucracy or
family's face when they
encounter this impossible crisis
is enormous, and this offers a
clear process grounded in
urgency.
This also will help with victim
blaming, which happens often in
these cases by establishing data
that we can use to hold the
system accountable when and if
they do not respond, Madam
Chair, and with that, I'm going
to introduce my um expert
witness, Secretary of Indian
Affairs, um, Secretary Moni.
Senator,
uh, would you, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, thank
you for having us today, so, uh,
um, we have a quick slide. I
won't go through all of it word
for word, but, um, just to try
to go through off of what
Senator Charlie has talked a
little bit about, so this bill
SB 41, uh, we're calling it the
turquoise alert, uh, to really
help address some of the missing
and.
Missing indigenous people
throughout the state of New
Mexico, uh, specifically created
so that we can address that
issue, it will work very similar
to the Amber Alert and the
silver alert, in fact, the
language is almost mimicked
exactly after the silver alert
we did, uh, you'll see the
amendments do have some caveats.
We changed how the definition
works a little bit, um, but it
will go through the various
channels through radio stations,
through print, through broadcast
media, cellular service
companies, and ensuring that
people have access.
To those, um, and that it gets
pushed out, uh, the alert is
designed to improve the chances
that we will find our missing
indigenous people once they go
missing. We all know that the
first few hours is critical,
I'm, I'm really sorry and I
don't mean to be disrespectful
and um we are having, uh, we
have to reboot online.
Um, because we do want to make
sure that the public can hear
this. So we've been assured 30
seconds. That's OK to just
reboot, so my apologies.
We had to do this on the floor
last night too. We had to to
while we rebooted, not not us
per se, maybe Senator Sheriff
rebooted.
At least twice,
um, we all, we all could
actually just use a little
reboot right now, um.
It does happen.
You ready?
Are we online?
Good to go. Thank you,
Secretary. Please go ahead and
continue, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, thank you. I
will, um, pick up from, uh, just
a couple of bullet points down
there. So again, the alert
designed to ensure that we can
locate our missing indigenous
people as soon as possible, as
quickly as possible, as many of
us know those first few hours
become critical when we have a
missing person and so the intent
is that we're able to identify
people and get that notice out
as quickly as possible.
Um, it matters again, uh,
because we want to ensure that
we have quick access to all of
these different media sources
and these different outlets to
ensure that we're getting the
notice out to the public on
average in New Mexico, there are
on average 200 missing Native
Americans across the entire
state our highest rates of
missing indigenous people are
ages 30 to 39 and 40 to 49 years
old and most of them being
males.
This also helps to address some
of the issues and items that
were stated in the state
response plan back in 2022, the
state issued a missing and
murdered indigenous peoples
response plan and some of
there's um 6 objectives and they
have a number of strategies
under those objectives as well
and so this alert goes to
address some of those objectives
and ensures that we are
implementing the state response
plan as the experts in New
Mexico on MMI.
he have asked for us to do.
Um, so, and then moving on, just
real briefly.
Maybe.
There we go.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
just, there are 3 other states
that we're aware of that have
similar alert systems throughout
the country, California,
Colorado and Washington, and the
Senator Charlie noted some of um
the statistics for Colorado.
Again, this one of the reports
from Washington was with their
alert system activated uh 94
times in its 1st 21 months in 94
of those 94 times 80 people, 80
people were located and, um, at
least 11 of those were
attributed to having
The alert system in place. Uh,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I stand for
questions. Thank you so much.
Um, there is an amendment,
Senator Wirth, do you want
to move the amendment for
discussion. Move the amendment
for discussion.
Right, Senator Charlie, if you
will go ahead and discuss the
amendment. Thank you, Madam
Chair, rely on my expert. She
drafted our amendment for us.
Madam Chair, uh, members of the
committee senators, so we do
have an amendment, um, the
amendment is to on page 5 to
strike, um, some of the
language, but then to add in
some parameters into that
definition of, uh, who would
qualify under the turquoise
alert and so, um, looking at a
person who is missing due to an
involuntary, unexplained or
suspicious circumstances,
missing persons, safety or
health may be inangered. The
missing
person may be subject to human
trafficking or the missing
person suffers from mental or
physical disability and
substance use disorder. We did
this in order to ensure that,
um, we could kind of ensure that
there are parameters, uh, to
help ensure our law enforcement
had accurate data to track and
figure out who they should uh
put the alert out for. We also
mimicked some of the language
from the other states and what
they were using as well. I'm
sure. All right. Thank you.
Madam Chair, I would just add
that this amendment um came from
a
conversation and concern from uh
DPS, and this has, uh, we
checked this with DPS and
they're supportive of this
amendment and so we bring it
forward, um, in, in response to
that conversation from our first
committee.
OK. At this point, any questions
on the amendment?
Senator share, this is on the
amendment, Senator on the
amendment, yes, yes, ma'am. So,
on number
2
Uh, but then some paragraph one,
person is missing due to
involuntary unexplained or
suspicious circumstances.
So
Senator, Madam Chair.
How do we know it was
involuntary? I mean, they're
missing, but I just wandered off
cause I wanted to.
Uh, Madam Chair and Senator,
that's a great question. Um, we
would establish involuntary
through the report through the
the person making the request
and giving that initial report
to law enforcement agencies
would establish the criteria for
involuntary, um, we're thinking,
you know, in the worst case
situation, someone is abducted,
um, and that would be
substantiated through that
report.
So, Madam Chair and senator, so
I
I talked to you and I had a
bunch of questions, and I'm
trying to find answers, but I
didn't.
get all the answers I wanted,
but what I did get from the
Amber Alert.
portion, Madam Chair, was.
For an Amber Alert, this is for
17 years and younger, law
enforcement believes the child
has been abducted.
And I know the Amber alerts I
get, you know, it says this is
the this is the child's name,
this is the last place they were
seen being driven off by uh some
man named Fred in a green car.
is pretty specific most of the
time.
Well, every time I got one.
Um
But in that case, in this.
In that case, they've got these
guidelines that that say that,
so you've got to have, uh, where
is it, enough descriptive
information about the child, the
suspect, the vehicle to assist.
At least my understanding here
what we're.
What we're facing with the
Uh
missing and murdered indigenous
people, is we just don't know
where they went.
We didn't see somebody get
abducted. They just didn't come
home.
Uh, and they may not come home
for a couple of days.
So we don't have any information
about
Were they abducted? Who took
them, the car they were in or
anything.
So that's
I'm just wondering how that
The involuntary seems
difficult.
Madam Chan, Senator, thank you
for going a little bit deeper.
You know, when families are
going to law enforcement and
sharing their experience, they
know something is wrong, um, and
I would go a step further and
And
They, the circumstances that
you're addressing there, that's
part of what we call victim
blaming. Um, it's been too easy
for far too long for law
enforcement to say she ran away.
She's on drugs. She's, she's
involved in trafficking. She's
involved in prostitution. Um,
this, this bill, it is an
attempt to to believe survivors
and families of those who are,
um,
When families know they're
they're missing loved one is
gone and it's not right.
Something isn't right, Madam
Chair.
No, Madam Chair and Senator.
I don't disagree with that.
But I also know if, if the
teenage daughter or son runs
away.
Uh, in the parents and it
doesn't matter who the parents
are, where they are in the
world, really. They're gonna
say, oh, well, until they're
gone for 24 hours, we're not
gonna do anything.
come back when they get hungry.
Uh, I know that this is
Different, but I'm just
I don't know how you clearly
define involuntary, so.
Right.
you know, trying to be helpful
here, not, not attack the
amendment.
So, anyway, thank you, madam.
Thank you, Senator Sheer.
or just on that point, I think
if you look on page 5.
Uh, this language, which is new
material here, the turquoise
alert advisory kind of has those
guard rails and I was just
looking, this is modeled after
the silver alert advisory
exactly the same process that I
think it was uh
Representative Pachico back in
the day did the silver alert and
it's the same issue if you've
got adults.
And you and I decide to wander
off. We probably getting close
to the silver alert, but we want
to do it, yeah, we want to do it
and how do you determine if
You know, so I think there has
to be, if you notice, after
reviewing investigation of a
missing person report, so
there's gonna be some process
there and that just tracks what
we've already done. So I, I
think it works.
Thank you, Senator Wirth.
Other questions or comments from
the committee.
On the amendment. I'll move the
amendment. We move the amendment
for adoption. Anybody in
opposition to the amendment?
See no opposition, if you will,
please record.
That everybody present is voting
in favor of the amendment.
Right, at this point, you are
welcome to continue on or we can
go ahead and go to public
testimony.
We're done, Madam Chair. Thank
you very much. All right, just
by a show of hands, how many in
the audience are in support of
this legislation?
A lot.
We're just gonna count it as a
lot.
15 on this side at least,
probably another 10 on this
side. Anybody in the audience in
opposition of this legislation.
All right. And we do have 5
people online. So what I'm gonna
do is just uh the number. Let's
just go ahead and do 5 people to
hear testimonies, and please,
you only have one minute.
Uh, you will get a thirty-second
warning. And then we're gonna go
to the top 3. So Kim, uh,
Benali, we, we have registered
your support, but we're gonna go
ahead and go with MMDRC.
Molena and then Cellata. Um, but
Kim, we also have your support
acknowledged as well, so we do
appreciate that. So if you will,
please keep it to 1 minute, you
will get a 32nd warning.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, I'm
Arturo Castillo and I'm the
director of equity and culture
at Conservation Voters New
Mexico.
The creation of the turquoise
alert system will be a key
component of climate justice for
all New Mexicans because it will
create a streamlined approach to
rapidly distributing information
about missing indigenous New
Mexicans.
Native American communities in
New Mexico are some of the most
impacted by the climate crisis.
These communities have
experienced a radical and rapid
rise in in missing and murdered
individuals for several decades,
reading the turquoise alert
system will give those
communities more resources to
slow this epidemic. Caring for
our land, air, and water means
caring for the original
stewards, primarily indigenous
women, who are missing and
murdered at alarming rates,
often with no justice.
Thank you very much.
Good afternoon, Madam Sharon and
committee members. My name is
Rita Hero, and I belong to the
Puvilara. I currently serve as
the coalition to Stop Violence
Against Native Women's Policy
and communications coordinator,
and I'm here to urge you to vote
yes on Senate Bill 41. New
Mexico is historically led with
being one of the states of the
highest states of murdered and
missing indigenous relatives in
the nation and a national urban
Indian Health Institute report,
Albuquerque and Gallup were
found to be in the top 10 cities
with the highest cases. We view
this proposed alert system is a
common sense solution to the
MMIWR crisis in New Mexic.
would bring much needed
awareness and rapid response to
our missing relatives and their
cases. The crisis of MIW has
been underreported and
underrepresented in the media
and general advocacy. It's
because of the lack of speed of
awareness that leads to so many
cold cases in some families
waiting years, even decades for
head weight in their cases.
Families impacted by this issue
already do so much of the
groundwork on their own, and
it's not easy, especially during
moments of high stress and
crisis for them. Visibility
makes a world of a difference in
these moments and can make
terrible situations better and
lessen the burden.
already on impacted families.
We know the alert system would
be a valuable tool for Native
American families, advocates,
and tribes. We implore you, our
legislators to take actionable
steps in addressing MMIWR and
supporting native communities
and families. Thank you for your
time and we ask you again to
vote yes on this bill.
Adam Chair and members of the
committee, I'm Marshall
Martinez, the executive director
of Equality New Mexico, and as
the statewide LGBTQ advocacy
organization, we are acutely
aware of what it means to be a
population that has been ignored
by our government, a population
that has been underresourced by
our communities and a population
whose real struggles are not
taken seriously by the
communities around us. And uh we
could not echo any louder or any
stronger what Senator Charlie
said, which is that protecting
those most vulnerable among us,
protects all of us, and so we
implore your support for this
legislation.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Kim
Lagant, registered lobbyist with
Mescalero Apache Tribe for the
reasons already stated, we stand
in strong support of this bill.
Thank you.
Thank you so much again. All
right, we're going to go online.
Uh, we have MMDRC which also
wrote uh a letter in support.
Hayden Kaufman also wrote a
letter in support as well. We're
gonna go to MMDRC first, uh, you
will, for those of you, uh, and
then Molina and then Selata, uh,
you will get a 32nd warning in
the chat. Uh, if you go over a
minute, your mic will be cut.
Uh, so go ahead and, uh, oh,
unmute your mic and um go ahead
and give your testimony, please.
And got a knee um thank you
committee members for discussing
Senate Bill 41. I am the project
manager, um, Zanabay for the
missing and murdered in
relatives coalition, we started
as a grassroots, um, effort back
in 2019, and now we are going in
our 3rd year of
Um, a nonprofit organization,
but we urge you all to vote yes,
and we strongly support Senate
Bill 41, the turquoise alert
system, um, we hope that this
will help us um improve
coordination and communication
at all levels across our state
of New Mexico, um, from our 23
tribal nations to all of our
counties and local communities
that have um missing persons
alerts.
As well as, um, when it
Time is very crucial when it
comes to finding missing
relatives, so we really urge
that um we support this bill in
helping to uh protect and
support our advocates and
families that are impacted by
this ongoing um crisis of
indigenous peoples that, um, at
a, at very disproportionate
rates are still being murdered
and going missing to this day.
Thank you, yeah.
Thank you so much, Melena, if
you will please, you have one
minute.
Good afternoon, Chair Hamblin
and committee members. Thank you
for the opportunity to comment.
My name is Melena Ortiz, and I
am the registered lobbyist for
the Pueblos of Zuni, Isleta,
Santa Clara, Okeawinge, and San
Felipe.
Who all support Senate Bill 51
and for the reasons stated
earlier, we urge you to pass the
bill. Thank you.
Thank you so much. And lastly,
some last uh gym, if you will,
please unmute yourself. You have
one minute.
Yeah, thank you, um, chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Salota Jim. I am a
member of the Navajo Nation. I'm
a mother. I am my daughter and
granddaughter.
I am concerned about our missing
Navajo relatives, and this bill,
I am in favor for because I have
been doing work for over 25
years in helping our relatives
who have gone missing, who have
been murdered, and who have been
involved in human trafficking.
As an advocate and community
member, I'm asking that.
You support this bill, as it
will help to strengthen our work
with the New Mexico Department
of Justice, as well as
coordination and partnerships
between law enforcement within
the Navajo Nation. Thank you.
Thank you so much, Sonata.
Um, at this point, uh, we now go
to the committee.
Senator O'Malley, thank you,
chair. I applaud the Senator
Charlie and Representative Beta
for bringing this forward.
Um, and I, I guess the only
thing is, you know, there's not
an appropriation associated with
this and and that's a concern
because I just don't want there
to be an excuse as to why this
can't be implemented and
sometimes that happens, and so I
was wondering why there wasn't
an appropriation.
Thank you. Uh, Madam Chair,
Senator, thank you for that
question. Uh, we did not
anticipate a fiscal impact with
this bill, but DPS returned and
let us know that they, um, in
order to upgrade their full
system to meet some of the
requirements around data that
there would be a fiscal
implication, um, I have since
had several conversations with
finance and DPS about assuring
that we have the money behind
this. I think there's strong.
support from um our finance on
the Senate side to help us
achieve this and um I, I echo
your concerns, but do you
believe that this is one of
those pieces of critical
legislation, you know, that gets
across the finish line that that
we're gonna have community much
like we did today overwhelming
community, um, to, to demand
that we have the follow through
that this act deserves. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, thank you. Thank you,
Senator O'Malley. Any other
questions or comments from the
committee, Senator Paul. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you,
Senator, for bringing this bill.
I just had a couple of questions
that maybe I had missed uh in
the presentation, but can you
help me understand what specific
gaps in the current alert
systems, amber, silver, I
believe that we have Brittany
alerts in the state, um.
That exist, gaps in those
systems that exist that support
creating another alert system.
Madam Chair and Senator, thank
you for that question. Our
experts going to answer.
Madam Senator Paul, uh, one of
the reasons that again to we, we
came up with the turquoise alert
is to specifically address
native people who are going
missing and so uh as I mentioned
earlier, we do have the Amber
Alert specifically for younger
children. We have the silver
alert that is 50 and older, but
we know that there's this, um,
adult age 30 to 39 and 40 to 49
year old males in particular,
but people, native people who go
missing and so, um, in order to
ensure that we have effective
alert systems and
com m un ic ation notification
that's going out to the public
to alert people. This is one of
the highest number, highest
demographic of missing people
across the country, including in
New Mexico per capita and so in
order to try to address that
issue, that's what gap this will
fill.
Thank you, I'm sure.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator. So is, is this
more of a target on that age
range then than anything since
we've have those other alerts
that they, those alerts could be
used for missing and murdered
indigenous people, correct?
Madam Chair, Senator, uh, the,
we did not put an age limit on
this alert system, so I think it
is potentially possible that you
would have somebody who
qualifies under an Amber alert
and a turquoise alert or a
silver alert and a turquoise
alert, but it is to ensure that
we can address the high
population of missing native
people in the state, and I'm
sure.
Thank you, Madam Chair. No
further questions. Thank you,
Senator Paul. Uh, Senator
Senator Sher, did you want to go
ahead and go next?
Um, thank you, Madam Chair.
So, first, Madam Chair, I want
to acknowledge, I understand the
problem here, and I wanna to
help fix it. So, my questions
aren't.
Always a scary thing.
But
It seems to me that
The root problem.
With the, with the alert. And I
don't think this solves it.
I
So somebody goes missing just
outside of Gallup.
Is it the the state police, is
it the Gallup City police, is it
the FBI, is it Navajo police?
Were they on the Late land where
they are Navajo land were they
on BLM land. And so now you've
got all of these, what are they
called?
And they don't want to talk to
each other.
So how does this fix this? How
does this say, no, somebody go,
go find this.
Madam Chair and Senator, thank
you. The jurisdictional
complexity is something that I
mentioned, um, earlier and how
this bill will address that is
it, is it transcends that these
alerts will be initiated by the
state police, tribal police can
contact state police to do this,
but this does not give a mandate
to tribal police or their
inherent rights under the
jurisdiction of tribal nation
governments.
OK, so,
Madam Chair and Senator.
And representative.
Um
So this goes out state, the
state police who put out the
Amber Alerts and silver alerts
now they put this one out.
Um, or the tribal police or the
city police notified directly
on, on these or is it just go
out and whoever has a phone, uh,
Madam President and Senator,
this would work just like those
amber and silver alerts that you
get, so they will go out to the
general public. They will go
out, um, on the news media and
on radio, and while it doesn't
give a mandate for tribal
nations, um, to respond or
reply, I think what this
bill does in its most.
In like drill down intent is
that it's raising awareness,
tribal police officers, people
on tribal land are also going to
receive those texts, and so
we're going to all know if
somebody has gone missing and be
able to respond to that and so
while it doesn't fix or um
mandate that tribal police have
to respond. It's asking for
community every the public to
respond, um, and I fundamentally
believe
that safety is a community
responsibility, and this is
asking all of us to rise to that
occasion, Madam Chair and
Senator.
OK, ma'am, I.
So I think things are starting
to.
clear my mind. OK, so it doesn't
matter where.
Where the missing person where
they thought the missing person
was last, doesn't matter where
that is. The whole state gets
notified.
And so now I just see somebody
and go, wow, that looks like the
missing person they were looking
for.
So then I can call my city of
Farmington cops.
But
They may not be the people that
deal with it, ultimately, well,
they may go there because
they're there, but.
But they're not ultimately.
OK, so the whole world's
looking, right.
Um
But this brings me and I, and I.
ask you this earlier. And I
don't have good answers.
Because I wanted to have good
answers before I ask you here.
So how many amber alerts have we
had in the last year?
And how many of these alerts
would we expect to get?
The secretary said 200.
Which
I don't know. Sounds like a lot,
but probably an accurate number,
accurate-ish, so she didn't say
201, but
Um, but there were only 4 amber
alerts in 2023.
Which is the only data I could
find.
So if there's 200 of these,
Then
What I fear is going to happen,
because with the Amber Alerts,
about 20% of the the New Mexico
populations already opted out
of, out of the Amber Alerts.
They don't want it anymore,
don't care.
And if we add another 200 of
those, so that's.
1 every day and a half.
And do math that fast, 1 every
day and a half.
A lot more people are gonna opt
out.
If 20% opted out with 4 alerts.
A lot of people are going to opt
out with 200 alerts.
It's my fear.
Madam Chair and Senator, thank
you for that, um, what the
secretary mentioned those 200
that are missing of those 200 or
whatever numbers are coming
next, they still have to meet a
certain criteria and threshold
to to initiate the alert system.
Um, and while we understand
concerns about alert fatigue and
the risk of the public tuning
out to the alert systems that we
have in place, we strive to
ensure that through this
legislation.
that we're using the alerts
judiciously and effectively. We
don't want people to burn out on
this.
Um, but it's important, Senator,
uh, Madam Chair and members of
the committee.
Each alert, it represents a real
person.
someone's child, a parent, a
loved one who was an urgent need
of help.
The alerts
are designed to be targeted and
specific.
So that when they do appear,
people recognize their
importance.
Um, we also, you know, are in an
age where technological
improvements allow for more
precise, um, regional alerts to
um to um avoid unnecessary
disruptions and, and, um, you
know, as, as the technology
develops, I think so too will
our capacity to find the people
who have gone missing. Madam
Chair, thank you.
Madam Chair, and I, I, I
appreciate that and I want this
to work.
But I do have that concern.
Especially after hearing the 200
because I couldn't find that
number earlier.
I had the number 4.
But uh, I am concerned that it,
it becomes overwhelming if it's
not.
Judiciously done. And so, in,
well,
Madam Chair and Senator, I will,
uh, the, the one thing I would
add to that is that our
communities are overwhelmed.
We are in crisis. That is the
reason we bring this before your
committee today. Thank you.
Right. OK.
Thank you, Senator Sher. Senator
Sanchez. Madam Chair, Senator,
representative, thank you for
bringing the bill.
I'm in support of the bill. I
just have a few questions.
What, what's the process? I know
it's always
You know, urgency to get these
out right away, Amber alerts,
whatever the new the turquoise
that will.
Hopefully we'll get into effect
here.
How long is that process, Madam
Chair, Senator, too.
From the time they get to the
station till it.
It's our phone.
Madam Chair, Senator, my
understanding from um in
discussions with CPSs that can
take a couple of hours for each,
um, for the system to kind of go
through. Once they get it, they
get the alert and they kind of
review it and get it, get the
system running, it can take a
few hours.
So Madam chair, uh.
Senator, on page 5, Senator, uh,
Worth was there where it says
review, so they do a review and
then it.
Am I wrong in saying in the
investigation, is that like
another.
So they do a review that
probably would happen, Madam
Chair senator at the police
station is the investigation
like another day or two before
this alert goes out or is.
I'm just thinking of the
urgency. I, we want to get out
as fast as possible, Madam
Chair, senator, not, not two
days later, because then
sometimes the police officers I
share centers.
2 or 3 days a weekly, it's not
an urgency no more, so they're
telling they're giving.
Excuses, but they're saying,
well, maybe something else, so.
Question, I guess, was, is
there, there's the review that
would probably happen Adam chair
center at the police station and
then the investigation is.
Is that all one?
Madam Chair Senator, from my
understanding, it is all one as
a senator We did point out, this
is mimicked after the silver
alert, so this language is
exactly the same and so, uh, law
enforcement is accustomed to
doing these types of alerts.
They know exactly how that
process and procedures should
work. We didn't add any new
processes or procedures we
mimicked what they've already
got in place, ma'am sure.
OK, thank you for that.
Uh, Madam Chaser, I forgot my
other question.
Yeah
Uh.
You're done, Senator Sanchez,
right? OK
in so many ways. Thank you very
much, Senator Ramos, we don't
mean to make light of this. It's
just, you know, it's, it is a
very heavy topic and wanting to
be very respectful and obviously
as you can tell, this committee
is very concerned about making
sure that this is done right so
that it serves the people that
it's intended to. Senator Ramos,
Madam Chair, Senator, uh, I, I
feel the same. I, I'm, I'm
probably going to support this
bill, but.
Help me understand if we already
have a process in place.
For everyone throughout the
state of New Mexico.
What is gonna be the difference
here?
Because if the processes don't
change.
And procedures don't change
anything.
And it's still gonna be reported
to the same police officers.
Same system
What's going to be the
difference if we approve this?
Versus keeping what we already
have.
Please help me understand.
Um, Madam Terr and Senator
Ramos, thank you for that
question.
If what we had right now was
working.
we wouldn't have this crisis on
our hands.
As I mentioned earlier in
Colorado, 17 of 17 alerts that
went out were solved, um.
Secretary Monet outlined, um.
We have
A demographic of people who are
disproportionately represented.
In this crisis.
Everyone, there is not a native
person you can speak to who does
not have a story to share.
If the system was working, we
wouldn't be here.
And so, um, Madam Charon,
Senator Ramos, what this does is
it builds an accountability, the
best policy that we can have and
that this body.
Can create, it meets a need, and
this is meeting a critical need
that exists in Indian country
and for native people throughout
the state.
Um, and Madam Chair, Senator, I
mean, that's, I mean, yeah.
Real passionate about this, I I
I sense that coming from me and
and I think we all are, and we
all want to make sure that the
best process is out there, but
if the process isn't going to
change.
What, what I want to hear is
where, where's the process gonna
change within the sovereign
nations.
to report
To the current system or the new
system. What's going to be the
difference? Because if it's
already been reported.
And we, we, I guess I'm trying
to narrow down where is the
problem?
That it's not because I'm
sensitive to what's going on. I
mean, I I was the chairman of
Indian cultural affairs in 2019
to 2000 when I used to hear a
lot of the a lot of these
problems.
And I'm, but I just want to wrap
my head about around this and
see what is the actual
difference. What's going to be
the new process is going to make
us solve this problem.
Thank you, Madam President and
Senator Ramos. My name is
Michelle Bada and I represent
District 69. Thank you for
having me.
I live in a tribal community,
and anytime I call law
enforcement for any reason, I'm
waiting days if they show up.
And right now, we don't have uh
a strong hold on what we can do
to empower our, our tribal law
enforcement.
With the exception that we are
actively recruiting officers. We
are actively teaching our
children about safety. We're
teaching our young men and women
about the dangers of going into
a grocery store and coming out
and situational awareness, we're
doing the work like Senator
Charlie had said, the
communities are pulling
together. But what we're
proposing here is an efficient
and very low costing solution
that we can provide all citizens
of the state of New Mexico who
qualify under this alert.
And we believe that that's gonna
close the gap in some of these
areas, and I understand the
concerns are that you may
receive way too many alerts. But
I think if you keep hearing
them, you'll know that there is
an issue happening on so many
levels, and the awareness and
the knowledge of that will help
us find more creative solutions
to collaborate with tribal
communities or urban populations
about what we can do to address
this in a better way beyond just
the alert system. Thank you,
Senator. Thank you.
Madam Chair and Senator
Representative, thank you for,
for the answer. And in that
answer, I heard you talk about
law enforcement not responding,
Madam Chair.
How is this gonna change them
from or to respond faster and
quicker and making sure that
this process is working.
Thank you, Madam President.
Senator Ramos again, right now
if you look in some of our
communities, we have social
media pages that act as our
alerts right now.
We send out information because
we may not get the police
response, but with an alert
system like this, you have more
community members being
vigilant, and you have other law
enforcement entities who are
also on notice that this is
happening. So while they may not
be able to respond, they would
be on notice that there is a
missing person.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Senator
Representative, thank you. Thank
you, Senator Ramos. I'm going to
go to Senator Sanchez and then
Senator Sheriff for a motion.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair, one
last question.
All the police departments,
whether they're tribal, state
police, uh, county sheriffs or
municipal can will be with this
bill we'll be able to implement
this.
And get it out, Madam Chaser.
Uh, Madam Chair and senator.
This bill addresses state
police. So tribal police will be
able to initiate the process by
contacting state police.
Um, but this is the mandate for
New Mexico citizens and not for
tribal lands.
Thank you, Senator
Senator.
Senator Scherer with the motion
of a do pass, do we have a
second?
I do have one question. You do
have one question. I'm sorry. I
just, I just want to make sure
there is a gap though right now
between, you're between 18 and
50. Is there any alert for that?
I'm just, I wanna make sure
cause the silver alerts over 50,
we've got the
Yeah, right, and we've got some
different specific, but, but
again, it seems like there are
folks that certainly fit to
Senator Ramos's question, feels
like this does feel in a, a gap
where anyone who's in that
range, which I think a lot of
these.
Cases have been in that range,
wouldn't be.
Currently caught under the
current alert, if I understand
correctly.
Madam Chair, Senator Worth, you
are correct. There are other
alert systems that, um, like
there's the Britney Alert and
the endangered persons alert,
um, that have specific
qualifications, but you are
right, there is an alert and
it's not addressed unless we
address it through this.
And just here, someone texted me
to let me know that there's now
another bill in the House to
expand the silver alert.
So again, we're going to do
alerts, but I do think that
this, this bill actually
is critical because of that
window of of the issue you're
trying to address with which
there is no ability to do the
alert, so I just wanted to flag
it. Thank you much. Thank you,
Senator Worth. So we do have a
uh a motion for a due pass from
Senator Scherer, 2 from Senator
Sanchez, to anybody in
opposition of this do pass
motion.
See noun, Rebecca, if you will,
you have a 10 to 0 to pass.
Congratulations, Senator.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you committee.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you.
Thank you very much.
All right, we have.
We have Senate Bill 275.
Senator Thornton.
This is your first time in this
committee?
All right.
So Senator Thornton, just to let
you know, we do have a 10 minute
presentation uh that includes
your expert, um, this committee
likes to be very expeditious and
thorough in their builds.
Don't leave it alone.
Right. Senator Thornton, go
ahead.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair.
And the Senate committee
members, um, I'm also here with
an expert uh who was online
named Eric Peterson, and so I
will.
qui re with with him at the
right time. So thank you for
this opportunity to present
Senate Bill 275, the strategic
Bitcoin Reserve Act.
This legislation grants does not
compel certain New Mexico public
funds.
Especially those with longer
investment horizons, the option
to diversify into Bitcoin.
modernizing our investment
toolkit, SB 275 lines New
Mexico.
With forward thinking states
like Arizona.
Oklahoma, Utah, and several
others who are considering
similar legislation.
While also allowing our pension
funds to follow the Wisconsin
and Michigan pension funds,
which already hold a combined
$400 million in Bitcoin.
Although New Mexico's public
funds have historically invested
in a range of conventional
assets.
Bitcoin provides a unique
inflation hedge and a potential
growth opportunity due to its
finite supply.
You can see the results from the
one pager that has been handed
to you.
Granting uh fund managers the
ability to include Bitcoin under
strict controls and only as a
small share of overall
investments, supports prudent,
future-focused stewardship of
state resources.
Now a key aspect of SB 275 is
its permissive structure.
The Legislation does not require
any public fund to invest in
Bitcoin.
It empowers professional fund
managers with the option to
invest if they deem it
financially advantageous.
Allocate allocations would be
subject to caps, ensuring
measured exposure rather than
overreliance on a single asset
class.
Now SB 275 also addresses the
secure custody of any bitcoin
acquired under its provisions.
Maintain the highest security
standards, state funds could
hold Bitcoin through either
exchange traded products or
qualified custodians such as
federally or state chartered
banks. Now New Mexico is not the
only state considering or even
having invested in Bitcoin. Uh,
I put this chart in front of you
so that you all could see that
there are. I, I found out today
there are 24 states who are now
looking at legislation in
Bitcoin.
Um, Arizona stands ready to pass
a related bill in its Senate
today as a matter of fact.
Oklahoma just advanced a
comparable proposal through
committee.
Utah awaits a decisive Senate
vote on nearly identical
legislation and Texas progressed
its own bitcoin reserve plan in
the Senate committee.
Meanwhile, Wisconsin and
Michigan pension funds already
hold substantial positions in
Bitcoin, nearly a combined $400
million underscoring digital
assets, growing acceptance
within stable professionally
managed portfolios.
Now SB 275 applies only to funds
with multi-decade horizons.
And as a consequence, it's uh,
it should not be invested in
short term entities.
That would be your normal
typical bonds, treasuries,
things of that sort.
So I, with that, I stand, uh, I
stand for questions, I also
have, well, we refer to my, uh,
I wanna make Hope sure he's
online. Eric Peterson, if you
introduce yourself.
Well, Mr. Peterson, you're
welcome to unmute yourself. Uh,
if you'll make a brief
statement, and then we'll go to
uh public testimony.
Uh, good afternoon, uh,
committee. My name is Eric
Peterson. I'm the policy
director of Satoshi Action Fund.
We're a nonprofit, nonpartisan
organization that works to
educate and advocate on behalf
of Bitcoin and digital assets.
Senator Thornton, I think
accurately described the bill.
We have been working with him
for months, and most of the
legislation that he had spoken
about is our model legislation,
which you see before you today.
This legislation is a result of
months of hard work speaking
with investment professionals
across the country in both red
and blue states to understand
which funds
might benefit the most from
digital assets like Bitcoin.
Some states have had the ability
to invest in multiple digital
assets, but I think Senator
Thornton has taken a judicious
approach in
Chosen, the custody solutions
available and just allowing for
Bitcoin because of that. Bitcoin
is in a nearly $2 trillion
asset. Is it traded on exchange
traded funds. It is traded by
some of the largest companies
and banks across the world, and
as Senator Thornton pointed out
is a valuable inflation hedge at
a time where we went, we just
went through low interest rates,
so low bond returns and high
inflation, um, a well
diversified portfolio might hold
2 to 3% in Bitcoin.
But the 5% was chosen to give
some flexibility. Again, this is
just a ability for the state to
invest in it in these dedicated
funds, not a mandate. I'll be
happy to ask, answer any
questions, especially about the
technical professions of the
legislation. Thank you so much
for your time.
All right. Thank you so much.
Um, if you will, Mr. Pearson, on
your end, if you do get asked
the questions if you can try and
speak just a little bit louder.
We were depending on the
translation, uh, a little bit,
and we couldn't increase your
volume on our end. Uh, and so at
this point, uh, is there anybody
in the audience that is in
support of this bill?
We have one, is there anybody in
the audience in opposition of
this bill?
You want to speak?
No. All right. Is there anybody
online in support or in
opposition? None. All right, so
I'm gonna go ahead and give you
an opportunity. If you wanna go
ahead and come up here, we'll
get you, uh, to speak.
center if you want to just go
ahead and turn on her mic.
And you have one minute.
Thank you.
I believe New Mexico needs to go
forward.
Diversifying funds. I'm sorry,
Tracy Major.
I believe New Mexico needs to go
forward in diversifying our
funding, times are changing. We
need to start now.
It doesn't cost the state
anything, the taxpayers.
If we wanted to go find out how
much.
We just uh experiment I should,
I don't want to say experiment.
But we could, we could invest
2%.
And uh see how our investments
Where the Bitcoin will go.
Oh sorry, 30 seconds. Anyway, I
am a big believer in
diversifying funds, my
retirement. I would like to see
New Mexico do things
differently. Thank you.
Thank you so much. You can go
ahead and go uh sit back down if
you like.
Alright, at this point, I do go
to the committee. Are there any
questions or comments from the
committee.
Madam Chair, if I may, uh, just
one quick question. Um, so I did
one hour before this meeting,
the folks came to me and said
that they had a constitutional
issue associated with Bitcoin,
and I wanted to, uh, and so we
spoke very quickly, and so I
sent you all basically would
strike section 6 completely out
of the, out of the so that's my
amendment. So you want to make
an amendment here in committee
on this very straightforward,
very easily to basically strike
section 6.
lately?
And uh page 5.
And, and the intent here was to
eliminate Hera and ERB from this
because they said basically to
me that constitutionally, they
already have the right to buy
Bitcoin.
So they don't need, they don't
need any uh authority from the
legislature to do that. What's
there.
So Senator Scherer moves the
amendment, second from Senator
Ramos. Anybody in opposition to
the amendment.
All right. Any other discussion
on your bill, senator?
That's it. OK.
So let's go ahead and have the
vote on the amendment after
you've made your comments,
you've made your notes.
So that was, there was no
opposition on that. So we just
want to go ahead and record the
vote.
We had Senators share.
Movie event, Senator Ramos,
right, second in your shorthand.
We don't have to, if there's
anybody in opposition?
Nobody is in opposition, so
we'll go ahead and show it.
All in favor.
Right. Any other discussion.
Thank you for that
clarification, Senator Thornton.
Going to the committee, Senator
Wirth, thank you, Madam Chair.
So I guess on page 3 of the FIR,
uh, the state Investment council
is basically saying they have
the exact same authority already
to invest in Bitcoin, they don't
need this bill and in fact the
limitation could hurt them.
So have they visited with you
about this issue the same way
that ERA board did.
Madam Chair, Senator, they have
not visited with me, but my
understanding is the the ear is
already included in the
constitution and they have, they
have, so there was a
constitutional issue that they
were addressing. This is
basically sending a message from
the legislation that they can go
ahead and invest in this
particular.
Uh
So there's, there's no oversight
from the legislation telling
them what they can and can't do.
I wanted to be clear on that,
and that's why, uh, that's why I
added the amendment.
So Mr. Chair, I appreciate, I
think, I think you had to amend
that other piece out cause that
was gonna cause real problems.
It's a uniform, prudent investor
act.
Which gives trustees authority
to make investments, and I think
your whole argument is that
Bitcoin should be something
that's considered.
Under the uniform prudent
Investor Act, but I think what
they're saying is that it
already is.
And I think they're worried
about the limitation by saying
only 5%, that creates a number
of different, and this is a
good, Madam Chair, I just think
the other thing too, you know,
these agencies write these
analysis and then the LFC takes
them and then they don't show
up. They don't testify. They're
not here to tell us what's going
on, and that's frustrating. Uh,
so I just want to flag, because
again, I think that they were
making the same kind of
discretionary argument. It's not
constitutional argument though,
so you're, that's a, that's a
definite difference. Thank you,
Macha.
Thank you, Senator Wirth. Any
other comments or?
Concerns from the committee.
Senators, I was just gonna say I
had the Madam Chair, thank you
for bringing this bill, Senator,
but I also had the exact same
point that Senator Wirth was
raising it. If we already have
an act that allows for this.
I'm not sure we really need
another one also.
That's my only comment.
Senator Figueroa.
Thank you Madam chair, um,
Aside from the concerns that's
been raised that I think we
already can invest. I think
we've got that covered. My
additional concern that hasn't
been mentioned is on page 5,
line 9, the statement that taxes
and fees paid to the state in
Bitcoin.
Or any other digital assets
shall be transferred to the
general fund within 60 days. My
understanding of Bitcoin is that
60 days can see a huge value
change. So if
Well, and that idea of paying
taxes with Bitcoin, isn't that
interesting? Uh, but if, if it's
paid on this date and yeah, and
transferred to the general fund
60 days later, it might be worth
a lot less, it might be worth a
lot more, but that kind of
volatility in the general fund
doesn't seem advisable. That's
my only comment, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, Senator Figueroa,
excellent, excellent catch, uh.
The, the issue there is first of
all, the state does not at this
point allow taxes to be paid in
Bitcoin. So, so the, the issue
was there that should this pass,
and in the future state decides
that it it is a valuable asset,
one can then take money from, so
it it it's an option for the
state in the future. It's not a
requirement, and the idea that
you would hold it for 60 days,
if you if your goal is to
transfer on the bitcoin network,
you, you can, you would cash it
in and within 10 minutes, the
network.
Basically
works every 10 minutes, you, you
do the transfer and transfer the
cash immediately. So, so the 60
days was arbitrary, but, but in
reality, if you had the net if
you're on the network, you can
transfer from cash within 10
minutes.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, sponsor. That's comforting,
I think if we were gonna go
forward, I would change that
language because 60 days is way
too long, 10 minutes might be
the way to go, but if that's a
structure for potential future
change.
I might leave it to put in the
future. Thanks, Madam Chair.
All right. Um, we were informed
that, uh, the state treasurer is
online and so
Uh, treasure Montoya, you wanted
to comment on this as well.
We'll give you that opportunity
to do so.
Uh, if you will, uh, madam,
treasurer, if you will, uh, if
you can keep your comments
short.
Yes, ma'am. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Um, this is your state
treasurer Laura Montoya. We did
do a fiscal impact uh analysis
that I, I hope the members will
take note of. This actually
impacts the state treasurer's
office a lot more than it does
SIC and to um Senator Wirth's
point, they already are allowed
to invest in the 5% would
actually decrease it to the
comments made the land grant
permanent fund severance tax
permanent fund and tobacco
settlement fund are not items
that I'm currently investing,
that's completely under SI.
I see, but under section 4A,
it's including me in to be able
to do that. That actually totals
about $2 billion at 5%. So it is
actually um pretty high risk and
as it relates to taking payments
or a custodian. I currently do
not have this in my budget, and
this would be in effect July
1st, we would have to do quite a
bit of work and work with DFA on
some funding and training, and
some resources in order to be
able to do something like this.
So at this current time,
Um, I just don't have, uh, the
ability to say that I'm in
support. Thank you. I appreciate
that. Any other comments or
questions from the committee.
What is the will of the
committee,
There is a motion to table that
means there's no further debate,
if you will.
Please record the votes.
Senator Figueroa.
Yes.
That was a yes, uh, over Scott
Scanlon sneeze, could not have
been more perfectly timed.
Scotty, thank you very much.
Senator Jaramil.
Senator O'Malley is excused
Senator Paul.
Senator Ramos.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator share.
Senator Worth.
Senator Bergmann's.
Senator Hambles.
Yes.
My apologies, Senator, Bill has
been.
Thank you, Madam Chair, for the
opportunity. Um, I, I was hoping
that this legislation struck the
right balance between innovation
and prudence, um, I, I believe
this is the right investment
tool for future of Mexico.
As you can tell, there is a race
going on between the other
states, and I do believe that in
the future, nation states are
going to be taking this on as
well. And so I was hoping to get
us ahead of that curve. Uh, so
I'll be back. Well, as, as a
journey would say, don't stop
believing. And you can, where's
Senator Brandt. He and I would
start singing.
Yeah, this great band of the
eighties. Thank you, Senator, I
appreciate that. We now have
Senate bill for 20.
Which is not a cannabis bill.
But actually community privacy
and Safety Act, Senator Du Hi
and Senator Charlie.
Are we missing somebody's I
think Senator Charlie is on her
way, but I'm happy to get
started. She's welcome to swoop
in when she gets in.
Thank you, Senator Dock, go
ahead. Thank you, Madam Chair.
So Madam Chair, technological
advances have given us a lot to
celebrate, and certainly the
internet and smartphones have
created convenience and access
to knowledge that many of us
never dreamed of.
But we also know that there are
dangers that that can lurk
there. And so many in this
building have been working to
find ways to limit the potential
harm that can come to people
from online activity, especially
young, young people.
Now with increased urgency
around risks to our personal
information online, Senate Bill
420 is the right approach to
legislative policy to protect
all New Mexicans from harms that
can befall them online.
This bill is aimed at limiting
the amount of information that
can be collected about us
without our consent and
therefore limiting how that
information is can be used to
manipulate us or find us or harm
us.
privacy and cybersecurity
experts estimate that there are
approximately 1000 data points
available for each and every one
of us online.
This includes things like basic
information, purchasing records,
like what we buy, how we buy it
and where, uh, our health data,
medical conditions, behavioral
data used to profile us, uh, and
real-time location data that
tracks like our commutes where
we shop, how often we visit
certain places.
The unchecked gathering and
trading of this personal
information can lead to real
harms and New Mexicans deserve
better.
So, Madam Chair, son of Bell
420, uh, is the work of many
advocates, uh, to achieve the
most protections possible while
guarantee guar guaranteeing uh
individual freedoms.
For years we've seen children
protection, children's
protection groups, the ACLU and
LGBTQ organizations at odds, uh,
over how to protect minors on
the internet. And this bill was
drafted with all of those groups
at the table and in full
agreement.
This bill restricts what online
entities can do without our
consent and creates a space for
consumers to opt in to sharing
our information, uh, in order to
achieve personalization in their
online activity.
But this bill makes our personal
information, our own, and gives
us greater control over it.
That I have two experts here
with me, um, Marshall Martinez.
Uh, and Lena Weber, who will
introduce themselves, and I
think we have an expert online
as well. Cody Vinsky.
Well, but Marshall and Lena.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee on
Marshall Martinez and the
executive director of equality
in New Mexico. Um,
The CSPA is Senator Duha said is
critical action, we must take
today to protect these
communities that are most
vulnerable. Uh, we, I'm gonna
skip some of my intro, but I
want to make some really clear
points for folks. We've already
seen data collected, um, about
indigenous folks weaponized to
harm indigenous communities in a
number of ways, um, over the
last few decades. There's no
sign that this weaponization of
data is going to end in the near
future. We believe that every
New Mexican has a right to
access information. We know that
internet access is a key point.
to liberation for many of our
people. But right now we are
being asked to trade our
physical safety for access to
that information.
Let's imagine a New Mexico
family living in a town that
borders another state like Las
Cruces and El Paso, a family
who, like so many of us do,
crosses that state line to go
shopping for school clothes, to
visit relatives, or even just
because there's a different
selection of restaurants and
they want to eat something
different on a Friday night.
Right now, that family's
location is being tracked.
Their shopping habits, their
searches for reproductive
healthcare or an immigration
attorney, or even their trip to
a transgender support group.
Data brokers are buying that
information to add to the
profile they've created about
that family.
Each person has their own data
profile, with dozens of pieces
of information, they didn't even
know it was being collected
about them.
These data brokers will sell
this information to anyone who
pays for it.
So our neighboring state in
Texas could purchase the
profiles of families who live
near the border.
They could look for families
with children. They could look
for folks who seek gender
affirming care or reproductive
healthcare or who visit a
specific healthcare provider.
Now they have a list of
families, lists of people who
probably crossed the state line
right before school starts to go
shopping.
who likely have broken the law
in that state by seeking health
care that is legal and protected
in New Mexico, or by visiting
these sites, searching for
attorneys, even though the
things they did in New Mexico.
We're fully legal.
Now that state can simply wait
for our family to cross the
state line, find them, harass,
persecute, or even prosecute
them for breaking that state's
laws, all while that family was
merely living New Mexican values
and taking actions that are
protected by New Mexican laws
that we passed in this
legislature. These are the
urgent issues we have to fix.
We're working to protect this
data because this data is how we
protect our New Mexican. Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
my name is Lena Weber, policy
director with the ACLU of.
Mexico. I will also be very
brief. I just wanted to briefly
say what this bill does and what
this bill does not do. Um, the
things that this bill does not
do, does not prevent
personalization of services. It
does not restrict content
online. It doesn't restrict any
entity from processing the data
they need in order to offer us
the service or product that we
would like.
It doesn't prohibit targeted
advertising, and it doesn't
impede cooperation with law
enforcement when there's due
legal process.
What this bill does do is
provide common sense protections
for everyone online, including
young people, or elderly,
immigrants, survivors of
domestic violence and patients
of reproductive and gender
affirming healthcare. It does
this by preventing the
unnecessary collection and sale
of our personal information
without our affirmative consent.
Putting in place guardrails on
data abuses by allowing
companies to utilize data only
for the requested services,
privacy settings must be at the
highest setting by default and
then can be changed.
Prevent others from tracking our
online activity in precise
location without our knowledge.
Help prevent profiling and
discrimination based on our age,
gender, political, and religious
views, health status and more.
Gives users more control over
notifications messages from
strangers, and profile-driven
content feeds, including default
protections for minors.
Enforces privacy rights by
allowing individuals to hold
companies accountable if their
privacy and rights are violated
and provides a curing period for
small businesses.
Thank you.
Thank you so much and Senator,
you said you had somebody
online. Would you like them to
go ahead and say a brief
statement.
You know, Madam, I think, uh,
he'll he'll be available to help
answer questions. Thank you very
much. All right, at this point,
uh, we go to the audience just
by a show of hands, how many are
here, uh, in support of this
bill.
Just keep your hands up.
That
Thank you.
Uh, anybody in the audience in
opposition of this bill.
12345. All right, so what we're
gonna do is we're gonna do 6
from each side.
So, uh, and then we'll go
online. Are there people online
who aren't support or
opposition, you're getting that
information to me. So let's
first and foremost get those who
are in support. You have a
minute apiece.
Uh, and then, uh, if once the
1st 6 go, then those in
opposition, if you can line up
after them, you will also have a
minute apiece. You will see Vice
Chair Bergman's give you a 32nd
warning. Uh, go ahead and
Adam chair members of committee,
Julian Kub, the registered
lobbyist for Planned Parenthood
of the Rocky Mountains, which
includes New Mexico. Many of you
who know me know I am not a tech
or social media genius, so the
bill feels incredibly it, it,
um, is addressing an incredibly
scary situation that I've
learned about. Uh, what we now
know is that Planned Parenthood
patients information and
geolocation has been purchased
by anti-abortion Act.
activists and used to harass
them. We know of one company
that tracked visits for 600
Planned Parenthood clinics, and
then targeted the patients with
anti-abortion ads online
information including searches
and location data have also been
used to criminally prosecute
patients in states that ban
those services. So for those
reasons, we are standing in
strong support of this bill.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Nathan
Savara, and I am the program
manager at Equality New Mexico,
the statewide LGBTQ advocacy
organization, which stands in
strong support of this bill as
an organizational priority.
Queer and trans individuals have
always experienced a higher
state of danger, and this has
been true long before the
prevalence of technology and
data collection. Now though, we
are under targeted attack,
because those who would erase us
from society are at the
forefront of the federal
government, several state
governments and powerful
corporations. Transgender folks
are in even more danger. Every
day we witness new attacks on
their identities and whether or
not they're even able to receive
life saving health care. These
dangers combined with the
unregulated access and
collection of our personal,
often sensitive information,
only increase.
is the potential harm, the
potential of real harm that
transgender New Mexicans
experience. Trans and gender
nonconforming people deserve
access to the resources they
need and the ability to do so
safely and privately, so they
are not harassed, persecuted, or
prosecuted when they cross state
lines to visit family, go
shopping, or take a flight.
Equality New Mexico strongly
supports the committee.
Urges the committee to support
SB 420, ensuring the safety of
all those within our borders,
regardless of sexual orientation
or gender identity. Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Aurora
Arriola. I am a policy manager
at New Mexico Immigrant Law
Center, as one of New Mexico's
only organizations providing
legal services to immigrant
communities, with a particular
specialization in serving
survivors of crime, and children
who have endured trauma, we
support SP 420, protecting the
data privacy of all New Mexicans
means protecting all New
Mexicans, including our
immigrant communities. Agencies
like ICE and CBP often cites.
due process and privacy
protections by purchasing
consumer data, as the federal
government continues its harmful
mass deportation agenda, it is
more crucial than ever that we
protect the privacy of
immigrants without the
protections provided by this
bill, immigrants are at risk of
being targeted for deportation,
marketing for predatory
products, unjust practices, and
tear apart families and
criminalization. Our immigrant
communities are already
overpoliced and over
surveillance. New
Mexicans do not deserve to live
in fear of their special of
their personal information being
collected and sold and then used
to cause widespread harm, and
that is why we ask for your
support for SB 420. Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Marcela
Diaz. I work for a statewide
immigrant-based workers' rights
organization called Somos Pueblo
Nido and Somosaion. We organize
Essential workers and members of
our New Mexican communities in 8
counties, all but 1, are rural.
Data privacy for immigrant
communities feeling particularly
vulnerable right now because of
threats from federal immigration
agencies is critical.
Through FOIA information
obtained at the national level,
it is clear that the Department
of Homeland Security and ICE has
multi-million dollar contracts
with internet companies and data
brokers, and use that
information to track and locate
immigrants for the purposes of
immigration enforcement.
This bill
would not cut off all
information from getting into
the wrong hands, but it is a
start and it would give people a
fighting chance. It would give
him the option to decide whether
that information is sold or not.
These companies are making so
much money off of our data and
we are reasonable.
Reasonable in our request to opt
in or opt out, especially if the
resale of this information and
the sharing of this information
can lead to dire consequences,
such as deportation and
separation of families. That's
why we urge you to support
Senate Bill 420. Thank you to
the sponsors for bringing this
forward.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, my name is Rachel
Ray, and I'm with Bold Futures
and advocacy organization by and
for women and people of color in
New Mexico.
Industries profit from
collecting and selling even the
most intimate details of our
lives. This exposes marginalized
groups to tracking and
surveillance by data brokers and
hostile entities, risking our
safety and privacy at a time
when so many of our communities
are being targeted for violence
and discrimination.
For communities of color, this
can lead to further
surveillance, harassment,
systems bias and
criminalization.
They're invasive and terrifying
examples of pregnant people in
other states who have been
criminalized for their
miscarriages, using private
messages, search histories, and
even location data. We ask you
to take an urgent and
much-needed stand to protect New
Mexicans and vote yes on SB 420.
you
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, Arturo Castillo,
director of equity and culture
at Conservation Voters New
Mexico.
Um, no one can deny that our
democracy has been under attack
for a number of years. One of
the most insidious tools that
has aided in, in that is
misinformation and
disinformation, which is all too
often spread because of the
unchecked practice of targeted
advertisement.
Conservation voters in New
Mexico wants us to live in a
world where we are not targeted
with disinformation undermining
objective scientific knowledge
as a means to dissolve democracy
before our own very eyes.
Conservationists and New
Mexicans need Senate Bill 420 to
protect us from this looming
crisis. For these reasons and
many more, this is a priority
bill for conservation voters. So
thank you very much.
All right, thank you. So those
in opposition, if you will
please line up, we'll take 6.
You have one minute as well.
I'm sorry?
Then if we want, we can go to 7.
If there are 7 in opposition,
we'll go ahead and take that 7.
If you will, please, you have
one minute.
A good afternoon chair members
of the committee. My name is
Alison Riley, public policy
director at the Mexico Chamber
of Commerce in opposition to
this bill. It's due to the way
that the small business
exemption is written, it
conflicts with the standards
we've seen in other states. So
the language in this bill on
page 13, line 17 states the
cover entity or service provider
did not annually process the
personal data of more than
15,000 consumers, and
additionally on line 23, the
cover entity or service provider
did not engage in the brokerage
of personal data. Many state
privacy laws
use a two-tiered threshold for
determining which businesses are
covered. If a business handles
the data of over 100,000
consumers, or at least 25,000
consumers and derive 50% of
their revenue from the selling
of that data, then they are
subject to the law, and that is
a change we would like to see.
We would also like to see
language that protects companies
brokering data if the offer is
related to a consumer's
voluntary participation in a
loyalty rewards discount or club
reward program.
We hope to work with the
sponsors of this bill to protect
our small businesses, so they
still have the ability to
compete with large corporations.
Thank you.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, my name is Renzo
Soto, and I'm here on behalf of
TechNett as the executive
director of Texas and the South.
Thank you for the opportunity to
provide testimony today. I want
to start by acknowledging that
we understand and appreciate and
agree with the goal of providing
consumers with important data
security and privacy
protections. However, we cannot
support this framework as it is
highly infeasible, if not
impossible to comply with in
several of its provisions, we
are concerned that it will
provide uh many compliance
burdens and costs on businesses,
uh, with its provisions similar
to what businesses experienced
out in
California, which this bill
borrows from. No other state has
replicated the data privacy
framework out in California. So
instead, we urged this committee
to consider and prioritize an
interoperable data privacy
framework 18 states have adopted
um says that such a framework
and it provides many of the same
protections that are sought
under this bill. Thank you very
much for the opportunity.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, Jason Weeks,
registered lobbyist for the
Albuquerque.
of commerce chamber does stand
in opposition of this bill. We
too do very much appreciate what
the bill is trying to accomplish
in terms of affording New
Mexicans important data privacy,
um, protection. We think that
this bill does do several things
that would make it very
difficult to implement. We think
it will increase uh and and
impose a significant burden on
small businesses that are trying
to compete nationally, but also
with large businesses that are
offering their services in the
state.
We think that there are
alternative frameworks, like the
framework that is offered in
Connecticut. I think it's the
oldest state of privacy law in
the country. It is pretty
protective, and it does a lot of
what this bill does, but it does
it in a way that is loud, that
allows business businesses to
actually implement it without
creating a significant burden on
them.
So for those reasons, and the
others stated, uh, we, we
currently stand in opposition,
but very much look forward to
working on this issue so that we
can try to implement a data
privacy protection bill or
statute that works for New
Mexico. Thank you.
Chair Scott Scanlon registered
lobbyist for the consumer data
industry association without
repeating uh we too stand and
uh.
Opposition to this bill, we
acknowledge the importance of
protecting consumer data, but we
believe that this particular
legislation um presents
significant challenges. Um, I
visited with the sponsor, we
look forward to working with
her.
Thank you.
So we do have some people online
and then I'll go to the
committee, Senator Scherer. I
have you right after Senator
Jaramillo.
So the people that we have
online are Chris Moore, Lance
Senna, and support, and then
Janet Williams and I think is it
Catriona?
Catriona Fitzgerald in
opposition, so, um, we do have
one more person that's going
under the title admin.
Um, they declined to speak, but
so, uh, what we're gonna do is
we're gonna give Chris uh all
four of them, uh, 1 minute to
speak. Uh, we'll start with
Chris Moore, then go to Laenna,
and then Janet and then
Katriana, you'll finish that
off. Each of you have one minute
if you will, please unmute your
mic at 30 seconds, you will see
a warning that you've got 30
seconds left. So Chris Moore, if
you will please go ahead.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Senators, I appreciate very much
that senators doig and Charlie
have brought this forward.
Um, the, you know, if I buy a
fitness app for my phone, I
expect it to keep track of how
many steps I take and how fast I
walk. I do not expect it to keep
track of where I go or how long
I spend at those places. But of
course, many fitness apps do
exactly that because that data
is very valuable.
I want to control this. I want
the freedom to control my own
data, and I don't think this
should be allowed unless I
actively consent to it, which is
why it's vital that the default
when I buy the app should be in
favor of my privacy that I don't
have to page through a lot of
fine print and find a button
that I can press to opt out.
Industry lobbyists will tell you
that this bill goes too far. I
urge you to stand firm, and I
say that both as a computer
scientist and a citizen.
Thank you for your time.
Thank you so much. We have La
Senna and then Janet Williams
you'll be after La. Lam, go
ahead and please unmute
yourself.
Thank you, Madam Chair. My name
is Lance Senna, policy director
for the Center for Civic Policy,
um, as stated from the speakers
before, um, in support of this
bill, we stand in strong support
of Senate bill, um 420 and urge
your sport. Thank you.
All right, thank you, Lynn. Um,
we do have a clarification, so,
um, Catriona Fitzgerald is uh in
support, um, and Janet Williams,
if you are in opposition, let's
go ahead and hear from you,
please.
Hi, I'm Janet Williams with the
National Organization for Women,
and we are in full support of
this bill. We believe it would
protect all of our privacy.
Thank you very much.
Madam Chair, I'll, I'll just
note there was a a reference to
the Connecticut approach being a
good one. Connecticut is, I, I
think either yesterday or today,
having hearings trying to figure
out how they can strengthen.
Their data privacy laws. So I'm
not, I don't think that would
be.
The one that
Right. Thank you very much,
Senator Duhi. So I'm going to
Senator Jaramillo first, Senator
Scherer, and then if there are
any other comments or questions
from the committee.
Madam Chair, Senator, um, you'd
be amazed the number of young
people that I've reached out to
Senator Hamlin and I, who are
part of the LGBTQ plus community
who are in fear right now. And
as much as we try to comfort
them.
It's hard to carry that role and
so not only are we representing
the districts we were elected to
represent. We're representing
the LGBTQ plus community. And so
you'd be amazed how many young
individuals have come to either
see us or call us on the phone.
But my question is, Senator, do
you by any chance have any
examples of the purchasing of
data to specifically hurt or
target the LGBTQ plus community.
Madam.
Madam Chair, Senator Jaramilo,
thank you for that question. Um,
I don't have numbers in front of
me specifically about the LGBTQ
plus community, but what we do
know is that a lot of LGBTQ plus
individuals seek health care
services, as do many other
people at Planned Parenthood
clinics, whether that's
comprehensive reproductive
healthcare, um, or a specific
service. Um, and we have an, you
know, an article right here that
has documented companies selling
the data after tracking, um,
visits to 600 Planned Parenthood
locations across the country, so
they were, uh, purchasing that
cell phone and for uh location
information and selling that
data to anti-abortion activists
who then targeted hundreds if
not thousands of patients, um,
or folks who might have just
been stopping by that clinic
with anti-abortion ads and
another.
Thank you for that, and Madam
Chair, just to comment, I'm
thinking about when you and I
were teens. If we would have had
the accessibility to Google
search. We didn't have very many
people who identified the way we
were.
There weren't many people to
look up to.
If we would have had a Google at
our time, we would have been
searching for answers or for
places to find support. And I
would have hoped that during our
time, Senator, that we wouldn't
have been targeted because we
didn't have a support system.
And so I'm seeing this bill as a
bill to a way to ensure that
those who don't have a support
system at home, you have to rely
on a Google search, can do so
safely and not fear that they're
going to be targeted. And with
that, Madam Char, I don't have
any questions or further
comments.
OK, thank you. Um, before I go
to Senator sharer, um, your
expert witness Cody wants to
make a comment. Cody, you're
welcome to do so if you can be
brief.
Thank you very much, Madam Chair
and senator. I would like to
point out one specific example
that uh made the headlines
recently, which was in uh a
Catholic advocacy organization
purchased data from data brokers
online that included data from
people who use the gay dating
app Grindr and sort of order to
identify priests and other
members of the clergy who
identified as LGBTQ plus and use
that then to out and attack a
priests who were gay in order to
uh eliminate them from the
priesthood.
So that data has in fact been
used for very specific
visualized attacks.
Thank you, Cody. Uh, Senator
Sheriff, and uh if there are
other members of the committee
who want to speak, just go ahead
and let me know.
Um, thank you, madam.
chair.
There's lots and lots of federal
laws out there.
That that do things. I'll start
with just the, the Graham Leach
Bliley Act, which has to do with
financial institutions, and what
they can do and what they can't
do and how they do it and how
they use it.
I
I believe that because there's
not really an exception to say,
well, the people that are
Held to the standards of Gramm
Leach's lily.
I can say that word.
Um
Since there's not an exception
here, then all of a sudden we
get our banks in trouble.
Banks and credit unions now have
to try to figure out, OK, which
one of these laws do we want to
deal with because there's,
there's potentially some
conflict conflict in there. The
Fair Credit Reporting Act.
is the same way.
There's things that you can do
with credit report, things you
can't do with the credit report.
Um
And, and there's reasons that
things are on those databases.
OK. Uh, if you're gonna buy a
house, for example.
Um, some of the questions they
ask are
You know, where, where do you
live, things like that.
What's not on your credit
report. It's whether you're gay
or straight, or black or white.
Those aren't on there.
Where you lived, where you work?
you borrowed money or not and
paid it back, those are on
credit report.
Some of the other information
is, so where did you live?
You know, a couple of house, a
couple of times before.
That's there because they,
they're trying to make sure
that, that you're the right
person.
And I think under here again,
we've not made credit report
exceptions.
There's lots of federal laws out
there that I, that I fear.
Now you, now, now people doing
legitimate business now have to
decide, oh, am I going to follow
the Gramly lightly Act, or am I
gonna follow the state of New
Mexico.
And
If they
In a pickle
In New Mexico anymore.
They just leave.
Cause nobody's gonna loan money
if they can't figure out if you
really are who you say you are.
Nobody's gonna loan you that
kind of money, except the loan
shark.
And we've outlawed loan sharks
cause we capped the interest
rate, so they don't exist except
everywhere.
And so, this, this is, I
understand why. I agree. I don't
like my stuff out there.
But because there's a notice on
your phone every time a
disclaimer and you signed up
every time you would do
anything.
Even right now, the phone is
listening to me.
But it's called the World Wide
Web.
It's not the New Mexico wide
web.
You can't stop it without
shutting down everything in New
Mexico.
I agree.
I don't want my phone listening
to everything.
But I don't know how you stop it
without shutting down every
business in New Mexico.
Every business in New Mexico.
And right now we're out there
attracting or attempting to
attract.
AI businesses come to New
Mexico.
We're no longer technologically
phobic, although we passed bills
that seem technologically phobic
all the time.
Bring your AI business here.
Bring your data center here. We
want those businesses.
And then we're gonna do
something like this. It says,
uh, you can bring your AI center
here, but you can't sell any of
your data, in fact, you can't
even collect that data.
Can't do anything with it.
Because I promise you, Madam
Chair, that if I ask Chat GPT
right now.
Uh
To give me an analysis of this
bill.
Within seconds, I would have an
analysis of this bill. If I said
give me an analysis of this
bill.
With the Republican slant, he
would give me an analysis built
public slant or a Democrat slant
or a gay slant or uh whatever, a
helicopter parent slant.
It would give me that within
seconds, because all that data
is out there.
All that data is out there.
Do I wish that I could take my
dad off, yes, and you can. There
are actually services that you
can pay.
Now remove stuff out there and
they'll keep doing it for you.
For your credit report.
Y'all listen up now, this is
really important. To do this,
annual creditReport.com.
Annualreport.com. That's where
you go get your credit report
for free.
There's 3 credit reporting
agencies, Experian, TransUnion,
and Equifax.
What I suggest to you all is
that this month, you get
experience or one of them.
4 months later, you get Equifax,
and 4 months later you get
TransUnion and you do that every
4 months for the rest of your
life, and then you get to look
at what's on that credit report.
And you get to dispute anything
that's not true.
free?
You also can put a, a, a freeze
on your credit report. It's
simple. You go to
TransUnion.com, find credit
freeze, you put it on there, and
then nobody can look at your
credit report unless you allow
them to.
In fact, I had to have my credit
report pulled yesterday, so I
went on TransUnion.com, click
the freeze button and I unfroze
my credit report so the credit
report could be pulled, and then
I refroze it.
Well people can't pull my data.
Of the credit report.
But there's all things
everywhere.
Everywhere
And I think, and I'm completely
serious about this. A, this
conflicts with some federal some
important federal laws.
It also adds some definite or
doesn't add definitions, but
talks about things in there.
Um
The, the service provider, OK,
but what's the service provider?
I don't think that's defined in
here.
So what service are we
providing?
And is that service?
TransUnion?
You can't give any information
to TransUnion.
See, now my phone is telling me
that it wants to tell me
something.
Depends on what we're talking
about
shame.
Uh
Anyway, I, I just have serious,
serious concerns about what this
does to, to business in New
Mexico. It's not gonna do
anything business in Colorado or
Texas.
Or Thailand for that matter.
And
And so, can we find data on
certain things? Absolutely.
If I want to send out a
fundraising letter for people
that own firearms.
I can go on there, like, hey, I
need, I need to know who owns
firearms because I'm gonna go
ask him for money.
Can I send out a fundraising
letter to just Planned
Parenthood? No, I can't, but
other people certainly can.
That data is out there, it
exists.
And we can't stop it.
Not from New Mexico.
Can we from the federal
government?
Maybe
But it's still the world wide
web.
And most of the people that are
doing things nefarious on the
World Wide Web are not New
Mexicans. They're not even
Americans.
Most of them are Eastern
European countries that have
this kind of operation going on.
Not here.
So the one consequence that will
happen there is we will stop
doing business in New Mexico. In
fact,
The only business that might
happen would be the loan shark
business in cash.
Not Bitcoins
Because they don't really care.
If you borrowed money and paid
it back before. They don't
really care, uh, if you, if
you're
There's another one out there,
drivers, oh my gosh, it's
another federal law out there, I
forgot now.
driver's privacy or something
like that. It's not federal law.
They don't care.
That will be the business we get
to deal with.
So we can take our cash, we can
buy dope, we can pass out, yay,
that's our business for New
Mexico. And
And in that
It's just making me crazy.
We talked about misinformation.
There's a ton of misinformation
around here.
In our democracy actually
happens when people can talk.
We've all put ourselves in
little silos, we don't even talk
anymore.
And, and, and it's just
The social media is still where
it's still in a silo.
OK.
We're in our own little bubbles.
I tried to get out of the little
bubbles. So I'm, you know,
We can have weird snippy little
comments with each other.
Do we disagree on everything,
almost, but she can still be my
friend.
And I disagree with Senator
Wirth on everything. Apparently
not last night.
4 out of 5 votes. I voted with
him, but it made me feel bad
But I think
We need more of that, we need
more human contact, less of the,
the data.
But I don't see any way to stop
that data.
From flowing.
It's out there and you can say,
well, I want to opt in.
But I, I, I promise you.
Google and Apple know exactly
where your phone is right now.
In fact, they might be able to
identify not that you're in the
capital, but what chair you're
in in this room right now.
Are you going to stop that?
We're going to pass a law saying
they can't do it.
But what you did is when you
turned on when you bought that
phone, you said, hey, I give you
permission.
He said, no, I didn't.
Well,
When you put that game on your
phone.
You gave him permission. You
didn't know it. Why? Because the
disclosure was so long, you
didn't read it.
And so you voluntarily gave them
that information, just gave it
up, you voluntarily gave him
that information.
Every app on your phone is
tracking you.
You can tell it not to.
But then the next app that comes
on your phone, you're going to
give them permission because you
want to use that app.
If you don't want people
tracking you, he don't carry a
phone.
And don't have any apps on it if
you do.
Because every single app on your
phone, you gave permission to
track you.
Every single one.
There's no way to stop this, and
this bill might feel good.
But it has a couple of major
flaws. One, it will interfere
with federal law.
Thereby making it, people have
to make a choice.
I want to do business in New
Mexico or not.
Because I've got conflicting
laws.
And all it'll do is make you
feel good because you've already
given permission to your app to
do everything.
Everything
Why can they do geo tracking?
Figure out where you are, what
you did, cause you gave them
permission.
Already
You already gave them
permission.
Normal business will stop.
Certainly our data centers will
look at us and go, oh, we don't
wanna go there.
And we hate oil and gas. We got
to do something else, but man,
let's run the data centers out
too.
The AI companies that are
looking at New Mexico, they're
gonna go away.
Why?
Because you're not even gonna be
able to ask him a question, why,
why would anybody that wants to
build these things want to be in
a state where you can't even use
it.
There is a problem.
I acknowledge this makes it
worse.
And by the way, I am very
frustrated.
Being told about everybody who's
a victim of everything.
I'm a Catholic. You know what
the most persecuted person on
the planet is.
A Catholic
Those are the churches that are
being burned down. Those are the
people that are being murdered
all over the world.
Do other people get murdered?
Yes. Should they? No.
But it's time for everybody to
back off of that.
Everybody has a problem.
Everybody
Your problem
is a problem, I acknowledge.
But that is not
The problem of the world.
The problem of the world is that
we stay in our own little
bubbles and we don't talk.
But I actually had dinner with
two of you the other night that
I insult either of you? Did I
kill either one of you? Did I
even think about killing either
one of you. No. Did you think
about killing me?
Hope not.
Didn't seem to be.
That's starting to bug me a lot,
and I'm asking y'all to mellow
out with some of that.
But it's business that this does
harm to.
New Mexico businesses.
And New Mexicans.
Because of the unintended
consequences.
Thank you, Senator Worth.
Anybody else from the committee
Yes,
very briefly. Sure. I think we,
we heard some things that, that
don't track with the bill.
Uh, first, this is not, uh,
conflict with federal law. In
fact, if you look on page 24,
uh, we address the interaction
with federal law there, uh, uh,
someone who would be covered by
this if they're in compliance
with federal privacy laws, they
will be deemed to be in
compliance with this act, uh,
for any of that data that's
covered under those federal
laws, so there, there is no
conflict there.
Um
There was uh an example given of
we won't be able to, if
someone's going for a loan, you
won't be able to use the data to
figure out if they are who they
say they are.
That is not true under this bill
that you would be using that
data for the purpose of
providing that service.
Uh, and that is completely
allowable. You just can't go
sell it to someone else without
the customers consent. Um,
I heard that this is going to we
will shut down all business in
New Mexico if this happens.
Uh, so, the EU has, like, way
more strict than a privacy laws
than anything we're suggesting
here. And somehow they
are functioning then.
Everything wasn't shut down.
Companies are used to operate,
especially.
Company is operating across our
nation and internationally are
used to operating in places that
have different laws.
This is, this would not be new.
Uh, they, they do so already.
Um
And um so there was the example
given of, well, I can ask GTP.
To write my analysis for me
right here, and all that data is
already out there.
Uh, AI and data centers aren't
getting data directly from the
consumer.
That's what this is addressing.
They're getting out of the, it's
already out there in those from
third parties, not directly from
the consumer. We want the
consumer.
To have a say in how their own
data is used. Um, and you
shouldn't have to be super tax
tech savvy just to have control
over your own data.
Right, those, those big long
agreements that none of us, uh,
actually read, um.
That
This bill actually addresses
that. It says you can't bury
everything.
In some super long agreement.
You
Have something as simple as a.
So I, I recently got a new
iPhone. Every app I've I
download now the first time I
use it, I get a pop up that
says, Do you want this? Do you
want to allow tracking or not?
I press no. That is how, how
easy this would be rather than
I'm gonna read through just 400
pages of incredibly dense texts
that I don't understand to find
the little thing about how to,
how I can opt out to protect my
own data.
Um
And you know, I'll,
I'll stop there, Madam Chair. I,
I don't wanna take too much of
the committee's time. All right,
thank you. Anything else from
the committee, Senator Ramos,
just real quick, Madam Chair,
Senator, has the attorney
general taken a, a, uh.
on this bill as the
Give me his blessing or since
there's no approach
appropriation on this bill.
And he's gonna have to enforce
it.
Where were we at? So, uh, Madam
Chair, Senator, um, I don't
think any of us should ask for
the Attorney General's blessing
on legislation that, that we
want to bring.
Um, but yes, this would, this
would have.
This would require
Propagation of the rules and
enforcement, which is the
attorney General's job.
Um, and my understanding is
there is a, there is a bill out
there that that all the tech
guys want, uh, and that I think
that might have signed on from
the Attorney General. Um.
I don't think that is a bill
that is going to protect
Mexicans, that is primarily for
the benefit of the tech
companies, not, not New
Mexicans.
So Madam chair, so why was there
an appropriation?
Madam Chair, Senator, I don't
think it needs an appropriation,
I think this is within the scope
of the Attorney General's work,
and
That's his job.
Madam Chair, um, senator.
What other states have adopted
a?
Bill of this sort and
Are they implementing?
Madam Chair, our, our expert
Cody online is probably in a
better position to Cody, you're
welcome to um go ahead and
respond to that.
Madam Chair and senator, thank
you very much. Uh, some of these
provisions have been passed in
other states. For example, we
have seen Maryland adopt a data
mini musician standard, which
Connecticut is actively
considering act uh, adding to
its bell as suggested earlier,
Europe has also adopted data
minimization standard, which is
the core of this bill, that's
core idea that the apps you
download will only use your data
for the reasons that you
downloaded the app, uh, and you
don't have to dig through a
privacy policy, so we're already
seeing states enact many of the
core provisions here.
Similarly, some of the core
provisions may look familiar to
folks, um, as adopted from
age-appropriate design codes.
This bill is designed to avoid
the First Amendment concerns
that those codes raise, but use
many of the same privacy
provisions that have already
been enacted in other states. So
tech companies and covered
entities already are building
the infrastructure to comply
with many of these provisions.
Manager, no further questions.
Right, thank you very much.
Anything else from the
committee? Madam. Hold on.
Figueroa.
Sorry, Madam Chair, um, my
question is on page 23, given
that this committee just voted
to add teeth to the solar
disclosure bill. I wanted to
look for a moment at the teeth
in this bill.
And page 23.
Um, lists.
The liability for civil
penalties.
Um, and I just wondered if the
sponsors had considered adding
what is in the unfair Practices
Act, some kind of statement that
says who?
In the unfair practices Act,
it's the DOJ, but say the DOJ
has the authority to bring these
actions, that's not actually
stated in here, just says the
DOJ will.
Create some rules, and I
wondered if you might want to
consider adding that at some
point as this bill moves through
the process.
Man center. So under this bill,
both, both the Attorney general
and so the attorney general
could enforce this, and you
could have, also have a private
right of action.
So, so it's both. You're right,
we're not making an explicitly,
uh, a UPA violation. Uh, I love
the UPA, maybe that might be,
uh, something to think about,
um, but, but.
But the the age does have the
authority to enforce here, uh.
In addition to a private right
of action.
That consumer.
Thanks, Madam Chair. I think it
might just be worth explicitly
stating somewhere in here, but
that's OK. Thanks, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator, and just a
reminder that this bill does go
to Senate Judiciary after this.
Anything else from the
committee.
Madam Chair, moving too fast. We
have a pass from Senator
Berman's. Is there a second from
Senator Hail. If you will please
go ahead and take the vote.
Senator Figueroa, yes, Senator,
had a meal.
Senator O'Malley's excuse
Senator Paul. No. Senator Ramos.
No.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator share.
Senator Wirth, yes.
Senator Burton, yes, Senator
Hamlin. Yes.
have.
5.
This is on a 5 to 4, you have a
due pass.
Thank you, ma'am. Thank you,
members. Thank you. All right,
next we have Senator Padilla. So
just to remind the committee, we
will have a hard stop at 6:15.
We'll try and get through as
many bills as we possibly can.
OK.
All right, so committee, just
for your reference, we actually
have an adult in Senator Padilla
sitting there even though the
chair brought you really low
down, uh, like you were in, he
hit the hydraulics. He hit the
hydraulics at the lowrider
chair.
Um, so this is a tax credit as
is the next bill. So these are
bills, a reminder for the
committee, we will stop hearing
tax bills on Thursday, uh, the
8th.
No, Thursday the 6th.
Um, as we continue to have
discussions about whether or not
there is capacity for a tax
package, but we do want to try
and give all of those tax bills
a fair shake, uh, to be
considered. So these are two
bills, Senator Padilla, uh, your
bill and then Senator Bergman's
bill, we will hold, we will not
vote, but we will go ahead and
hear testimony. We will have
discussion, opportunity for
public comment, and then we will
hold. So.
You're ready to go. Thank you
very much, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, Madam
Chair, Madam Vice Chair, and Mr.
ranking member, um, yeah, so I
think we all know that we have a
severe uh issue that we face
right now with our 1077 uh
foster children in New Mexico,
we just simply don't have enough
foster homes, and so um I'm
partnering with uh various uh uh
organizations here in our state
government to figure out how do
we solve this? And, um, as a
result, we've come to you with
an idea um Senator Bill 3:30.
5, which proposes the
establishment of a tax credit
for foster parents and legal
guardians, uh, the legislation
aims to provide financial relief
and incentive, uh, incentivize
individuals to participate in
the foster program should they
become certified with all the
regular requirements of how that
works. The key provisions in the
legislation are this becomes a
tax credit valued at $500 per
month per child. And then that
would be a $6000 a year maximum
that could be claimed, uh, the
eligibility criteria.
I would be promulgated and
managed by the Child, Youth and
Family departments, you can
receive a certificate that you
would apply for. You would send
that in with your tax return.
Uh, the tax credit is
refundable, allowing caregivers
to receive the full benefit even
if their tax liability is less
than the credit amount, so I
think that makes it also a very
positive item. Uh, the pros on
this one are financial support
for caregivers and incentivizes
foster care participants. It
improves child welfare outcomes,
and then there are economic
benefits to the families that
are willing.
To do this, Madam Chair.
And um I think we all know that,
um, you know, 49% of all
children being fostered in New
Mexico are being fostered by
their grandparents. A lot of
those grandparents are on fixed
incomes with Social Security
checks and things of that
nature. This would be a dramatic
kind of game changing way to
raise these children should they
want to continue to do that, um,
I think that the other benefit
to this was back in 2014, I, um,
those that were here at the time
I requested a Senate Joint
Memorial to gather all sorts of
data from CYFD, we had a foster
homes because we were so short
on foster homes and emergency
placement foster homes, you
know, we, we had some averages,
uh, some months of the year
where one foster home had, uh,
you know, 7.8 children per home.
I think if we can expand this
number, we're going to see a
dramatic reduction in that
number and that that ratio, and
I think that just bodes.
well for the the situation for
that particular or that group of
children. And so that that's why
I'm here with you today. I do
want to call a couple of things
out that were pointed out in the
FIR ahead of time so that I can
try to be efficient with your
time, uh, a revised FIR did come
out. I don't know if you have
that or not, but um I do have a,
you know, the tax person for the
state of New Mexico, Secretary
Chardon Clark here and um
together we kind of threw some
numbers back and forth that came
out in that FYR that the
original FIR says that this
would cost the state anywhere
from 22.
24 mil a year. The actual number
is probably closer to 13.2 to
17.6, so almost cutting that
number in half, uh, there were
some assumptions that were made
where every child uh was was uh
in in a home for 12 months out
of the year, and so that's why
the number was sort of inflated
there. Um, so with that, I just
want to point that uh those
things out, just making sure
that you know that those numbers
in the original FIR were not
accurate and they've been
reissued.
Thank you, Senator Padilla, and
I know that we have Secretary
Chardon Clark here. I don't know
if this is something that you
wanna speak on, you're not
required to by any means, but
you are certainly welcome to do
so.
Or if you want to do.
Stay on mic. I'm here to support
the bill and I'm happy to answer
any questions you may have.
Thank you, secretary
and I also do have secretary of
Thank you, secretary
and I also do have secretary uh
here as well. Yes, let's go
ahead.
A man chair members of the
committee, Tracy Casales from
CYFD and CYFD also supports this
bill. It's a huge way for us to
support our foster families, um,
that take in kids and this helps
with the cost that continues to
rise for raising those children,
and as the senator said, for
grandparents raising
grandchildren. Um, it's huge and
it's a great way for us to
support those individuals that
are really helping the state to
do the work that needs to be
done. So thank you for
consideration and Madam Chair,
I'll wrap up, uh.
opening statement with uh
Representative Rebecca Doo in
the house is a co-sponsor on
this bill, she and I worked
together over the many years
that we've both been here at
different times. Uh, well, I've
been here the whole time. She,
she came back. I don't know why,
but she did.
Um
If I were out of, I might stay
out too. But um, but essentially
I just want you, this is a
bipartisan effort, uh, we've
been working on this stuff for a
long time. Thank you.
Thank you so much and thank you
secretaries both for being here,
um, now we go to the audience,
those in the audience, uh, by a
show.
Thank you for being very
energetic about that. If you
will keep your hands up. I saw
you, secretary, 123456789. All
right, 10. Um, we may go to, uh,
let me just see if there's
anybody in the audience in
opposition of this bill.
OK, we have one. All right. So
what about online?
Nobody online. All right, so
what we're going to do, um,
you're still in opposition, am I
correct?
All right, you got to make up
your mind cause um
Thank you very much. All right.
Get given uh that we've got uh
support in here. I'm gonna go
ahead and just record how many
people, uh, were in support of
that. And now we are going to go
to the committee, um, Senator
Ramos, I have you first. Go
ahead.
Madam Chair Senator, I'm one of
the crazy ones that came back
also.
But uh I totally support this
bill. Thank you for bringing
this. I, I think we've.
Uh, we definitely have to do
everything we can to help uh
help all our foster parents and
and uh.
Uh, do what we can to, to help
these young children. Thank you
so much, that's all I've got.
Thank you, Senator Ramos.
Anybody else on the committee?
I have a quick question. Go
ahead, Senator Bur. Thank you,
Madam Chair and thank you,
Senator Padilla for bringing
this. I'm just curious if you've
looked at Centerville 272, which
is the income tax exemption for
foster parents.
And I'm just, I'm just curious
if you have the answer. Have
you?
Or anyone else.
I say maybe the secretary, um.
Could these bills work together,
or would they be in conflict?
If they were to both pass and be
adopted. Madam Chair and Senator
Berham's.
I think the
Theoretically, you could exempt
these folks' income completely
and provide them a refundable
credit.
Um, but when we looked at
providing this tax relief, we
felt strongly that a credit was
a better policy than an
exemption, because the costs of
housing a child, whether they're
your guardian or a foster parent
are roughly the same per child.
Whereas
And and so this credit would
provide $500 per month.
Whereas the income situation of
the foster parent or the
guardian might be very
different. You can have uh
Uh, a lower income foster parent
with almost no taxable income
and almost no taxable relief or
tax relief from an exemption, or
you could have someone with very
high taxable income that gets an
entire exemption relief from
that. So, the credit we thought
was much more equitable.
And on the Madam chair and madam
vice chair on the lower end
income scale that the secretary
just spoke of, um, you'd
received the credit or you'd see
the receive the dollars you
would have received for the full
credit, whereas you wouldn't be
guaranteed that with with the
secretary just described.
Perfect, thank you.
Right, and we will be hearing
also the, the bill that you
referenced, the vice chair
referenced 304. That will be our
last bill of the night if we can
get to it.
But there might be that one's
not the one that you were
talking about. All right, so
then I should pay attention to
the numbers that you say.
It's OK. Um, any other comments
or, or questions, remember this
is a bill that we hold.
Um, and we're certainly welcome
for that.
All right, so no further
questions. So this is a bill
that we're gonna hold. Thank
you, Secretary, for your input
on that. We appreciate that.
Our next bill is 294 and that is
Senator Bergman's and this one
is also one that we hold.
And this is the increased child
income tax credit.
No, we're not voting on this is
a this is a hold Senator
Padilla.
OK.
I said Vi chair, you're ready to
go.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee Senate Bill 294
is
A doubling of the child income
tax credit for children under
the age of 6.
In 2023, well, in 2022.
The state adopted the child tax
credit in New Mexico and in
2023, it went into effect.
This, the credits range from $25
to $600.
And we all know that
Family economical being is
critical to the foundation of a
healthy child development,
exposure to economic stress and
hardship can take a toll on a
young child's physical and
mental health, education
achievement and social and
emotional well-being.
This tax credit is an important
tool to help mitigate these
hardships and provide greater
economic stability for families.
It also helps reduce child
poverty and reaches every single
child in New Mexico.
I could keep going, but I can
also, we can, uh, I think you
all understand what this bill
does. And with that, I'll stand
for questions. All right, thank
you. Uh, so now we go to the
audience. Uh, are there those in
the audience that are in support
of this bill?
123. Anybody in in the audience
in opposition of this bill?
Is there anybody online?
You're writing this down. All
right, so let's get the three of
you up if you don't mind.
We'll give you one minute
apiece.
Uh, Marilyn Beck, um, New Mexico
Child First Network, dedicated
to improving the lives of
children in foster care and
impairing those who serve them.
Um, the tax credit, and I just
want to say New Mexico, we hear
a lot that we're doing really
bad things, the way we've
invested in early childhood
education and really supporting
the 0 to 5, prenatal to 5 is, is
leading the nation. Prevent
child abuse America chapter, um,
nationally identifies that
increasing the child tax credit
or even just simply having one
is one of the number 1 to 4
ways.
to reduce and eliminate child
abuse. And so we just can't
support this enough. We thank
the sponsors and we're just
proud to be in New Mexico today.
So thank you.
Thank you so much.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Kim
Strauss. I am a board member of
the New Mexico.
Uh, going blank cause I'm
nervous, uh, the, uh,
New Mexico Children's Trust
Fund.
And um we support this, anything
that can help stabilize
families, uh, support families,
uh, and therefore decrease uh
child abuse and neglect, we're
for. Thank you.
Thank you so much. Anybody else
in the audience? Otherwise,
we'll go online. We do have 4
people online. Um, I'm going to
Uh, we'll go to all 4, but if
you will, please keep your
comments as brief as possible.
We're gonna start with Page,
then Richard, Kurt, and then
Sephora. So if you will, Paige,
if you will, please unmute
yourself. Uh, if you can keep,
if you're hearing that there are
folks in support, so if you can
keep your comments short, that
would be great. Much
appreciated. Go ahead, Paige.
OK. Thank you. Good afternoon,
Madam Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Paige
Knight with New Mexico Voices
for Children, and we stand in
strong support of Senate Bill
294. This legislative body has
done tremendous work creating
and then increasing New Mexico's
child tax credit. We know this
action was incredibly important
because tax credits not only
help reduce poverty, but they
also help kids thrive in the
long run because that improved
economic well-being and
financial stability. It
translates to improved child and
maternal health, school
achievement, and a host of other
benefits. SB 294 will help
amplify those many benefits by
providing a targeted boost in
RCTC for young children
specifically. These early years
are the most critical for child
development, and also a time
when parents are more likely to
be struggling financially. It
will provide a valuable
long-term investment in our
state's greatest asset. Our
youngest minds and learners. We
think the sponsor for bringing
forth this legislation, and we
respectfully urge your support.
Thank you.
Thank you so much, Richard,
you're next, if you'll please
unmute yourself and keep your
comments brief, please.
Yeah
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Dick Mason
and I'm a board member in a
registered lobbyist for the
League of Women voters in New
Mexico. The league stands in
strong support of of SB 294. The
league supports tax credits and
our deductions that promote
equity and efficiently achieved
their purpose, uh, SB 294 does
just that. Policies like the
child tax credit to boost
economic opportunities for
families are shown to reduce
childhood poverty and improve
outcomes.
kids and their families.
And so the League of Women
Voters wants to thank Senator
Bergman for introducing a SB
294, and we urge the committee
to give it a due pass. Thank
you.
Thank you so much, Kurt, your
next.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. This
is Kurt Reger with Lutheran Avos
Ministry of New Mexico, and
Lutheran advocacy also speaks
the position of the New Mexico
Conference of Churches, and I'm
here this afternoon to express
our strong support for SB 294.
We've long been disheartened,
dismayed, and even outraged at
the number of New Mexicans
living close to or below the
federal poverty level. No one
should lack access to the basic
necessities of life, of
nutritional meals, clothing,
safe housing, and health care, a
lack of basic needs leads to
negative outcomes throughout a
person's.
Life and tax credits provide
more resources for a family to
meet these daily needs.
We're grateful for the
legislator's targeted tax
reform, especially through tax
credits for low-income New
Mexicans, and this is reflective
in the right of a recognition of
dignity of all and the concrete
results of previous work done by
you is seen in the dramatic
improvement of New Mexico in the
supplemental poverty measure. SB
9294 builds on the recent
strides made and more
importantly, targets families
with our most vulnerable
population, children under the
age of 6. Lutheran advocacy in
New Mexico and New Mexico
Conference of Churches urge your
support
for SB 294, and I thank you for
the opportunity to speak this
afternoon.
Thank you so much, Sephora,
you're the last one, if you
will, um, you have one minute.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair. My name is Tippora
Nefesh, and I'm the executive
director and registered lobbyist
for New Mexico thrives. The
state nonprofit association, and
we stand in strong support of SB
294. We have seen how effective
child tax credits are for
children and families in the
economy overall, and we urge
your support for this important
bill. Thank you very much.
Thank you so much.
Senator Bergmans, would you like
to respond to the public
comment. I just want to add one
thing, um.
The public comment
It was great. Um, I just wanted
to make sure that everyone knows
that similar to the um.
Tacts we just heard in the last
bill that this is also a
progressive tax so that the
families with lower income
receive larger credits.
Making it very effective.
That's all.
Thank you so much.
Alright, at this point now I now
go to the committee again. We
are holding this bill, but
you're certainly welcome to ask
questions and make comments.
Wow, not, not expecting crickets
on this one, so thank you very
much.
But
if that if that's all, thank you
so much. I hope we put this in
our tax package. That is, this
will be considered for the tax
package.
Uh, I'm sure I'm sure I'll give
you something to talk about.
So, on my bill.
OK
All right, so, um, vice chair is
gonna take over as uh I'm
presenting the next bell.
And you'll get the 2, the one
bill after that.
Yeah
Whenever you're ready, madam
chair.
All right, Madam Chair and
committee, thank you very much.
Um, I'm bringing, I'm, I'm here
today because of a couple of
conversations that we've had in
our communities, and I think
they're applicable throughout
the entire state. Uh, is that
Senate Bill 357 creates the
essential services Development
Act, which allows state support
for infrastructure projects,
primarily in residential areas,
and this is relating to
broadband, which we all know as
a result of the pandemic that
should be a basic utility, um,
but also energy, water and
wastewater services. And I want
to give you a little bit of
background because I have a
feeling some of my folks from uh
southern New Mexico are online
right now in Southern New
Mexico, and I think it's
relevant throughout the state is
that we have rural communities
or people within our communities
who are on septic systems, but
are just yards away from a sewer
line, and they cannot afford
attaching to that sewer line. So
under SB 357, only the state may
provide public support for
essential service projects
including grants, loans, loan
guarantees, infrastructure
improve.
s and professional services. I
want to give you a little bit of
background in 2022, the
legislature passed HJR1, which
allows for an exception to the
anti-Donation clause, which was
the big conversation that we
were having regarding this when
we were starting to talk about
this, which would allow the
expenditure of state money to
provide for essential services
primarily for residential
services which include the
infrastructure, as I mentioned,
internet, energy, water,
wastewater, and other services.
I want to stress right now
wastewater is the big deal, uh,
especially in southern.
Mexico. And so with me, um, you
know, we have residents in our
community that are on septic
systems, and I think I saw
Senator Jaramillo shake his
head, uh, I, I may have, I don't
know if I misinterpreted or not,
but Senator Ramos also
understanding that, especially
in Silver City and in that area.
And what this bill does is it
allows cities and counties to
help provide direct or indirect
assistance to support an
essential services project by
use of public support funds. And
this includes homes with septic
systems that need to be
connected to sewer, the
placement of new broadband
telecommunications networks
facilities and grants for public
works infrastructure
improvements. I have a couple of
uh experts with me, um, right
now, I have Larry Horan, who is
a lobbyist with the city of Las
Cruces, somebody that I've
worked with on, uh, several
projects with also
I have to my right, Elizabeth
Teeters, who is the economic
development director for the
city of Las Cruces. Um, we also
have Adrianne Widmer who is the
utilities director. She's
sitting over here from City of
Las Cruces and Carl Clark, the
assistant utilities director,
and I believe we have the
county, uh, the chair of the
board of, uh, commissioners
County Donana County Board of
Commissioners. Also in the back,
we have the Assistant county
manager, Jonathan Mascias, and
all of them are here in support
of this legislation. And so, um,
at this point, I would like to
go ahead and give my expert
witness to
Uh, make a few comments and then
we will go ahead and go to
public testimony and and the and
the committee.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Larry Heran
registered lobbyist for the city
of Las Cruces, just to a little
more detail of what's happened
in Las Cruces. The Environment
Department changed the
regulations for septic systems,
I think it was in 2009, 2010.
That's when we actually started
getting capital outlay for
septic systems, sewer lines for
communities or a home that has
property that's less than half
an acre, if their septic system
fails, they can no longer get a
new septic system. So it was a
$50 million project in 2009.
When I started with it, it's
probably now 150 million because
we haven't finished it and we're
we're still going, but what we
have found is we can run the
sewer line right up to the
property line, but we can't help
connect to the house. And so
once we heard about the joint
resolution, septic systems,
what's really popped to came to
mind, this would really help in
those kinds of situations to
adopt a program responsibly,
that has to be passed by
ordinance by a local government,
so you can adopt criteria for
the spinning of these public
dollars, but to help those homes
most in need.
Of things like the connection to
the sewer and then Senator did a
good job of explaining other
opportunities that this would
have. I think the last thing I
would say is the constitutional
amendment required enabling
legislation to start to develop
the program.
This is that enabling
legislation, so this is that
first step for us to have that
program at the state level, so
we can start funding those
projects in local communities,
and it is limited to state
dollars.
And Madam Chair, we do have an
amendment.
To this
It's uh 231-398.1.
It's in your book.
I'm I'll move the amendment for
discussion.
Thank you. Would you like to
explain the amendment? Sure
thing, Madam Chair, and I might
have Larry tag team with me as
well. Um, uh, it's on page 4,
lines 1 and 2 were striking only
the state may provide public
support, and then you'll see
also on page 4, striking the
subsection designation of A and
lines 11 through 14 on page 4 as
well. And Larry, if you want to
go ahead and explain the
rationale behind that.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair,
members of the committee.
The constitutional amendment and
the statute in the definition of
public support makes it clear
that only state dollars can be
used.
So B was a provision that
affirmatively set a local
government is not authorized to
provide public support.
They can't anyway, because it
has to be state dollars so they
can't use local dollars, so it
created confusion when the bill
was introduced in local
government said, wait a minute,
you're telling us, we cannot
provide public support.
So it created confusion that
there are other areas where they
would be prohibited from
providing public support. So
after looking at it, having
discussion with the sponsor, we
just took it out. We didn't
think we needed an affirmative
statement, they can't do it when
it already says it in the
Constitution and it already says
it elsewhere in the bill. Thank
you. Is there any discussion on
the amendment?
So I'm sure where else in the
bill does it say that?
Madam Sheriff Senator Worth, if
you look at the definition of
public support.
On page 2, 19H public support
means the provision of
assistance by the state to
provide direct or indirect
assistance to support an
essential services project. So
that's, that's where the state
provides the funding and the
prohibition is in the
Constitution that says it is
only state funds. So I'm, I, I
get the constitutional
prohibition and I'm not, I mean,
we can talk about it, but I
think I'm, I'm a little
concerned that all these local
governments by taking this out,
now we're gonna start thinking
exactly.
what you're trying. The
confusion could go the other
way.
In other words, they're going to
think all of a sudden.
OK, here, here we go. Now, why
can't we just do this?
And that's, that's, that's just
my, as I'm sitting here
listening to it, I, I mean, this
is, this is a new area, I think
it's super important and it's
good that we're talking about
it.
That that everyone out there
here is that all of our local
governments here, but this is
all designers can all go through
the state, right? We have to, we
have to actually present. This
is kind of it, is it having
spent a lot of time doing
behavior health guard rails this
session. I just I wrote this as
a guardrails bill.
They're gonna have to put
together the the plan, bring it
to us. We provide the funding,
correct? And it's got to be
approved by us subject once we
approve the guardrails that are
there.
So again, I, I, like, I guess
I'm kind of agnostic as long as
it's in the definition. I just
wanna make sure though that as
we discuss this, we just
reiterate, because again, it's,
yes, it's in the Constitution,
but I think everyone's trying to
figure out.
What's the scope of that
exemption, and I think
What you're saying, and I think
it's correct, is that it's, it
requires state, state funding to
be able to do it. So City of
Santa Fe couldn't decide.
We've got $5 million and so we
want to do these connections
directly.
Madam Senator, that's correct.
That's all I have when I have
it.
Is there anyone else in the
amendment?
Is there any opposition to
adopting the amendment?
see none. The amendment is
adopted.
Was, is there anything else
you'd like to say?
No, ma'am, I'm sure we can go
ahead and go to public comment.
I do know that there are some
folks online who have been
waiting quite a, quite a ways
all the way down from southern
New Mexico. But if you want to
go to the room first and then
online, I'd appreciate it. Thank
you. Are there in the committee
room, um, those in support, can
you raise your hands?
I see one. Is there anyone in
opposition?
In the committee room.
Would you like to go ahead, sir?
There's one in support in the
committee room and none in
opposition, so we'll have.
One speaker in person will go
online.
Hello, uh, my name is Sam Leo.
I'm a city councilor in the city
of Espanola, and I just wanted
to uh say that I support this
bill. Thank you.
Thank you, and I do have the
list of supporters from online,
there are only supporters,
correct?
And there are 3, so we'll go to.
Arturo first, you will have one
minute and you can unmute
yourself.
Go ahead.
Madam Chair, um, members of the
committee, my name is Arturo
Uribe.
I stand in support of Senate
Bill 357 for the much needed
infrastructure and our
unincorporated areas in Donana
County, known as our Colonias,
so I stand in support of Senator
57.
Thank you. I also have.
Is Rose Garcia still on there?
Is there anyone else
who would like to speak online
in support.
What
Oh was there Nora Beltran?
Go ahead, you have one minute.
Go ahead. OK.
Um
Madam Chair and committee, I am
Rose Garcia, and I'm here
representing residents in San
Miguel, and I'm testifying for
the severity of the need for
wastewater improvements, um, for
Senate Bill 357. I, uh, strongly
support it and ask if you could
support it also.
Thank you, and then is one.
Juan, are you still on there?
Go ahead, you have one minute.
Hello, Madam Chair, members of
the committee, my name is Oscar
Padilla, must be a mistake on
the computer. Uh, I'm a
representative of the, of the
chancery of the Roman Catholic
Diocese of Las Cruces, basically
southern New Mexico.
Uh, this bill would directly,
potentially affect uh one
location in particular in San
Miguel, where we have a parish
facility.
Our diocese was established in
1983, and it's carved out of two
larger dioceses of Santa Fe and
uh, and El Paso.
Essentially, that makes us a
very small, uh, quote unquote
mission diocese and uh typically
that means that we are low in
funding.
And that being the case, each
parish facility is responsible
for the upkeep of all their
improvements to their specific
location.
So considering the financial
realities of the the parish
facility of San Miguel, um, in
San Miel.
Uh, I urge you to pass this
bill.
Up to date sewer infrastructure
can be implemented not only for
the church, but also for the
neighboring property owners.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, the chair of the
Donana County Board of
Commissioners is online.
If we can allow him as the last
person to speak, that would be
great, commissioner, I see your
hand raised. Go ahead, you have
one minute.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
and members of the committee.
Um, I'm actually driving up as
we speak to Santa Fe, um, so I'm
glad to join you all here today,
but I just wanted to speak as a
Donana County commissioner and
commissioner for District one,
which has the
Largest number of coloniass, um,
In southern New Mexico, and I
just want to say how amazing
this opportunity in this bill
would be to provide services in
these colonias in the areas that
have been so underfunded and so
forgotten about for many years.
So I stand in support, and I
hope that you can all join me in
that as well.
Thank you, Madam Chair, is there
anything else you'd like to see?
Um, you know, I, I do see, um,
Natalie Green, but I wanna, I
wanna go ahead and be respectful
of the committee's time. I do
want to recognize that Natalie
Green is the person who oversees
our housing, um, accessibility
and affordability in the city of
Las Cruces, and, and I want to
point out to um Rose Garcia, who
works with Tierra del Sol and
they provide housing, especially
in the colonious area. She had
brought that she was speaking on
behalf of several residents in
San Miguel. And part of that is
because of internet
accessibility.
They were actually at their
office, um, because there are
several people who weren't able
to have access. There is a
person uh who lives down in Cham
Barrino, who spends over $300 a
month on internet satellite
internet because they don't have
access to this. And so I think
many of us can figure and think
about communities in our
particular districts that would
benefit from this, and I want to
stress that there are certainly
procedures and protocols that we
have that the communities have
to follow, so this is not just
handing out.
money to people. This is making
sure that people have access to
a basic utility that should be
everybody's right. And so on
that point, uh, Madam Chair, I
go ahead and, and uh welcome
conversations from the
committee.
Thank you,
Senator Hermia. Madam Chair,
Senator, thank you for bringing
this forward as somebody who
represents rural New Mexico, but
3 million is just a drop in the
bucket. What made you come up
with 3 million as your starting
point?
Are you reading the corrects no
money. I'm looking at Senate
bill appropriate 3 million for,
oh, I'm looking at the wrong 10,
you're thinking of the wine,
yeah, I am. That's how tired I
am. That's how 10. That's how
tired I am. It's is there an
appropriation to your bill. We
need more of the appropriation
for wine.
So there is not an appropriation
of this is that the the the
municipalities and counties
would uh seek through through
state funds. OK. That's how
tired I am, committee, but
here's what I want to tell you
we had a
major issue that Senator
Trujillo helped us with when she
was at the licensing department,
rural northern New Mexico's is
fueling or warming their homes
through propane, and there's the
natural gas line that runs
through Tierra Maria, but
residents can't afford to
connect to that line and so the
county doesn't have the money to
help them connect. We have the
major issue as you do and
Senator Ramos does with septic
tanks and the threat of
groundwater contamination, this
bill makes sense for those of
us who represent rural New
Mexicans and the need is there
to ensure we can connect them to
basic needs for their living.
Sorry that I misread that. I'm
looking at the wrong report,
that's how that's all right, you
perked up Senator Sher because
he's like, yes, 3 million and
mine is a good thing. I woke you
up, Senator Sher. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you, Senator.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Are there any other questions,
Senator, thank you,
Madam Chair and Madam Chair. So
basically on page 4.
Uh line 3 paragraph 8. Each
project has to come to the state
for a bill.
The way I read that.
Mr. Chair, Senator, each project
has to be approved by the state
or I think with this language
and and you probably would even
know better if there's funding
in the general appropriation Act
for a particular project, and
that would be specifically
authorized by law, so it would
have to be appropriated at the
state for an approved project
for the funds could flow down.
So in Mache and Mam chair and
Larry the this though goes on to
say the law shall include
provisions to safeguard public
money and other resources,
including allowing the division
to recover money. It was
basically a clawback provision.
Uh, if
And other resources if the
essential services project is
not completed to the
satisfaction. We had a lot of
discussion the other night in
the Senate Judiciary Committee
on a Senator Hickey.
And Senator Munoz Bill for I'm
also exhausted, so I can't
remember exactly what it was,
but.
It, it barely moved out because
there there was concern over the
clawback language, but it uh it
does look to me like, and maybe
we could get some kind of a
You could do it through
language, possibly.
But I just, I also wanna make
sure cause I'm also thinking
about we've got a huge issue in
Tasuki right over the hill, uh,
bishop's Lodge, you know, has
been trying to discharge
effluent, uh.
And lots of folks all on septic
and visiting with the Tasuki
pueblo downriver. It's like they
need to, you know, during the,
during the summer months, the E.
coli levels are going way up
cause everyone's on septic. So
again, it's a perfect example,
and I just try to figure out,
OK, if we do that, does that
mean?
I've got to introduce a specific
bill. Here's $5 million. Here's
all the.
You know, the pieces to it, and
I know you've got the
Criteria, the local government's
gonna put together the plan, but
I guess I'm trying to just
figure out that they have to
bring that to us and then we
build it into legislation.
Madam Chasener, they would have
to bring it to the legislature
now whether or not it could be
in a general appropriations Act
or a funding bill.
Versus a standalone piece of
legislation, I think that would
be.
Policy decision by the
legislature and having come
before you on several tax
increment development districts.
I do know that when we come with
with requests for those types of
funding and they have to be
vetted.
Um, you know, whatever the,
whatever the will of the
legislature would be, you would
have the ultimate say before
before funding a project, so
that way you ensure all those
concerns that are laid out in
what needs to be in the plan are
addressed and are properly
addressed to your satisfaction.
And Madam Chair, just to be
clear, I mean, this is gonna
allow the whole purpose of the
Constitutional amendment was to
kind of do the.
The last mile.
Right, were, were you involved?
Yes, let me yield to Senator
Figuero.
Good, you're good, good. No, I
just it was to do the last mile
part of this.
Right now we can already
appropriate all the money to do.
I can.
You know, if we could figure out
how to do it, we could
appropriate the money to do a
new.
sewage system in Tasuki, I just
can't.
Take it from the line.
Of the house. That's what we're
talking about. That's what this
bill does.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Senator Figueroa, thank you. I'm
going to follow up on that, um,
because the senator, Madam
Chair, got it, at some of my
questions if these plans that
are made by the locals are being
brought to the legislature.
And we're gonna get a pot full
of them, Madam Chair, and we're
gonna have to line them up one
against the other, and the
criteria and the plan is made by
the local government, so it's
gonna be comparing apples to
oranges. If we are setting up a
system whereby we are evaluating
that last mile plan, we need the
clear criteria by which we are
to judge them and measure them
against one another and choose
or prioritize them, and that's
um.
When we lay in this bill, madam
Chair, the
Burden on the local government
to create that plan, we may not
have the information we need if
the decisions being made in the
legislature, and I'm not sure.
The legislature with our time
constraints is the right body.
For this.
Uh, we might need a different
entity to collect these
applications, prioritize them,
line them up, and then, you
know, we fund the money out, but
I'm, I'm not quite sure what
entity already exists. I don't
want to make a new one, Madam
Chair. But
I'm pointing at her CEO.
I'm trying not to point that out
because like oh do I need to be
here
um, yeah, or overburdened NMFA,
uh, but.
some entity that can.
Do this process, uh, the DFA
mentioned in here isn't.
Necessarily the best.
Um, for this purpose, I don't
think, but that's my concern.
who is, who approves these
projects and then the clawback
piece.
Madam Chair, is, is the clawback
from that.
Residential person who was
trying to get that last mile
piece built and maybe didn't get
it done right, didn't meet the
standards didn't, you know, and
we're gonna claw back money from
them, or is this an agreement,
Madam Chair, between the state
and the local government, who's
going to build it on loan, so to
speak, for the resident, and
then we'll give him the money,
you know, with the understanding
that the money from the state
will be provided because it's
been approved.
proved. The
The line for the funding isn't
clear enough.
Madam Chair, and senator, and I
appreciate, and this is why I
really like, um, I'm bringing
these two committees because I
think we all get the the intent
of it and understand how it's
going to help our communities.
We just need to get all the
right channels and and I uh want
to commend uh Marquita because,
um, you know, that's the rewards
you get for being good. Um, I
know you're like, no, it's not,
but, uh, the uh I would like to
turn it over to Larry because
when we're talking about those
funding sources and I completely
see what you're talking about
because like many of us
with the 30 and 60 day session,
we've got bills that have to
wait 2 years, and I don't want
our communities to have to wait
2 years for the legislature to
go ahead and decide, I think
that's where, uh, you know,
Madam Chair and Senator
Figueroa, you were going as
well, is that that's a long time
for communities to wait. So I
would appreciate Larry, if you
want to contribute to that.
Madam Chair Center for Growth
just so right currently as
drafted, the division is defined
as the local government division
of DFA.
So right now that's where those
plans would go.
Um, part of the reasoning for
that is DFA and local
governments already have a
relationship as it relates to
capital outlay agreements.
And so, I don't think it's the
intent that the legislature
would look at the plan and
decide.
The local governments are most
in touch with what the needs of
the community are and what the
criteria should be.
So then that would be submitted
to the state for review.
And then the state would say,
yes, we think it meets the
criteria, no, it doesn't when
they provide the funding.
And then when you, when you
receive funding as a local
government from the state, you
have to enter into a funding,
you have to enter into
agreement, there's a memorandum
of agreement, there's a
contract.
For all of them, and so those
things like clawbacks, that's
where that could be handled
because I don't think.
I don't think the legislature
nor local government would say
we want you to go after the
property owner, it would be more
like City of Las Cruces, you
didn't do this right, so now you
we're clawing back $5 million in
what you did with your septic,
that can be covered in that
agreement that the funding flows
because
The legislature has to
appropriate.
GSA or whatever governmental
entity, even if it's the finance
Authority has to enter into an
agreement with the local
government, the local government
has to take that agreement for
acceptance by the governing
body. So there's lots of steps
and processes in place where you
have people looking at it and
making sure it's gonna be fair
and it's gonna work, and it's,
it's in place today, but it's
focused mainly on either growth
funds or through capital outlay.
That's what we're seeing, and
Madam Chair and.
Sponsor, then I would.
Post that our capital outlay
flow is not something we really
want to expand or or build on,
it's got problems.
So, uh, and laying that burden
on DFA might be more than they
can handle. The language
problem, I think, Madam Tay is
on page 54 to 5, because on page
4.
Bless you, it's line 21, 22, a
local or regional government.
Shall adopt a development plan.
And then when you go to page 5.
Um, line 10, that plan will
describe the criteria to be used
to determine eligibility.
I think it's not clear the local
government branch of DFA needs
to develop these criteria.
Because they're gonna be
measuring the projects one
against the other.
Not the local
Government itself. See, the
local government division versus
local government needs to be
really clear here.
Madam Sharon Center for the
intent of that language is, is
if you're in the city of Las
Cruces or Espanola, where you
have.
You know the community you're
trying to serve, and you're
gonna have a program where where
a homeowner is going to apply
for.
Funding
That local governing body is the
one to set up the criteria for
that actual program that then
has to be approved when they
submit that to DFA and then the
legislature has to agree to
that, we're gonna fund this for
septic.
You've adopted criteria that's
fair appropriate, puts the right
safeguards in place. You don't
get the funding if they don't
think that the criteria adopted
by the local government is
appropriate.
OK, madam chair and sponsor,
then I would say there are two
levels, there's the application
from the homeowner that wants to
build the line, but there's also
the application from the city of
Las Cruces to the local
government division of DFA. And
both of those levels are gonna
need their own criteria for
measurement and their own
evaluation process. Um, and
again, I think we're all on the
same page with intent. I'm not
sure the language is here yet.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, senator. That's why I
appreciate these conversations.
Are there any other questions?
And so, if I may, Madam Chair,
this, this bill does go to
Senate Judiciary next. No, it
doesn't.
Where's it? Do I not know where
my bill goes?
So
I'm sure we need to talk about
that, yeah, yeah, and Senator
Cervantes is on Senate
conservation, but I think we
definitely, given the, given the
constitutional issues and kind
of how we're
Yeah, it should, so we can, we
can.
if you're good with it, I think
I'm, I'm very much, Madam Chair
and Senator, because the thing
is is that I, I do appreciate
the conversation and I think the
intent is there and, and we all
see the need there, but we do
want to make sure that this
language is correct. Um, and
like I committed before with um
the, the other bill that I
brought forward and having those
conversations, um, I certainly
want to make sure that to do
that because I think we all can
all all of our communities can
benefit.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
I'll just ask a quick question.
On
The bottom of page 7.
For the
Lines 20 to 25.
This fund.
I mean, do local governments
have the capacity?
To regulate this fund as
envisioned in this language.
Madam Chair and sinner.
Yes, yes, and the reason for
the, the need for this is you
cannot commingle the local
dollars cause they're prohibited
from being spent, so we have to
segregate the state money and
know that it comes so the color
never changes, so that's why we
have to create a separate fund,
which is something, and I, um,
I'm gonna look to Elizabeth,
that's something we do in other
instances, so it's not a burden,
but that's the reason that we
need to separate. Thank you,
Madam Chair. I'll just add to
that quickly, so in the local
economic development Act, it's
already written in that any
state
Funds that come to the, the
municipality, goes into its
separate account. So this is
something that
The municipalities should be
familiar with because we do it
already in a different,
obviously project setting, but
it can be done.
Thank you.
And like everyone has been
saying this, I feel like this is
a very good concept. I just feel
like this is loose framework and
needs a lot more guardrails in
there. Um, but with that, what
is the will of the committee.
Thank you, Ma. Just the top of
page 7 paragraph A. just, this
talks about line 3.
Once the, once the plan is
adopted the local and regional
government may begin accepting
applications for public support.
So I'm sitting on the city
council.
Does that mean I'm accepting
individual homeowners that want
to connect or submitting an
application to me to get their
line paid for. I, I just want to
understand exactly what that
means there.
Madam Chernen are worth, the
local government adopts the
either plan or ordinance. It
puts the criteria in place, so
then that allows whatever their
criteria for applications to
then be could be submitted.
to the staff, presumably, cause
that's who would handle it to
make determination about
eligibility for criteria. That
just allows them to process the
application.
Um, and then once they get the
funding, then they can fund the
projects.
So it's not the, it's not the
governing body, um, the public
support is a defined term in it
to describe.
So it, the language gets a
little.
Wonky because of that defined
term.
Thank you Madam Chair.
Senator Figueroa, sorry, madam
Chair, that brought up another
question that is gonna.
That potentially could get
really tricky. If an application
for a support comes in and the
person who's making the decision
has anything to do with being
elected. There's all kinds of
lines, so you have to be careful
of there.
Madam Shanson or we, that has
happened as it related to some
of the ARPA funding, so I think
we learned very well how to put
those guardrails in place, so
the governing body makes the
policy decision.
Then staff then has their
direction and then they follow
criteria that does not involve.
The governing body making those
decisions. Senator.
Madam Chair, just one last thing
I'm thinking about my role is
when I was a county commissioner
and Reba, that we are north of
Santa Fe to the Colorado border,
is how would then I make the
determination and I'm just
thinking out loud of the people
who need so much infrastructure
and how would then I determine
who was priority and then how
would I try to get my county to
implement or try to work on
getting these projects done,
it'd be something that's very
hard, but I, but I do support
it.
And the last comment is, what if
we use espanola as a test with
your bill, and we can get all of
our work done and I'll come back
next year and report to you,
then we can decide what to do,
you know what we might want to
do, Madam Chair and senators,
that be given the, the, the
folks online, maybe what we can
do is look at North versus
South.
I appreciate that offer. Thank
you. No further comments or
questions.
Then there were
So, I'm sure, I, I, I think I'd
like to make a motion that we
move this without
recommendation, given everything
that's here, we can as a
committee, it's interesting, we
can add a referral. I don't
necessarily want to add a
referral because I think we
should do the flip on the, on
the floor.
So I don't think we can put in a
committee report that we'd like
it sent to judiciary instead of
conservation, because I've not
seen that. I don't know if
Senator Sheriff, you've seen
that.
We could, we could make it up,
our, our, our, our clerk though
is uh
Pretty good at being very strict
about how we do it, we don't
want to slow it down, right? So
I mean, I just, and I appreciate
the commitment, so I would just
make the motion without
recommendation with the
commitment of the sponsor to go
visit with, with Senator
Stephanics and Senator
Cervantes. Let them know what's
going on and then stand up and
ask for a unanimous consent we
flip that around. I can do that
in the morning. I appreciate
that.
Thank you.
And I'm a majority leader and
thank you committee.
So you've got, is there a second
for the motion?
Is there any opposition?
emotion.
With that, you have a new pass
with no recommendation. Thank
you and thank you for your
honest and thoughtful
conversations, and I appreciate
that. I'm gonna let the vice
chair go ahead and lead this
next meeting because I have not
been able to move.
And uh
Thank you.
Senator, you are here.
Like, where are we on this list
for.
287, and you have a committee
sub.
Madam Chair, I have a couple of
witnesses, um, expert witnesses
here with me today. I'd like to
introduce Michael Oaks from the
recreational Vehicle Industry
Association.
Um, I believe he flew out here
from the East Coast, um, for
this committee meeting. So I'm
glad we're being heard. Um,
we've got Bob Sholl from Rocky
Mountain RV and Jeff Myers from
Myers RV.
So I'm just gonna give a brief
explanation of, oh, go ahead.
I'll just, is there a motion to
move the committee sub for
discussion.
I move the committee substitute
0.231176.2 Senate tax business
and transportation Committee sub
for Senate Bill 287 for
discussion.
And just as I'm sure, I think
you need to do do not pass on
the original bill and then
I think you do it both times
technically, but.
We know where we're going.
No.
Senator Trio, go ahead.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you committee members. So the RV
industry and the automobile
industry have very different
business models. The RV industry
operates on a one dealer to many
manufacturers' model with no
true ran franchise relationships
between the parties in a
manufactured dealer agreement.
While the auto industry is one
dealer to one manufacturer and
is based on a true franchise
model. Due to these differences,
the franchise provisions of the
automobile industry simply don't
work well.
Um, for the RV industry as a
result, the RV Industry
Association and the New Mexico
RV dealers are asking the
legislature to place RVs in a
separate chapter of law.
Um
The substitute.
Addresses the significant issues
that were brought up by Thaksin
Ra.
Um, and, um, Madam Chair, with
that will stand for questions,
and I'm gonna defer to my
experts, um, including, um, my,
um,
Help over here, uh, Randy, who
has information about the
amendments.
For the substitute.
OK.
Is that all, do you want to
speak now in defer to them,
yeah.
Oaks with the RV Industry
Association.
Where the National Trade
Association, which represents RV
manufacturers and their
components, art suppliers who
together build more than 98% of
all RVs produced in the US.
We're here today in strong
support of SB 287, uh, Senator
Heow's legislation to govern the
relationship between
manufacturers and dealers.
We have some similarities with
automobiles.
RVs have wheels. They're
regulated by NHTSA at the
federal level.
They travel on the roads of the
country, but as Senator Trujillo
said when it comes to the
business models by the
industries, they are quite
different.
To address this, we are asking.
Uh, this committee to support SB
287.
Thank you.
Madam Madam Chair and committee,
uh, I wanna thank you again for
the opportunity to present the
Senate Bill 287, um, from a
dealer standpoint, uh from the
dealer and the manufacturer
standpoint, this has been worked
on since 2020 and been adopted
by uh quite a few states in the
country. I think a little over
20.
Um, it was a mutual agreement,
which doesn't, I don't think
very often happen in and
certainly doesn't happen often
in the auto industry. I don't, I
do not believe. But uh there,
there's a give and take on both
sides of manufacturer and the
dealerships. Um, some of the
benefits is for giving us as
dealers in the Mexico, um, is
giving us a little bit of a, of
a, a more consistent and level
playing field with, uh, you
know, we're in competition not
just within the state of Mexico,
we're competition across the
country with with uh buyers, um,
and you manufacture.
Um,
operate in different manners
within each state based upon
laws that they're dealing with.
So it gives them the continuity
of every state they're having
the same same ball field, the
same game rules to play by. For
us, it's given us a better
ability as dealers to provide a
more constant and and consistent
product, both on the on the
tangibles and on the service
side of the RV industry to our
consumers, um, by, by having,
having a warranty, more
streamlined and more.
uh, easy to obtain the parts and
and and being able to be paid
for the work that we're actually
gonna be doing uh in repair on
the warranty side, um.
It gives us the ability to to
feel secure on the products that
we're carrying and not the
manufacturer being able to pull
the wool out from underneath us
and and change a brand just
because they like the big box
dealers, if you will, uh,
further down the road.
So it is supported, uh,
tremendously by both sides of
the manufacturers and the dealer
side of of the equation. So we,
we certainly hope that within
the bill we don't have anything
that just strikes any.
The alarm fire drills in your
eyes.
Thank you very much. Appreciate
it.
Madam Chair, committee, thank
you, uh, for hearing this uh
this afternoon, um, as Bob was
stating, this is really
important to us because we, as
Bob stated also that this is
going to be a more standardized
congruent.
Um, package for both
manufacturers and dealers that
have agreed upon, and this is
going to streamline a lot of our
processes as dealers, um, and
having a little bit more
consistency throughout different
manufacturers that we carry, um.
A lot of the manufacturers, uh,
you can get paid one labor rate
from one manufacturer and a
different labor rate from a
different manufacturer just
depending on your structure.
And this is gonna get that a
little bit more standardized for
us and also be easier on the
manufacturer side, so they don't
have to guess what state law is,
um, and as we said, this has
been 21, Michael, 21 states
have, have been able to pass
this specific.
Legislation for RV dealers and
manufacturers. One more thing I
would like to add, Madam Chair
and committee, I apologize. One
more thing I would like to add
to the RV side of things, unlike
the auto dealers, RVs are built
by not, they're built by a
manufacturer, but the components
they use within that product
that they're building are from
hundreds of other vendors
throughout the country and our
warranty is not just limited to
the manufacturer itself, like if
you bought a Chevy, Chevy covers
99% of the coach. We have
go through about 15 different
vendors on any given coach to be
able to get the warranty covered
for a consumer who has a problem
with the refrigerator or a
furnace, a water heater,
whatever it might be. Um, and
again, this bill also holds the
vendors, um, liable to, I'm
sorry, liable to uh.
Play by the same ball game as as
the rest of the rest of us are.
So again, it it the streamline
the process and to help us as
dealers be able to get the
product that we need to prepare
to repair the units under the
warranty process, um, this bill
helps us in that regard.
Thank you again.
Thank you.
The trio, is there anything else
you want to say before we go to
the audience committee? No,
madam Chair, thank you. Thank
you. Going to the committee
room, is there anyone here in
support of this bill?
Would you like to say something?
But yeah, clearly yours.
Quickly, is there anyone in
opposition to this bill?
OK, go ahead, Randy.
I
Go ahead.
Thank you,
Association, um, first I'd just
like to note how different they
have the manufacturers and
dealers sitting at the same
table together. Several of you
might recall how unique this is.
Um,
And so I wanted to address a
conversation I'd had with
Senator Figueroa, just kind of
been anticipating this is what
we did is we took the uh
existing law, which took the
model law and then we um the
reason we're doing the
substitute is that we forgot, I
forgot, drag over the uh
consumer protection aspects of
the existing and so uh in order
to add that back in, we're doing
the substitute and uh the
question was posed to me, did
we, did we bring it all over?
The answer is yes. I think this,
this morning I indicated a
little bit differently. Uh, we
did bring all over, bring
entirely all the consumer
protection um language from the
uh existing franchise. Thank
you. Is there anyone online in
support or opposition on this.
Thank you. Uh
Members of the committee, are
there any questions, Senator
Ward? Uh, thank you, uh, Madam
Chair. So this is gonna go to
the judiciary. I mean, there's
just a whole string of things
that, I mean, we've got.
Venue provisions we've got
attorneys' fees provisions, I
mean things that I know Senator
Cervantes is gonna.
Flag and we'll discuss all of
these when we're over in
judiciary, so I don't wanna do
it, I do it here, and they may
be existing language coming out
of the other, uh, which I had
the bill we did last night when
that went through Senate
Judiciary, that had all kinds of
flags, and once I walked through
and explained that we were just
carrying over the existing
language. I, I'll just say, I
mean, I have been here long
enough to have seen these.
Dealer manufacturer.
I won't say fights, but
conversations. So the fact that
you all are at the table is a is
a really good thing. I mean, I
think that makes sense, uh, but
I just want to flag that.
You know, there's a lot of
things in here that are gonna
gonna raise some questions and
we'll talk about those at the
next, next stop.
Yes, uh, Madam Chair, Senator,
um, we got a call, um, early on
once this was introduced from a
trial attorney who does, um,
consumer protection, um, cases
and realized that's when we
realized that the all of the
language for the consumer
protection hadn't been brought
over. And so we promptly look to
remedy that as well as some of
TRD's concerns, and that's why
Are there any other questions?
Senator Figueroa.
Thanks, Madam Chair. I did the
substitute address the question
of, and I can't find it in the
sub. I'm trying to line these
two things up page by page and
it, it escapes me, but there was
a reference to revoking
licenses, and it's my
understanding we don't license
these things in New Mexico.
OK, so that's gone.
Thanks. Um, then I think I'll
leave my 11 broad question, and
I'll leave the rest to
judiciary. Um, there was a
concern about affecting current
contracts. Is there language
that this would pertain to new
contracts moving forward in the
future and not change existing
contracts.
I stumped the panel.
I don't think it's addressed in
there. I don't remember it
having, but we could, you could
put a provision in there to say.
effective, you know, as of the
effective date, all new
contracts.
But it does require each
manufacturer and each dealer
who's selling that
manufacturer's product, to have
a dealer agreement in place.
Madam Chair, Senator, I will
just say that's a contract
issue, a legal issue, and the
changing of the law would not
nullify contracts. So those
contracts would have to continue
to be Madam Chair and sponsor
that was the concern brought up
in the committee analysis in the
FIR. So just adding the word
new.
Might take care of it, but
that's it for me.
Is there any other members of
the committee?
What is the will of the
committee?
It's
Do you wanna make the?
We'll have Cher making the do.
I do not pass on the
SB.
Is there a second? 2nd.
Is there any opposition?
Seeing no opposition, you have a
pass on the committee said.
Sure, Madam Chair, do you want
me to wait for the next bill, or
can I do my last bill? I would
say, let, let's go ahead and
move to your bill of Senator
Paul is OK with that since
you're sitting right there.
Thank you. I appreciate that.
Thank you. Thank you.
Madam Chair, this next bill is,
um, and I, and I never say an
easy bill, um, simply because.
Nothing ever is easy, but this
really is uncomplicated. What
we're doing, and I have an
expert witness with me here
today, um, from the.
Santa Fe
County clerk's office, uh, Rose
Angela is a deputy.
Um, county clerk here in Santa
Fe, and her and I have had the
pleasure of working together for
many, many years. Um, she was
actually one of my IT
specialists when I was over at
the regulation and licensing
department and um we lost her
just before I left, but and and
an excellent um witness here. So
what, what we're doing here is
simply raising the marriage fees
from $25 to $50. Um, that's all
we're doing.
And I'm gonna let um, Los Angela
talk about how this came about.
Yes, so
don't, don't bite the hand to
feed you. We have a due pass
from Senator Sher. We have a
second from Senator Figueroa.
Sorry, Senator Wirth, you just
walked right in on it.
I'm now. OK.
All right. So, um, then, so if
you will, um, we have a, a DuP
pass, are we just moving too
fast for you?
I, I'm,
I'm with you. OK, so, uh, motion
from uh Senator Sheriffer Du
Pass.
second from Senator Figueroa,
um, knowing Senator Wirth's
vote, if you will, please call
the vote.
Senator Figueroa.
Yes.
Senator had a meal. Yes.
Senator O'Malley is excused
Senator Paul.
Yes.
Senator Ramos, yes, and explain
my vote.
Senator Sanchez.
And to share.
Senator Wirth.
Senator Bergmann. Yes.
Senator Hamblin.
8, yes.
So, you have,
Senator Ramos, you want to go
ahead and explain your vote
before I give you the, I just
wanted to say I'm glad you
brought this bill. I was a
county clerk 27 years ago, and
the cost is still the same, so
it's it's time to to move
forward and uh thank you so
much. Thank you.
Thank you. So, uh, it, uh, 8 to
1, you have a due pass. Thank
you very much for sticking
around. Senator Paul and Senator
Campos.
Thank you so much for waiting
and then
hopefully we'll finish this off.
He.
She's like
Oh.
Mhm.
All right.
Senator Paul, so, so
Representative Harlan's beard is
the equivalent. I mean, every
time I know people are just
gonna confuse us
I know, I, I feel your pain.
Senator Paul, why don't you go
ahead and you've got Senator
Campos with you and
Representative Harlan Vincent.
So please go ahead. Madam Chair,
committee members, uh, thank
you, uh, is the chair had
mentioned, we've got uh several
folks up with me that I would
like to introduce, I've got the
best hairdo of a senator.
Senator Pte Campos MBM every day
that I see him. We've got
Representative Harlan Vincent
whose beard is pretty wicked.
And then we've also got Rick
Baugh, who's the general manager
of Racetrack, uh, Downs, uh,
casino.
Rio Doo Downs racetrack and
casino, excuse me, and uh
Um
So I would just like to begin by
giving kind of a brief summary
of what Senate Bill 393 is. To
me, it's pretty short and
simple.
The community in Lincoln and
Otero County last summer had
faced some wildfires, then
ensuing flooding that just
wreaked havoc on those
communities. What this bill is
looking to do is to be another
piece of the puzzle for, for
these communities in a
specifically for, for the
Lincoln County and Otero County
areas, and I would say even
outlying areas to recover from
the events that occurred last
summer, the devastation and
disasters that happened there.
So
The bill's looking to get a
temporary exemption on gaming
tax.
That is only going to apply to
the Riodoso Downs racetrack and
casinos or casino.
It'll be a temporary tax that
would run if this bill makes it
through till July of 2029. Um,
Here in just a second, I'll let,
uh, Mr. Bah and Representative
events that are, uh, Senator
Campos have anything to add, um,
but these are the types of
things that help to turn this
community around. The, the fact
that.
These gentlemen that are sitting
up here with me, some in the
audience as well. The minute
that these disasters struck,
they took action to put a plan
in place to turn their community
around. So I applaud them, um,
and for the communities
themselves of being willing to
stick together and do everything
that they can to make sure that
they're back up on their feet
and they're successful, and they
continue to be successful in a
great place for for folks to
enjoy down the road. Um.
Well, you take a pause, um, if I
may just remind the committee
because this is a tax, uh, it
has potential, so we're holding
it. Um, but, uh, I, I have a
feeling senators, uh, and
representative, um, we all
understand that pain. Uh, we
haven't directly felt it, but,
uh, this is something that is
not.
Not, uh, a first time that we're
hearing about this and and
understand the devastation and
so, um, is this your first bill
presentation, Senator Paul?
I think it's the first one in
this, all right,
can't wait to see it on the
floor. So, so I'd like to open
it up for, for, uh, Rick Bar or
if anybody else has anything
else to say. I do want to go
ahead. We've got 25 minutes.
And you know me.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, senators.
There's always a silver lining
that comes out of the emergency.
And the silver lining was.
They've they've been really
resilient at the racetrack,
trying to keep that thing put
together and I'm sure you've
seen lots of the videos where
they work 24 hours around the
clock.
The silver lining is.
Our community
As well as the Mescalero Apache.
You know, the mountain gods
didn't realize what an impact.
That racetrack is to our, our
hometown, and we are a resort
destination.
And
The thing that I appreciate the
most out of New Mexico is when
they they felt us hurting a
little bit, they started showing
up.
And they started spending money
in town and keeping our local
businesses alive and with this,
with this gaming tax, it's gonna
hopefully help these guys get
their, their racetrack put back
together, but that's I just
wanted to say that there is a
silver.
Excuse me, a silver lining that
come out of this. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Madam Chair,
members of the committee for me
very quickly, and of course to
Senator Paul to uh
Representative Vincent as we go
forward.
Uh, I was there a couple of
times, uh, in Riodoso this
summer as we saw the
devastation, the big issue
continues, uh, the racetrack and
casino are definitely an
integral part of the economy in
that area. I'm gonna make my
comment very short as we deal
with this, this definitely would
go ahead and provide the
enhancement, uh, to help to keep
the racetrack there, more
importantly, to continue to go
ahead and create the economic
stimulus that uh this area
definitely needs. Thank you very
much, madam Chair and members of
the committee.
I'm sure I'll be brief. Riodosa
Downs itself has $160 million
economic impact to this.
It's one of the hardest things
I've ever done and we had to
cease our operations at Riodosa
Downs, knowing full well.
That we were gonna affect
numerous businesses in that
town, and we did.
Some businesses were forced to
close.
And our goal is to get it back
up, get it going, we're
sustaining approximately $12
million loss at our property,
and it's growing on a daily
basis, so with that being said,
I'll be brief. I know that we
have the chairman of the gaming
control board here. We have the
mayor and the village manager
from Riidoso. Thank you. Thank
you so much and you know, we
still can't get those images out
of our heads and out of our
minds, um, just because it was
so it was so horrific horrific.
Um, so for time's sake, if I
can, uh, just by a show of
hands, how many in the audience
are in support of this bill?
I'm gonna take a picture of that
for you all.
Because that's amazing. I got
you in there. You're front and
center.
I've got a magnetized.
Paperclip. All right, get your
hands up.
All right, thank you. Uh,
anybody in the audience in
opposition?
When you
I know, right? Uh, we do have 2
people online that are also
showing support. We have Richard
Bustamante and uh a T Padilla,
um, for time's sake, so what
we've recorded that there is the
support, but I do want to go
ahead and move that on to the
committee. Remember that we are
holding this bill, so there are
discussions, but, um, Senator
Ramos, if you'd like to go
first, Madam Chair and center
and uh representative, thank you
for bringing this bill front,
but I do have one serious
question, since we don't have
any rain in Lordsburg.
Can we move the downs to
Lordsburg and be set for a long
time under your flood or so. No,
I'll, I'll do seriousness, um,
we, I feel for you, I'm so sorry
that this has happened in that
area, but uh I'm glad that we're
doing some new help. Thank you
so much.
Thank you, Senator Ramos.
Anybody else from the committee,
Senator Wirth. I thank you,
ma'am Chair, just so uh I
remember pandemic precedents.
Carrying a bill that helped the
restaurants with an interesting
kind of creative GRT they could
charge the GRT and keep it.
And again, it was designed to
deal exactly with obviously
something that.
No one ever thought was gonna
happen and what you all been
through.
A similar type deal, uh, so.
Again, I just think there is,
there's precedent for doing
something like this when we're
in a position to do it. I think
the challenge, just so you all
know, is finding the recurring
revenue for the tax package. And
that's the thing, it wasn't
built into the, into the budget
framework. So we've got to
figure out how we're gonna pay
for this.
And I think there's a real
desire to do it.
Uh
But let me just say, it's gonna
mean finding the revenue from
somewhere and so.
That's the policy choice. We'll
have to figure out, so, but I, I
really appreciate, you know, on
the show of supporting Mayor,
thank you for being here for
coming up for this cause I know
how hard you've worked in your
community and appreciate what
you've done.
Thank you, Senator Worth.
Any other comments or questions
from the committee?
So Senator Worth, um, you know,
we, uh, for those of you in the
audience, is that what we will
do is we will be working with
the house and looking at what
capacity we have, um, and this
is where as a committee we
provide input into our side of
the tax package. Um, and, and we
do, uh, want to incorporate some
of these things, especially
something like this from Senator
Paul and Senator Campos, and so,
uh, I, I think you have more
than just the three of you as
cheerleaders. I think you've got
this, this committee supporting
this and so.
Um, it is dependent on capacity,
so we're gonna keep our fingers
crossed and we should know a
little bit more by by early next
week. Madam Chair, but my, one
of the things that
I think we're proud of uh
Representative Vincent made
mention to it earlier that we
created a task force, uh, in
Lincoln County.
And uh it drew us together the
entire county closely together
and uh we've received a letter I
hope that's up there in full
support of this as well.
We do have that as well and and
thank you, that's an incredible
model of collaboration and
community coming together for
the the overall purpose, so we
do appreciate that. If there are
no other comments or questions
from the committee, I'm gonna go
ahead and let you move on and we
are finishing up with um Senator
Tobiasson, you have 2 bills. Uh,
thank you very much, gentlemen,
for being here. Thank you very
much, Madam Chair. Thank you,
members of the committee. Thank
you.
So we have 2 bills from Senator
Tobiasson. Um, one is Cephil
that's got a committee
substitute, so we're gonna do
297 1st.
Which is the Healthcare
Authority market assessments.
OK.
And then we'll finish.
I'll let you deal with her on
the floor there,
send I'm sure
some walk up, yes, I, I'm
imagining some Beyonce.
Senator, we need some walk up
music. I seeing how you were
dancing down there on the floor.
Oh, well, you missed it the
other day when she blew in and I
was like we need to have some
Beyonce and some fans blowing
the hair around.
Yes,
madam chairs, senators, I think
that we should create a, uh,
bill, don't we have ghost bills
still?
Dummy bells emergency bills
emergency.
I think it would be an emergency
for us to keep our energy up
that every afternoon.
We have to have some kind of
dance. I would lead it. I, I
think some walk up music that
could be assigned to Senator
Haramio.
Cause he's got some good
playlists,
and Senator Wirth can provide
the fan.
So, um, thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, Senate Bill 297 is a bold
step toward expanding healthcare
access and ensuring fair
reimbursement rates for
providers in New Mexico. The
bill mandates regional
commercial insurance market
assessments to align Medicaid
payments with neighboring
states, Arizona, Colorado, Utah,
Oklahoma, and Texas.
Additionally, it seeks to
increase Medicaid re.
Reimbursement rates up to 200%,
ensuring that healthcare
providers receive fair
compensation, strengthening
provider networks and improving
care for New Mexicans in need.
OK, do you have an expert or
anybody here that you'd like to
introduce or help?
chat with you at this time.
Given that it's 5 till 6 at
night.
Um, all right, this, this is a
bill that we will vote on. And
so, um, seeing Senator Scherer
pull his hair, um, I would just
like to see if there's anybody
in the audience that is in
support of this bill, carry, uh,
anybody else?
Uh, anybody in opposition,
you're like I'm just gonna raise
my hand for the heck of it. Uh,
anybody in opposition?
Is there anybody online
One support online? All right.
So, um, what we're gonna do is
we're just gonna go ahead and
acknowledge that support. Uh, if
we may, and uh that we have uh
all in support, no opposition,
uh, for that, Rebecca, you're
going ahead and taking that. And
now I'm gonna go ahead and leave
it to the committee to um ask
questions. I see looking through
FIRs and so, so Senator
Brigminster starting up.
Just very quickly, did you talk
to the healthcare authority
about this idea at all. Madam
chair, Senator, no, I did not.
OK. Thanks.
Other questions from the
committee.
So
I just want to be sure. Just,
can you just in a couple
sentences, tell me again exactly
what this does. It's been a,
it's been a long day and I just
wanna make sure I understand
what we're doing here.
And chair senator, um, what it
does is every other year there's
a regional market assessment.
To see what is the average
commercial market rate in the
states mentioned.
And
Whichever is greater, the 200%
Medicaid to bring up to 200%
Medicaid or the average regional
market rate is where we would
set that reimbursement for
providers and I put this
together just based on
conversations with so many
providers around the state, um.
Rural and in the metro areas
that are really, really
struggling and so in addition,
75% of that increase would need
to be spent on personnel that
are providing services. So in
other words, that increase, it's
not a carte blanche increase so
that people can build a facility
or do whatever market in the
region, it's really so those
entities can help pay for people
providing medical services.
And so on, man, Madam Chair and
senator.
Without this, basically.
The HCA is setting sets the, we
can, we've tweaked the rates,
correct? We've made some, some
legislative changes to these
rates. You're trying to just
statutorily put in place a
mechanism to do that. Am I
getting it now?
Madam Chair, Senator, yes, and
the rates that we've increased,
we're trying to bring carte
blanche most rates up to 100%,
which not all rates are up to
100% and then we have like 3 key
areas right now that are
currently being brought to 150%,
but it's just the tip of the
iceberg, it's really not.
It's just not enough statewide
to help providers make ends meet
and pay staff.
So man, does does this bill,
this bill goes to finance, is
that correct?
OK, cause yeah, I'm seeing that
there's a pretty significant,
you know, fiscal.
Cost to this. They're gonna want
to, yeah, they're gonna want to
take a look at that, Madam
Chair, Senator, I mean, in
finance we talk in tens and
hundreds of millions every day,
so it's, you know, hard for the
course. I surrounding here.
OK, Senator Sanchez.
Um, Madam Chair, senator for the
cost increases this only for
Medical doctors, is this covered
dentists as well for healthcare.
I'm Madam chair Senator, it
covers dentists as well.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator Figueroa. I
see you already reaching for
your microphone. I'm learning.
Thanks, Madam Chair. Um, I just
want to point out, Madam Chair
to the committee, we have looked
at item after item after item to
address physician recruitment
and retention.
And tax exemptions and changing
GRT for physicians and tax
credits, uh
This actually is far more
expensive.
But this actually would make a
more substantial and long
lasting difference.
This could be huge.
And if we can't work it into the
budget now, we need to seriously
put it on the agenda to get it
done because we're tweaking
around the edges, and this is
the core.
Thanks, Madam Chair.
Thank you. I think you've got
your promotional materials from
Senator Figueroa.
Any other questions or comments
from the committee?
All right. So, Senator Figueroa,
do you wanna make a due pass?
Do pass on send a bill 297,
Madam Chair. Thank you, and we
have Senator Sheer as a 2nd.
Anybody in opposition of the Du
Pass motion.
Seeing none, if you will, please
register that you have a 9 to 0
to pass on this.
All righty. Thank you, Madam.
Let's do another. All right,
reminder that this is a hold.
Um, there is a committee
substitute on that.
And so, if you would like to
present your committee
substitute.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair, um.
Yes. Actually, I do need to
move, uh, a movement on the
substitute. Madam, I move a do
not pass on SB 304 and a do pass
in the committee substitute for
SB 304 for discussion purposes
only.
Any opposition?
See then, do I need a second?
No, it's not.
No, it's not a vote yet. So, all
right, let's go ahead now.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, I
would like my expert witness.
Andrew Thornton
Tax attorney to explain that.
Thank you. My name is Andrew
Thornton. Uh, I'm an attorney
and part of my practice is
dealing with nonprofits, uh, we,
the initial bill uh had a lot of
problems that were pointed out
in the FIR so that's why we have
the committee sub that I hope
addresses most of them, um, in
the interest of time I had a
long speech, and then I had a
short speech, and I'm just gonna
skip both and get to the, the,
the, the meat and potatoes of of
what the committee sub um
addresses. Uh, first,
and foremost, it, uh
Addresses the double dipping,
possibly of being able to take a
uh itemized deduction for a
charitable donation, and so you
either take the itemized
deduction or you get the tax
credit, um, the other issue was
that it missed the percentage
donation eligible for the
proposed tax credit, and it is a
dollar for dollar 100% uh tax
credit in the bill. Um.
The other thing, the, the
elephant in the room on the uh
FIR was that the legislative
Finance Committee seemed to have
an issue that only 50% of the
revenue or the budget of the not
for profit needed to go towards
the charitable purpose or, or
for the foster children. Uh, but
rather than being a minimal
floor that is actually designed
to allow more organizations to
participate in the program so
that if they, if at least
50% of the population that they
serve as children in foster care
and the other 40% is uh another
population, they could still
qualify for this. Uh, what comes
to mind to me, at least as far
as Albuquerque organizations go
would be Cossack Q, uh, they're
a not for profit that provides
housing opportunities for LGBTQ
plus, uh, youth, um, most of the
people who go through that
program are somehow connected to
the foster care.
system, so the ones that aren't,
uh, they'd still be able to
qualify under under this uh this
provision. um.
That's, that's the long and
short of it, as far as the
changes that were there, uh, one
other edition that was made was
that if the uh donation is made
before the 15th day of the end
of the 4th month, tax, tax day,
uh, you, and you make the the
the payment during that, it
would count as being paid as
12:31 on the year prior so that
you can essentially pay your
taxes by paying one of the not
for profit.
All right, great. Thank you so
much.
Um
Now with this, uh, I'm gonna go
ahead and go to the audience and
see who in the audience is in
support of this legislation.
We have one person
enthusiastically over there. Uh,
anybody in the audience in
opposition of this legislation.
see none. We do have one person
online, uh, who is in support of
this, and so just as as again
for brevity, I'm gonna go ahead
and go to the committee. Your
support has been acknowledged
and so, uh, now I open it up to
the committee, do I see Senator
Figueroa eager or am I putting
you on the spot?
No, madam chair, it's fine. I
appreciate the sponsor and the
committee sub because it
addressed almost all of my major
questions. I still, Madam Chair,
I'm hung up on page 3. I think
you need to add, it's OK if you
want to designate 50% of the
organization toward foster kids,
but we need to specify that 85%
of the organization funds need
to go to services of some kind.
Otherwise, it could be a 50%
going to admin costs, and that's
not the intent. Um, the other
two pieces that are missing, uh,
you've got the repeal, but the
measures of success in the
report out pieces for a tax
credit. Would we assume this tax
credit is a success in 5 years
if we have doubled the number of
organizations serving our foster
kids in this state.
What is the measure of success
and how do we get the report
back? Those were the three
things to add, but I know we're
not voting, so just to keep in
consideration.
Senator, you're welcome to
respond if you'd like.
I'll
Madam Chair,
I'll refer to my.
Thank you.
Uh, I, I, I'm, I'm used to
interpreting the tax laws and
not drafting the tax laws, and
so I may have missed some
important things, that's why we
addressed it with, once we got
the FIR if you have proposed
legislation for that, I believe,
or language for that, we'd be
happy to put it in.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Any other comments from the
committee.
Senator Bergman, thank you,
Madam Chair.
to make sure I'm not reading the
same parts in a different
Figueroa just mentioned.
In our committee analysis it
just mentions that maybe the
word contribution should be
defined.
On page 3, line 16.
I don't know if it's necessary.
I don't know if it's actually
necessary, but I wanted to.
Throw that option out there
also.
Madam Chair, Senator Bergman's,
uh, if you look at page 2,
subsection B, it says the the
amount of the credit shall be an
amount equal to the amount
contributed.
So I don't know if that actually
is there or not other than the
credit amount it it is.
It's in the statute that the
credit amount is equal to the
dollar amount.
That sounds like it answers that
question then, thank you.
Thank you so much. Any other
questions or comments from the
committee?
All right, there are certainly
I'm sorry, San Paul, um, you
know, and that's the thing in
order so so that we can consider
this, I would recommend making
those those changes. Um, so that
we get the solid thing when we
are looking at uh a tax package
and don't want to go back and
have to amend that uh at this
point. Uh, any other comments
from the committee before we
adjourn?
Committee, I'm so grateful for
you. Thank you very much. Um,
uh, I, uh, appreciate all of the
conversation and uh we are
adjourned by the way committee.
We will be meeting on Saturday
afternoon at 4 o'clock. The
agenda is a little shorter, just
as a, as a.
Morning, I know Senator Sheer.
We are meeting at 4, unless we
get off the floor early, um, and
so that will be the incentive
for, for those of us if we get
off the floor early.
So you know.
So thank you, we are adjourned.
Thank you everybody for staying
so late. Thank you committee. I
have, yes.
