Then okay yeah that would she
just did so.
Great.
And his pledges.
What are you.
Not not his I. pad that to the
New Mexico provided weapons at
email starting with that okay.
All right it was just sent to
his provided email address so
great all right there is.
Okay lane road to take real hold
the whole the definitive.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Griggs.
Senator Hamblen here Senator
Hickey.
So this will I know he's here
present here.
Okay there Senator graves.
Of Senator how to meal.
Senator Kernan I know you're
there Senator.
You.
Senator Tallman I have him on
the phone checking here.
Senator Wirth here and senator
Shendo okay you have everybody
except center today is here to
okay I sorry I didn't call you
Michael and you were there so
you have everybody except Brandt
and how to meal okay.
Okay great all right okay
Senator.
Have a quorum so welcome the.
Committee members and those of
you to join in on the.
Zoom and webcast
do we have the money owes.
Are you on.
Senator manual so I believe you
are in.
Chairman I am in okay so Senate
bill four thirteen.
The.
I believe we have an amendment.
Thank you Mr chairman just a
just like speaker here okay.
Questions thank you.
Which.
Thank you Mr chairman.
yes we can thank you so.
We looked all over the place for
broadband and and know what New
Mexico really doesn't have a
plan for broadband.
So what.
Senate bill fourteen or thirteen
does it trade just great
regional broadband franchise Act
so communities can partner with
whatever eighteen T. Comcast and
they can begin the regional
brought broadband structures it
allows them to.
Free money and allow them to lay
infrastructure words underserved
or doesn't have enough service.
It's model kind of after a
little bit of the U. called
utopia model of where they saw a
mass expansion over a five year
period of broadband.
It allows me to partner with
whoever they choose franchises
city that governmental entities
and it'll allow them to finance
it with capital what we
ultimately look at is when we
put the hundred thirty three
million in the broadband plan
and we created that
infrastructure of the commission
you misspelling can go back and
say okay we want to have
broadband service to Senator
Shendo district at toe at Crown
Point New Mexico and so they can
partner with.
Maybe thank you a for tribal I
think they're running until he's
out there maybe it's gotten over
by that runs that that utilities
allows them to do that for
structure in place thank you
very wants to charge you for
help them get access then the
greatest enterprise and then
they get a at portion of the
revenue so.
I do have an expert witness is
the only one that exists in the
state all the broadband stuff
that you see around and and and
that is Adrian hello.
Okay thank you Senator before we
move you want to move the
amendment for discussion
purposes.
Trying to figure out maybe
change my stuff up.
Yes Representative.
Hello can you hear me.
Interesting yes do you want to
move the amendment or.
Or the memo for discussion
purposes.
I'm gonna have a Adrian
explained that amendment.
Okay.
Mr chair members of the
committee the amendment more
than anything addresses the
major pretty much every single
issue that was flagged by the
FIR so it cleans up the language
and ensure that we have cyber
security measures for anything
that's leased out using state
infrastructure it also
establishes and the federal
baseline speeds that must be
transmitted through the services
because the last thing we want
is we don't want to just state
allowing go slow we want to
speed things up and get to that
point where we have service
throughout the entire state and
good quality service right so we
want to at least meet that
baseline standard established by
the FCC which currently stand at
twenty five three as most of you
have heard from Senator Padilla
all right here the bill that you
heard your reaction to broadband
that's that's the goal right we
want at least baseline speed
throughout the entire state the
amendment clears that up.
It addresses the
constitutionality question by
striking out one of the powers
that the franchise would have so
this way the franchise can't go
into debt it does have the
ability to bond what the bonds
are not.
With in relation to tax they can
bond pledging their revenue from
the franchise so and this
creates a new potential revenue
stream for as center when you
just mentioned the franchise or
enterprise zone that gets
created between collaborating
and public entities.
Okay.
Is Senate senator.
Okay any questions on the
Senator Padilla we'll go to.
Questions on the amendment.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator thank you Adrian.
Just real quick can you.
To define the term baseline now
when I talk about you know
standards I'm talking about FCC
standards USDA standards things
of that nature can you where do
you define is another page to
the cell I'm I'm looking at my
documents my office right now
It's baseline.
On the second page of the
amendment one seven.
It says data transmission speeds
of the space I get federal
standards promulgated pursuant
to federal.
Okay so that's different to that
and so does that Adrian suggest
when federal standards adjust
I'm right speed yes exactly so
when federal standards
adjustment increase because
that's the only direction are
going to go
the standard for the state will
also in just so the regional
franchise will have to address
its reporting so it stays
current with federal standards.
Thank you Mr chairman that's the
only bill I'm missing in my
office right now but that's fine
I can pull it up but okay that's
what I want to know just want to
make sure that the baseline
meant federal standards that are
adjustable and I'm going to
trust that that's what this
language states.
Yes and then another point to
part of this franchise
Will directly collaborate with
the board.
You know the broadband.
That yourself friends and Senate
bill ninety three and then of
the Representative and House
Bill ten the broadband issue
that gets created.
A member from that entity will
serve on the board of the twenty
two franchises so as you know we
expand our broadband and state a
lot of franchises arise those
positions are funded and will
have direct access so it's going
to according directly with
whatever strategic plan here
broadband office our broadband
division whatever
and the establishing so in
Mabel's full coordination.
It provides a regional tool that
can be used for those purposes.
I think that's all very good I
can agree with all that
does anything.
Lewd justices touch and all anti
donation issues related to
public private partnerships I
know that we don't have a formal
PPP which I've tried probably
five times in the bill's been
run over back over and then run
over again to make sure they got
it articulate but I think we're
on the cusp of formalizing PPP
your public private partnership
legislation is anything that
that the Senators the bill Mr
Chairman is that it's doing this
it precluded doesn't affect anti
donation in the constitution or
PPP's from what I've been
explain from what people have
told me our lawyers and whatnot
and since we're generating the
revenue and it's paying for the
service for maintaining and
expanding and upgrading it you
know for our own infrastructure.
Where we're not hitting an anti
donation clause violation.
At least that's how it's been
explained to me.
Hello.
It Council services are very are
top when it comes to that so
sure well I mean it I would
always like to say that with.
Alright is they work for all of
us sometimes I you know it
doesn't always work out that way
but and and then that kind of
brought another question to mind
is there is there going to be
the ability on a regional basis
to create a new sort of a public
broadband company if you will
it's publicly owned is that
would we.
So that's one of the conditions
and that's actually where we
differ from like utopia model in
other models thank in the bill
on page seven aligning.
Fourteen it's Pacific then
explicitly states that
the franchise shall not provide
retail internet or any other
transmission service to
consumers itself the idea is
let's look at all of the fiber
let's look at all of our powers
of the gate all of the
infrastructure that we have in
the state.
And let's use it to reach an
established a strong middle mile
networks and actually be able to
branch out from there to our
under served and unserved areas
you know so for example give you
an example if we look at.
all of our schools right almost
every single school in the state
is connected to internet in some
way that is state infrastructure
it's not used to its full
capacity but if we were able to
partner you know granted out.
You.
Private industry.
They now have a foothold that
they can start branching out to
the tribes of branching out to
our smaller communities that are
completely unserved and under
served right and then having to
build it out completely from
Albuquerque a major hub it saves
the money by just leasing it out
and in the bill there are clear
provisions that protect the
public infrastructure so for
example with the schools if that
the school districts to partner
with you know the county or the
city or you know whatever other
entity whatever its original
intent is that's what has to be
used for first it gets priority
in regards to the traffic so
that original intent gets used
and then any excess space is
been leased out and the whole so
basically in a technologically
neutral basis as well so you can
have the phone companies you can
have backlogs for telecom you
can have internet service
providers you can have Comcast
you can have all of these
different entities use that
excess space that right now it's
under utilized.
Will this also.
S. USS spaceship one knows that
I'm told is going to broadcast
broadband all over the.
The continental United States.
Where I live we don't have space
ships that draws will.
We have what you call a Navajo
treaty.
Which was struck I was trying to
name the device after you Mr
chairman Williams Mr Chairman
gender I was trying to make it
up to you but if you don't want
that all right.
Thank you Mr chairman that's all
I have.
Okay do we have any more
questions from the committee on
the amendment we're still on the
amendment.
I don't see any to we don't have
any moved to pass on the
amendment okay we have to pass a
by Senator Padilla on the arm do
I have a second.
The second.
In the second.
Senator Kernan any opposition to
the motion.
Okay I don't see none so senator
or chairman you have be amended
bill so we're we're back in the
bill now.
Anymore a.
Mr Chairman on the on the bill.
We don't have any other comments
are just waiting for your
questions Mr okay all right at
this time we will go to the
public.
Percent for thirteen we did not
have any members of the public
register in advance to speak in
opposition if there are any
members of the public who wish
to speak in opposition to Senate
bill fourteen at this time
please raise your hand.
Seeing no hands we will now move
to those members of the public
who registered and fans.
And Senate bill four thirteen
beginning with the pandemic
comical.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee I need to work on full
registered lobbyists for
economic Albuquerque membership
supports this legislation as it
looks to creating regional
opportunities as important
components for the effective
implementation of widespread
broadband infrastructure act
what excuse me broadband
infrastructure and accidents we
think that this is a perfect
complement to the rest of the
broadband package that is making
its way through the legislature
encouraging your support thank
you.
Thank you very much next up we
have JD Bullington.
Next we have maker.
Good afternoon thank you for
having me by name is pent Ben
Baker I am.
Of representing both the New
Mexico democratic veterans and
military families caucus and the
president of the baton chapter
of the American veterans for
equal rights for thirteen is a
piece of the pie that helps us
deliver.
Broadband across the state there
are a lot of moving parts and I
compliment all of thirty seconds
work working so hard on this we
stand firmly behind Senate bill
four one three thank you for
your time.
Thank you.
Next up we have Rikki Massey.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee my name
is Ricky massing I'm retired and
live in Los crucis.
The region three vice president
for communication workers of
America local seventy seventy
six or public employees I am
speaking in favor of Senate bill
four one three.
I want to thank senator Munoz
for presenting this bill and
it's hard work.
I work for the New Mexico
department of health for
fourteen years and travel to
four corners of our state making
sure that our people in long
term care first second were
cared for properly I've
witnessed the shortcoming of
internet and phone services.
We need a standard broadband
what we need the highest quality
and needs to be regulated
appropriately thank you Mr
chairman and committee members
thank you very much are there
any other members of the public
who wish to speak in support of
Senate bill four thirteen please
raise your hand.
Seeing no other hands we are now
done with public comment for
this.
Thank you at this time we'll go
to the committee for questions.
Mr chair Senator Padilla.
Thank you all of the pretty
quick here Mr chairman and and
chairman one yes and patrons so
what sort of money are we going
to have.
What sort of money are we going
to have a flow through these
regional franchisees are or what
have you how are we going to
generate money for them to
utilize are they also going to
be able to match how will they
coordinate their matches with
state matching activity and what
have you.
Senator we just put a hundred
thirty three million dollars in
the broadband funds and what the
infrastructure and the dollars
that are there in the commission
to coordinate they can apply for
those dollars okay get their
structure started in and then
figure out how they need to for
their money and and then a
they'll be able to tap those
dollars in the broadband.
Yeah I just want to know kind of
calm how are they can generate
funds and it that's that's that
makes sense they can get
together and ban together and
pull money together and make
that happen for themselves and
they can't so they can will be
able to apply to state and
federal and all that stuff or
were they what we want them
these regional groups to to to
go through state government in
order to to to pull monies down
or would they be able to bypass
the state to go after other
things.
Want to bypass the state because
we need a plan across New Mexico
and we didn't know who has what
and and words being late and how
much what the speeds are so we
really wanted to coordinate.
With the council once that's in
place so they can have their
structure and maybe and lot more
mobility access easements
knowledge about where to put
stuff in so if the according to
the council that's ideal and
they don't and they're in a
rural area that there's not a
lot of coordination they don't
need and also be able to go to
the council get the money out of
broadband and yet they need to
do an enterprise fund and bond
they'll be able to.
Thank you.
Match for rural New Mexico then
a portion and that matches is
very simply made with the with
the broadband.
I thank you Mr chairman and Mr
chairman so so whether you like
it executive director of Lydia's
staff that runs this thing or
this is work.
No I think that the
municipality will be able to
create their own enterprise all
and once they decide they want
to create that enterprise on and
I'm just going to use an example
say they want to partner with
eighteen T. because eighteen P.
has their services and they'll
be able to partner with them
there will be no real council
will be agreements on what's
going to happen and how it's
going to happen in the state
okay eighteen T. will allow you
to use our L. R. alley easements
in the state Gallup the to run
broadband and word on the
telephone poles to expand and
then they'll figure out what who
who gets what and what
percentage of the enterprise the
money that would go to the city
of the county.
All right thank you.
K. R. the next unless is bricks
and then Senator Tallman.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Mourinho's can you kind of go
through how you envision
potentially this right of
eminent domain to be exercised
on on page nine in New I mean we
we talk about that it can be if
it doesn't involve taking
property owned by an internet
provider or law and.
Then the the chief broadband
officer gets to to make that
decision I mean is that.
Is that pretty far reaching
powers of of eminent domain or
or do not Senator how do you how
do you view that working.
Well you know eminent domain is
always a big issue for however
the property owner is right.
In the state for instance that
maybe there's no way with that
we can claim them and another on
a reservation for tribal entity
but if you have eminent domain
where you need access across a
highway or an easement that the
highway has
that they may have these men
already but you may have to
attach something trying to cross
approve it.
Our property they should
negotiate that first.
And if there's a critical need
to do that then they should be
allowed to use eminent domain
and I'll give you the perfect
example whenever they get the
fiber line.
Somewhere between Laguna and
requests.
Everybody loses all their fiber
all our cell towers going down
and we have to re route through
Arizona.
There should be a fiber line
that comes back across from
Farmington back to get all the
tribal entity of will probably
give us the the right away.
As well as long as we go through
the answer but if we get to a
point where said okay we got a
section of private land we need
to get the easement and you make
a reasonable offer and then they
refuse in order to provide that
service to the community or even
the school out there.
They Matthews away.
Mr chairman and senator.
I mean it will always be I mean
hope that that they don't you
try to use it too often and too
heavy handed
and then.
You know we've left it in the
hands of one one person that
chief broadband all teachers so.
There is a lot of lot of stroke
right there so I hope that that
that particular provision didn't
mention meshed up program center
shows thank you Mr chairman and
thank them and let me bring us
your question a little bit more.
Mr chairman Senator I just want
to add so the oversight and the
decision is going to be done by
four are that board is going to
be representatives from each
entity that came together right
so it's not just one person
making the decision for rural
boards the board as a whole and
it will have guidance or support
from the broadband office as
well as from DFA
and
that of course is coordinating
it all with the broadband
council which was included in
Center W. as built and part of
those councils brings in all
this level of expertise so they
will have guidance and support
throughout the process and it
won't just be one person because
that is I agree too much power
for one person to you.
And and make sure centered
expert made online for Page ten
it says add determined by the
chief broadband offer show you
know I'm not exactly sure I know
what that means if it means
exactly what you guys intend for
germane or not that I would I
would sure.
You know ask you to to go back
in and and look at that Mr chair
and that and senator because it
doesn't exactly sound the same
as your as you're making it
sound and maybe just needs to be
just a little tighter right
there but the yeah I'm gonna
leave it to to you guys to go
back and and look at the
comments that were just made and
made sure they correspond to
what you've got written that
show a show again thank you Mr
chairman thank you senator.
Thank you.
Senator Tallman.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator.
Ranges bill for.
A couple quick questions that
this is such a bill.
Work in concert.
With what Senator Padilla.
I was trying to do this is
compliment the what Senator
Padilla destroying is.
Is that comprehensive a.
Legislation regarding the
expansion of of broadband that
work it.
This is complemented does it
work against it does that work
in concert with thank you.
Senator let a hearing and for
that.
Mister chairman Senator AUMENT
if I can be granted access on
me.
Other computer to share my
screen I can really quickly show
you how the alignment works let
us give you all a better picture
If we can get.
Share the screen privileges on
a here in this computer.
Yes thank.
Well.
Show you on.
How this works.
This is the alignment right so
as you can see we want to
harness our local infrastructure
to the best three possible
center could be is built as well
as house bill ten does all the
things that are highlighted in
blue right to create for
broadband and he establishes the
fund which we can leverage to
get to the last mile it insurers
we have baseline broadband
center throughout the state that
we have quality service and it
said that the expectations and
they're the ones who will set
the rules of how these you know
private partnerships might be
able to work etcetera what this
bill does it addresses the green
right so it establishes the
powers that a partnership could
have at the end of the day
though it's a joint powers
agreement so what ever the local
entities agreed to that's kind
of how that partnerships gonna
work so it's very flexible to
meet each individual community
it also grants them access to
the state infrastructure in that
area so state DOT happens to you
know already have to the
necessary to run stuff it's like
here you go eases the way for
that and also the technology
remains technologically neutral
so in order to
In order to facilitate the
conditions for use for each
technology it's flexible enough
to adapt so it's not going to
become an archaic franchise here
in five years when we certainly
have high altitude right it
allows it to adapt to the needs
of its people so that kind of
how it works and at the end of
the day that the key to this is
that it's fiscally self
sustaining generate money for
that area which can be
incredibly useful and continuing
to expand out to for their areas
and to you know increase and
improve the service overall.
Everything that we've done is
been complimentary that to every
other bill and so that's the
last piece of broadband that
complements everything.
Okay thank you senator.
Thank you Mr chair for that
explanation of one other quick
question.
The.
It says in the analysis that
the.
The state of unfunded mandates.
And the FIR says Susan.
No financial.
Impact on the last.
You know the FIR as senator bill
relates to Senate three sixty
six which appropriates twenty
million is that where the money
is going to come from two of.
Fund the separate this of this
bill.
Chairman Senator this is not a
mandate for anyone to do this so
there's no funding necessary
the twenty million dollars now
compiled in the hundred thirty
three million dollars for
broadband.
And so nobody's requiring it's
just we want everybody yeah
we're gonna really do broadband
New Mexico we need to private
provide every tool and cultures
that we can and maybe not have
them come back to the state and
say I need more money any more
money my broadband this gives
them the flexibility to generate
their own revenues and the
money's there and broadband fund
for access so.
Okay well thank you senator for
that explanation thank you Mr
chair.
Thank you so Majority Leader.
Thank you Mr chair we take down
the screen chair.
All right great thanks so.
I gotta say I share some Senator
Griggs concerned about the
eminent domain
Hi I just.
If we were to take that
provision out what how how would
this entity.
Require.
The right away is that it needs
if it didn't have a specific
grant eminent domain.
They have to purchase some or
find another route.
And so I guess I mean I I
certainly understand I'm it
domain works on I really worry
notice is given way way too much
power
as senator grace pointed out
that looks like one person
realize the board but the board
is going to support the gosh
it's running the board it seems
to me is I I'm not our part
about that for sure the other
thing I want to understand so
this this franchise can issue
bonds.
So tell me we we when I first
came to the Senate center money
owes you an hour they're the
same time two thousand nine.
Senator Harding I carried a bill
trying to give readers the
ability to issue bonds that went
down in flames on the Senate
floor because we're real
concerned about that so can you
just explain how this would work
and and how these bonds would
work and and I just wanna make
sure I understand what this is.
And let me answer your first
question.
We're basing this off on model
that that been very successful
in Utah we know eminent domain
is a hot issue.
Right.
If we need to move eminent
domain off and not give it to
one of forty and that's not
heartburn for us we're just
trying to succeed in placing the
ability to do this
all at a during the eight it
explain the rest.
In regards the lines being
models that we're basing it off
of they.
We're trying to make it so that
way we don't repeat a mistake
that they made they want they
bonded using tax revenue to fund
all their stuff we don't want
that we forget actually so for
us it simply things like if you
have clients lined up right and
you can't get the money from the
state because they are fun
right.
You know we expanded so quickly
and say the federal match
doesn't meet the needs of you
know you don't qualify so to me
that last gap of funding we're
giving them the opportunity to
be able to actually bonded by
pledging.
And then you are going to get
from leasing out so this way
they can can they can build it
out or maintain it or you know
upgraded and meet the needs of
their specific community so it's
just giving them that final pool
in the event that they can't
line up funding in other ways
but we make sure that we do have
some provisions within like the
fund that's created in.
Senate bill ninety three that
they can draw from that fund and
they should be able to you know
get money from the fed so
realistically that's just a tool
that we included here in the
worst case scenario the last
thing we want is to be right
there you're just completing and
getting to every last home and
then not have access to the
capital necessary and this just
gives them another tool that
they could use they do not have
to
Of course and you know this is.
They have to have a specific
project lined up okay so in
order to be to receive the ones
that there is a specific project
lined up
or it has to directly and ask
your directly relate to the
purpose of their mission
statement and that's why we have
a member of the state attached
to each one of these franchises
because they'll be able to tell
it's like no this is a bad idea
this is a good idea you know
given that financial support to
be able to now I think okay you
know what before you find.
Let's try all these other
options right so that's why we
included them as part of the
boards for each one of these
franchises that may or may not
bring up.
And so Mister chair just three
clear so that and the franchises
are.
Their public so too are more
public agencies so give me an
example of.
Two or more public agencies
would form a franchise.
Gallup and Gallup McKinley
county schools could former
franchise in order to test
infrastructure where they
needed.
The city of requests in the city
Gallup could say okay we need we
need infrastructure from
Albuquerque to Gallup and and we
and will serve all of us so we
can participate together.
And so Mister chair and so yes I
mean let's say their ten million
dollars short.
And then the project falls
apart.
Basically that means the city
and county of Gallup are going
to be responsible for.
I'm just trying to figure out
how that I'm just trying to
understand how these bonds work
and what.
Who is responsible for them and
and what happens if there's some
kind of a problem with the
project who's all but are the
taxpayers under under any
scenario on the book for these
bonds.
Mr Chairman no they're not
So if it's the last ten million
and they form an enterprise and
say they they partner with.
On renewable by electric.
The last mile for the last ten
miles in their ten million short
when a partner in con LA vie
electric says because we're in
an enterprise and work hard
together and amount of revenue
that we're gonna generate off
the broadband goes into the
enterprise fund which then says
okay now and at the five year
just give us a revenue number
five year projection it's going
to produce two million dollars
in and and prize money been able
to pay that with the revenue
that they came from
The by electric.
And that pays the bonds and the
taxpayers are not on the.
Okay.
Well Mister chair I I would the.
You know going back to the
eminent domain piece you know I
I just have real concerns about
that.
And so I mean I'm hearing from
the sponsor that is not
necessary and burst to an
amendment to remove that.
Section I don't have amendment
drafted so Mister chair I don't
know how you want to do that
basically it's it's on page nine
one twenty one and I you know
all of the original bill.
still waiting paragraph seven
which goes from one twenty one
pages nine through line for on
the top of Page ten.
And then remembering the other
sections so I guess Mr chair Sir
would you also made is that a
problem if we take that out of
here.
We don't we don't see it as a
problem
we're not going to object to it
because you know we've we've
never created one before and and
so we're following the model we
don't have a problem with taking
eminent domain now
I think they can still
accomplish what they what they
want and if it's done correctly.
So we don't have a problem
abandoned building being removed
and and if you want to track
these and we'll go substituted
the bill moves forward however
you want however the chairman
wants to do it.
It does all Mr chairman I I do
want to make that motion based
on the fact it's not opposed but
I don't have.
An actual amendment in front of
me so it's up to you just how
you want to do it feels like a
cut should be wound up into us
so I kind of I kind of agree
with center when you also given
the other men that we should
line this up to that address you
but.
Yes we have a to the proposed
amendments or one recommendation
amendments and that's just to
the.
With the substitute.
Okay so so let me make some of
the mean make a motion that we
can take the boat now I think on
the second amendment or I guess
Mr chair or do you want to.
Just tap Center when you just
come back with the with the so
that adds its first amendment
takes this paragraph out I think
that's up to that could work as
well.
Senator mills.
Mr Chairman can we just listen
to the other comments to make
sure there's there's no other
concerns before we come back to
addressing all the all the
amendment on the claim that that
that other people may see it on
Senator Wirth and agreement that
yes No I I I appreciate that it
just the final thing is is I
just want to make sure my
broadband right hand guy Senator
Padilla.
This this feels like a pretty
major piece of legislation
that's being introduced here yes
I Senate bill four thirteen and
I just you know Senator do I
have you.
Statement again others this
coming from a different state I
mean if you had a chance to go
through this and does this does
this work for you.
Mr chairman and
majority leader.
If you're on earlier but I have
quite a few questions earlier on
the at this and then also
I feel confident based on the
answers that I received I feel
good about it
I'm concerned about you know and
some of the things I brought up
earlier where where's all the
money going to come from for
these regional operations to do
their work I didn't get into the
eminent domain piece I assume
that that you would do that are
a few others because I'm not not
well versed in that area
there were some amendments that
came originally I I I but I'd
like to see if at all possible
is that we don't act on this
today even after we get all of
the the feedback but are we
meeting on Saturday Mr chairman.
A yes we are yeah so so you know
we've got you know forty eight
hours to get the draft or the
sub rebuilt and that way it's
nice and clean based on
everything else that happens
here in the those of us that you
know in in our swim lanes can
read thing top to bottom cleaned
up.
That's what I like to see happen
but I'm very flexible you know
but whatever the committee wants
to do so.
And Mister Mister chair I'll
just say I appreciate that I
really.
Kind of waiting on you Senator
Padilla as the person in our
caucus in the and I know and I
realize etcetera but we us and
and Adrian this is a this is a
you guys are all question and
this is good we we need to do
this and this may well fit in
there but I think that I think
that does make sense to do it
that way and so just up to you
Mr chair we've got I don't know
whether the committee agrees
with me on the are some and I
think I get a center Greg vote
but you know we should I can
make that motion we can we can
take a motion so it's clear
exactly where we are if you
live.
Regards to the eminent domain
correct the gentleman if I can
interrupt just for a second
sorry but yeah I I thought it
was there anybody else on your
list I liked what senator Munoz
said Mr leader also that we here
that he gets to hear everything
before we you know.
Thank you
very scared so I'm done here
thank you.
Senator Tom and your hand is up
to you.
well take it down.
Okay
I don't see any other of the
committee member I had the issue
with the eminent domain as well
but I know that's been pretty
cover with the with the Majority
Leader and so forth so I believe
that suspected for a from the
committee.
Mr chairman I want to raise my
hand again I didn't get to a
fast enough okay go ahead
Senator it's a real simple one
thank you so all I would say is
once the service put together
would love to have Adrian's
analysis obviously he's I know
he's worked Mr chairman of
finance in a really hard with
you on the steps
but also is there is there is
someone in maybe the leader can
tell us about this is there
someone up vote Legislative
Council that
can talk to us maybe come on
Saturday or be part of that
discussion I just want to make
sure that we we get to the
bottom of a few of these items.
Yeah Mr I'm not sure who drafted
this but we also do have and I
can't remember
she's name off the top of my
head we do have someone that
does some of the bond I think
could give us advice on that we
used to work for I believe LFC
and DFA as the and it.
To yeah so if that person is it
all available and would be
willing at and available that
day it might not be a bad idea
to have them here for that
discussion as well.
Thank you just a Mr chair
Senator yes I just think you
should pass set up whatever
drafted and and whether they can
you know bring their I think
there's a column up there who
could address some of the finest
pieces of this.
Mr Chairman on the bond issue
the drafter was mark and he
talked to three other members
and council about the bonds and
and so if we wanted there but
read about three other people
drafters and how bonds work so.
Is for information Mr chairman
are you referring to market
rates yes okay he's directed
most of the stuff this year so
if you feel comfortable I'm
sorry leader I think you were
going to COVID out of it yeah I
mean I I feel comfortable with
with what he's told you that
okay thank you.
Okay thank you Majority Leader
do you still want to make your
motion on the amount of the main
or just.
Yeah I want to make them I would
like to think about
just on the block on the bottom
of my page nine starting on line
forty one delete paragraph seven
and that runs from page nine
line twenty one through Page ten
lines for and then re number the
remaining sections accordingly.
Okay.
And second that motion secretary
motion by Senator Griggs.
Any opposition to the motion.
Just to clarify Mr chairman then
we're going to have a sub
drafted that we all get to
review and I will vote on the
sub on Saturday correct all
we're doing is taking action on
the amendment of the main
portion thank you we'll have
that on record so.
Okay I didn't see any opposition
to the to the motion so that
will be stricken from the
substitute bill.
so with that of we will
But this on on Saturday.
so that we can consider again
with the various changes have
been recommended by the
committee members so.
With that Senator since we you
have two more bills will go
ahead jump right on those two
bills a Senator a share.
Thank you.
Working with.
Or.
In the bill three seventy eight.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Senate bill three seventy eight
changes that the horse racing at
Its primary intent is to make
changes that but so that the
functions that are more for an
inequitable manner and it's
given by the commission with the
more diverse background and
interest.
The bill does that by adding two
members of the racing commission
that can be practical readers of
racehorses Mr that current
requirements three.
Representative Jeff percentage
of money racetrack license you
can rental from thirty three
percent to sixty percent when
paramedics show betting tickets
are not retained or refund or
claim for simulcasting the forty
meaning forty percent would be
split evenly among the breeders
and horsemen's the and the
division of the revenue for any
on plane tickets related to to
live racing the race it would
remain unchanged so this only
does it compare with Joe
training it also provides at ten
percent the person right Janet
from from wagers on live
simulcasted aces should be
placed into a fund.
Created by the New Mexico
readers Association which reduce
the lord's going to the breeders
while increasing the horse
racing persons which will allow
increases the stakes of
individual races and make races
more competitive and ultimately
how we're tracks to offer a
high quality products.
With that I have been expert
witness Jason Weaks with us.
And I'll let him go into a
little bit more detail.
I think chairman Mr weeks thank
you Mr chair members of the
committee Jason Weaks on behalf
of the Albuquerque downs
racetrack and casino also I
think that is an expert there
was a Beth McKenna was added I
don't know she's on that she can
chime in as well after I'm done
but basically the intent of this
is to update their horse racing
Act our racing Act had a couple
provisions in it that you know
and they're basically from its
inception you know tracks have
been closed for almost a year
now and we want to given the I'm
not tracks but the casinos at
the tracks then flows from most
year racing was greatly reduced
during the pandemic and the shut
down really what we want to do
is give tracks what kind of a
wake up in terms of a starting
the recovery the two most
significant changes in this are
related to
the percentage of unclaimed
money basically when tickets are
deemed whether not claimed that
goes money goes into a pot
currently it's a thirty three
percent division amongst the
breeders the horsemen and the
tracks this is only relating to
simulcasted Reese's though live
races the division still stays
as as it as it does the same for
that provision it's worth noting
that the racing commission
pointed out that for some cast
the racetrack operator for cares
more expenses including
telecommunication costs
equipment costs interface fees
and video service fees so it's
really only fair that they get
to retain a larger percentage of
the relevant money coming out of
that pot the horsemen and the
breeders would still get forty
percent that they split among
themselves easily even on the
other the other provision here
is actually taking
Money generated from wages on
live in some cast races the stop
going to the breeders fund as
they are now it's just ten
percent that money will then go
on into pots or or so it right
basically increases the stakes
of the races which ultimately
will be we talked more rich
stakes and hopefully improve the
quality of the product that the
tracks roping I don't know that
that any additional comments
that she wanted to add but she's
the technical expert from
Albuquerque downs who kind of
can dig into the details of the
bill that.
Hello are you on.
The case was expert again.
It was let me check.
It was bath.
You can see from my Albuquerque
downs I'm a texture right now Mr
chairman I I would say that just
in the interest of time not to
belabor this point I'll text
that to make sure she says she's
muted.
But I I'd say she can just be
available to answer questions
and all we'll try to get around
muted well I'd hand it back to
Senator moon you know stiff yes
any other.
Pointing wants to make otherwise
it I think we stand for
questions.
Thank you Mr chairman thank.
Mr chairman will stand for
questions okay at this time the
public for.
Four three seventy eight first
stop speaking in opposition we
have Mary Barbour.
Members my name is Mary barber I
am needs active director of the
New Mexico first graders
Association.
Although there are several a
significant negative changes
this from a prominent supports
readers the two most significant
are the loss of commissioners
for the New Mexico racing
Commission
and the drastic reduction to the
ten percent awards that we now
enjoy
our awards in two thousand
nineteen point two one million
two nine seven three hundred
dollars and the second.
I I'm sorry the tracks but at
six hundred fifty of these rose
fourteen hundred check.
Eight hundred fifty dollars and
those checks will go down to
eighty three dollars if you
pass this bill so I am asking
you to please vote against this
bill and thank you so much for
your time.
Thank you very much next up we
had going to Ralph but he does
not appear to be in the meeting
so we will go on to and that.
Your I'm here go ahead.
Chairman Gendo members of the
committee Tom brown trucks on
the president New Mexico our
readers I'll be brief
this bill would cause
significant harm is ms barber
just the illustrated to the
racing industry New Mexico and
in particular the breeders
racehorses in New Mexico we as
an industry as I'm sure all of
you are aware are just beginning
to see signs of getting back on
our feet and this bill if passed
would be a major set back to our
industry again just as we are
seeing signs of.
The New Mexico our readers
Association is opposed to this
bill thank you.
Thank you very much.
Next up we have in New Mexico a.
And that you're you're to be
muted.
Can you hear me now yes.
Thank you madam down members of
the committee I have a prepared
statement here I'd like to right
and first of all I'm speaking
against Senate bill three
seventy eight I am an owner
operator of New Mexico quarter
horses and thoroughbreds.
And when you read section one C.
it says you were trying.
From at least three to no more
than two members of that
commission shall be practical
readers now.
All
Owners of the business would you
like the state of New Mexico to
legislate someone to be in
control of your brisk business
that knows nothing about your
business we need people on that
commission you understand it day
today I think my horses every
day we checked and we take them
to the that a second reason
against three thank you very
much.
Next up we have Mike Logan.
Thank you for this opportunity
to participate
I live in a condo New Mexico a
great race and race state New
Mexico bred racehorses I would
like to speak out in opposition
to estimate three seventy eight
it is vital that that we keep
the majority of three
commissioners that are practical
graders on the New Mexico racing
Commission
there there that the burger is
the genesis of the whole our
industry so we we suggestions
secondly I would like to address
the temp set track greater for
this is a very competitive
industry and all of our
neighboring states are very
lucrative pre programmed so
thank urged you to pose this are
for a change in the horseracing
at thank you very much.
Thank you very much.
Next up we have the NASA
Alexander.
All right can everybody hear me
okay.
Yes go ahead.
Thank you good afternoon my name
is Vanessa Alexander and I am
speaking to you all today is a
newly elected trustee New Mexico
our readers Association.
Racing is the third largest
industry New Mexico and we
cannot afford to lose it I am
imploring this committee to vote
against this bill in a nut shell
this bill essentially takes
money that is meant to be spread
amongst the participants of New
Mexicos racing industry I
handful of track owners are the
only people who would benefit
from this bill while thousands
of others like me.
New Mexico's best racing
incentives shrink and nearly
disappear for example if my
horse wins a race track owners
incentives a thousand dollars
this bill would make it fifty
dollars that is unfathomable New
Mexico bred program track owners
incentives are critical to our
racing industry most of my
clients live out of state and
they choose to run in the state.
Even though costs are higher
because of these incentives.
Thank you very much.
Are there any other members of
the public who wish to speak
against Senate bill three
seventy eight please raise your
hand on his.
To.
Okay now we will go to those
speaking in favor beginning with
Scott Steinborn.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Scott Scanlon registered
lobbyists for Sunland park
racetrack and casino in Dona ana
county and Sunray park and
casino in San Juan County we
stand both both of the tracks
stand in full support of this
bill we believe that this the
shifting of these funds will
will enhance the the purses and
the pots and we think this is a
good bill and we urge your
support thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you very much.
Reserve the public who wish to
speak in support of Senate bill
three seventy eight at this time
please raise your hand.
Okay that concludes public
comment at this time thank you
very much.
Thank you oh now we'll go to the
committee for questions I'll
start with the Senator Kernan.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
and sponsored bill
then yes I I guess I'm concerned
because I have ever seen L. when
in startling appreciate to the
casino portion appreciate that
the track portion and I didn't
hear from money per se no on
this bill but I certainly am
concerned that so many of the
horse breeders are not happy
with it the our green park and
when they bring us forces and
and and and I'm trying to
mislead them in my area it's
they're pretty important part of
the whole thank you can't have a
casino without a.
So can is there any way that
this can be resolved where and
I'm just not sure where the
funds are going from where to
where and and if it's a is it
about the money said about the
board members not sure where
that the most discontent yes but
but it concerns me that that
we're kind of far apart on this
thing.
Thank you Senator Kernan I bet
you want to answer that question
for.
Yes Sir Mr chairman and members
of the committee.
If I may take just a couple
minutes and explain to and this
may have missed Senator Kernan.
How the money is distributed.
In the parimutuel world.
Basically.
It to handle is the money that
on the on the races so eighty
percent of that about eighty
percent going to go back to the
batters and about twenty percent
is going to be captain Wes
Commission called commissions or
retain edge so then that retain
its by statute gets divided up
amongst a lot of entities of the
breeders get a piece of the win
place and show they get a piece
of the Interstate retain edge
they get to
At out half of the breakage and.
Thank you all of this money goes
to breed various breed programs
at the breeders have an.
I will be stepping on someone if
I try to explain because I.
The breeders now for far more
than I do so anyway these
distributions are made and then
the net retain edge after all
the distributions that is
divided between the person's.
And the and the licensees.
So the ten percent breed award
is one of the only the breakage
and the ten percent brit awards
are not based on the handle.
The breakage is the
rounding off of the payouts on
the bets and the ten percent
read award is based on the
person it's not based on a
portion of the handle when this
statute was enacted in a
regionally there were no casinos
so ten percent of the purse was
more closely related to the
handle than it is now because
casino funds have.
Dramatically inflated the purse
structure and hence the ten
percent right award.
Actually the game funds.
At the downs Albuquerque run
about ninety percent and there
right it is ninety percent
casino funds and ninety percent
purse funds.
But.
The first one flight and that
the brit awards have become a
for inflated and if we just take
the ten percent of the.
Cursed from the.
Part of that person and and pay
it to the breed award then the
remainder of that money goes
back to the purse structure and
it enhances the purse structure
and.
That part of it goes to the
licensees as well for their
operating expenses.
So if you if you increase the
purse Fund you increased the
purses across the board and.
Breeders.
If they would and and they do
and you can't enter upgrade our
in an open race.
So you get the.
Read our still gets a ten
percent rate award but he also
gets part of an incentive award
that is twenty percent of the
regular persisted by by first
second third I do not like to do
math in public but anyway this
is not taking money away from
the breeders it's.
Taking the portion of the money
away from the ten percent create
award and re distributed right
it is so it does increase the
purses that gaming money that is
part of the present read award
is really earmarked for purses
that gaining money the twenty
percent that comes to the tracks
it gets divided things like he.
Seven percent Ishq to the person
on and.
Thirteen percent to the breed
awards so.
I don't really know that it
should be long.
To the right award.
Anything about how this money is
not.
Just an outright robbery.
Well Mr chair and and and I
didn't follow too much of that
but you know the bottom line is
we've got to at some dissension
here in in in the horse racing
world and and they don't like
the fact that we're changing the
board and I kind of understand
that portion but I know there's
always been we've always had
some problems with regard to the
different ports and and it's
always about the money that I
just kind of wish that Mr chair
of finance and and maybe the
school groups could get together
and figure something out because
I don't understand how you pay
out and I just know that the
money shifting and I know that
they're not happy with the
change on the board and it takes
all this together everybody to
that to make the singles work
and we just don't need
contentious.
Situations here is we're trying
to get everybody back up and
running including the racetracks
including the casinos so I wish
I could get together and figure
out how to fix this thank you.
That's all.
Senator Griggs.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
you're Senator down when I first
got in the legislature I wish I
was lucky enough to be on Senate
Public Affairs and I think I was
there was Senator Kernan but
some of the stuff that we got
early on we scope of practice
step.
And the the scope of practice to
of course the she are in age
versus the A. eight years and
everybody's arguing about what
needs to be what and they're
coming to the legislature to
make that decision.
And.
Mr chair Senator Munoz that kind
of what looks like what they
shipped is it we want to do
something a little bit so we we
come in and do that and
obviously it sounds like the
breeders either either work talk
to or were an absolute
disagreement with with the whole
the whole deal and you know when
I read it and this is is me so I
don't know that I I don't know
that I understand their staff.
But we talk about an amount
equal to ten percent of the
first money of a person one.
Which was the language it was
there but then we had in that is
generated from wagering on live
and shine will cast iterations.
So the way I would read that.
Isn't it we're adding.
We're adding shine will cast to
to that so there would be more
money available but that's the
way I would read I'm not sure
that's what it me.
and so that's the concerns that
you know that I have from what
I've heard.
By the the breeders I mean the
You know the taken one person
off the board of meaning.
I don't know that there's that
looks like that's something
that's almost kinda kind of
punitive you all and I don't I
don't know whether the user is.
But I'm I'm kinda was senator
Kerr and I'd I'd like to have
the groups come together and say
these are the changes we we need
but you know I've said on a
number of issues with race
tracks to know that that's
pretty hard to do so you know
there's wage and
Your Senator moon yo's and
Education and Scott if there's
there's ways you guys can can
massage there's a little bit I
think I'd be handy but that you
all are going to have to to tell
us so that's all that's all I've
got Santo and move Eurovision Mr
chair.
Thank you.
We have a Senator Padilla.
Thank you Mr chairman and madam
German and Williams I'm so what
what are the three you know
benefits of us doing this making
this move.
Mr chair Senator PS if Senator
Munoz says money I'll start
mental condition handed over to
Beth I think it's it's about a
sort of equitable distribution
of development funds at this
point yes that's was explaining
when a lot of these provisions
were enacted we didn't have
racinos we just had our tracks
racinos have changed the game
for horse racing entirely and
they've essentially property
industry up ramming like huge
percentage of our relative.
Pots in terms of the you know
the the race winnings are being
generated by racinos at this
point and a lot of the
provisions from the horse racing
Act need to be updated to
reflect the equitable
distribution of those relevant
funds and we also have an issue
where you know we don't want to
run more races we want to run
richer more competitive races
because when you do that you
increase the quality of the
product building up to the
general public and the racing
industry as a whole can be
healthier so the first changes
basically you know just saying
all right what we we don't let's
change the composition a little
bit you can still have
greater on there but we're not
going to make it three we're
just gonna say it can be no more
than two readers can still be on
there because we feel like we
need some more diverse
perspectives on on that board
really I mean we've had a huge
amount of problems with the
racing commission board members
in terms of conflicts with one
another and and otherwise and so
I think that's what that is
intended to do change to is
really a doctor this is about
equity I mean this is only
targeting simulcasting R. Sam
caspase racing and we're just
saying we bear the burden is a
race tracks put simulcasted on
we should get a little bit more
of the relevant revenue so let's
change the distribution from one
third one third to sixty percent
twenty percent twenty percent
because the race tracks are the
ones that are primary
responsible for putting on some
casting and and you know the
front and costs associated with
that the last one is essentially
trying to divert money and and
so that we can we can make the
braces rich we can increase the
the the purses and at this point
I mean I that's my depth of
understanding on that one
because it gets into numbers and
I'm hoping budget can give a
little bit more clarity on why
this is an equitable change and
why it will actually lead to
better more quality force races
in the racing industry.
Mr chairman senators
I think it sounded out fairly
well.
I think there is some room for
and certainly there should be
discussions and we do all need
to get along especially census
industry is in pretty well
devastated over the last year.
But the ten percent brit award
if you have bigger purses for
your
not very and bring in
competition the greens have
every opportunity and they have
such fine award programs that
they will also benefit from them
from this and right now I'm I'm
sure that everybody is going on
my god we're having a change and
we just can't.
Understand this and.
I guess that the account is
different than the casino
accounting or retail
establishment and I don't want
to take up all your time going
over how it really works but in
brief.
Any money that is taken away
from that ten percent read award
then goes back to the purses and
to the to the licensees who do
as Jason said we operate to
twelve months of the year seven
days of the week where as the
race mate is on the probably
three months so those nine
months of work we still have to
pay for it's a costly business
you're gonna have a tow company
and you've got to have the video
and you've got to have all that
stuff and it costs a lot of
money and Lee our when they're
they're in the breeders put on
the show.
And we are more than willing and
they get it a nice percentage of
the of those funds that the ten
percent creative award is simply
out of whack the cost of the.
Huge increase on the casino side
that has Jack those awards up
disproportionately but like I
said I'm sure that we and the
other tracks would be willing to
sit down with the breeders and
work out some changes to a lot
of the racing statutes.
Mr chairman and and so there's
not a cap on the actual amount
that the ten percent could equal
so if if the purses were higher
if everything right all boats
rose together at ten percent
would be more meaningful is that
correct.
Yeah because there's no cap Mr
chairman on there is no cap no
Sir okay and and and states that
have done this Mr chairman I
mean what what sort of results
with a singer they are do you
have any data that you would be
willing to share under that you
could share on that I mean.
I don't have any data.
Jason Mr chairman and.
Chairman yes Jason Weaks you
haven't.
Mister chairman Senator yeah I
don't have a specific date on
that point I could commit to try
to get you some specific data
but you know I think every
states recently Act and how they
handle racing is this kind of
organized differently so I'm not
sure we're going to specifically
comparative data but I will
absolutely dig for what what
would be a small comparable
point
to give you that data from
another state.
Thank you Mr chairman and
chairman of my notes
This is do anything to the folks
working on the tractors is do
anything to prevent them from
being there I mean that's the
only thing I would be concerned
about at the moment actually.
Mister chairman Senator yeah I
don't think it does anything to
hurt or harm the actual track
operations or the actual racing
operations and in fact I would
argue that because we're gonna
try to increase purses it might
improve track appropriations
because we're gonna have richer
raced and you know I don't want
to mislead I don't totally I
mean that that how the money
shifts around is something best
understands what this bill
ultimately that fire confirms it
alternately that fire says
persons will likely increase so
the money is going into
purchases some of its thing to
track but my so it's going and
purses which then is distributed
to the actual members of the
relative industry
in that range.
Thank you very much that's all I
have Mister chairman I might
want to go again but but there
are others thank you.
Is a no the.
If you don't have anyone else Mr
Chairman moved to pass at this
time.
We have a motion for a do passed
by our Senator Padilla.
We have a second.
Second the motion.
Thank you take of role please.
Senator Brandt.
Yes Representative passes.
Senator Griggs.
You know.
Yes.
sure.
Senator Hamblen no.
Senator Hickey.
He.
Senator how to meal.
Senator Kernan.
I'm gonna pass.
Senator Sanchez.
No.
Senator Tallman.
Senator Clemente.
Senator Wirth yes.
Yes.
Okay
Senator Brandt two passed.
Yes.
Senator Kernan you passed.
Okay.
state senator Hickey come back
at.
Okay Senator Padilla yes.
Senator Shendo yes.
You've got six yes.
Three no four three no what
have.
Sorry.
Yes.
Okay senator Dicky.
Right seven yes and you know
still makes not doesn't work one
three four five six seven seven
yes Senator Kernan I have you
know I didn't see it so we have
seven yes of for now.
good management Mr chair I think
can we go back to the list I
because I have it is one two
three four five six I have it is
six five.
Okay R. Senator Brandt.
I have a test.
Yes that's correct Senator
Griggs I have a test yes.
Senator Hamblen a no correct.
Senator Hickey is a yes.
Senator Hickey is that correct
yes yes hi to me I have a note
that.
Senator how to meal that's
correct.
Okay Senator Kernan I have a no.
That's correct senator Sanchez I
have a no.
Yes ma'am no.
Senator Tom and I have a test.
Correct Senator Wirth I have a
test correct Senator Padilla I
have a test correct and Senator
Shendo yes right.
So I have one two three four
five six seven yeses and one.
Two three four nose are you are
you of the same as I am senator
Wirth.
Mr chair I think that that's it
seven four thank you thank you
line all right you should public
math.
I believe chairman Mister
chairman Senator Griggs or
somebody what explained what it
was it is me okay yes and and
yeah I think you guys got some
work to do R. I think that are
you know there were some staff
in this bill did certainly get
the attention of the breeders
and I think that to maybe the
numbers need to be tweaked a
little bit maybe the the board
member states that I don't know
yield with the this is this is
Steph you're gonna have to live
with when you you you do this
and they're not necessarily
getting a lot of by and from the
other side show our bench bench
the reason I've I've voted for
you all hopefully that you will
you work with them and and come
up with some solutions thank you
for sharing that sets me explain
in my book thank you Senator but
did you want to I did just
briefly just to say ready what
you have a pretty large
contingency watch instrument
we're usually in much better
rhythm I just want everything
else watching rhythm typically
and and that one ask for
permission to remove our jackets
Mr chair.
That that's fine.
Thank you you're good okay you
have to pass and then the your
last bill centers when else's
the Senate bill three eighty.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members for the last of Senate
bill three eighty L. just create
additional operating hours for
the casinos.
So they can do normal operations
cleaning maintenance
Be able to claim the casino and
allowed to train their staff.
Usually what happens is when the
casino operates are only allowed
to operate certain number of
ours and when those hours are
met then they have to shut down
completely so what this does is
gives them time to come back
into the operational hours
allows the employees to get
training allows them to to non
casino activities the casino
does not rain remain open during
these hours this is mainly a
staff employee cleanup and and
training time I never really had
to do that during our regular
casino hours so this just allows
them to do that it also asked
that the gaming control board of
which monitors all with racinos
in New Mexico and monitors under
one system if that system goes
down then they have to shut down
and what this says is it there
what their system goes down that
they can go out to another
system.
management until the other
system comes back online
it's kind antiquated shut down.
Whole facility because the state
system that goes down and
there's no back up for operation
so you're losing customers in
that time frame.
And so that's what the building
so I think Jason is with us
still and I think that those
with the sole reason want to add
anything else.
Mr chair representative
committee.
Just a couple quick points and
actually we have Frank the
proceeds from Albuquerque downs
on this one since this is sort
of a casino operations this
bill.
the real the real intention of
this is the sort of streamline
how we view and conduct some of
our internal operations I think
I think that senator Munoz did a
great job explaining both
aspects the the only point I
would add on the second is the
all the racetracks cream I have
already have third party
monitoring systems and so when
we have to shut down because the
system goes down we lose revenue
we have to take everybody out
and then wait until the state
system comes back on and then
let the state system you know
then then we can reopen the
relative for the third party
monitoring it collects all the
data and sends it for the third
the the state's monitoring
system so this is just a way for
us not have to turn operations
office the state system goes
down we still collect all the
relevant data and information
from the gaming and that is
immediately sent back to the
state
once the state system is back
online.
Frank did you have anything to
add.
Your muted.
right we want to be able to find
a better product for our
customers and our guests and by
being able to go and work on
this equipment during off hours
allows us to do that when the
games are disabled by the state
system there's only so much that
we can do to prepare the games
and get ready for the public and
by having extended hours of the
game is being active for us to
be able to work on them would be
very helpful it doesn't change
our operating hours to of course
you know operations were
generating revenue which just
makes it much more efficient for
us to be able to do the
preventive maintenance do
training and prepare these games
so they are the best condition
they can be for the public where
we but we do open operate.
That would that Mr Chairman will
stand for questions.
Thank you Mr chairman a we'll go
to public comment.
Senate bill three eighty we do
not have any members of the
public registered in advance to
speak in opposition are there
any members of the public who
wish to speak in opposition
Senate bill three eighty at this
time please raise your hand.
Seeing no hands we will go to
the first person who signed up
to speak in favor of Senate bill
three eighty with Scott can't
find.
Mr chairman members of the
committee I'm still Scott
Scanlon still representing
someone park racetrack in Dona
ana county and sun ray Parkins
and San Juan County we support
this bill you know the central
system is a twenty year old
holdover each race track has the
complete audit of forty
inability and and current
software to to absolutely back
up every single machine only the
racetracks have these
capabilities and then that are
shared by the state through the
central system so this is a it
this is a a much needed update
to the to the twenty year old
statute and we urge your support
thank you Mr chairman members.
Thank you.
Whether any other members of the
public who wish to speak and
support Senate bill three eighty
please raise your hand.
Okay.
The COVID thank you.
Thank you and I will go to
committee I have a Senator
Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman firstly
I'd like to do is a point of
order as you want to interrupt
the flow but once the vote total
is announced the rules say that
no one else is allowed to vote
so everyone is pretension and
wrote in one it's time because
once the vote count as announced
by the secretary it's too late
so you can add your vote after
the vote counts been read out.
I just wanna make sure we
understand that.
I know it's difficult with this
the the way we got this set up.
If you mess you mess.
So just Mr chair on that point.
What relief so any member could
reconsider if we needed to
really do that to allow members
to vote I mean again we're
trying to.
We're dealing with technology a
lot of times and I just think
there's some so again there's a
there's a process to address
that that situation if we need
to if we want to do it you know
again I I'm not I'm not
disagreeing with you Senator
Brandt on a on a.
scholia interpretation of the
rules because I think you're
right that's what the rules say
but I think there is certainly a
process until the until the bill
is read out and read out of the
committee it's still in the
committee so any member could
reconsider it and then bring it
bring back that member to vote
if we if we needed to so I just
want to make that point of that
some point you got in the boat.
Yeah.
Mr chairman and senator to go on
otherwise we can stay here and
try to vote on one bill for half
an hour at some point you gotta
stop you know in the airport
point well taken results
this somewhat we got stopped for
so Mister chairman Senator did
have a question on the bill as
dealing with any of these bills
that are dealing with the
compact every time you change
something you're you're you you
have a rest of the compact is is
there any risk in what we're
doing with this function
allowing a change in the hours
for the for the gaming machines.
Mister chairman Senator answer
that may go to Jason no we the
only thing we asking for is
additional hours for training
for employees and maintenance of
the building machines whatever
that may be step opening that
whatever timely open and closing
whatever kind of close and and
only being able to do
maintenance and training during
those hours it just gives the
flexibility the second part of
it is the state system shuts
down
then everybody leaves and
they're shut down when that
happens in the state systems
come back up people have left
the parking lot they may have
went home and you know they may.
For whatever reason they're shut
down and they leave and we never
get access to those to those
back.
So those are the to answer it
again.
One anything is just want to
make sure because every time we
play around with the slang.
I want to do some things to and
I've been told very clearly you
can't do that because then
you're gonna violate compact and
I just wanna make sure that
we're not doing that anyway.
Mr chair Senator Brandt a little
while since I read the compact
but based on my memory I don't
there is there is provisions in
there that said it your gaming
can only occur a certain number
of hours within the context of
Recinos and to increase the
number of gaming hours I do
think would violate the contact
but we're not doing that here
what we're doing is just saying
training and maintenance can
occur during non gaming hours
but we don't have to shut access
the for Austin tire Lee to our
staff this kind of a safety
issue too because we want to be
able to do maintenance and
training when nobody's in the
casino and so that's really all
this is about it's not
increasing the number of gaming
are so I think senator Munoz
says answers were were
completely on point I don't
think this bill negatively or in
thank you it I don't think it
affects the contact at all.
Thank you I'm sure my guess is
that the compact is no total
number hours not laid out
specific hours of the day so I
think you're you're right if
that's the way it was working in
the contact I just you know we
just want to make sure that we
don't put that at risk although
you know there's there's parts
of me that don't mind putting
that at risk but that's all
right we'll talk about that
another day of Mr stand when Mr
weeks thank you Mr chairman
thank you serving us.
Senator Kernan and then Senator
Padilla.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
I think this that makes a lot of
sense and certainly just the
casinos opened their doors again
cleaning is going to be very
important and we want to make
sure that it is a safe
environment and that that the
casinos have the that
opportunity and the time to do
it right so I really support
this I think it's a great thing
to do and certainly with regard
to connective itty with at the
state.
The casino shouldn't at least
revenue because system does
stand if they have a back up
system so I strongly support
this and I hope the committee
will join me in that.
Q. Senator Padilla.
Mr chairman I only worked with
Senator Kernan for going on nine
years now but she made my exact
point so I I thoroughly
appreciate that thank you
Senator Kernan so with with with
that all moving to pass Mr
chairman
hold on a second the.
I have a question on Mr Chairman
on the third party system.
We I guess we talk about the the
state system has that gone down
before and the backup has been
used so how does that work.
Chasen our expert witness and I
think Scott makes beyond I don't
know how many times it's gone
down.
Tatian we have the answer to
that.
Mr Chairman I don't know how
many times this pandemic has
gone down and in the past what
happens is we just got our
casino for down with this change
would not support we reduced
operating and then Senator the
state central fact that
information from our third party
monitoring system would then
relay all the relevant
information to the state central
but Frank can probably provide
more clarity on how many times
are gone down and down.
Thank you muted.
Thank you I don't have an exact
number but what happens is if we
have our senator or whether
nominations take place it will
call as servers to communicate
with state to reset going act
and as soon as that happens sure
that communication link between
the state and the slot machines
on property breaks slot machines
go an act that we have to wait
for the state to.
The reenactment and turned back
on so it happens it usually
happens in the most inopportune
times.
Okay
Mr Mr chairman Mr chairman Mr
chairman and someone park
when we get a lot of rain and
Senator Hamblen those that so
few and far between but when
when when we get a lot of rain
our servers tend to go down but
I think the important thing to
remember about this though Mr
chairman Mr chairman is our
backup systems are the systems
that we have it all of our
racetrack casinos holds all the
same it the identical
information that the state's
central system so when there is
that this the the central system
goes down all of the information
is secure at the tracks all of
it is audible on to audit a bowl
and all of it is maintained at
the tracks that we can been
turned over to the state when
they do come back on so it's all
protected Mr chairman Mr
chairman okay thank you SO this
third party more to system is
that owned by each casino or is
it another third party that owns
it or the independently owned by
each respective because you
know.
Chairman.
I don't think it's owned by any
the casinos they contract with a
third party for monitoring and
so that they monitor their
machines and Frank correct me if
I'm wrong and so they just
transfer the data but another
racinos on monitoring system I
don't believe Frank is that
correct so the the researchers
individually we're responsible
to have a a player tracking
accounting system which we we
can insurers and purchase so
comes from companies like value
manufacture site to games
aristocrat IGT and you know
there are systems that are
installed throughout the country
at different casinos
very similar system to sit on
the reservations of the native
American casinos in New Mexico
but they are independent of any
other monitor
the way this works is with the
need for this you there is a
it's called to port to port
configuration where one forty
screening information to the
system that we monitor maintain
the other port fees information
to the more just system that the
state monitors both those
systems.
Basically reside together next
to each other in our server room
and the game constantly
refreshing Phocis with the
information so as we stated when
the state system goes down our
system maintains that
information and you can upload
it and keep all the information
Okay thank you all right I.
I believe we have any more a
question from the
Committee so with that the we're
supposed to the committee.
Yes.
Minorities Mr chairman.
Are we gonna do pass motion by
Senator Padilla the second by
Senator Hamblen.
Lane can you please to grow.
Brandt yes ma'am Senator great.
Yes Senator.
Yes Senator Hickey yes Senator
Hotmail yes Senator Kernan yes
senator Sanchez yes.
Senator Clemente yes.
Senator Wirth yes Senator
Padilla yes Senator Shendo a yes
eleven yes votes.
Good we have a due pass Mr
Chairman.
Thank you Mr chairman I
appreciate the committee's time.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
committee members.
Okay we're now moving on to a.
House Bill I.
From Garcia.
Thank you Mr chairman.
I will be a new this bill today
thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee of house bill five
as amended.
Related to electric up generate
facility economic district
providing the the what amount of
additional members and it does
have an emergency clause on Mr
chairman the more members if you
I do have additional witnesses
either Mr chairman.
It just give you a little heads
up on the on what we're doing
here.
This bill is constitution from
not session establishing a
redevelopment authority to help
brought to help create jobs Mr
chairman we did a broader policy
guidance that is why we need one
more small County and three for
the governor's office Mr
chairman and committee members
if you're well aware
The power plant in December we
lost over a hundred and jobs in
the facility itself Sir Mr
Chairman
The economic impact of McKinley
County on this loss of jobs was
three million dollars in taxes
and two million dollars in G. R.
tease us what county had about
ninety five percent of the
workforce in that facility and
we lost the ball three million
dollars in revenue direct
revenue chair thandi and the Mr
chairman and Division gentleman
you're well aware of that
we just lost no
Refinery in Gallup also.
And our coal mine is in jeopardy
of going away and what we're
trying to do here is to draw
more business into our
community.
The reason for the three point
from the governor's office Mr
chairman is to help organize
this authority also with the
power of the governor's office
to reach out to national and
international businesses let
them know what we have to offer
enough Pruitt economic cluster
Mr chairman with that I stand
for questions.
Representative but did you have
a expert witnesses said you Mr
mom sorry yes I do the nation's
name is reciting our old from
Wakanda economic development if
you would let her and so she
could the.
Food food more input on what
we're talking about thank you.
Senator.
Getting Mr Chairman
representative Garcia my name is
Eileen Chavez Yarborough I am
the executive director of Cibola
communities economic development
foundation we've recently
experienced the loss of Mexico
on that power plant and the
greater Gallup economic
development and Cibola
communities economic development
have been working and
anticipating for the last four
years that this was coming down
the line we didn't anticipate
that it would happen so soon so
we pivoted and and we.
Are working together to
establish an authority McKinley
County the business of that went
away the power plant is in
McKinley county but we prefer
the Cibola provides ninety five
percent of the workforce so
we're working together the
authority would use the assets
that are in place right now from
the tri state operation as in
rail infrastructure equipment
and such the anchor tenant that
is currently there McKinley
paper company I just received a
five million dollar
a donation to help create the
Authority one point two five of
that excuse me they received yes
five million dollar lead award
along with us the money from the
state and
and that is going to help
McKinley paper thank the anchor
tenant continue to operate there
our organization just recently
helped begin the papers secure a
J. tip award to expand their
operations and create ten more
new jobs and so now what we're
doing is trying to create the
ability to specifically look at
how can we create and replace
those one hundred and ten jobs
that we lost from their electric
plant and and find something
that can go there they can use
those assets and that is
economic based bringing new
money into both counties and
expanding our economic tax base
we do as the military does have
a person that they have named
for the fifth member of Cibola
County and so if there are any
other questions I'd be happy to
answer them.
Mr chairman if I may.
Representative
Mr chairman of the economic to
of this story was formed they
allowed I members of from can be
County and they gave us to
December thirty first two
redundant joining county to join
the forty and the only county
which is in with that mileage is
the somewhat County they have
joined authority and they do
have all members on board we're
just trying to Polish it all up
Mr chairman and members of this
committee to try to get this
going because as you know all
right now we the City of well
the cognizable and non McKinley
our devastation usual the
closures due to the COVID you
know we're getting hit from all
sides right now and we really
need to get ahead of this before
at the because of the economic
disaster in our area thank you
Mr chairman thank you need to
know when the committee.
Thank you of a this time we'll
go to the public.
Five a as amended we will go
directly to those here in this
meeting first off for those
opposing the bill is there
anybody who wishes to speak in
opposition please raise your
hand.
Seeing no hands we will now go
to those who wish to speak in
favor of house bill five as
amended there any members of the
public who wish to speak in
favor please raise your hand.
Thank you very much.
Comment on this
Thank you now we go to the
committee for questions.
I don't Senator Brandt.
Sorry Mr chairman trying to
multi task
So Mister chairman Senator sorry
about the the need to give your
promotion representative of Mr
Chairman representative what
what did you find me some dinner
too if you're a.
What the testing well Mister
chairman yeah down here in my
office I do have some leftover
meatloaf on that heat up in just
a little bit so if anyone wants
to join me I can split it will.
The we'll see if we have enough.
Jesus took me I'll never one to
fishes and five loaves we can
make it work.
Mr chair representative what is
the this authority and I'm I
guess I'm I'm trying to read
through and find it is it a new
authority that we're creating
is it what is the economic
development authority what is Mr
chairman Senator this authority
was established last did not
session.
It is a mall already and it but
if I open referred to my ex for
witnesses to help me out with
that.
R. Chairman representative
Garcia and I asked Senator
Brandt it is an electric
facilities are already that is
been put in place to are
replaced and create economic
based jobs that were lost
through the closure and the
generating station the electric
generating station.
So so it's it's kind of an
economic development authority
basically created originally in
my guesses for the San Juan
generating plants.
And and the one that you're you
have closing here is that
correct.
I Chairman representative and
senator it is an authority that
has been created to address
specifically the closure of the
Escalante planned to improve it
of which we can they County and
Cibola County share resources
for the plant is in McKinley but
Cibola provides ninety five
percent of the workforce and we
lost about a hundred and ten
jobs when it closed those are
obviously economic based high
paying quality jobs and so try
tristate generously when we were
looking at how to replace those
jobs tristate generating and
transmission who owns Escalante
gave five million dollars to
help mitigate the loss of those
jobs and two point two five of
that is going to help establish
this authority.
So your regionally it was.
I members right members and.
And then eight Chairman
representative and senator
originally it was eight four
from McKinley and for from
Cibola I understand that the
amendment is changing it to get
Cibola
excuse me originally it was I
from McKinley and for from
Cibola and that was it the
amendment is now going to
increase Cibola to have equal
number as McKinley so there we
would be adding one more and
then there would be three point
three government governor
appointees.
So there'd be eight from the two
counties and then three from the
governor that appointed by the
governor so for a total of
eleven.
I from each county and three
appointees for a total of
thirteen is my story so I and I
I think I still got stuck on the
form for so I and I and then
three from the governor.
The.
And so how are we changing it
today besides the I guess the
governor appointees of the what
we're changing.
Chairman representative and
senator what is changing is that
C. will will be adding their
fifth.
And then the governor will be
adding her appointees to make
the total thirteen.
From nine to thirteen.
I believe that's what the
amendment calls for.
So what is the authority
accomplished so far in the in
the two years it has been in
place.
Sir Chairman representative and
senator the authority has not
been in place for two years
greater Gallup economic
development and Cibola
communities economic development
have been working with tri state
and three other departments of
the state of New Mexico economic
development workforce and
environment on addressing those
losses that the wording was put
in place this past year and we
can the just recently in
December approved building the
fiscal agent for the if the
already and now tristate made
the donation to set up the a
forty a portion of those funds
were used to set it up and so
the next line of business was
for each county to appoint their
authority board members and then
the amendment came for the
governor to have three
appointees and and want to see
less so that they may be can the
actual work of addressing the
job losses in getting the at
thirty.
Thank you I appreciate that
Mr chairman Representative.
Help me understand why we want
the governor to appoint three
people.
Mr chairman if I may well the
reason for a we'll put on the
governor.
Would be basically of Mr
chairman.
For for the power to governor's
office because they could reach
out to consider years Mr
chairman of Representative I
mean Senator they give a result
national and international
business businesses to get
attracted to what we have been
in our community.
The.
For what did you have anything
to put on that.
Yes Sir Representative that
Chairman representative and
senator we would like my
understanding is having the
governor appointees would allow
this story to use and help
facilitate
recruitment to the state of New
Mexico using the governor's
resources and the state of New
Mexicos resources where as while
we have appointees from McKinley
and Cibola our resources are
limited as far as our circle of
influence if we had the
governor's appointees on board
that hopefully as good as the
governor's word for us to be
able to have her help I say her
the governor whoever's governor
at the time to help us interact
with these companies and make
them understand the opportunity
that we have available here for
them there's already
infrastructure and assets in
place we just need some help
getting someone here and at this
point the governor and the state
of New Mexico has those
resources to help us get that
recognition and that attention
for that specific it's a pre
cruise meant opportunity.
Mr Chairman representative of
appreciate your optimism.
hasn't worked out that great for
us the state.
but you know maybe maybe the
governor's people will come
through for you thank you thank
you Mr chairman.
Thank you Senator Brandt.
Of any other questions from
committee members.
Senator Griggs.
Thank you Mr chair and I just
yeah I just want to.
To say to our the sponsor.
That you know when you when you
when you talk about making a you
know maybe the simplest easiest
bill we've seen so far you know
that's almost a challenge to see
how hard we can make it.
Then the.
Mr chair and and representative
Garcia I'm really not going to
do that but but I could add some
little being key things
throughout this bill but that I
want you guys to be successful I
really do and I think that
there's things in this that are
a little hard to understand.
For insurance on page well it
may got amended I'm not exactly
sure but on page two line can we
talk about members closest to
but not more than one half of
the membership shows for two
years I'm not sure I really yeah
maybe just me but I'm not I'm
not sure I understand that
particularly well
we also.
On page three we have authority
members poster surely bond for
the faithful performance of
their duties for sure into the
surety bond act I don't know how
many orders and
thank you we actually asked
people to to post bonds for
Sure I can whether we actually
need that or not but it's just
issues thank you know we gotta
honor again page three we gotten
elected official which I guess
means any elected official from
anywhere.
but you might have somebody from
Santa Fe County that might be a
good board I don't I don't know.
But Mr Chairman.
Representative Garcia as just as
just may have a little bit of
fun with you so if I get over
there on your side you can
certainly have fun with me so
anyway thank you thank you Mr
chair thank you Representative.
Thank you Mr chairman I don't
know I don't.
General questions from the
committee members.
Representative.
Mr Chairman to take the table go
to this meeting today and it's
not over with yet first I was
called Senator which is our
right they were by the do we
meet low flow that's even better
thank you Mr chairman.
Mr Chairman I will go to pass.
Mr chairman that's
Representative Senator Garcia
hit the nail right on that all
right senator would deal with
the the best motion we have a
second.
Packet second by Senator Griggs
lane can you please take grow.
Senator Brandt yes Senator
Griggs yes Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Hickey yes Senator how
to meal.
Senator Kernan yes Senator said
just.
Yes.
Senator Tallman.
Senator Tallman.
Senator Wirth yes Senator
Padilla all yes.
Senator Tallman
the the yes.
Senator how to meal.
Senator Shendo yes.
Of ten.
Two one excuse.
Representative the best motion
thank you thank you very much
thank you senator and sisters Mr
chairman thank budget really
appreciated by what we say is
our issue.
Thank you all right now we'll
move on to Senate bill one oh
three as amended.
Thank you Mr chairman
Senate bill one oh three amends
the pesticide control act that
we have in state statute to
restrict the use of
neonicotinoids pesticides with
certain exceptions.
In a minute I'm going to go over
the exceptions thoroughly
because then none of the
opponents to this bill will have
read that and I want to make
sure that everyone knows that so
we have a great Department of
that we have been working with
them for many months
my expert is Michael dax with
the defenders of wildlife and
and make code from six to
society this bill requires our
New Mexico State University to
adopt rules for certification
program to educate and train
private insecticide applicators
also makes Miner technology at
terminology and grammatical
changes to update the act so
over the past seventy years our
pollinator populations
including native bees and honey
bees and other populated other
pollinators have declined
precipitously in our country all
over the world really in New
Mexico in a twenty nineteen and
twenty twenty we had a forty
seven percent failure in our P.
heights.
even with this pollinators
continue to contribute twenty
seven billion to the US food
economy every one of every three
bites you eat you can think of
pollinator for that so I had no
idea we had so many native
species we have fifteen hundred
different types of native bees
in New Mexico six of our bumble
bees are now at risk of
extinction.
The use of pesticides in
residential lawns and gardens
and in some of our agriculture
is truly part of the decline of
this.
In the European Union has banned
the use of naked to Noites so
has the United Kingdom our EPA
started to do some work to
mitigate this in twenty twenty
but they haven't really followed
through yet I have hopes that
they will I just think this
comment pandemic has made our
dependence on these foundational
building blocks clean air good
food clean water healthy soils
sparing necessary for us to
thrive so this is just a
restriction it's not a band it
bans the sale and use of
neonicotinoids an outdoor
residential settings it requires
licensure for use in commercial
agriculture and that is already
there and it institutes labeling
requirements and the the FDA
also requires those so here are
all the profits that don't use
pollinators that are not going
to be part of any of these
restrictions seven hundred and
eighteen thousand acres of
agriculture in New Mexico
alfalfa wheat corn sorghum
cotton pecans dried beans chilli
peanuts onions potatoes none of
them are really impacted by
these pollinators many of these
crops start with a seat that
already has the neonicotinoid
and that those seats have to be
identified that way fire federal
government and they are we are
not talking about restricting
those neonicotinoid use sits at
all
neither for grapes let us the
star shows some berries and some
plants so there's about fifty
five hundred acres.
It's basically pumpkins melons
apples squash peaches aper
caught pairs some very some
plums those are impacted by
pollinators and that's where we
want to try to restrict the use
of neonicotinoids so the
The approved uses also include
Care control parasites the
domestic animals from that's
already in pet products control
of lice or bed bugs apparently
bed bugs really hate me and if
it two nights and so that still
approved indoor use to control
pests treated wood products we
have wood products that are
already
infused with pesticides like
this they are not caught up in
this
the sale and use of
neonicotinoid treated seeds and
plants for agriculture now the
residential we really want to
have the products labels and
many of them already are stating
the potential risk of the
product to pollinators
commercial agriculture crops
again not pollinated by insects
those are all the ones that I
listed are not part of this so
So Mister chairman with our work
with our a great act department
I just can't say enough about
Brad Lewis do Baca for helping
us do this they brought
amendments in the last committee
a which we we accepted them and
put them in they have brought
to.
With little amendments for today
and this so that too much rate
from my desk.
but if you put that right
remember that thank you.
So Mister chairman this
ammendment takes off two of the
amendments that the department
of that wanted to begin with
but the main amendment that they
now want is on page fourteen a
page fourteen lists the areas of
agriculture that are not
impacted by of the restriction
on the and make it to the lights
and they want this the for the
purposes of this section this is
page fourteen line for after the
designation be for the purposes
of this subsection neonicotinoid
class pesticides shall not be
designated as restricted use
pesticides unless they are
designated as such by the US
environmental protection agency
so that page essentially lists
the the of products that I talk
to you about that we're not I
will not be restricted use under
this bill so Mr chairman this
this really is a health issue
these neonicotinoids are used
everywhere they're very cheap
they're very effective they're
very dangerous they stay in the
ground and water for a very long
time they affect fish because
fish a reach up and touch those
little of flight type insects
those types in sex are impacted
by neonicotinoids Minnesota just
did a study of their dear a
population and they found
neonicotinoids in the livers of
deer they are moving to restrict
these sites as our Vermont
Connecticut Maryland and I said
Minnesota and Massachusetts I
believe has just a band them so.
just the impact on these in
particular is very concerning to
the conservation of community
they cause high mortality and
honey bees they compromise their
ability to navigate back to the
heights they can't figure out
where they're going a level of
neonicotinoid insecticides used
in agriculture really help
impairment of brain is these
brain cells and poor performance
in the colony so there's there's
lots of studies about this I
won't go into any more of them
but I have more I'm so Mister
chairman if if you want to take
action on the.
The amendment that would be
great and then I have a two
expert witnesses that I would
like to be able to have a make a
few comments that's Michael dax
and a coat.
Mr chairman I'll move adoption
of the amendment for purposes of
discussion okay we have a motion
anymore questions on the
amendment by members of the
committee.
Non native option of the
amendment okay we have a motion
the second Mr chair.
Second by Senator Hamblen.
Any opposition from ocean.
I don't see any so a motion is
adopted so you have an amended
bill twice.
You.
I will go ahead with your expert
witnesses thank you Mr chairman
I think Michael dax's in your
zoom room at this is I'm a coke.
Mr chair members of the
committee Michael tax here
Michael dax with centers and
wildlife here in Santa Fe
over the past several years the
New Mexico legislature has taken
several actions to promote
pollinator health there's
memorial promoting be aware day
promoting pollinator friendly
plants at the round house
pollinator from the plant
labelling and then I believe
last year two years ago was upon
a different license plate as
well so the legislature has
already recognized the
importance of pollinators and
taken some proactive steps
unfortunately it is not enough
to just be proactive provided
will Nader's but we must also
address packs that are harming
them as well
and that is where we get to
addressing a need to consumers
as this bill does
So what as the senator do
detailed the this bill would
leave a lot of uses of Munich no
it's intact what it's really
going after is those retail
sales so if you're just you know
someone in New Mexico with a
garden in you're having problems
with a fits into.
And you want to go to home depot
or Lowes to buy an insecticide
most likely you don't know what
you're buying in New Mexico it's
are very common they're the most
common class of pesticides in
chances are you might grab one
of those even though you might
be someone who wants to protect
pollinators and you know that
might be reserve one of the
reasons why you have your garden
and so there is a lot of
potential for unintended use and
that is what this bill is really
going after similar with the
labeling laws for nurseries if
you're someone who's going to
you're not local nursery to buy
plants you know most likely it
is you know that is something
you enjoy it you might you know
want to be promoting pollinator
health and not know that a plant
maintenance untreated with
Indian it NEO Nick it's not so
that is what this bill is really
going after in as a senator
detail for the large large
majority of our agriculture New
Mexico is will continue to be a
lot thank you.
Thank you
I don't know if I'm a coach is
there.
Yes.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is imei code I
work at this R. C. society for
vertebrate conservation
my background is in by mental
health and toxicology and I
think Senator Stewart needs to
get any.
Degree in toxicology Act I don't
even need to cover much she did
a lot of the covering of the
risks of these chemicals.
So Senate bill one of three is
as Michael described really
where what is going to do I'm
just gonna give a couple of rob
brushstroke point about these
chemicals wise we're honing in
on Munich is no insecticides and
basically one they're highly
toxic that means very very small
levels of these chemicals levels
that are being found in the
environment are enough to
severely harm beads in the ways
that Senator Stewart explained
to they are long lived that
means weeks months and sometimes
years after an application there
are still toxic and harmful
environment three they are
systemic that means they're
moving up through a plant and
can be expressed in pollen and
nectar that's a direct route of
exposure for our pollinators
Barbies and I'm there and other
pollinators out that.
Lastly there's streaming
commonly used that means to be
can be exposed in the backyard
in your local park in a number
of different agricultural fields
they don't have a place where
they might not be exposed so for
those reasons when you look at
the various risks are counties
are facing multiple risks but
Munich a joint is one of the
risks that we do need to address
and this bill takes a really
scum and sent step towards
eliminating uses that are for
the most part because medic not
economic issues not not pass
that are going to be causing
harms to our crops and our food.
Quickly a couple of stories to
drive this home
I work with a researcher in
Pennsylvania who studies apples
and he was actually doing an
application a home garden
pesticide product on his home.
Apple tree and he was shocked to
see these falling to the ground
die after that application he
alerted us to that we went and
did a quick review of different
products and we found that
ornamental in home garden
applications can be at a higher
level than their Ag counterparts
I don't want to I just it's
probably because of food crops
verses ornamental in home what
we're looking at extremely toxic
chemicals being applied higher
levels in our home yards and
he's a license applicator wasn't
in this application.
These are the reasons we want to
read it really rethink whether
we want these to be on the
shelves for homeowners to be
choosing.
Another quick example to just
actually came out.
Just let late last month was
looking at a native the caller
squash beets amazing be a female
actually messed up the base of
the squash plant and the mail
sleep inside the flowers this
study looked in the field in and
and they've evolved with squash
plants chords melons and that's
really the only plants that they
pollinate this study looked over
three years of legal uses of
neonicotinoids and found that
eighty five percent fewer nests
were in the infield where these
chemicals were used eighty nine
percent fewer bees that were
being reproduced in your
building produced huge impact on
these B. species species that
are absolutely important for for
our crops and for.
For and natural areas as well so
I will stop their I think we've
covered this is an issue that is
being considered around the
country are we've got you know
Vermont Massachusetts
Connecticut California across
the country state I have either
passed laws or are considering
passing laws right now to reduce
immunity to make use.
Thank you so Mister chairman
before you go to your audience I
would just like to mention a
couple parts of the bill that I
failed to do originally that I
really like and that is that the
department of that will have
rule making authority and they
they already do help with a lot
of the great regulation and we
are going to step up the
continuing education for people
who do the insecticide
application and then we're going
to have pollinator health
outreach education and materials
developed and this is all going
to come out of the department of
that is been helping me with I
think I've had for pollinator
memorials over the last ten
years they are always there to
help us so the last part of the
bill are really was fund putting
this together with the
department of that so with that
Mr Chairman we stand for public
comment questions.
Thank you Senate pro tem we will
now go to the public.
Thank you very much.
Beginning with those who wish to
speak in opposition to Senate
bill one of three as amended
first off we have Glenda MasTec.
Moving on we have Bob then sorry
sorry I'm here okay you may go
ahead all right thank you.
Our chairman Senators thank you
for the opportunity to testify
I'm going to MasTec executive
director of the Colorado nursery
greenhouse Association and of
our New Mexico chapter of the
same.
This bill creates a heavy
bureaucratic burden on our
industry the amount of paperwork
to track which plants have been
treated in which happened.
And the separation required to
maintain two different areas of
plants in the greenhouse places
another onerous burden on
industry which was hard
significantly but being shut
down during the pandemic during
their busy times a year
particularly licenses bill goes
into effect on July one of this
year this targets plans which
are already in stock all of
those plans will have to have
labels placed on them by hand
with the cost of the label the
cost of the labor cutting into
an already know profit margin
nurseries also have their stock
of PED's control products on the
shelves are ready for consumers
to buy this bill would require
them to throw those all the way
on July one incurring a
significant monetary loss you're
asking one industry which has
many many small family thank you
very much next up we have Bob
then.
Good evening my name is Bob and
I'm representing the national
association of landscape
contractors and that amending
the on Mexico members thank you
for allowing me to speak to
bring this is the Senate bill
one three I want to think about
the comments off and senator
about the of the pandemic
mandated by the Massachusetts
I'm afraid it's not so it is
instructive committees know that
this was just recently this past
Monday The New Mexico north will
go over to the restricted use
category and this was done by by
statute and.
It resulted in a study that
looked at the literature that
surrounds these products and
then went to the pesticide what
subcommittee which is the R. the
the the group that registers
pesticides and after public
comments a public hearing on the
James River eight eight are a
compromise with the will to
drugs restricting use I think
this will be a much better
resolutions of the so the
science and situation here in
New Mexico.
Thank you very much next up we
have Tiffany Rivera.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee good afternoon my
name took near there and I'm the
registered lobbyists for New
Mexico farm and livestock bureau
neonicotinoids are federally
approved class of pesticides
which agricultural lies upon
heavily to prevent damage caused
by pests.
In New Mexico in Munich it's
noise are utilized in the
production of many of our crops
including the cons chili
watermelons and more the bill
before you looks to restrict the
use of this extremely efficient
safe and cost effective tool in
order to address concerns of
poverty second which according
to state and federal data
obtained does not warrant the
proposed restrictions we believe
that this legislation is not the
correct approach and that the
state should instead proactively
focus on education and outreach
to improve pollinator health
statewide lastly as part of its
registration review of
neonicotinoids EPA has proposed
a number of application right
restrictions timing restrictions
and increased label requirements
to address concerns of
pollinators the thank you very
much.
Next up we have Ryan.
Thank.
Good evening Senators chair
appreciate the time that you're
giving me today to speak about
our concerns for implementation
on Senate bill one oh three we
have concerns that are found on
page fourteen section four
there's a may because the
thorniest for the got for the
department of agriculture to
allow these exemptions and we're
just asking for a word change
from made to a shout that will
eliminate implementation
concerns aware that once this
bill takes effect that gap for
the second.
Once this bill takes effect how
are these exemptions gonna be
affirmed by the department we
appreciate the Senator taking
maintenance for our
for are concerns earlier this is
the last thinking point of our
concerns and we appreciate
changing that may in section
four alright the two it shall
thank you for your time.
Thank you very much next up we
have Gregory burns.
Good afternoon Gregg Albers
forty two years nag Business I
grow peppers excuse me Townsend
grapes and the bike is valid I'm
here representing the New Mexico
property auction Association we
strongly oppose this bill in any
fashion is totally unnecessary
with the regulation we are
currently under pollinators are
important and we had to protect
them.
The one thing that the senator
and to experts failed to mention
was colony collapse disorder
which is the cause of declining
bees we strongly object to the
thirty second.
Yes aside language LD fifty
which is how toxins are
measured.
Lethal dose to terminate fifty
percent of the population
capping a hundred and fifty
aspen two hundred household
ammonia three fifty vitamin D.
ten nicotine fifty copper
sulfate commonly used in organic
farming three fifty the nektonic
mail nectar points are for ten
it is not as dangerous it is
regulated we use it thank you
very much next up we have Chris
cycler.
did after state good evening
Senators my name is Chris
Sechler a fifth generation
farmer is Carl County.
Really investing for thirty five
years
We use thirty five years ago you
we use things that kids these
kids spiders kill beneficial
insects the kids everything and
now we have you know negative
noise that I feel is one of the
safest and most beneficial
pesticides I've ever used thirty
seconds.
It's it's it's very effective in
what it does it's very safe we
use it primarily when the plants
are small prior to pollination
there with we're not even used
when the plants are pollinated
and you're just going to drive
our industry out of the state
you're gonna drive cross the
border with Mexico that's all
you're gonna do by passing this
bill thank you.
Thank you very much.
Next up we have Christopher
federally.
Good evening Mr chair and
committee members Chris for
federal and household commercial
products association echo the
concerns about the portion of
the bill that includes
Department discretion on the
exemptions some of the products
that the companies we represent
include some of those products
that were mentioned late to
sleep medication slide basements
And we feel that the
predictability and the
regulatory space it is important
for for any business and that
provision particularly when
Jackson uncertainty into the
market so we do encourage that
to be changed and and and also
like to thank the author and the
proponents for to continue
dialogue and spell thank you.
Thank you very much we have
Lauren Patterson.
Thank you share Shendo members
of the committee lord Patterson
on behalf New Mexico cattle
growers.
Proposes that the market three
as Neil mechanoid class of
pesticides are safely utilized
in livestock production for the
control of blood sucking flies
and lights it is utilized in
concert with other pesticides in
a veterinarian consulted
recommended rotation reduced
levels use and reduce genetic
resistance in relation to seven
point eight that could be well
over nine million in less than
fifteen years it is the charge
of my generation of
agricole serviced meet the
required twenty five percent
increase student.
production with an ever
decreasing amount of land and
water and not remove one of our
sites based improving tools for
more toolbox thank you.
Thank you very much next up we
have Michelle frost Maynard.
Afternoon Mister chairman and
members of the committee
Michelle frost mater speaking on
behalf of New Mexico will
growers we oppose SB one of
three annually one New Mexico
producer will feed themselves
their family and a hundred sixty
six other people placing
restrictive regulations in
removing tools to achieve this
level of production is negative
to every citizen of our state
older forms of chemicals do not
offer same selected benefits
them in the individual it's and
would require more frequent
application reversing progress
made with integrated pest second
which would reduce crop yields
for the more negative way to
offer ranchers selective control
over passed by utilizing fly Tax
por on its based on livestock
such as cattle sheep and goats
to control the spread of disease
parasitic issues in internet
internally and externally as
well as offer pet owner
selective control over fleas and
lice and their dogs and cats to
treat various parasites mange in
cat scabies thank you for
consideration of opposing
Senate.
Thank you very much next up we
have Beverly it's saying that.
I thank you Mr chair members of
the committee I'm Beverly it's
and get executive director of
dairy producers of New Mexico we
respect please stand in
opposition to Senate bill one oh
three just because for some
specific crops the loss of these
pesticides but forced production
costs excessively high or
eliminate the only tools
available for controlling
certain pasts the negative
impact would extend to the last
several community infrastructure
and the economy thank you.
Thank you very much next up we
have land paying.
Next up we have Joran robs.
Thank you Mr chair committee
members Mr Roberts the executive
director New Mexico Chile
Association we are spectrally
oppose SB one of three New
Mexico farmers best defense
against insects that kill a wide
range of crops including Chile
cons watermelon and many other
crops units are highly regulated
by the EPA and are proven to be
safe for use at a hundred and
twenty countries without the use
of neonics farmers will be
forced to use older chemistries
that can offer the same benefits
and they are very damaging to
the environment this will result
in reduced yields and require
more strict application of other
guys.
In addition there are many
examples of healthy thriving bee
populations in close proximity
with commercial ad operations
that use more nets respectfully
oppose this legislation thank
you.
Thank you very much next up we
have Justin Boswell.
Next up we have credit on.
Next up with you.
Was that this.
Yes ma'am okay this Craig Ogden
time thank you I'm opposed to
that bill Senate bill one oh
three we is integrated pest
management when we do any spring
spring is the last thing that we
want to do it too expensive are
the integrated pest management
that we do we look at the
beneficial it's very carefully
in the past so we we make some
really rash in our decisions
when we do have to spray that
spring is the last thing we want
to do when you take our choices
away that's going to make it
more difficult for us the bill
that was changed is not cover
all of agriculture and I think
that it would be beneficial if.
You didn't have winner or losers
in that at category again I
stand opposed to this bill thank
you.
Thank you very much.
Next up we have Steve Cottrell.
We have to heal.
Members of the committee this is
due to a tree on a registered
lobbyist for CropLife America.
At this point with all respect
to the sponsor to continue stand
opposed to the bill I respect
for the committee's time and
repeat the comments that have
been given other than to say I
think it's for those down to the
disagreement over the science of
there's an extensive body of
scientific research that is
consistently shown that you're
going to control aids are not we
are going to be the calling of
the client what part of
supplied.
Label directions more for me I
will say this quickly a
different issue hasn't raises
when you push start down
rulemaking Mexico partner back
is one of those agencies that
that does not allow members of
the public to initiate
rulemakings to be able to dress
up as percent administrative
level that needs to be changed
and that's a big huge problem Mr
process that way thank you.
Thank you very much next up we
have Chris Morgan.
Next up we have Michael.
Michael berry.
Next up we have Erin pirtle.
Next up we have with John Cleese
Solti.
Committee members thank you for
giving me a time to to speak to
you.
My name is John closure within
the state of.
All my life we've been the
largest commercial beekeepers in
the state my brother and I were
also large commercial Congress
we do use the next we have your
B. arch right next to some
converts are we using your next
we have not seen.
A detrimental effect from you
seven in our own experience.
I do think thanks to the check.
And amendments there well
reasoned well thought out.
I am I would appreciate I would
agree three stick the needle
next from people who do not have
a private applicators license I
think they need to be and with
people with a lot of education I
have a daughter who's teachers
toxicology New Mexico station
professorship manner stand all
these things and I appreciate
her so I'm gonna take a neutral
position right now.
Thank you very much.
Next we have Jason Espinoza.
Chairman members of the
committee Jason Espinoza
registered lobbyists with the
New Mexico coalition of
conservation districts and while
we do appreciate Sanchez concern
for pollinator health which is a
concern we also share we do
stand in opposition to Senate
bill one of three as right in
this legislation creates on
favorable and confusing
regulatory structure for the
second time we do a group any of
the points already made in
opposition and instead we would
urge a collaborative approach
with the NMDA nursery operators
agricultural stakeholders
holders and others to really
develop and encourage outreach
to the general public regarding
pollinator health and growth
thank you Mr chair.
Thank you very much next up we
have Charlie market.
Okay are there any other members
of the public who wish to speak
in opposition of Senate bill one
of three at this time please
raise your hands.
We will now go to those who
register to speak in favor of
Senate bill one and three
beginning with the may have are
a.
Thank you for this opportunity
my name is leaving about an
attorney at the New Mexico
Center on Law and Poverty
agricultural workers deserted
neighborhood health and healthy
and see settings that limit and
in some cases prohibit their
exposure to pesticides.
I could many other states New
Mexicans New Mexicans including
large agriculture produces often
use neonicotinoid pesticides
compact pets harmful to their
agricultural products research
over the past few years however
suggest that the Nick it's no
it's our own state for the
environment Senator organiz
insider politician thank you
therefore it is imperative that
you mess with limited and in
some cases prohibit the use of
your gardening farming or in any
other way harvesting drugs we
think Senator Stewart
introducing this legislation and
we just of the committee passed
thank you.
Thank you.
Next week we have Louise get it
all in place of Diane Ruiz.
hi this is gonna it was the
other way around they in recess
when those going to be speaking
on behalf of the Sierra Club.
Okay is Diane.
I think you should be.
I do not wish to speak in her
place yes I'll I'll speak really
prefer I'm with the Sierra Club
many mysteries got it on the
legislative political organizer
and we have four thirty five
thousand members we stand in
support of this bill
and I just I'm asking you please
vote yes in support and thank
you so much to Senator Mimi
Stewart for putting this bill
fourth thank you very much.
Thank you very much next up we
have Dan Robert.
Yeah good evening committee
members Dan Roper with trout
unlimited I shared a written a
statement with you all couple
days ago just pointing to you to
some of the science that links
neonicotinoids to contamination
of surface waters impacts to
aquatic invertebrates and
declines in fish and bird
populations are there is a large
and growing body of scientific
research that demonstrates this
across the world and we are as
an organization that works on
session and clean water and
watershed issues this is a
concern for us and we wanted to
draw to your attention thank
you.
Thank you very much next up we
have a common.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee and
Judy COVID and and the New
Mexico policy director for the
Audubon society we're in strong
support of SB one of three
testified like neonicotinoids
have great impacts to birds in
addition to impacts to insect
pollinators unix are typically
applied as seed treatments for
crops and so the most directly
affect insects and seating birds
like the scaled quail and
western meadowlark but they're
also typically found in
agricultural runoff affecting
other parts of ecosystems like
rivers and streams grassland
birds most affected by your next
are also the group of bird
species showing the greatest
declines in North America with
more than half loss since the
nineteen sixties has decided
effect on birds can be direct
mortality but smaller doses can
also affect birds ability to
properly navigate migration as
well as a reproductive success
with birds facing overwhelming
feds New Mexico now from climate
change and long term drought
restricting the use of this
class of pesticides and
encouraging a transition to
other kinds of pest management
is something relatively easy we
can do now to help so I'm thank
you very much next up we have
our cilia insys custom.
Thank you Mr chair and members
of the committee my name is our
city says Costello and I am a
resident of Albuquerque and I'm
also with New Mexico interfaith
power and light over the years
I've been involved with these
across the spectrum from stating
that thousands of the of the
species and the pollination
impact on to helping my friend
counter honey bee colony
backyard and I can say without a
doubt that the services they
provide are not something that
we can replace well we tends to
fall back to separating the
ecosystem from the human impact
and argue about the profit
losses versus the environmental
harm thirty seconds providing
for us without any expectation
of getting anything in return
there are free multi billion
dollar industry and to the least
that we can do to support them
as restricted pesticide that's
known to be extremely toxic for
them and for this reason and
many more ask that you vote in
favor of SB one of three.
Thank you very much next up we
have Oscar Simpson.
Moving on we have on this team.
Senator Patrick.
Ruth strike all.
Chairmanship in senators thank
you for the opportunity to speak
my name is Ruth street I'm on
the board of directors of New
Mexico interfaith power and
light as a person of faith I'm
convinced that all forms of life
for sacred the use of
neonicotinoid pesticides is
particularly harmful to our bees
causing acute B. kills affecting
the queen bees in particular and
eventually killing entire hives
are beekeepers are seeing huge
die off of their colonies this
affects everyone of us without
bees to pollinate the flowers
many of our food crops will be
decimated almond.
Those onions carrots apples and
hundreds of other fruits and
vegetables depend upon bees our
livestock eat be pollinated
forage crops such as clover we
are part of the interconnected
web of what and when we destroy
another species we do so at our
peril please limit the use of
this pesticide before it's too
late thank you.
Thank you very much next up we
have and I. Hampton.
Moving on Holly fields.
My prior Lucier.
Next up we have drew to her.
Good evening thank you Mr
chairman the rest the committee
for the opportunity to speak I'm
sure to our community resources
policy director at the national
nonprofit beyond pesticides I'm
here today on behalf of our
members and supporters in New
Mexico to urge the committee to
protect the state's declining
pollinator populations by
passing SB one of three you know
it's our whole plant poisons
once sprayed onto a plant they
make their way into the pollen
nectar and do drops the plants
produce and pollinators and feed
upon exposure impairs pollinator
navigation foraging learning
behavior it suppresses the
immune system and makes them
more susceptible pathogens
despite overwhelming data EPA
actions have been limited to
minor label changes around
application timing and amounts
but under federal pesticide law
EPA sets a floor in states have
the power to go beyond the
standard in the face of EPA in
action several states have
already impose restrictions
Canada and the U. have banned
Munich use the danger continue
to allow these chemicals is
clear we urge lawmakers not to
wait for EPA follow the science
and pass strong restrictions on
unique pesticides thank you
again.
Thank you very much next up we
have Dr Angelo Committee.
It right on the money.
What they need me.
Believe me.
Mr chairman that with your
permission and anyone that's not
speaking can you please major
lines thank you.
Next up we have Jessica Johnson.
Good evening Mister chair and
committee members I'm Jessica
Johnson with the animal
protection voters Senate bill
one of three sets out a very
measured restriction I want to
emphasize that and it's tailored
through very targeted exceptions
on some of these uses of
neonicotinoids in order to slow
the decline of B. other
pollinator and other even non
pollinator wildlife species
which are so important to
protect our fragile ecosystem so
we respectfully urge your yes
vote on this bill thank you.
Thank you very much next up we
have Mara Hoffman.
Okay and with that we have a
user here our hands up but does
not have their name displayed
you may now speak but please
introduce us with your name
before speaking.
You're on an iPhone.
Okay I see me okay.
Yes thank you Mr chair members
of the committee for the
opportunity to speak my name is
Mike in fire TV and I'm a
resident Albuquerque I am an
avid gardener and I have
observed a decline and fall of
pollinators specifically piece
where I lived for the past
several years pollinators as
well as other wildlife already
faced many threats from climate
change our summer's drought and
make them even more susceptible
to pesticides like Munich time
to know it's unix can persist in
plants soils and water long
after application and their use
could pose long term direct.
What relations and industry is
already developing several of
alternatives some of which are
already available and as a state
on the front lines of climate
change New Mexico can be a
leader on this issue so please
support SB one of three and
thank you to sponsor.
Thank you very much that
concludes public comment at this
time.
Thank you and I will go to the
committee for questions.
Senator Senator Padilla.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
thank you madam pro tem um
received a ton of input on this
matter and just had a question
in terms of
I see the value of of the
science it's been presented but
but I'm also trying to figure
out you know how can we possibly
retool this you know that the
industry folks that have come
forward here in New Mexico what
sort of economic impact economic
studies have been done on how
this might be accomplished.
Mr Chairman.
A first of all again the
majority of the opposition is a
talking about crops that this
would not impact.
You know Chile is not part of
any restriction
I think chili seeds may come
already with the neonicotinoid
in a we're not doing any of that
and that is a restricted by FDA
and it must come with labeling
and with the instructions so
At in this is a very narrow a
used to try to keep that out of
home gardens and lawns and to
try to educate people about what
it really does
you know you heard about the run
offs in rivers.
we heard about the fish
population this is an attempt to
restrict widespread use there's
plenty of science it's
everywhere I can send you a lot
of things to read I've been
working on this for years
I'm not quite sure I probably
not answering your question
because I didn't really
understand your question.
Thank you Mr chairman and madam
proton Alaska again
what what large crops would this
affect.
It would not affect seven
hundred eighteen thousand acres
that we have now.
Also also we corn sorghum cotton
the cons dried beans chilli
peanuts onions potatoes grapes
let us the staff shows some
species of berries and some
species of palms these are crops
that are not pollinator
dependent they're just not
pollinator dependent some of
them get wind pollination but
for the most part they are not
impacted by by honey bees so the
crops that are our pumpkins
melons apples squash peaches
apricots pears some species of
plums and berries so the
department of that has been
regulating this and pollinators
for many years so we certainly
already have restrictions on
some of this this bill just lays
out in more detail where we can
get away from the use of
neonicotinoids and tries to
restrict just those areas.
Home gardens on those props
those props I mentioned cover
about fifty five hundred acres
but the crops that are not
impacted cover seven earned
eighteen thousand acres.
So Mister chairman you know what
is Madam pro tempore to is gonna
have an effect on me at the
grocery store than.
Well you know long term we hope
you're not eating food with
neonicotinoids and.
You know you've you've heard
what happened with round up.
You know round up is more
specific cancer causing and now
the the on Sunday mon sun total
I think owns roundup is having
to shell out millions and
millions of dollars for people
who are dying or have cancer we
don't want to get that way with
new nicotine alliance the
science says that it just stays
on the ground stays in the plan
stays in the water if we can try
to mitigate the over usage of
that we're hoping that we can
diminish the impact on the
environment and our food.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
I might go past begins chairman
that's all for now thank you
I've Senator Sanchez Hermio and
Senator Brandt Senator center.
Yes
Mr chair of Madam pro tempore.
I heard in your in your
explanation of the getting all
these.
Places where they did all this
research.
How come none of it was done in
New Mexico in the middle Rio
Grande Valley from Colorado all
with el Paso where they were
start checking the ground scene
of the New Mexico during it.
Many your studies were here in
New Mexico.
Well Mr chairman I didn't really
even mention studies I mentioned
the other states where they have
restricted the use but and I
also mentioned in the beginning
that over between twenty
nineteen and twenty twenty we've
had a forty seven percent the
hive loss in New Mexico which is
in line with the the statistics
and other countries in other
states so
I didn't mention any specific
studies we have a huge of
beekeeper population in New
Mexico and department of that
works with them on a yearly
basis to study be lost to study
their heights so
that the the research around
naked to Noites is is pretty
it's it's intense science so
it's it's done in lots of
different places I don't know if
may call code and answer any
more than that she's one of my
expert witnesses Mr chairman.
The chairman members of the
committee
There you're you're right there
hasn't been a lot of study that
in New Mexico but where the
studies have been done.
When you look for the new an
additional eggs there found
whether to U. S. Geological
Survey or the state of
California or whoever is looking
when they're tested for we're
finding them
They indications their their
behaviors are very much the same
no matter where you're going if
you're going to be looking in
regions that are of similar.
Echo readers is what we have in
New Mexico we know these along
with can because we know they
bind with water and persistent
long time these are things that
we know about Munich doesn't
matter where they are used I
would love to see more research
done in New Mexico but not to
the delay of the meeting changes
in order to reduce risks
especially from our residential
one thing I didn't even mention
was the US environmental
protection agency most recent
risk assessment found harm on
lines for our kids playing in
those lines these are the
reasons we want to move forward
and yes we can still do more
studies as well.
So are Mr chair of Madam pro
tempore so who are you targeting
with this are you going after
farmers are you going after the
people actually buy their
product off the shelf at home
before Walmart.
Growing up as a farmer being in
the farming industry all my life
my family all our lives you know
you have your applicators
license you have to post prior
to spraying the fields.
with you in forty eight hours
before you can spray of fields
are very nose in our area
everybody gets with all the
beekeepers we heard from the B.
T. one of the largest bee
keepers in New Mexico.
saying that he has not seen a
decrease next to the cons.
So.
Who are you targeting our
business for the farmers are
this for the people that are
their lawns like we just heard
from are your expert witness or
is it for after the farmers.
So Mister chairman we're trying
to restrict the use of
neonicotinoids we certainly
don't want to affect crops that
are really not of part of the
pollinator process so you know
all Phelps not really dependent
upon pollinators and they come
on their seats are already
treated with neonicotinoids and
they're regulated through FDA
and they have to they have to be
labeled in their label already
so of the court circum Khan
because it's dried beans chili
at peanuts onions potatoes none
of them are dependent upon
pollinators because they well
that's just the way the plant
works
things like onions onions are
harvested before they flower so
if you let them flower then of
course you track pollinators so
we have been working with the
department of that first they
can speak speak about this much
better than I can we tried to a
little bit of the use in on
lawns residential we want to
make sure that the nurseries
label of the plants and they've
been doing that we've been we've
been doing that for years with
other bills and other memorials
we've been trying to promote
pollinators pollinator friendly
plants so you the nurseries RD
label pollinator friendly plants
we want to make sure that they
continue to do that so
there's other more safe of
products that you can use around
your home on your garden your
lawn you don't have to be using
the and naked to Noites so we're
not targeting any we.
One person or property or
industry we are trying to lessen
mitigate the effects of this
voice than in our environment by
finding those areas that we can
restrict it without harming our
farmers are ranchers you know
Chile etcetera.
Mr chairman pro tem so.
All the farmers you spray in
April we don't spray when
they're pollinating our.
It's just our practice with
pharmacy always spray any of
your fall for and all your stuff
in April wants to get rid of all
the aphids and all the bugs that
it came in through the winter
months with the land and and
through the seasons.
Person that there's never a far
restrain you know and August
September in the on all of July
and August for the only.
So that's why I was asking about
the study's been done I mean in
other states I don't know how
they farm but so.
Surely there's a lot of these on
Chile there's a lot of these an
awful awful always in third
cutting you lecture off off of
all the let it bloom out every
farmer does a.
So you know I don't see the you
know and hearing from the
largest beef farmer in New
Mexico Senator is not a decrease
of these at this.
That brings me to see that I
don't I'm not sure of all the
science that has been
are presented here today.
No further questions Mr chairman
pro tem.
Thank you I have a Senator
Hermio Senator Brandt and
senator Mr chairman Senator
Stewart so the question had been
answered twice on studies that I
read and and looking into this I
did see that Chile P. cons corn
alfalfa were not affected and so
you reiterated that that a
couple of times so it does back
up on what I read prior to this
bill which would have been my
concern in northern New Mexico
with the chili farms Cornell's
also we have but you just
solidified or what I read and so
thank you for that so once again
for I do know that there's
people from my district watching
and once again just remind them
that this does not affect their
alfalfa your chili your your
corn so that's been stated a few
times so thank you so much Mr
chairman thank you senator.
Okay Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator of this you know the
house and I just recently sold I
I.
Have a lot of fruit trees.
we have always had a big garden
and actually had grant which you
know is.
Not too common in New Mexico
anymore for residential area.
and so what what is the common
household of product that
contains these neo naked till
it's this is that right.
Yes for two nights
so that's part of our our find
another.
It's part of the exemption is
some of fees inside
Products that we use to fed
Bucks Parilli near Technica ten
arts is the only thing they'll
kill bed bugs there are some pet
products
that are are exempted there are
You know the there's would
that's already been treated with
neonicotinoids that they use in
construction or building or in
homes that's extent that
so.
See if I'm getting any.
Age fourteen so it is page
fourteen and.
This spring releasing depositing
aplik cation by licensed
applicator for use in commercial
agriculture on crops not
pollinated by insects
completely exempt from the
restrictions that goes with the
senator Sanchez comments drugs
use intended for pet care for
the reddit reddit K. to
controller medication care sites
are posted mystic animals exempt
products use intended for
ratification controller
medication of lice or bed bugs
exempted drugs use is intended
for indoor use or outside around
formations and other parts of
structures to replicate control
or mitigate yes that's exempt a
wooden preservatives pesticide
or wood preservative products
that contain neonicotinoids last
as decides similar or similar
pesticide used to treat with
drugs that's exempted
the blooming are flowering plant
plant materials Garcia is
clearly and conspicuously labels
as having been treated with
neonicotinoids last pesticide
and includes a description of
the risks to pollinators and
other non target organisms
that's allowed so we want to we
want to make sure that the the
nurseries and the folks selling
this label them but you know
just reset their layout
So.
And the amendment that the
suggestion and came in the
opponents we took care of that
in the amendment so this starts
on page fourteen would be it
follows two pages of these
exemptions and the paragraph
that we've put in to the
beginning of that is.
For the purposes of this
subsection and this is the
department looking at these a
naked for our class has to sites
for the purposes of this
subsection neonicotinoid class
pesticide shall not be
designated as restricted use
pesticides unless they are
designated as such by the US EPA
so all of that that I just read
that can be allowed to use
pesticides and certainly with
that and if the if they are a
designated as restricted by EPA
that's different but otherwise
those are your exemptions I
probably said wait too much
right.
Chairman so I really appreciate
it because you know I as someone
who has enjoyed very much for
the last seven or eight years
you're raising a lot of my own
food honestly and that's one
thing I'm gonna mess with the
the amount of work that went
into it was slow too much for my
health the the you know so you
know that's I I was always very
careful about one I used because
I realize how important bees
were and I actually had a
neighbor to two doors down who
had beehives and so yeah we
would work together to make sure
that their bees were safe and
that we will make sure I sprayed
at times when the bees were out
if that was something that might
affect them
And so I think that that's
something that's important so
there was a question on the
exemptions that was brought up
that says the department may be
granted that is left to the
discretion of the department did
we change that the amendment.
So Mister chairman we did not
but we did much better than that
we put in what the Act
Department sets if you put this
in then they can't
You know new nicotinamide class
pesticide shall not be
designated as restricted use
pesticides unless they are
designated by the US EPA so they
don't really have a lot of
leeway here and they.
You know they.
They take care of agriculture
and I just think they're one of
our best agencies the way
they've worked with me over the
years so I think that that
amendment that they asked put is
much better than than changing
the maybe pile shall.
Get put in the reason why they
can't do it.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator appreciate that and and
the yeah I think the amendment
was really important to the
bill.
To protecting ag industry I mean
you know.
If we're not careful we're going
to make it were no industry can
survive in New Mexico with our
little changes to law here in
there and I don't think we want
that I don't think we want to
get rid of you know every
industry in the state to where
we all have to rely on things
being shipped in from out of
state your vote cons and Chiles
are two of our largest.
Drops in the state of New Mexico
effect I was surprised to find
out how huge proponents were you
you said that that that this
doesn't affect current crops
I I've never grown grown so I
don't really know how they're
living process works for
realization process works
I think that I I have a better
understanding of the bill it's
getting late
one of the things I I hate in
these situations
is I I wish we had an expert
that can really speak from the
Act industry instead of just the
advocates of the bill
there and we give them one
minute
and it really doesn't give us
enough time the specially with
the online like the US in the
situation that we're in we're we
can really hear from the
industry besides the text
messages that we keep getting
as to what is going on with the
bill I would love to hear
conversation and and to help
them more of all
Yes it's not a problem senator
Sanchez if you can please mute
your line thank you.
Thank you.
we have Representative Lewis on
I believe from department of
that we have we have the red
blue on.
If you would like to request
very on.
Yes.
This is here.
Thank you Mr chairman Mr will is
what what is the concern from
the agon Destry around the this
bill and as the.
As for it from being from the
ACT Department you know we're
we're you at on how this might
affect the crops that we have.
Mr chairman and committee
members.
Senator Brandt lists Mexico
department of agriculture the
department stays neutral on the
bill so all state that first on
this regarding agriculture in
general.
The bill as Senator Stewart has
stated it has reserves of the
uses of the bill for the vast
majority of agriculture there is
the restriction that they will
be have to be licensed for but
to the general.
Reserve the availability of it
for the majority of the crops up
in the state.
And again the ones that are are
restricted from the state the
five thousand acres or so that
Senator Stewart is as brought up
will have to find alternatives
for the products on their I
think in general the the
position as that of the
possibility of losing a tool in
the toolbox which has been
brought up by some of the people
in agriculture for those areas
but in this case that that total
is being preserved
to the extent that the it'll
meet the intent of the bill.
So Mister Lewis Mr chairman
school us is there any concern
about the US it affecting our
our our largest crops our state
I think all of us have fought to
protect our our Chilean or or
const but we have other crops in
the state is there any concerns
about being able to protect them
and what other pesticide besides
these neo they get to know aids
is effective.
Out of control in past with
these cross.
Mr chairman and committee
members Senator UP excellent
questions.
the deal next have been proven
to be very efficacious is can
somebody harder and sex the
cattle and agriculture and those
are the second sex the aphids as
you probably know from from
previous experience and so forth
on it there are alternatives
that are coming up within the
ranks of the pesticide world
there are a couple of them that
are available right now on their
but again within agriculture EPA
has taken steps and so the
growers of the state to.
Try to maintain the neo Nicks
within commercial agriculture by
following labeled
recommendations that EPA as
required to be put on the.
In terms of not spraying rubies
are present providing all sorts
of warnings are General Mills
labels the commercial
agriculture has on that and I
think in a few studies that
we've done in the state
regarding your next and you've
heard up John play showed visit
with you about
Cultural role and and the and
the impact that it's had on
visas been very minimal on those
commercial hives that are
judged.
So I think agriculture is done a
good job and I think Senator
Stewart recognizes that in her
bill by allowing these these
products to be used.
Thank you Mr chairman Mr Lewis
has there been any studies or
any signs of near naked to noid
residue in beehives in our state
do you know.
May Mr chairman and committee
members Senator that the
department has run a few studies
in cooperation with the
beekeepers the the non
commercial beekeepers recently
by taking samples of wax and so
forth from the bees and hives
and so forth.
I am not detected any meal makes
in those times I think the one
thing to point out again that
that's only from the.
Managed bees and not the native
all images and so.
Thank you.
Mr Lewis Mr chairman I really
appreciate that I have learned a
ton about.
Pollinators in the last several
years from my own experience and
I will tell you that I don't
know if there's anything to get
rid gets rid of a fits in the
state but they are the biggest
thing about my existence I
couldn't get him off of my
teacher neighbor cut trees I
couldn't get him off of my
lettuce in my garden and they're
just a little stubborn thing in
the state I think I I've tried
everything on them and and I
kind of gave up in the end it
just said whatever I guess we'll
have to co exist I even tried
going out and buying lady bugs
and from the.
That did nothing
The I I've never seen the state
we're we have so many aphids are
I guess they like the dry
climate or something so thank
you I appreciate the the answers
to the questions I think that
helped me a lot
I do think we need to a little
more research the see what the
effects is in our state of this
and my concern is that we really
don't have anything that's
effective to replace it
and it I don't know what you do
because we have to eat and I
will tell you I grew up in the
in the farming community of Las
bond Yost California.
If anyone wants to look it up
yes there is a town lost in
California called the toilet
and you know so and it is the
farming area of the state of
California and the pesticides
that we used back then.
Those were dangers.
and we have really come a long
way when it comes to pesticides
in our country and so it
concerns me that we're taking
this the step without really
fully knowing and without really
seeing affected our state
we've we've we've done the
research on the highs and
haven't seen any residue that I
don't know how we can make the
claim the cause and effect
wanting us to be careful because
in fact the state that this is
killing off or be population
when we're not actually seeing
any evidence in the hives.
Of these neonicotinoids I think
is a stretch thank you Mr
chairman thank you Sir sure
percent.
Thank you to the senator from
was my nose and we'll go now to
Senator Kernan.
Well thank you Mr chairman and I
think my questions were answered
by Senator Brandt when he asked
about replacement I'm not sure
what
what we will replace this with
and at some point could that be
also listed as a danger to the
B. to the B. population so this
is for Mr Lewis with the
department and I think you
stated that you really have not
done significant studies on
whether this particular
pesticide has damaged the
population so do you have any
evidence
at all that that that has
occurred in New Mexico to this
point.
Mr chairman and committee
members Senator regarding your
next Pacific late we have not
picked it up and the hires at
this point in time that we have
been sampling.
Thank you Mr chairman and I have
one other question for you I
think I heard something about
rulemaking and with regard to
rulemaking at did I hear that
I'm do you take public comment
or
is that a land when you develop
rules from your particular
department.
Mr chairman and committee
members Senator.
Again with the department of
agriculture my experience with
New Mexico department of
agriculture the secretaries of
that have always worked with
industry that they feel that
there needs to be a will in
place with that are secretary
Seneal always directed us
towards working with them and
then developing the role and
then working from that point on
so for so we've always been and
an agency that is always taken
to heart with the industry as
wanted and and look at with
respect will make.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for that so going forward as
rules are developed with regard
to this particular bill should
it pass then there would be an
opportunity for we heard a lot
of input today and it's
concerning to me I want to make
sure that they're heard going
forward although and if this
bill passes potentially many of
their concerns more not be
addressed through the rules
because that will have been
addressed through the bill so
that's what happened thank you
very much.
Thank you Senator Kernan I just
want to be respectful senator
Sanchez I saw your hand up for
quite awhile did you you were up
again did you have any other
questions.
Mr chair now down okay thank
thank you very much okay it's
it's down Senator Griggs.
Thank you Mr Mr chair and and
Madam pro tem the.
The amount of acres I guess it's
in Mallon's in and out as bad
about that five thousand five
hundred acre numbers at is that
right yes Mr chairman.
Okay so show if we if we were to
pass this bill.
What kind of pressure side what
would they use.
In order to in order to protect
their crops from pests would be.
Some worse would it do we have
something better do we didn't
really even know why gash that.
Because.
I mean that's fifty that's fifty
five hundred acres out
Albuquerque's way way bigger
than been even that there can be
you know they could be more
sayings in Albuquerque killing
bees then then these guys using
that on their own Malinche down
around demi.
Of I don't.
I don't I don't.
No.
The way that that this is going
to have the impact that you want
by putting these guys that have
there's have a melons
particularly either either out
of business for driving their
costs way I don't really know
that so I'd I'd like for you to
to tell me and basically tell
them.
Mr chair madam pro tem how they
can maintain their their crops
and what it is that they can do
to to maintain their business.
All Mr chairman and senator
creeks there are plenty of other
things to use besides the
nicotine arts you just heard
Brad Lewis say that they're even
developing more and there's some
that you can now I certainly
will never buy no that's grown
with neonicotinoids me these are
this is food you know this is
food that we're all eating of
that's impacted by pollinators
so
and I Mr chairman if I could
also have make coat away in on
this issue of what to do with
other
pesticides.
This coach.
Mr chair members of the
committee I want to say this is
it this is very very complicated
and I appreciate that difficult
conversation that we're having
because our crops are so
important to first I just want
to thank you all for being so
thoughtful
on the issue of alternatives
every creating every crop is
very different but we're looking
you know when when we're talking
about residential uses for staff
easiest here a lot of companies
have already removed any annex
from their products there's
still some out there hold out
but clearly you can be using
residential products that don't
have unix we're not gonna be
taking away every tool in the
toolbox that's out there I
myself hope that homeowners are
going to be using a chemical
that actually can be looking at
deeper smarter solutions to
avoid the use of these chemicals
but that the alternatives are
out there there was a question
about the fact are those
alternatives are potentially
going to have risk of their own
yes that's exactly why we invest
in our extension services and
others to be finding the
smallest miss more solutions but
when we're talking about our
health we're talking about our
pollinators in the unix R. have
multiple strikes against them is
a good idea to taking these off
the shelves so that's the
residential piece in ag there
are also other up options out
there there's a number of newer
systemic insecticides that are
that are on that are on the
market in moving through you're
right though it isn't always
easy and it's not easy for
growers have gotten used to
something to make a switch so we
but the we do need to start
making steps recognizing the
risks of these management they
are so long that they are so
significantly toxic and they are
so and.
And they are so commonly used so
just.
At some mentioned hides I just
have to mention I so appreciate
the department of ag for doing
the hive study and but they
looked at wax New Mexico it's
are water soluble they bind to
water wax is going to repel it
is Linda felt like in fact the
the study the came back actually
the lab actually stated you're
not gonna find unix because
they're going to be in the water
they're not going to be one
lacks that's not a good
indicator of if you these are
being exposed or not the also
the thing to look at is the
level that they were looking at
they're looking in the parts per
million which sounds really
small one part per million
should be really small amount to
to find that chemical in that
high but actually these are
chemicals that are toxic at much
lower levels in most studies are
looking at lower levels to see
if they can find these
neonicotinoids at this lower
harmful levels so just I don't
think that the state that we
have currently rules out the
fact that our bodies are being
exposed.
And so many other sites our
native bees are around all year
long there in the ground it
doesn't matter the spring April
your you can still potentially
expose them but.
I hope I answered some of the
questions.
Mr chair and and and etcetera
and and an expert you know.
You you venture to the best we
can but you know for those guys
it's important that fifty five
hundred acres here you have
entered a very well at all.
The and so what what I'd like to
do is it's real quick Mister
chairs asked Mr Lewis what it is
they they can do to help these
guys in damning or in the in the
thank you Sally where they grow
melons and other stuff as well
on how they can Dan.
Better prepared for you know in
a lot of ways the coming
apocalypse.
Mr Lewis.
Mr chairman and committee
members Senator brothers
department of agriculture yes
they could always have been.
A valuable tool for those five
thousand.
when we have been asked about
alternatives to those when we
have screened of the data sets
and so forth we have come up
with at least one new chemistry
of privatizing which probably
could be use the product is
relatively new so I cannot tell
you if we have the expertise and
the experience the chairman of
the to a direct replacement for
the media making knowledge on
that the other issue with the
other crops is they'll find that
any replacements for the meal
next will be quite expensive for
them if they're going to use any
of the in your neck of your IT
industry has the sides I think
the bank of remember with those
those smaller crops is that that
that inmates have been have been
popular because of the price
they're no longer protected in
terms of their chemistry so
they're available on what's
called the gray market and so
the price is very cheap or so
probably there the main issue is
going to be the increased cost
for the alternatives.
Mr Senator Griggs if you just
hold for just one moment please
and and madam pro tempore you
for your patience so I just you
know when you're vice chairman
of the committee gets to all the
super popular stuff the chair
informed me that we will be
stopping after this bill so I
didn't want to hold up all the
other folks that are waiting and
I I sincerely appreciate it we
will be rescheduling everything
here to Saturday for the
chairman thank you very much
thank you very on the Senator
Griggs.
And the and thank you Mr Mr
chair I appreciate that and I
you know I don't and I don't
intend to ask of you know a
whole lot more because I believe
I believe we've got we've got to
the to the crux of the issue is
that
You know there's a there's a
dispute somewhat about the fact
that there's.
This pesticide is is harmful to
to be used in New Mexico.
And or more harmful than the
climate should ban the drought's
been different things are crazy
challenges for all all things in
New Mexico the last few years so
I don't I don't really know what
I I do know that you know the
people that I've got calling me.
Are telling me to support this
bill they're telling me that
they're in that you know that
this bill is not helpful to them
and I just think that you know
for the department of ag you
know can help these guys out
then I think it's going to be
very important that they do
because when when we take this
approach which basically seems
to have excluded those people
that do that and
Mr chairman and madam pro tem
and I hope that's wrong but it
but it certainly appears that
you know the people who were
directly involved with some of
this in those communities were
excluded from the process of
being able to find information
to hello this was going to
affect that.
And.
You know Mr chairman.
We.
Mr Mr chair and and settlement
program which is kind of hard to
go look those people in the act.
When they say what you're doing
is is destroying their business
so Mister Mister chair madam pro
tem experts I appreciate all the
all the discussion tonight.
Thank you senator Rick Madden
pretend that you have some
comments so follow.
But I don't know do you have any
other questions I think just but
you were trying to respond when
I was we we did meet with people
we've been working on this for
at least eight months and
Department of that also brought
them together so I I know the
concerns everybody's afraid of
change you know they just wanted
to do things the same way
they've always done it I think
this is a health issue I think
it's an environment issue I
think it affects our food our
our waters are ground so I think
it's important that we try to
restrict it which is why brought
the bill.
Thank you very much Madam pro
tem I see the chairs back he did
have his hand raised virtually
empty get robot Fund.
And and take your somebody's
back now Mr chairman.
And I did announce Mr chairman
the the the scheduling change to
Saturday thank you okay I
appreciate that thank you vice
chair and
Was Senator Kernan less or less
or who is that hi everyone it's
spoken except for you Sir okay
all right thank you thank you a
just a question madam pro tem of
is for Mr Lewis
What will your Department be
able to implement.
This legislation
Just returned from a regulatory
perspective I know we've heard a
lot.
You know from the.
Or our farmers or growers and so
forth so.
You can answer that appreciate
that.
Mr chairman and committee
members of.
Excellent question no doubt
there will be some challenges
and regulatory aspects of this
bill just because the popularity
of the neo next and the
widespread availability of them
through the internet and so
forth.
I think we will be able to
manage the regulatory aspects of
it with the intent of the bill
it may not be a hundred percent
but I think it is manageable.
Okay
You know it's interesting you
know because you know we heard
from a.
On both sides I know I'm getting
a lot of emails and and so forth
of.
In the testing of the beast the
the decline in and people are
saying that you know that's not
really happening.
What are other issues that might
affect or effect in our B.
populations.
besides the.
The N. word I can't even
pronounce indignity NYC that
connected to.
I got close to Brett.
I tried.
Also Mr Chairman climate change
is certainly impacting you know
all our flora and fauna
so and there's there's other
viruses that affect them
so that the science on the
neonicotinoids is very clear.
And then you you heard it may
say that if you're looking in
the wax you're looking in the
wrong place so
I don't think that
neonicotinoids are are different
in New Mexico than they are in
other places it it just affects
the entire environment you also
heard on may say they they get
everywhere in the plant pollen
that stem the route cetera
Minnesota just did a huge study
on their gear and they found
neonicotinoids in the liver of
their your population.
A huge percentage of them so
it's a it's a long lasting of
chemical and it's dangerous to
plant life.
And animals.
I appreciate that thank you I I
think I.
No we we all want our clean air
clean environment.
Of.
You know the good good food to
eat and I know.
My folks a we've been growing
the.
You know our crops for thousands
of years and I don't think I we
heard any of these you know
that's the size of a we use and
so forth and we found ways to to
do and of course you know with
more sustainable us you know
more more a sustainable
agriculture as opposed to you
know.
Of bill making to a business or
enterprise out of it and so
forth but the.
I know there's a lot of work and
I know it's a you know I'm glad
that the specific focus
in terms of of what it's doing
and so with that the.
Appreciate the debate I think we
heard a lot of a.
Of of discussion on both on both
sides and I hope that we can do
the right thing without making
sure that we protect our partner
the same time and not to harm
our our our our our chili you
know or or are already green
and so forth but I wanted to be
a question of the past the but
the certainly I I think we
understand the situation and so
forth so with that
Committee of what is the
pleasure of the committee like
to motion for do pass Mr chair
we'll just by Senator house
House.
Goldman.
Of late the previous April.
Rant no ma'am.
No.
Senator Hamblen yes we're Hickey
yes Senator how to meal yes.
Senator Kernan no.
Senator Sanchez no Senator
Tallman.
Yes Senator Wirth yes Senator
Padilla.
Yes Senator Shendo.
Yes.
The seven four.
Seven four four in opposition.
Okay thank you madam pro tempore
of a depressive for thank you
thank you so much thank you to
everyone in the committee.
Thank you members of the
committee we will have a good
night rest and we'll see on the
floor tomorrow.
At eleven we'll continue on
Saturday.
Mr chair do you know what time
on Saturday I believe we will do
the afternoon I know that the
folks with the on the cannabis I
will give a little bit more time
hopefully you can a few more
hours Saturday morning and then
the I'm thinking of maybe about
one o'clock on Saturday that way
and then I think we're gonna
have a floor session start at
five of you is a good four hours
okay thank you Mr Mr Chairman
ring to get the Majority Leader
to work with me and we'll just
bring our own cannabis bill
since I don't like those other
ones are gonna work together so.
It
that earlier years now you know
we we keep dry and we just can't
can't seem to get it right but
in order to work on it
the WYO.
Mr chair stay tuned Senator
Brandt.
All right thank you committee
members of unite.
And thank you.
And I thank you.
Good night many.
When I go.
