Move the amendment thanks for
discussions.
so make sure we got this right
so I knew.
Us this point two two six of six
point two cent taxes and
transferred to a Tatian
Committee amendment to house
taxation and revenue committee
subject about the five forty
seven as a metaphor discussion
groups but I could have just
been informed that there's no
sound on the webcast at the
moment okay so we'll take a
pause take a pause give you a
chance to read through
everything this is we get
notified that there is something
in the bill.
That
is a strong for commission.
It's more screws and bolts in
the.
And.
This
is.
All orders.
Okay.
Okay for some reason what costs
all right so we are reporting
this so it's still will be able
to be documented and so we're
going to go ahead and resume at
this time because we just as
like all of us were we're in a
time crunch now so let's go
ahead etcetera etcetera thank
you we need a movie that we need
to a motion I mean the most we
need a second I'm not no okay
there's a motion to discuss the
amendment had etcetera etcetera.
K. so for students summary of
the
Committee substitute
Me amendments to house technical
committee so for those two five
forty seven.
Of.
Increases
The amount of specialties
adopted a child tax credit.
Of this Senator Gallegos.
Senator provided compacts go to
for school supplies purchased by
public school teachers.
On renewable energy side created
your thermal electricity
generation income tax the job of
the cruise of the generation
corporate income tax credit G.
R. T. income tax deductions well
Joe thermoelectric generation
facilities construction costs
eliminates of hold harmless.
Also of.
Senator sos legislation extend
your program cope Google the tax
credits increases the annual
aggravate caps on the credits
because the credit is refundable
amends the definition of
geothermal.
Program couple he comes for
credit reduces the cash to
million.
The additional.
increases the annual aggregate
cat an additional amounts of tax
credits amend certain
requirements to be eligible for
the credits the funds to Mexico
Film partners imposes a fifty
million cap on above the line it
provides additional five percent
reductions.
From the health area
This committee bill will serve
provide security deductions for
one third of receipts for
copayments and deductibles for
services provided by healthcare
professions practitioners and
associations of healthcare
practitioners.
centerpieces Senator for photos
of of four seventy five provides
your deductions for one thirty
seats for services provided by
counseling and therapy
practitioner.
The tobacco
Senator Hickey is bill imposes a
thirty one percent right the tax
rate on the liquid the
cigarettes are to this.
On the alcohol.
Uses a tax on certain local
Regis by five cents per serving.
Gross receipts this Senator Baca
Craig W. R. T. in compensating
tax deduction for die diesel
used for agricultural purposes
after reporting requirements.
The corporate income tax removes
a single sales factor.
Capital gains of social workers
will reduces the Mexico business
structure from forty to twenty.
On the G. R. T. deductions it as
of five years census to all
deductions.
Leave there is also a trigger
On the G. R. T. of if it falls
below is a ninety percent ninety
five percent.
So with that of Madam will stand
for questions.
Okay at this point we want to go
ahead and go to the any public
comment in my correct yes okay
so what we're gonna do is we're
going to for those in support of
this we're gonna be twenty
minutes
Senator Wirth will be timing
that twenty minutes total and
we'll try and keep it all
depending how many people here
in support of this.
One two three four five.
Okay
Then only twenty that if there's
anybody on soon.
Two one two two one soon so
madam chair anyone just
announced to the public that
we've heard all of these bills.
Before in committee so that's
why we're going straight okay
and for those of you on is the
zoom on the webcast so we have
heard all of the bills that are
being referenced here in this
budget presentation and we voted
on them and today is the summary
of all of that work from moving
bills from the committee to this
of this tax package so at this
point if we will it is for those
of you are in favor and we will
get to the people online if you
will go ahead and come up and
stand in between representative
Lente and senator Shendo just so
that their microphone can pick
you up will give you.
Half.
Right thank you madam chair
members of the committee
Sanchez my name is Camilla I
will then I director of the Rio
Grande chapter this year we
strongly favored the addition of
both geothermal tax credits into
the bill thank the house for.
Three climate Tax total
including all of the time the
tax credits for the session
we're so grateful after summer
of fire and flood the action
that you're taking at least
probably thank you.
Thank you.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee Rikki Lee
Chavez on behalf of eighteen T.
thank you to the sponsors of
this committee we appreciate the
work that the committee has done
with regard to single sales
factor that continue to support
our work in expansion here in
New Mexico we've invested almost
a hundred and fifty million in
our wireless broadband we also
through our partner with
FirstNet have built a nationwide
network that is specifically for
first responders for the last
five years eighteen TS provided
is dedicated wireless broadband
network for first responders and
other emergency personnel
specifically to New Mexico in
cases of wildfires and other
disasters in your support of our
company helps us support of
services so we appreciate that
and appreciate your work on this
tax package thank you thank you
thank you.
Madam chairman for yes madam
chair members the committee
Carrie Roberts with the medical
society we very much appreciate
the acknowledgement that our two
year TV issue is a little bit
unique and so we appreciate its
included in the amendment thank
you so much.
The child tax credit will
benefit three hundred fifty
thousand New Mexico kids in a
way that's proven to improve
childhood outcomes your prevents
in the lowincome comprehensive
rebate benefit those are
communities that need the help
most providing rebates for every
single New Mexico Family cutting
the gross receipts tax with
historic cuts the budget every
family every business in the
state thank you making really
common sense improvements in
corporate taxes that level the
playing field for businesses and
you know without said I would
just add that I think the work
that you all have done over this
past year over the many years of
the personal income tax
provisions for capital gains
provisions that were in the
original version of the house
bill that especially want to
give kudos to chairman Shendo
and chairman one day and senator
Wirth job worked so hard on
those are really key you know
capital gains as it came into
this committee this morning
legislative tax cut four hundred
sixty thousand New Mexico filers
and that's just a tiny bit more
for less than half percent five
hours in the state personal
income tax changes would have to
time more from just three point
seven percent filers you know
those things would go a long way
toward improving fairness in our
tax code to prevent racial
equity in our tax code and to
help us whether future revenue
down jurors whether they happen
in a few months some economists
predict or two or three years as
a history with project for us
but again strong support and
really appreciate the work comes
the thank you thank you.
for go owners want to know it's
my son of.
No my grant.
Thank you Representative
Bridget.
What.
Chair members of the committee
the gentleman.
We appreciate most about this
bill is the all this and you're
six your local governments.
The G. R. T. reduction helps
everybody that's really what we
push for want to dispute here to
reduction work everyone
benefits.
In other cities will protect
their revenue streams are
protected and we we can continue
to provide the services that we
all use every single that.
We appreciate that you look at
the data.
The data that we provided to the
committee on a city by city
basis for all of you and the
fact that we can now give you
individual impacts of
legislation.
In the listen to the fact that
the what's not.
Right the anti German you want
to create another call back
Hobbs the north largest cities
would not have been able to
absorb that hit.
We appreciate that the process
in the house.
I will tell you all of our
mayors and managers that came
the house tax.
What they left with is that they
were treated with respect chair
let date remember each city and
call them out one by one they
remember that they appreciate.
We also understand the road fund
we've been trying to do this for
years the priority the fact that
all of motor vehicle excise is
now going to the Rose.
To leave is a seventy five
twenty five split we support
that we understand the cost of
Romo for the state is much more
than locals.
We're Senators given take vocals
lose about twenty one million
dollars in this bill we
understand that there's always
given take affect this bill.
Anybody else here in the
audience.
We have those on soon as well go
ahead then you yourself about a
minute and a half to top.
These are folks who are in favor
of the bill.
Go ahead trials.
Chair members of the committee.
Yeah.
Thank you very very much for all
the.
The original bill handing them
a.
That
have.
Impacted so many more.
Including our students.
Cool.
They are engaged.
Also thank you for the.
Thousands of that could have.
On the other G. R..
Thank you for that.
Or this year for all people of
it as well as the three.
They will help Mexico.
Thank you very much thank you
Charles a lot.
This is a.
If you well you got a minute and
a half.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee my name is the
part of the registered lobbyist
for New Mexico as we stand in
strong support on tax bills and
we thank all of the.
Reports of harm next will help
our the members of our community
who needed in this thank you.
Thank you support anybody else
online that would like to speak.
Level Lois is survived this.
So your hand up we see this.
All right let's say you've got a
minute and a half.
Your the members of the it's
issue.
Many others have been thank you
for sale at three please.
They feel IT.
It could help you.
Do you still think thank you
all.
Thank you so much all right at
this point we will go to anybody
in opposition of this bill sure
your hands please okay.
we have to folks so if you will
go ahead and stand between the
teachers.
Morning Mr chair madam chair and
members of the committee I'm
Terry.
CEO for greater Albuquerque
chamber of commerce good morning
we appreciate so many things
about this legislation
particularly the G. R. T. right
regulate rebates personal income
tax reductions child tax credits
G. R. T. deduction helps health
practitioners and the absence of
New top income tax rates are
opposition this morning relates
to two important items.
When Mexico's capital gains tax
deduction was established and
set passed fifty percent it was
supported by Democrats
Republicans business and labor a
lot.
It was a priority of the
democratic government there's
been broad agreement in New
Mexico that we want to encourage
investment and savings it's good
for the economy at large and
it's good for average folks who
invested their retirements state
for the blind all state for a
child's education and so on
leading economists have called
taxed capital gains about the
most efficient source of tax
revenue in the economy we're
pleased with the amendment on
capital gains this morning but
we urge you to remove it from
the bill also we urge single
sales factor to be restored.
The last thing we want madam
chair members of the committee
is capital flight out of New
Mexico or to discourage state
and making investments here that
deduction was already reduced to
forty percent years ago we urge
the committee simply keep it
there thank you very much thank
you Terry.
For.
Madam chairman committee my name
is prince for for registered
lobbyists for enough and after
bush and my comments are focused
specifically on the increases
that are proposed for the liquor
excise tax the general package I
can appreciate the the sponsor
and all the work that went into
creating the tax package our our
issue is with the proposed
increases and we testified on
multiple bills this session
related to liquor excise tax
increases then also some of the
other legislation that talked
about creating using the funds
that are generated by the
correct size tax to try to
address responsible consumption
and iser bush's definitely in
favor of responsible consumption
in the state a large amount of
money now actually trying to
promote responsible consumption
we think that's a better
approach as opposed to an
increase in the correct sized
you heard various proposals we
think that's the better way to
go we stand respectful
opposition to the liquor excise
tax increases thank you thank
you Representative.
It would be online in opposition
okay will give you that he will
give me about a minute and half.
A little more.
Those are.
And she Albuquerque.
right unfortunately stand
opposition this bill we're
located in Canada.
Actor generation family business
out of business.
Albuquerque since nineteen
seventy six we have six
employees
Requires twenty five percent are
increases are expected is not
sustainable for us people will
just go to taxes for the middle
online reservations
so that being said I hope there
can be some sort of
is the cascade place for us
Thank you
this goes through
we're in transition.
Thank you.
Thank you madam anybody else in
line online state offices.
All right at this point let's go
to the committee.
Senator Wirth thank you madam
chair I'm happy to jump in
I guess I'm kind of like Terry
Cole a sense because there's a
lot of good things in this bill
that I like and there's some
things I think we could have
done better and I'm disappointed
you know I respectfully disagree
with with the position she has
on the you know the capital
gains were were I think the
house eliminated that with some
specific provisions for New
Mexico businesses yeah I'm also
disappointed that we didn't put
enough programs city at the top
of the income tax
again I realize it's a tough
environment to do those kinds of
changes but I've been here long
enough and every single
environments.
The good the bad and the ugly
and it's never easy to.
Programs in the in is important
what's different I guess for me
is that I really appreciate you
know that that some of the
advocates why no we're
disappointed stood up in support
of this bill I'm certainly and
support this bill because again
well there's things I don't like
in it things I think we would
have done differently I really
appreciate Mr chair of the work
both Mr chairs in the house of
the way this came across and I
understand the compromise
process and that's what happened
and and I respect that also this
committee again there's been a
an effort to have both sides and
but members on both sides
and discuss the different issues
you for that Mr chair and so the
end of the day we've got
something that's that's big I
think there's things in here
that.
All of us like and things here
we don't life but at the end of
the day you know for those of us
who are going to take a vote on
this I don't think you can vote
against something like this just
because there's one P. C. L. Y.
I mean that's the impact that
this will have a gentleman that
create you recognizing I mean
this is I think the biggest tax
package we've done eight years
here and it's really gonna help
Mexicans and you know the
progressivity in the path of the
child tax credit is something we
should be incredibly proud of
and and that originate the house
I think we need to give us
credit for that and then this
also has a rebate which I think
in the in the discussion with
the amount of revenue we have
that need to be part of the
discussion and we again it's a
compromise it's not the number
that Senator Shendo started with
and if the governor wanted and
it's not the number that came
out originally out of your
committee chairman and again
this is the part of a compromise
that goes back and forth but at
the end of the day I I just
think this.
Tax policy is incredibly
important to kind of drive our
our values we talk about the
budget being a value document
this is also value documents and
again I think we come up with
something that is a.
That is a good bill I'm gonna
vote for it and I feel good
about going for it but I did
want to say that there still and
again you have that conversation
gentleman left eight and again I
know you know these are these
are the top things in this
environment I'm respectful of
that as well so again I think we
come up with a compromise and I
plan to support thank you madam
chair thank you senator Wirth
Senator Kernan thank you and
have we've had conversations but
previous big tax bill house bill
six years ago.
I remember that that that I
supported that not a single
Republican it didn't have to go
back in and actually Defense
Monsanto and and I did on in
most cases but then there are
some areas that bill that of
course is many of you know have
come back in and been a real
problem for my particular area
that you know that's history and
we have to move forward but
there are things in this bill
that outline and certainly
appreciate the chair from our
perspective the things that you
added that that we have
appreciated in that we can say
these are good things and then
of course there are always a
sense of that are very difficult
for for me to support and in the
course number one I think the
capital gains issue and
I think we talk about small
businesses and then we also have
very large businesses in over
time I think we're going to come
back and find it some of those
extra large businesses have the
opportunity to make structural
changes and how they do this and
I.
It would be interesting to see
down the road the for five years
hello some of those very very
large corporations and how they
restructured and the shifting to
other states and I think that is
it really worth it maybe is my
point I think most of the first
of all small businesses and
I think that.
You know as a person who was all
business on for many many years
just recently sold my business.
You know I had to to learn what
that impact is even under
current law but that's committee
and and that's just part of it
but I think going forward for
the C. C. an impact not only on
the small businesses there was
place the use and then I think
we're gonna see some losses with
the corporations restructures
just a big family situations
that are going to have the
ability to.
you know in the forest in Texas
and
I think that many states are
similar to ours in the fact that
we get so much more revenue from
fossil fuels and the we all
acknowledge that we know that
other states that also are in
that category actually a
reducing taxes are not raising
taxes and and that's going to be
another interesting scenario to
watch as we go forward here we
are state with just found
revenues and we're kind of taken
some some places where we think
it's appropriate for whatever
reason to rise taxes and I I
just think it's in such a bad
message and I wish we could have
had a had a bill that
just off we've got revenue don't
need additional revenue the
shifting of those dollars from
general fund to particular
purpose was totally support the
the excise tax and also the
other types it go to the fund to
help alleviate the problems
created by some of these these
these issues that.
Appreciate that the reduction in
the other areas I think that was
really a good compromise that
speaks to the fact that that
people are willing to compromise
and pass appreciate that
just
thinking about you know I keep
coming back to cigars in that
field has are just.
In high I don't understand that
because initially the whole
issue with the tobacco was that
are young people are young
people are we want to protect
them and we do in the banking is
you know that's part of the law
that the cigars smoking scholars
and I'm telling you that you
would be probably a minor visor
fits into change that just
doesn't make sense to me and I'm
sure there were some
negotiations that went on
between and among maybe some of
the tobacco companies and the
cigars Act I don't know what
happened there that make this
the part of this bill but I
guess I'm just a little
disappointed in that but overall
you know we I have trouble voted
for tax increases but I do
appreciate
the ways that people work
together and and I think that
there were some good things put
in this bill and and perhaps
some things that I certainly
cannot support but I do
appreciate thank.
Senator X..
Thank you madam chair and Mister
chair Mister chair of.
So this.
For everybody that's been
involved in the in the the great
part of this process you know I
yes you know I have great
respect for appreciate all the
work that you all the.
I would involved in the nitty
gritty for.
There's things in the I don't
know why are there I don't know
what to Rio have to do on the
capital gains.
I don't I don't understand that
I don't know why in some of
these things we did look at
other things and I have been
available if we feel like we
need to.
Your role consist of right.
one of the things which Senator
night were very surprised that
this year by the city of
Alamogordo Chicago more repealed
their largest.
And we appreciate your and you
immediately she that you know
you don't need it.
Sure sure.
But saying Mexico doesn't have a
lot.
More stable.
Which is paid a lot of people
who are you.
And so when you look at things
like let's raise taxes on full
force that you know.
But you're unwilling to
consider.
Maybe Dawn.
I don't live in your community
that that makes sense to me.
So
That spent one of those those
deals that I I think the.
I think the pipe could have been
bigger and what we look at.
And it gaps focus on things that
we have in place all right.
Show less iterations which
characters with racial slurs.
And I think sometimes H. that
short sighted and H. short
sheeting.
Your your state community by by
doing that
we missed out to me.
On a on an opportunity sure
words I've been on him.
On this particular issue.
But.
We've got a oil and gas
Tax credit.
That would cautious four point
three million dollars to make
cash nearly four hundred dollars
and I mask comes from Alamogordo
and from New Mexico state.
But if.
Very in cost and four hundred
million revenue even my New
Mexico made a map can figure
that out.
So that's that's a concern to me
that we chose to ignore that
which also about your democratic
colleagues I'll tell you it was
an opportunity.
For you to show that the oil and
gas industry report to.
And by leaving it out you miss
that opportunity.
As about quit talking about it
but
The.
The.
The leader changes.
I wish I understood exactly
because it looks to me like the
simple way to deal with that is
you've got a tax on liquid.
And if you think you need to be
different.
Rage the tax raise the
percentage on that tax dollars
go through here like you did a
iterations but you did staff on
alcohol by.
The volume is alcohol in the
staff you may be more difficult
to manage.
You have to decide.
So I I appreciate that work
that's been done and I
appreciate that I think that
that could have been done use
your shameful.
But maybe not maybe not the.
I would gauge in those
discussions and I couldn't find
the input that maybe I would
like to.
show.
That that to me is the is some
of the some of the things you
know in the bill
I am concerned this.
That that captain.
Does the which will.
I'm concerned that that's going
full of people that you don't
really want or.
And.
I I think that we need to talk
about.
We need to find out why we're at
twenty instead of for the why we
don't need to be thirty or why
we don't need to be fixed.
I don't.
Again I would engage with that
so I don't know
I don't have those.
Who we think we're going to get
that for.
Who is your current which got a.
Who is she is going to be costly
measures.
Hello I'm a wider church next
door right.
Actuals.
Show it's not a it's not one of
those things we think about
additional.
Corporation.
That capital gains.
Creatures called.
Show
madam chair those my comments I
I can't tell you move over Elon
disappointed insurance things
and and I.
Appreciate the work Senator
Wirth is no issues on eighty
four not a fund here's
people white parts of it
Representative.
For the last year account opened
centers with Representative I
know you get also your.
And I'm proud of the fact that
you tried to financial solutions
she calmed down I'm writing nice
kind letter to former government
retention your position
but the other other than that.
Match all it's a it's a
monumental the.
I'm proud of the work that
you've done.
Sure sure sure sure for sure for
and our I wish more pollution
more share of that is the.
Thank you Senator Griggs anybody
else with it.
Sierra.
Shares
Two of Representative in the
center for the work on this so
this tax bills jumpstart our
economy all.
And explained.
Okay this is a.
Are we.
send faxes to every year the
greater.
Follow the
The alliance brings in experts.
And they tell us what we do in
our economy.
And they all agree that the.
We have
Hi from our schools the lack of
skilled.
force and.
For the.
So.
The.
Anywhere from the New Mexico
chamber of commerce.
About this
The most important issues why
businesses select the site.
You have to go all the way down
to number six before taxes the
highway accessibility number one
availability of skilled labour
to recall three quality of life
for I construction because.
And then the taxes for the city
manager these thousands of.
This has surveys taxes were.
Number five six seven.
So taxes alone are probably
about the problems of our.
In New.
So
we have.
That they should rex New Mexico
Santo Domingo number twenty
five.
Hello on property taxes and so
on P. I. T. and.
Hi and that here to the fortune
we we've we've lowered that so
now are people think audio to
lower the taxes to regulation G.
you gonna be on easy street that
simple taxes over rated.
For the reasons just.
The body thanks this is not just
our economy the wrong vote for
this bill we got a lot of
problems thank you Mr chair.
With the message thank you very
much built.
Carryover from last night.
anybody else in the committee.
Center were so Madam I frankly
think to both sides to to pass
on the Senate first on the
Senate amendments the gentleman
Jack I'm sorry if I may madam
chairwoman of that committee
members.
I appreciate the session this
morning I appreciate being
invited to present the house
version of the income tax of the
tax bill as as I look at the
synopsis of what you're
amendments what will do to the
to the house's version of it and
I look at the I think we all
receive this this
Synopsis but in any event
In FY twenty three twenty
something that this is five of
public that that that ex that I
created and looking all my
papers like they create this or
did complete.
I I created this but in any I'm
looking at the numbers now and.
In FY twenty three twenty four.
The cost of this would be one
point two nine billion dollars
which is ninety one point three
million dollars higher than the
house bill that was sent over
now with with the amendments and
out years FY twenty five plus.
It looks like it's going to be
seventy five point six million
dollars higher than than than
the house bill that was sent
over and I'm looking at and the
taking notes as to what was
changed or what may be proposed
to be changed and love love the
things that that are represented
here
income tax deduction for school
supplies and if that's an
amazing this special needs child
red is is amazing
you know I I I looking at
capital gains and and the
reduction from forty to twenty
percent I I share with the
senator Gramm that and I'm
wondering what what why that was
changed to maybe generate six
million dollars to the general
fund
question question that one thing
I I do question is.
In regards to the liquor and
tobacco taxes in which.
All of these increases now go to
the general fund and not to any
prevention fund and and I think
that was the initiative that the
house and over that.
For alcohol for instance it was
going to go to the W. I. grant
funds to the alcohol harms
Haitian fund to help those that
are played with these issue that
plagues our state right and and
now it's going to go to the
general fund and and I I I look
further into this discussion and
the amendments made to it and.
I I I've I've been in in our
committee very open and
transparent it regardless of
party affiliation on wanting to
go to garner the support that's
why you have a a bipartisan
supported tax package on this
side now and the reason and how
we were able to do that that I
was inclusive of every single
member of our committee not to
say that you were Mr chairman
but that the the way that we
were able to do that was
because.
I included them in discussions
and and to your point center
grades up I I want to make sure
that as we move forward with
this and if this is an
amendment.
I respected the legislative
process in regards to how bills
got into our tax package meaning
that when early on in the
process.
A discussion was had and and and
a question was made to me
personally as to how with hello
with how will things end up
being here on this tax package
can the administration to send a
message down and get things into
the package and I said no.
I said that every single bill
that we will have in this tax
package must be a standalone
bill run through the entire
process the legislative process
one that I respect and and I'm
and I'm wondering now with was
seeing fail as part of this tax
package and I look at the cost
of this in out years of of of
seventy million dollars per year
to the general.
And I'm wondering are we taking
money now from.
Liquor and tobacco from those
from those outside off harms
funds that we initially wanted
to dollars to go to by passing
that going to general fund to
help.
That money to this film and I'll
have to be honest with all of
you is that that that that
concerns me a lot as one
legislator here as one house
member that's outnumbered by
Senator at this point but at the
same time it's going to be a
tough you have to bring this
back to to to to my committee
into our chamber to say.
These are the changes and.
For all the reason that tax.
Of that film tax credits
provides I don't know if if if
if they would be able to get
that but they would understand
where I'm coming from in regards
to the complexities but yet the
simple notion of transparency
being communicative and open
regarding the process and how
respect that process so that's
where I met those with my simple
statements in regards to what I
see in your changes but none the
less respect this process and we
will go through the motions but
Mr chair Madam chairwoman Mr
Chairman
you know for for for all other
said that that's my initial a
reflection of the amendments
made thank you thank you
chairman datacenter or so as I'm
trying to support the vote in
the issue alcohol we address
what percentage is going the
general fund and what percentage
is going to the treatment
because I don't think it's
correct what you said about all
going to the general fund I
don't think that's a correct
statement so Mr Taurus
commuters.
madam chair and senator it is a
nuanced issue for sure there
there's a couple of issues at
play here in the house version
there was nothing going to the
general fund so it was all for
the treatment and the tax
increases a little smaller as
well and I believe in the Senate
amendments the increases larger
and so there is some going into
the general fund in the Senate
version that would not have been
in house version but there's
also still a checkpoint for
treatment as well so
there is a piece of the General
Fund amount all the Senate that
is not in the house there's
still some going to treatment
and and madam chair so what how
much money from the house
version was going to treatment
versus the Senate versions at
the end of the day yes there's
what twenty five million the
because the general fund but
based on the new alcohol tax how
much more money it's going to
treatment that was in the house
for.
Nine okay someone clears the
Senate version since more money
to treatment at the end of the
day based on the higher taxes
some so again I just want I want
to be fair and will be clear I
also want to say that you know
there was a lot of collaborative
work that's gone under the
interim and certainly the house
made changes to this bill that
were not completely discussed
with our side but I understand
the process and I respect that
but again this is where you got
to chambers full chambers have a
right to have inputs and and we
do things not always in the
exact same way and so I'm
respectful of that but I just
again I think that we've got
something here that that have
issues and and and we're gonna
need to continue the discussion
and that's that's how this
process works and so I just
again a respectful the chairman
again how are you done on your
side I also want to say that I
really appreciate what
passionate about this on our
side and it may not be exactly
the same this is a collaborative
process that involves both
chambers and of course we've got
to get the bills signed it
involves the governor as well
and so we certainly during the
session.
You know this is we're trying to
work through things I think we
have a chance to do stuff in
store here and and yes it may
involve some additional
discussions go forward and I
think we're willing to do that
but I just want to kind of lay
out from our side kind of weird
things were and you really
appreciate you and what you've
done appreciate Mr chair
Senator which is and I would if
you're ready next year I would
make a motion for to pass on
this first of the Senate
amendments I'm sorry I would be
at the center.
Thank you Mr chairman I'm sorry
I the the I also decided I
should go last even though I
need to be here so.
But
If we go back to the discussion
on the liquor tax so what have
we increased it to us well and
this and that but I think right.
During.
So we're not doing the volume
the way we currently have a.
That's not what was.
What was my understanding when
we all met together.
There's a lot of discussion and
I think this whole how it stacks
to.
Of this very complicated and and
so I think on the house side the
the just thought that it was a
fifteen percent increase per
current.
But you know by volume and so
forth so try to make it simple
so our our our amendment to the
awful is the.
The five cents per service.
The worst worst that acts State.
I am C. eight cents per litre.
Building that.
And then.
It is the.
Thanks for with this.
Chair and senator rand so the.
Have to follow along with you
but it is a five cent per
serving increase converted back
to the correct formula used with
neither meters down depending on
the product so there are
guidelines on how much serving
as an ounces depending on the
form of liquor and so we
calculated the five cents per
serving increase I got back to
be in readers are down depending
on the off.
That's a much larger.
Increase the.
But when I was involved sections
throughout that that's very
frustrating.
I thought that we were
collaborating together.
What comes here is not what we
discussed.
So.
I'm surprised as you are Mr
Chairman that it's not all going
to treatment.
that's one of the things that I
thought had a lot of bipartisan
support for is that the money
from those would not go.
The general fund we've we've
talked about for months
and the that all the liquor tax
would go.
Dealing with issues caused by
look.
And I'm with you I'm with you on
that we should all be going none
of speak going off.
And I'm sure there's a lot of
the things I ever have a chance
to look at the moment since that
was changed since we last met
probably a lot of things.
In order to look for a case for.
Senator Brandt with so much and
would you pass on the.
Two point two two six of over
six point two to house.
The house bill four.
The amendment on the minutes so
if you will please do a follow.
Senator Brandt no Senator grace.
Senator how to me.
Senator Kernan of Senator Lopez
yes senator Sanchez so.
Senator Tom yes Senator Wirth
yes Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Shendo yes we have five yeses
and for now.
So I to Florida state sixty
four.
Six point.
Six four the amendment passes
is.
Senator and moved to pass on
house taxation recipe subsidy
for House Bill five forty seven.
Voting on the bill as amended
you will please take roll
Senator Brandt no Senator right
now.
