So senator Clemente Senator
Brandt.
R. J..
Okay we have a quorum so we'll
go ahead and get started pleaded
in the.
Log on here pretty soon.
Of.
First one on the agenda we have
a Senate bill three small
business recovery act.
And we will turn over to Senator
Candelaria are you on.
Yes Mr chair good afternoon.
To you and to your Mr vice chair
Mister ranking member good
afternoon.
Senate bill three a re
authorizes the small business
recovery act emergency loan
program of two thousand and
twenty.
It re authorizes that program to
continue making very low
interest below market loans to
qualifying New Mexico businesses
in calendar years twenty twenty
one and twenty twenty two.
I want to discuss that the up
front Mr chairman how
appropriate as it is I think
this committee is looking at the
myriad of different
tools that will be required for
our state to really finance and
Dr and economic recovery as we
discussed earlier this week for
many firms even the lowest
interest loan makes no sense
those firms that have been shut
down for six months those firms
that have that have really been
eggs the
on fumes at this point taking on
additional debt doesn't make
sense but for many others it
does not explain why this bill
will be an important economic
tool as businesses and as
entrepreneurs begin to do
exactly what we need them to do
as soon as possible which is to
believe in the New Mexico
economy and to take risks to
make investments to expand their
business and to double down
their investments in the state
of New Mexico.
as many of you will recall the
original small business recovery
act legislation was authorized
for only one year and it
authorize the state investment
council to invest up to four
hundred million dollars into the
program we had approximately
forty million dollars that was
loaned under the program between
the spring of twenty twenty and
today that you may be asking
well why was there not as much
subscription or why was there
not more subscription
so my first observation is and
it leads to the first important
change that you'll see in this
re authorization bill is
broadening the universe of firms
that could potentially benefit
from this very low interest
below market financing I will
venture to stay out front Mr
chairman that the terms afforded
under the loan of this program
none of us I certainly would
provide in the private market
and fact most small businesses
unless you were super
capitalized would provide these
terms in the private market so
why are we providing this loan
program with below market terms
well because so many small
businesses so many firms have a
backlog of demand they've put
off making investments they've
put off expansion they've put
off making a lot of difficult
decisions and we don't want not
having access to credit to be
the issue that stops those firms
from taking full advantage of
our economic recovery.
And so originally when the
legislation was passed the only
businesses that could apply and
receive the funds where those
who could demonstrate a thirty
percent gross revenue decline in
both March and April of twenty
twenty after that time the
intent was to benefit only those
businesses that were directly
impacted by the public health
orders that shuttered them in
March and April as as some sort
of an attempt to get cash out of
the door.
As we've seen this pandemic
involved however and as time has
gone on I know that I as well as
senator Wirth Gavin cop in this
house
we've been getting a lot of
feedback from various business
to saying this is a great
program the terms of it are
excellent and will be an
important source of capital as
many businesses sort of dust
themselves off and stand up
again and think about growth we.
but the terms were too
restrictive so under the terms
of the revised Act we no longer
have the strict thirty percent
revenue decline in March thirty
percent revenue decline in April
of twenty twenty instead the New
Mexico business needs only to
demonstrate to the satisfaction
of the New Mexico finance
authority that they have under
gone of substance substantial
reduction in revenue or
appropriations due to the COVID
nineteen pandemic that is a very
large universe of New Mexico
small businesses entrepreneurs
and others who can and now
access this financing so I think
we responded to those concerns
in addition throughout the last
several months Mr chairman and
some of you on this call are
participating in that my office
convened a workgroup to
refashion an update this bill to
ensure that we are adequately
responding to the needs of
industry has this pandemic
unfolds again this isn't the
right bill for everybody this
isn't the right bill or rights
source of financing for everyone
but for those who it is how do
we make this work the best so I
would address your attention to
the FIR on page two there are
some corrections thank you to
make to the FIR is there's two
mistakes that I've counts so
first this legislation before
you extends the period of the
loans from from a fight from a
fixed five year term to up to a
thirty year variable term at the
discretion of NMFA.
The loan interest under the
original bill low interest began
to accrue immediately once the
loan was taken out
Under the rivet and the revised
bill before you
no interest and no payments will
be due for the first three years
of the loans life.
loans going to repayment in year
three and only then does
interest begin to accrue like
the original bill the interest
rate here is set at one half of
Wall Street prime that is the
interest the interest rate that
applies to the loan is that
interest rate that existed when
the loan was originated it
doesn't vary which is another
very attractive feature of this
loan
today one half of Wall Street
prime is one point six two five
percent and for the thousands of
New Mexico businesses were under
capitalized to are really small
who are really trying to make it
work
We do not provide one point six
two five interest rates
anywhere.
all the maximum amount allowed
under the loan originally it was
seven hundred fifty thousand we
took our marching orders from
our partners in industry who
said that that amount should be
at least a quarter for the
calendar year so the maximal
allowable amount increases from
seventy five thousand to one
hundred and fifty thousand in
addition the original version of
the bill Mr chairman only
allowed businesses to use the
loan proceeds funds for general
operations this revision however
looking forward to New Mexico's
future and as firms and all of
us hopefully I get into this
period where pent up demand
really takes our economic
trajectory from flat or going
slightly down to going upward
the the K. parts right of the
economic recovery.
We want to be able to show up in
support businesses who we're
going to be participating in
leading that fight and so in
addition to allowing businesses
to use loan proceeds for general
operating the river the re
authorization bill allows
businesses to cover capital
improvements that they have had
to make in light of the COVID
nineteen pandemic such as
putting in a patio plexi glass
others sort of assets or capital
improvements I will note that
firms can use this program as a
sort of gas as a source of debt
refinancing so for firms that
did already have to go out into
the market and take out loans to
finance that construction at
much higher rates they can now
come to the NMFA program
refinance and bring those rates
down.
In addition the revised bill
also allows businesses to spend
these load per loan proceeds and
invest them.
In assets that will improve and
grow the businesses he commerce
and sales capacity we know now
that e-commerce is an even
bigger part of our
transactional and commercial
lives even before the pandemic
and so this bill also puts a lot
of money on the table for
businesses who want to perhaps
develop a manufacturing facility
who need to buy new pieces of
equipment so that they can
increase their comic con a means
of scale.
As well.
Now in terms of the structure
and the fiscal implication this
is where I wanted to make the
correction.
the FIR suggests that if this
bill is passed there would be a
five hundred million dollar sort
of transfer from the severance
tax permanent fund immediately
in FY twenty one and place that
immediately into some sort of
fund managed by NMFA that is not
how this bill works as the
original bill contemplated in as
this bill works money is only
transferred from the severance
tax permanent fund to the loan
fund on an as needed basis
following a schedule that is
developed between NMFA and the
state investment council so much
like our other NMFA bills where
we authorize a maximum amount of
investment we follow that same
trajectory here so while this
bill authorizes over the next
two years a maximum of five
hundred million dollars to be
invested in this program that
doesn't mean five hundred is
going to be spent and it
certainly doesn't mean that five
hundred million dollars is going
to leave the severance tax
permanent fund all in one swoop.
The other issue I wanted to
bring up.
Is we also listen and I'll end
here with my comments with Mr
chair before I wrap up we also
listened intently to businesses
who wanted us to adjust the
definition of what constituted
in New Mexico on business I
think the definition in the
original bill was a bit more
restrictive than it needed to be
and so the definition of New
Mexico on business found in this
bill tracks Senate bill ten from
twenty nineteen the small
business investment bill
sponsored by the late cardinal
Cisneros which expanded the
amount of severance tax
permanent funds that are
invested in small business now
I'll leave you with this since
two thousand and nineteen I had
the reports run and I was able
to share them with the Majority
Leader to Senate bill ten past
and twenty nineteen is presently
two day funneling money to
community based organizations
that are doing exactly what this
program intends to continue
doing which is make low interest
capital available to
entrepreneurs to small business
owners and to those affected by
the COVID nineteen pandemic and
I will say that those loans have
been overprescribed there is
more demand than the money that
was pumped out to Senate bill
ten can actually meet again why
because in New Mexico we have a
lot of businesses run by first
generation folks by folks who
don't have strong banking
relationships we have folks who
just traditionally are not in
the credit market and that keeps
them from being able to fully
participate in the economy and
the fully released their
businesses on potential so as
you can see is the son of a
small business owner who grew up
in a pretty poor neighborhood if
it wasn't for a small business
that made more bill I would have
gone to college and I probably
wouldn't be talking to all of
you find people who look
increasingly bored with my
talking so I.
I will add my comments here and
I thank you Mr chairman members
of the committee.
Thank you senator.
It is time you don't have
anybody else to speak on this
bill as a witness for anybody
okay all right good so with that
of we will go to.
Public comment.
And the we go with the in the
beginning that is pollution.
So.
To have anybody.
No based on the list that I was
emailed I don't have any opposes
Carol right I did receive your
email that you didn't say if you
work for against so go ahead.
Yes thank you Mr chair members
of the committee I am Carole
white the CEO of The New Mexico
restaurant association and on
behalf of our thirteen hundred
members we really appreciate the
changes made by Senator
Candelaria to the loan program
in this bill.
Well we've made it clear that
restaurants are hesitant to take
out loans when they don't know
how long the economic recovery
will take we do believe that the
changes made in this bill will
make these loans attractive to
struggling businesses and
restaurants so thank you for
this and and we do stand in
support thank you.
Agora Matildas go ahead and call
my next we have JD Bullington.
Thank you thank you hear me yes
thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee and particularly
sponsor Senator Candelaria
speaking on behalf of the
greater Albuquerque chamber of
commerce what's not to like
about this bill we've got longer
repayment periods and we've got
expanded eligibility to include
those businesses that didn't
necessarily have to close
completely or significantly
reduce their operations so once
again we applaud the sponsor for
bringing this legislation
forward and I would just take a
note to personally say to
Senator Candelaria you know I've
been watching these types of
legislation for several days now
and Senator Candelaria you have
been on the forefront of
carrying the torch for small
businesses in New Mexico and the
greater Albuquerque chamber of
commerce recognizes that as too
small businesses across the
state and you really deserve a
round of applause for that
because you on the front line to
this effort there's no question
about that so we improve the we
we certainly approve the the
effort here to improve the
accessibility of this program
and we are wholeheartedly in
support of this legislation and
impact and urged passage thank
you.
Thank you.
Next we will be hearing from
Jason Espinoza.
Chair members the committee
Jason Espinoza I'm the New
Mexico state director of the
national federation of
independent business and we
stand in strong support of this
legislation the small business
recovery act loan program
provides an important Avenue
financial relief that will
benefit many small businesses
across the state no to small
businesses are the same and
that's why it's extremely
important to have multiple
relief programs available to the
wider array of small businesses
I'm while the small business
carriers relief grant program
that was created during the
second special session last year
was welcome relief in the form
of grants it's important to note
that only six thousand seven
hundred fifty six businesses out
of more than fourteen thousand
that applied actually received
the grants
in this requests are on average
were a fifteen thousand dollars
that means only a fraction
really less than five percent of
New Mexico is a hundred and
sixty thousand businesses we're
able to get requests this re
vamps and small business
recovery act loan program
provides increased flexibility
that will make it more
accessible to small business
owners in the importance of a
program like this especially as
we start to see light at the end
of the tunnel with the roll out
of the vaccination and the
potential and insight financial
calculations are different now
than when this bill was
originally passed last year and
this program can really provide
important financial assistance
to get small businesses across
the finish line as we answer
what many hope is the last mile
of this public health emergency
and pandemic.
I'm I know there's been back and
forth in the legislature whether
you should just passed a loan
program a grant program or tax
relief in our opinion given the
extent of our economic crisis
New Mexico doesn't have the
luxury of just picking one
option the legislature must
taken all of the above approach
and so that's where we stand as
strong support this legislation
and thank the senator for
bringing this forward for
working on this over the last
six months we urge the committee
to move forward with this
important measure thank you.
Thank you Mr snow said.
Thank you we'll turn to Jason
Weaks.
If he's available.
J. son.
It doesn't appear so so we will
go on to Ashley Wagner.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I'm
Ashley Wagner director of public
policy with the New Mexico
chamber of commerce and we
support this bill and would like
to especially thank the
Billsponsored for his continued
support a small business in New
Mexico small businesses are in
desperate need right now and so
we appreciate the intent of this
bill to provide much needed
support thank you thank you.
Next we have Allison Smith
Allison.
Doesn't appear to be available
K. and we already heard from
Carol are there any other
members of the public that they
were not on the list I would
like to speak if you could raise
your hand.
It doesn't appear so so we are
done with all public comments.
Okay at this time.
We will go to the committee so
for any question so.
Committee members Mr chairman I
have my hand raised first well
beyond what I'm what I'm what
willing to wait for the other
members whatever however you
like to do it.
Okay
Senator okay thank you Mr
chairman so I I want to echo Mr
chairman and senator kind of the
lady at your very very stalwart
effort and work and and a true
measure of how we can help lift
up New Mexico small businesses I
think this was one of the things
that you and I just got
clobbered on over social media
and you took the bull by the
horns and did a wonderful job
and I'm very proud of you and I
this is a simple question I just
want to make sure that I heard
you correctly when when the
the three year repayment period
starts down the road where are
we where I just and I'm sure
this is the case I just want to
make sure we're not Cuming
interest from day one to day two
year three are we or is that the
case and then all of a sudden
you've got a pretty sizeable.
Michelle ahead of you so as all
answer the question now I'm
interested is not accrue from
the date the lotus originated
until the day that repayment
begins so it's essentially
acting as a zero interest rate
loan for those first three years
it then becomes an interest
bearing upon the thirty year and
why another knob towards
economic stimulus it's another
nod towards keeping money in the
pockets of entrepreneurs and
helping them put that to to work
sure.
Thank you Mr chairman that's
exactly what I was hoping you
would say thank you Mr chairman
and again congratulations
Senator Candelaria on another I
successful program your.
Thank you.
On the list I have Senator
Brandt Senator Hamblen in the
Senator Griggs so Senator
Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman I think
senator Gregson panel were
before me so I don't know if you
won't we're raised
Our.
If you want me to just go just
go okay thank you Mr chairman
are just trying to make sure
that we're doing it fairly so.
With one of the accused of
jumping the line for anything.
but the Mr chair senator I do
have a few questions
I'm trying to remember I think I
voted for this in the special
session.
But yeah he's saying I did so
that's a that's
I I have a few questions first
of all only forty million page
views I think you're pretty good
answer for that we're wanting to
move the amount up to five
hundred million
one legislative at the four
hundred to four hundred million
and change it if we need to
later on this reason the bump
that up if only forty million
was used it's a great question
senators of the five hundred
million dollars was originally
where this bill sat the
investment threshold if you'll
recall one hundred million
dollars was appropriated in your
regional bill for emergency loan
financing to local governments
thankfully the local governments
across New Mexico did not need
to we're not in the position
where they needed to take out
basically G. R. T. back that and
one of the best idea but it was
an emergency
tool for them I will know that
instead of taking out those
loans the City of Santa Fe in
particular.
Work with NMFA through other
programs whereby the City of
Santa Fe was able actually able
to refinance old debt that
carried a much higher interest
rate I was able to refinance
that with the NMFA so
essentially the five hundred
million is an authorization
figure if the program for
example.
Let's say this the now because
of the different parameters now
and because of the universe of
businesses who can come in the
door
you know let's assume we use the
full five hundred million before
next session well in the
programs exhausted let's say you
know we see more tweaks that
need to be done we can do that
again next year I think the
intent here is not so much about
what's that top number that
authorizes but are we getting
the money out the door to the
people who need it in the most a
teacher way and that has
certainly changed since I was
last before you on this bill and
I want to thank many of the
legislators and the members of
the business community who were
on many phone costs trying to
figure out how do we continue to
involve these incentives so they
continue to evolve with the
pandemic and it's economic
implications.
I appreciate that Mr chairman
senator you know I thanks
appropriate time to reiterate
that that you know
The business is really just want
to get reopened that's their
that's their main thing of
really will say these businesses
will remove the restrictions
that haven't done a thing for us
and get them re open if you look
at the per capita rates around
the nation it hasn't really
mattered whether we were closed
down completely open completely
the per capita rate
coronaviruses about say
some places lower someplace
higher.
I'm wondering with the and I
can't remember which year
iteration the federal government
is on the cares Act if it's
three or four Tanner you know it
gets confusing from the federal
government level but with the
last one that was passed under
the previous administration
what kind of federal dollars
were coming in and and is the
still necessary with those
federal dollars coming in I
haven't been able to actually
get a break down of that and I
don't know since you're on the
finance committee maybe have a
better grasp of that sure so for
our small drive business
community for entrepreneurs the
this still remains necessary for
a couple of reasons the P. P.
PED round two that was passed by
Congress comes with a lot of
restrictions are chief among
them being restrictions that hi
that incentive programs simply
to employment and so for many
borrowers PPP second round is
simply going to be not available
for example my law firm we apply
for PPP for the federal
government and received a seven
thousand dollar PPP law we won't
qualify for second round GDP
because I've actually hired two
people during this pandemic so
my my gross receipts my
everything is going up.
So I won't qualify so for many
firms this remains an important
source because.
Congress's federal aid
I think we're seeing is becoming
far more targeted I think it is
going to become.
There are gonna be eight some
more strings than not and so in
light of what I've what I
understand about the use and
accessibility of PPP round two
the short answer is yes the
other thing I'll note for you Mr
chairman.
And it was a mistake in the F.
I. R..
We allow under this bill NMFA to
sort of run a pilot program.
One of the few pieces of
feedback we got in crafting this
bill was if you were a real
entrepreneur who started doing
business in twenty twenty in the
pandemic just ended your dreams
you don't have the evidence of
actual losses from prior
quarters to really qualify for
any state or federal sources of
relief so the bill does not
guarantee all of those people
money but it allows NMFA the
authority to basically use some
of this funding and develop a
pilot program for entrepreneurs
and start ups who were who were
hit hardest in twenty twenty
and but can't otherwise access
the kind of federal relief
you're talking about.
Thank you Mr so that you
actually got a lead in to one of
my next question Senator of Mr
chairman which is why we were
removing the requirement to show
actual losses and other regional
requirement was thirty percent
losses are more I think that was
what was
is there any requirement to show
losses at all in the bill and if
not why not so there is and and
this is where I think
respect Lee this is an error in
the FIR the the bill requires
that borrowers generally yes
provide proof NMSC a in the
manner and form that NMSA will
determine of actual losses right
I had this much gross revenue
order one of our quarter three
of twenty twenty here's my
revenue quarter one of twenty
twenty one right
it so the exception is the
exception as a borrower who does
not have the actual losses NMFA
can consider a pilot to provide
financing for those types of
borrowers but the general rule
is still actual losses must be
sure we are simply trying to
open this up a little bit for a
lot of feedback I got which is
if you were a start up.
In twenty twenty twenty twenty
one because of the way federal
and state relief has been
structured to this point you
really were left out in the cold
in terms of any where you could
go for relief.
Mr chair center that makes lot
of sense you know especially if
you open a restaurant in the
last year you know you have
really especially one that
doesn't have a drive thru window
so it's not a fast food
restaurant you really been
destroyed and your dreams and
hopes of been destroyed by the
governor's actions this year so
that makes lot of sense the that
we need to have that in there
for for the staff businesses
that just open up in the last
year so the other issue I think
probably needs to be addressed
is in the FIR under the
significant issues that actually
talks about the legality of the
bill's provisions one of the
things is it talks about the
Unifor prudent investor act and
whether this bill conflicts with
that
if you have any comments about
you know because this is
supposed to be an investment
fund and these really aren't
investments so can you comment
on that and help us out with
that with the legality of the
bill sure so so legally
absolutely
these on their face these are
loans these are intended to be
paid back we have now for
getting this provision we have
now negative interest rate
provision which that was an idea
I wanted to love to session was
an actual negative interest rate
where we kind of rate borrowers
to take the money and the longer
they kept that the less they had
to pay back
so the question of
constitutionality I think it's
been well discussed well debated
in this committee that's prior
to iterations certainly on the
Senate floor in the house the
test is on its face what is this
for on its face this is an
investment
made of the severance tax
permanent funds and in a way and
in a manner that the legislature
shall direct which we have the
authority to do so under statute
and we are approving an
investment of up to five hundred
thousand in this new loan
product it's like no other
investment products that the
state would invest.
what's different about this is
we have sort of created our own
loan product and are funding it
with our own investment and I
think that is a pretty
ingenious.
And pretty effective way of
maximizing our state's permanent
funds by making a deal on
investments
product that is only and purely
accessible for the benefit of
New Mexicans.
What about the uniform prudent
investor actor mean that I don't
think that this really is
complies with what that act
would would ask for and I I
support the measure I'm just
trying to figure out you know
within you know that act I don't
think this is the most prudent
investment we can may we're
definitely not going to get the
best return that we can get from
an investment in less you you're
on
your casinos in the hospital
that's probably pretty decent
investment.
If you look to that
yeah we had a lot of
conversation I think there's
just a respectful disagreement
of opinion
I think you know the legislature
in the original bill and in this
bill as well specifically has
entered a finding that this loan
program otherwise complies with
for investor act why because we
get to decide what the proven
best practice and what that
standard is and I fully
understand this this this
tension between lost returns on
Wall Street verses out lost
returns on main street but I
will venture to say this to you
all this money will be much
better served being spent and
lands and circulating in our
economy over the next five years
it will do much more good in
that fashion then it will do had
reported it and simply allowed
to become another rounding air.
In in in the severance tax
permanent fund and in the annual
distribution I guess we know we
all understand there's a cost we
could certainly invest in an S.
and P. five hundred mutual fund
index that would return a lot
more on this money but we as
policymakers are thing you know
our task is.
Is meet the definition of an
investment yes I think the next
question is how do we understand
the value of this program the
value of this program is
avoiding job loss giving people
access to financial capital they
need to get on their feet.
And and I think as a New Mexican
for me what it signifies is for
once we're going to recognize
that not at you know Wall Street
isn't the only good place to
provide investment sometime good
investments are found on main
street as well.
Thank you Mr Senator really
appreciate the answers I
appreciate of the what you're
been trying to do for small
businesses the on your you're
trying to step in and repair the
damage that's been done by our
governor and I appreciate that
but the fact of the matter is we
as a state are now having to
step in the loan businesses
money because our governor
destroyed those businesses thank
you.
thank you Senator of Senator
Hamblen.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator set out for this
opportunity thank you Senator
Candelaria for bringing forth
this bill as the CEO and
president of the Los crucis
green chamber of commerce we
talk about the importance of
locally owned businesses and
believe they are the backbone of
our economy and so I'm grateful
for the dedication and passion
that are legislature's had for
helping businesses survive the
pandemic that has led to a
challenge for them and how they
conduct business you know I
think our our local businesses
have become much more creative
and how they reach their
customers from increasing their
social media presence to doing
curbside pick up to take out
creating family packs like my
favorite topics restaurant
Misia's salute they Misia to you
know affecting those businesses
a Senator Brandt talked about
you know we're just opening
Senator Candelaria you address
this as well there's a billiard
place lucky dog billiards and I
really would like to go to but
can't right now but they have
done an amazing job in trying to
be flexible in adapting to the
different challenges that this
pandemic has brought you know
Senator Candelaria and I have
talked about how you know loans
aren't necessarily the most
ideal businesses would much
rather have grants but loans
there are some of those
businesses that as you mentioned
Senator Candelaria that loans
are appropriate and that they
have been able to extend their
life and so the thing that
strikes me as most powerful
about this legislation is the
extension in the payoff period
because I believe and I think we
you agree as well as that we're
going to be seen recovery from
the pandemic not be solved in a
year but it's going to take a
couple of years for that to
really kind of turn around for
businesses to feel stable again
so I appreciate that and I think
just doing whatever we can to
help our small businesses
continue to strive to thrive and
to keep their heads above water
many of them are just barely
doing it and every day there
businesses open in success so
you know the opportunity to
support this this recovery act
Is something that I'm really
proud to be able to do and so
thank you Senator Candelaria
thank you Mr chair thank you for
your insight Senator answer your
work in Los crucis.
Chair sentimento de sorry a.
We're trying to figure out we
have a.
Of somebody on the phone trying
to figure who was a senator
phone or public so
the so Senator have been are you
done.
Mr chair I am thank you very
much all right what will move on
to the Senator Griggs that would
have Coleman and senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr chairman and that
and thank you Senator Candelaria
you know I appreciate what
you've done I appreciate what
you're what you're trying to do
for for small business I do want
to want to talk to you about a
couple of points in the bill
that I think you are.
You may want to talk to some of
your colleagues about is as a as
this bill goes along because I
I've been on a on a few
committees in the past eight
years it kind of made me think
of pollution.
And
On page three
Senator you talk about a a
business said sustained a
substantial decline or
substantial disruption and you
use someone leave it up to the
NMFA to determine what that is.
But those are those are you know
those are undefinable terms
exactly so you I just want you
as you go along if you find
something that might work better
than the the broad language of
substantial Stangel destruction
or substantial decline I would
think that might be better in
the bill.
In the center when you go to
page eleven.
Page eleven talks about you have
to pay back the talks about
annually installed.
And for many people annual
installments are difficult.
It's it's because you have to be
you have to be very disciplined
in order to set the money aside
to make the annual payment and
I'd recommend that you consider
different things because of that
and it just it should be ashamed
to have a great program coming
and you've got a payment come in
and you didn't have the money
available to make your payment
because it's an annual payment
and that that would be the thing
that would would concern me a
little bit and then honestly.
I think when you push it out and
three years that could possibly
be problematic in that same way.
I would think maybe you know
pull it back a little make
monthly payments and everybody
will get on board quicker and
they will be more more able to
do what you're trying to do show
up Mr chair senator applaud your
efforts I just think that as
your some practical sign G. R.
look at those and see if they
say they will really work and
help the people that year that
you want to help so thank you Mr
chair thank you senator Mr
chairman thank you to Senator
Griggs
Share your point of the thanks
for the little bit.
But one of them I think we're in
absolute agreement on which is
Mr chairman I I will just
Representative everyone here
that I think it makes a lot of
sense to address that the
programs in the farm the annual
repayment to a repayment
schedule that's determined by
NMSA as the lender.
To provide for that sort of
flexibility I don't think that's
going to be a problem and it
would be lucky enough to get
your endorsement today I will
prepare that endorsement
present.
A great.
Senator Griggs are you done
yes Mr chair okay thank you
Senator Tallman.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you.
Yeah.
Thank you Senator Candelaria.
This is that a lot of leadership
on this issue is that the joins
the others to appraise your
efforts on behalf of.
Small business but it's a couple
of quick questions one of the
last stage of the.
Bill analysis says the.
Bill also loans up to thirty
years which will impose a
substantial cost.
NMFA I the first surgery three
years is of R. G. short.
What was the thinking going up
as far as thirty years of that
consideration of the twenty
year.
Mr chairman
we base the flexible thirty year
term this based upon basically
taking it from the market market
you typically get fifteen or
thirty year notes thanks very I
will say the Senators point we
are in now as of this bill is
moving forward in continuing
conversation of the New Mexico
finance authority they have
advised me that they may want to
see that variable thirty year
term reduce dandruff with near
term which I still think the
be very attractive said that may
get we is well but the thinking
behind that was just stated you
know you try to find other kind
of physical examples that people
are used are complying with the
used understanding their your
home market.
Thank you thank you Mr thank you
Senator
Join the in late may be your
answer this question so if you
could tell me to just go away.
So.
I couldn't find the bill what.
How is what happens to the loan
when the business.
Those out of this.
So Mr chairman one of the
ascential elements of this
program is is
is that we rely upon the because
there is now a personal
guarantee or collateral put up
by the buyer by the land by the
person borrowing
you know if there is a case of
default Mexico finance authority
would have to see reimbursement
for damages for the payment of
that vaulted maam the civil law
office meeting
all New Mexico finance authority
on secured creditor and this
transaction and again now if we
were if we were developing a law
that was landing right in
ordinary times ordinary market
participants under ordinary one
the firm we probably would would
require collateral probably
would require capital but
he has the intention here is
also to ensure that there is a
subscription to the funds and
bonds are expanding the economy
and that is why you did not see
a stronger penalties division
other than New Mexico finance
authority can certainly do
recruitment of its that legal
proceeding like any like any
follow up procedure.
Thank you Mr thank you senator
again I apologize for the error
strong leadership and.
Support of small business thank
you.
Right Senator Kernan.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Senator Candelaria I'm I'm going
to support your bill and and I
think this is a great thing for
business we certainly needed I
did want to if you would look on
page four of the FY are down at
the bottom just talking about
the impact on the severance tax.
It found and and what that's
going to look like it seems to
me that Senator Tomlinson idea
of maybe reducing that thirty
year opportunity for for pay
back to the shorter time frame
what that impact
the harm to the severance tax I
mean that would impact the
severance tax permanent fund but
making that shorter how would
that have an impact on what
we're actually doing with regard
to loss because I've been to
many to the general fund because
of this so Mr chairman I thank
you senator of brown and I will
say that the FIR was calculated
a lot differently what's last
act we did this I think now the
analysis is not only looking at
The money that's coming out of
the fund but is postulating a
certain lost rated return on
those funds I'm sure if you that
if we restrict the long term
provided ten years you would not
realize just looking at the same
chart you are you can just cut
this chart off at ten years.
Right you won't we won't go to
twenty will go to thirty because
stand simply those loans need to
have been called back there's
not a refinancing provision in
this act for a borrower to
extend the life of that long so
you know.
In short the answer question yet
just chop off the twenty and
thirty year mark and look at the
ten year mark.
So Mr chairman and senator is
that something you're really
going to consider do you think
that's too short for the.
For the opportunity to to pay
back if you I mean if you take
out a
small.
A hundred fifty fifty and fifty
thousand so you know I think it
be interesting to consider
shortening the thirty I'm not
sure all the way to ten but I
think maybe might look at that
and I'm just and with regard to
the severance tax permanent fund
How does that impact I'm trying
to understand the the bottom
paragraph that's page for.
To see really what we're doing
add to that it what we can
anticipate what that will mean
to the general fund down the
road is it if we can just take
this money and use at take it
from the general fund right now
we're gonna have a good year
evidently I'm hearing lots of
money this year mmhm at just
program the money to do this
instead of withdrawing from the
severance tax.
Portion.
So.
Sure sure sure sure Mr chairman
and and and Senator Kernan
you are correct so so you just
let me just walk through so I
think the sticker price years
because of the thirty year term
because we're considering that
this money is lent out is only
making returns of about one
point six five percent we may
see higher than market rate
default rates let's be honest
I've always said that from the
beginning
so you know I recall under the
the the bill from last year
which looked at only a for a
three year
and I'm pulling up the FIR.
Small business recovery act
twenty twenty.
Allah says sorry Mr chair
warning as fast as my little
fingers can carry me so.
The.
The original estimate when you
just look at the first years.
Of.
The three year program the
estimated hit to the.
General Fund in terms of reduced
distributions from the land
grant permanent fund and
rejected in the first year
should be a negative a four
point two million what I will
say however is that we are
seeing.
How this pandemic is playing out
right our stock holdings are
investment holdings are doing
super well.
While main street business is on
its last legs.
Right I mean and and the stock
market is kind of its own
reality right so I think Senator
your point we minimize the
fiscal impact of the general
fund by reducing the number of
years.
That is one measure we can
certainly take it I think is
going to be looked into
seriously.
Because of the variability in
the rest of the state in the
long term but what I will say is
I think it's a real question of
whether or not in the next year
two three four we would see any
real reductions in transfers to
the general fund from the
severance tax permanent fund
because our rates of return the
the market conditions mean you
know we have great investment
returns we're cash for.
So I.
Hi angle and right you know what
you're saying and I think we
need to adjust some of this in
finance and I think if you know
again if it's lucky enough to
get to the floor I think you're
gonna see an adjustment on that
you're chairman I'd love to work
with you on that.
Sure and at some Mr chairman
thank you senator I I'm I'm glad
you've expanded the L.
eligibility peace because I know
locally some of my constituents
when they they had a terrible
loss in March but not so much in
April and so that they could
never get and so that's gone and
and now they're going to be able
to take a second look I think
you're gonna see a lot of people
apply for this and and that's
the purpose and I agree with you
the benefit to the small
business that will be a benefit
to the state in New Mexico and I
think we have to look at it in
those terms regardless of
whatever loss you might see in
another pocket the the benefit
is going to be even greater
aren't on the side of saving
these businesses so I want to
thank you want everybody else
thank you very much I'm that's
all Mr chairman.
Thank you Senator of.
Apologize to our Senate Majority
Leader.
I skipped over in his hand on
the computer is almost the same
color at this wall so I can't
really see it so you might want
to change it to red or yellow or
something like that Senator so
Senator Wirth and we've got
Senator Hickey.
There I appreciate that now look
into fixing that.
Senator Candelaria I also want
to thank you for the work done
on this this took an
extraordinary left and I
attended one of those meetings
the stakeholder meetings and was
able to sit and listen and to
hear the concerns raised the
fact that you've got the
restaurant association in
support
again given the the message that
they didn't want loans they want
to requests I think is an
indication of how you shape this
and you've made it into
something that again a Senator
Kernan said I think you're gonna
have a lot of businesses
take advantage of this for good
reasons I do want to push back a
little bit on selected brands
and his continuing effort to
brand this all on the governor
and I just note that we've had a
national response on it's been
require given the pandemic and
given that the extraordinary
economic impact of this at all
levels and I'm very thankful to
our governor and the lives that
have been saved because of the
approach she's taken so we can
have that debate but the reality
is
our businesses are working
families need help they're
getting it from the states we
have stepped up in June in
November and we're about to do
it again and thankfully our
federal government stepped up on
twice in March in December and
we need them to step up again
this is gonna take and an all
out effort to prevent a complete
and utter economic disaster as
the result of Corona virus and
that's what this is about and so
I think it's very prudent
a couple of things I do agree
with Senator Kernan in terms of
the like the loan.
Thirty years does seem to belong
to me I would suggest a fifteen
fifteen year long term makes
more sense to me.
I want to be sure in response to
a question from Senator Brandt
and again I appreciated his
questions
I want to make sure that.
The general purpose of this
pocket of money is for
businesses that suffer actual
losses I know there's some
flexibility there but I guess it
does concern me because we've
had winners and losers through
all of this and you mentioned
your law firm and other law
firms have done you know very
well through this period of time
and I just I want to make sure
that this money isn't being used
to refinance a whole bunch of
Business deaths by very
successful businesses in other
words I've got loans out I'm
doing well what I'd I'd sure
love to take my hundred fifty
thousand dollar loan at four
percent and refinance it under
this program and I just want to
make sure and and maybe you can
addresses that NMFA has the
ability and how they frame this
so that when business is calm
it's those that really have
suffered here that are getting
that the bulk of this money and
we're not going to end up with a
whole list of businesses that
we're doing well I just went and
refinance dat so can you address
that piece yes Mister chairman
thank you so we will certainly
make sure the language is is
Chris.
On this point but I I do believe
the current version of the bill.
Does to get in the door you have
to show a substantial decline in
revenue or appropriations that
applies whether or not you have
proof of actual losses or not
right I mean the argument from
an entrepreneur is Hey I started
my business on March the fifth
or February the fifteenth and
then the world and right so I
think we need to we need to put
maybe some parameters around
what I was basically referred to
as the pilot program piece of
this for the entrepreneur for
the folks who work in those very
special situations but I think
Mr chairman Senator the
structure of the bill the
threshold matter of proof is I
had a substantial loss in
revenue or appropriations
I cannot demonstrate that
you know and and I I have a lot
of faith and NMFA to apply that
very fairly
yeah I was just exceptional job
thus far I was just gonna say
exactly that.
I just think that Marquita
Russel and her team and NMFA are
the job they did in pushing out
one hundred
a hundred million dollars that
we did in November in requests
was extraordinary and I just
want to make sure that it's
understood that all because
again I don't I when we do this
and put all that language
together I really want this
money to be focused on those
businesses that have have the
actual actual losses and as you
mentioned in your opening center
Candelaria
my number of those businesses
here in Santa Fe came to me and
we're very frustrated with the
former senator Wirth.
And so again this is this is
your response to Senator Wirth.
Can you hold on a second it
looks like the web has crashed
some get a text.
Can we double check to see if
the the web is still still I can
see everyone and here everyone
from Albuquerque.
One of the things that happens
Mr chair someone someone's only
web crashes and then they think
that it's that State Council
that occurred all right okay so
what we're good going on sorry.
No I appreciate that and that's
exactly what just to be clear
for everyone watching.
Chair should though did exactly
the right thing if we have any
any state web issues will stop
immediately but I'll just I'll
just wind up
You know I do think I guess one
more question not that has been
kind of flag is there any tax
liability if I receive one of
these.
Loans I get a hundred fifty
thousand dollars I don't have to
pay anything back for the first
three years are there any tax
implications to receiving that.
Loan not in the so let's let's
focus on those three years is
the short answer would be no
because you're not accepting
taxable income your your your
accounting for a at a loan
that's that's on your books that
taxable year now if someone were
to default on a loan I have some
administrative defaults on a
loan then that there is a
mechanism whereby that person
I'm not entirely sure how it
works if it's the IRS to finds
out of with the lender let some
now or or if it's the actual
borrower that that that if it's
business that can be converted
to a taxable
income but that is not in all
cases but to your question
specifically Peter Wirth when
the funds are transferred let's
say in calendar year twenty one
or twenty two that is not a
taxable event and I appreciate
that and and just one final
question I think you indicated
the interest rate is one half of
Wall Street crimes and there's
no interest required burst three
years is that there is a
minimum.
You know I I know from from my
law practice if there is a
minimum interest rate that the
federal government does require
on on a for example family loan
for it to be considered that
does that apply at all here we
can have any issue with the
minimum interest rate trigger.
That issue is not been flagged
we kind of went through this for
remote with a fine tooth comb on
the tax implication issues but
that's certainly a question I
can posed to staff one flag in
our review but I'm not so I'm
not going to venture an answer
on the fly Mr chairman we'll get
the majority the correct
information well Mr chair
there's a sign another good
doctor lawyer legislator.
Thank you madam the worst thing
to do is to just go down now we
don't know the answer to I
appreciate that and we've got
some fantastic are certainly
something to this o'donnell can
look at in this peacock and look
at the next that just to get it
right but this is a a huge piece
of work that fits right into
what we're trying to do have as
a legislature on a bipartisan
basis which is help recover and
so I just again commend you for
the work on this and and fully
intend to support thank you.
Thank you senator I have both
Senator Hickey Senator Padilla.
Sorry so.
Okay so now we're going to
continue.
Mr chairman and senator
Candelaria and all of the
senators who spoke before I want
to commend your comments and
Senator Candelaria this this is
so important having started to
small businesses myself in the
last eight years
this kind of flexibility is
going to be essential I do
however have having been a
businessman
you want to say that there
probably is some logic to
limiting the length of the loan
to ten to fifteen years even a
ten year business loan is pretty
is pretty long and and the
reason the reasons are that I'm
not sure if you look at the
average life of the small
business if they really go on
that long I think it could be
shorter.
Secondly I can get to ten years
and not pay the.
That are only paid some of the
fact that that kind of interest
rate I take the principle that I
have invested in the market and
make a lot more money so I think
a shorter period I mean that's
that that that's what happens
the so the I would I would limit
the length of time the other
thing is and and I did not reach
with the help of I did the two
of us the deal the IFR but the
R. do you have will there be in
the loan some sort some terms
around the termination of the
business either through
bankruptcy or selling the
business another words if the
businesses so is the the
principal and the interest still
do accrue to the the new owner
of the business and also if it
is in a bankruptcy are there any
very often and maybe this is
the.
NMFA in come up with this.
It's when that happens it's hard
people get in line another words
what are the top priorities in
terms of being paid back if
there are still assets to be
The.
So and and what have you where
would the state be in line in
terms of being able to make its.
And with that hi
It's in my questions.
Thank you Mr chairman on the on
the issue of where the state
would be in line let's assume in
a bankruptcy proceeding I do I
do bankruptcy representation
the state would be an unsecured
creditor right and so would be
one of the second tier of
creditors used maybe all after
everything else is taking care
of why at well after the the
secured creditors and the
superscript of federal
government are taking care of
regarding the termination of
business there's not a specific
clause in the legislation that
talks about what happens to the
debt should the business
actually go under if you know
since there is no personal
guarantee involved obsessively
that that stays with that
business so we like to get to
Senator where they don't have
the correct answer for you but I
look forward to working with you
in thinking this through a
little bit because I see what
you're talking about especially
if we're looking at a ten year
term this question of
transference of that upon
dissolution and reconstitution
shutter during winding down
becomes an issue so I look for
the conversation center.
Thank you very much and again
Senator Candelaria great job
it's a really what the state
needs thank you.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you senator will go to
Senator Padilla.
Thank you Mr chairman and I'll
go for a second time yeah I Dr
Senator Dr Hickey asked my
question with regard to the
termination of the business and
and what disposition that would
be I I would ask I don't it
didn't sound Senator kind of ID
like you wanted to address that
at the moment but I would like
for you to take a look at that
what happens should the business
be sold sometime in the period
of time or and and maybe that's
a very positive thing for that
business but you know there's
there's going to be a list of
other loans I'm sure and other
things that the business did
leases any number of other
things that have to be satisfied
and weird where do you put this
loan
And we have a crossed we came
across that bridge because it
hasn't been built with I'm
assuming very few of these
businesses so I I'm not gonna
ask you to respond to that right
now but you know I am happy to
advise you on that if you're
interested and we can work on
that together thank you.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you don't see anymore hand
to I had the several questions
the.
That that have been addressed
and and there were around the
the length of the loan which I
think has been discussed
thoroughly and I know that
Senator you may be looking at
that as well and then also on
the tax liability issue and then
I think the the last one also
was the the the resolution or
sale or whatever of of of the
small business it comes to that
point and so forth so those have
been addressed so appreciate the
everyone the.
Questions and comments and the
this is a as all of her have
stated I think this is a.
Of tremendous built it's going
to help a lot of business in
this state so with that what are
the pleasure of the committee.
I will move it to pass Mr
chairman okay we have a due pass
motion by Senator Padilla and we
have a second by the thank you.
I will have the secretary to
roll call.
Senator Brandt yes Senator
Griggs.
Yes.
Your Hamblen yes Senator Hickey
yes Senator Senator had a meal.
Senator how to me had to step
away okay.
Senator Kernan yes senator
Sanchez.
Yes Senator Kalman.
Yes.
Senator Wirth yes Senator
Padilla yes Senator Shendo yes.
Under the area you have a new
path motion thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee I just I just wanna
imparting say I know it's harder
than usual but I think this
proves why are committee process
is so important you know we've
gotten some great feedback from
many of you today Senator that's
just gonna turn into amendments
to make the bill stronger and
more responsive so thank you all
for your time today Mr chairman.
Thank you.
So next on the agenda we have a
Senate bill six.
Liquor control act the Senator
Wirth and progress I know we
have a.
Of the two amendments that have
been submitted so turn it over
to Senator Wirth bricks.
Thank you Mr chair and also I
believe on.
Representative Hochman Vigil
who's caring this bill in the
house is going to be joining us.
And so on and the buy a house is
the director of alcohol beverage
control is the expert witness on
this bill and I very much
appreciate Senator Griggs
building the other primary
sponsor.
So this bill does three things
and I'll touch on it kind of
from on high level perspective
and then I'd like Senator Griggs
to get into and secular the
licensing issues.
And Representative Hochman Vigil
can get into more specifics
about the delivery piece and
then what we're happy to answer
questions and we do have I'm
aware of one amendments
so we can do those when we get
to that point basically this
build us kind of three things it
does allow for delivery of
alcohol and there's two
provisions in the new section
one of the first allows a person
otherwise qualified
under the provisions the liquor
control adults and apply for and
the department can issue an
alcoholic beverage delivery
permit authoring authorizing
that person to deliver alcoholic
beverages if the applicant rules
a valid retailers dispensers
craft distillers winegrowers
small brewers or restaurant
license.
Up second for a valid.
Alcoholic beverage delivery
permit issued to a restaurant
licensee
that's there is a requirement
there the currently says that up
to twenty five ounces of wine or
seventy two fluid ounces of beer
could be delivered by that
restaurant when there is a
purchase of a minimum of twenty
five dollars worth of food as
it's drafted and then it's got
provisions and and we can get
into the specifics about who can
make those deliveries
and again this is something that
we have heard about this since
the pandemic started we actually
passed a delivery bill in twenty
nineteen that was vetoed by the
governor because again it didn't
quite get where we need to go so
that certainly
Yes.
Representative Maestas commute
thank you there's a need to do
this and this bill I does this
not on a temporary basis this is
a new a provision in the bill
the second thing this bill does
which is a bit which is a change
it creates a new restaurant
license a type B. license that
would allow restaurants to serve
spirits in addition to beer and
wine are again this traditional
type a restaurant licenses with
our we're just beer and wine so
we're adding spirits to that
there's a new fee for that and
and a cost of those licenses the
third thing this bill does is
allows a dispensers license that
lost the privilege to sell
package alcohol to transfer out
of its district to have that
privilege reinstated for a fee
which currently is fifty
thousand dollars so why are we
doing this well again we just
heard Senator Candelaria is
built on recovery I think of all
the industries that have been
hit the hardest it's our
restaurants it's our bars it's
our hospitality industry this is
an effort to give them new tools
are to actually expand the
hospitality market with the new
licenses and we believe and feel
very strongly that these changes
are important step in that
direction so with that I'd like
to yield to Senator Griggs and
then to Representative Hochman
Vigil and then certainly a Mr by
House can way in up front or can
be there to answer questions so
with that Mr chair ideal Senator
X..
Thank you thank you senator
Wirth and and thank you Mr chair
Senator Wirth is gone through
this bill pretty pretty well so
folks understand watch what's
happening but let's let's talk
just a little a little more we
talk about the inner local
dispensary license which was a
which is a license we're the
original dispenser license do
either sold or transferred it
outside of his local option
district where the license was
first.
At that lost package show all it
can do is now sell liquor by the
by the drink the bill allows for
that location she become to the
state and buy back that package
privilege the bill then lounge
for anyone who has a dispensary
one strange that license is able
to move across the.
crusher stayed around the state
without loss of that package
privilege that that provision in
the law goes goes way roughly
right now there's somewhere
between three hundred and four
hundred which called in our
local dispensary Washington.
There's.
Somewhere around eight hundred
dispensaries each.
Senator Wirth touched on the
fact that it adds a new type the
restaurant license.
The distinction in the
that licensed is it allows the
holder of a restaurant license
which is a beer and wine
collection they can convert it
to this type be and be able to
self encouraging.
For a new restaurant can come in
and actually apply for that
license and and get it what
those licenses do though is they
require a sixty forty food
alcohol ratio that means that
you have to show sixty percent
of food forty percent words of
of alcohol you report that I
believe and he can say but I
leverage annually to the to the
ABC.
To verify that that's page
current page occurring that
license the restaurant license
has to be approved.
By the by the L. O. D. there had
to be a vote and hello do is
local option district manager on
Alamogordo Shanta fair
Bernalillo county and Otero
County.
Those are all local option.
They had to hold a vote of the
people to allow for restaurant
licenses to be in their
community in the first place
what this does is it allows them
the county commission or the
city commission to
pass an ordinance to allow for
type B. licensors to then be
located within that local option
district these licenses will
cost three thousand dollars
annually the type of the type a
license cost of thousand and
fifty dollars annually.
This bill does strike a
provision on page twenty two in
section one that currently
states that dispenser eight
inches and retailer licensors
can't move more than ten of them
into an L. O. D. in any one
calendar year.
The strikes that provision so if
fifty wanted to come in in the
market would handle fifty I
suppose fifty could come in.
That strikes language on page
twenty four page keeps holders
of rural retailer rural
dispenser and rural club
licenses from being within ten
miles of another licensed
printers that was placed in long
years back there are very few I
believe of those law those
licenses actually in existence
and I I'm gonna gashes right
around ten or fewer and I'm sure
and you can verify those
numbers.
It also changes one saying in
the in the law which is been
problematic for years and that
she just changes the word meals.
To food and so instead of having
to say you've got to spend
a year you have to buy food or
you have a meal nobody really
knows what a meal years they
debate that time in and time out
so the issue says it has to be
food and that's the that will be
the requirement and then the law
the sixty forty ratio food
alcohol that takes a that takes
over so Mr chair and danced my
explanation of that part of the
bill and I will happily turn it
over to Representative Hochman
Vigil to talk about the the
delivery portion.
Thank you very much.
What.
Thank you very much Mr chair
members of the committee I also
to take a minute to thank our
leader worst and my other co
sponsor senator grace for that
contest Act explanation of this
complicated and nuanced bill are
for the most part I think that
most salient points of have been
explained I want to kind of give
more of a high high level
analysis on the delivery portion
of this bill and why it is so
important to deliver this type
of relief to New Mexico's our
restaurants right now and it's
something that we have been
working on for quite some time
as leader Wirth had explained
earlier of we have tried in
previous iterations of bills to
bring this possibility to New
Mexicans we feel that it's
current form is is the strongest
form and we have worked in such
a way that we believe we can
offer this and it's safe and
reasonable manner while still
trying to accomplish the
objective so with that I think
everything else is been well
explained happy to answer any
questions and at this point
director by host if you want to
add anything else please by all
means.
Eddie.
Your muted your muted.
To the you enter by a health.
All right okay thank you Mr
chairman and thank you committee
Mr chairman I I know it we
talked yesterday and I know you
have there's a lot of veterans
on this committee but there's a
lot of new members as well you
want me to go through that
snapshot of dispensing licenses
for the committee I think I'll
be helpful for new members.
Can your a.
Yeah we're good.
Hello go ahead with that.
So while the callous pulling
that up what we with the chair
asked was to sort of give a
really brief thumbnail sketch of
what the liquor license in New
Mexico is all about so what
we're talking about when it when
we pull it up yeah that is
you'll see it doesn't have craft
brewing craft distilling or
winemaking and it is real we're
just really dealing with the the
dispensing type liquor licenses
and so and are also excluded
early club licenses and
governmental licenses so as
Micaela Micaela sharing.
We would pull it up.
Okay.
Thank you the way Mr chairman
McHale is very good she's so
efficient.
Big big upset her in line okay
so we just go through these real
quick so that we're on the same
page so in New Mexico again
excluding the craft distillers
you know the craft the liquor
industry this is the traditional
way the Lakers delivered in New
Mexico so of these licenses I'm
just going to on the list the
the the most the the the the
most well I should say the
primary way to deliver alcohol
is with the dispenser license
dispenser license has to
privileges to it it allows you
to pour by the drink or so
package it or do both so like
places like quarters in
Albuquerque actually do both
Monte Carlo do you do both but
for the most part most
dispensing licenses are used for
one purpose or another and
they're decidedly more for a
package so for convenience
stores all have dispensing
licenses at for the most part
and I'll get to the other
exception the retailer but but
there's are some bars and
restaurants and on full
dispensers but for for variety
reasons those typically are sold
to of convenience stores grocery
stores and such or independent
liquor stores and if you're
operating more of an on premise
business you we you would
typically have what you would
call the I'll do that stand for
in our local dispenser so in our
local dispenser as Senator
Griggs pointed out is one that
we used to be a dispenser and it
moved out of its local option
district and we're amending that
statute in this legislation but
that that statute in our local
statute.
Would once you transfer it out
of your L. O. D. then what would
happen is you lose the package
and so it's by tree going so so
let me go through this real to
quit before I should have done
this before dispenser licenses
there's about seven hundred
ninety eight of them and they
can do drink or by the package
they can transfer out of the
local option district but of
course they lose their package
of the transfer out and yes they
have package and the average
sale price for dispensing type
licenses four hundred seventy
one K. that's a lot of money.
The up front investment.
And and an investment that
people have made as well so that
in a local there's about four
hundred seven of those those are
just by the drink and they can
transfer out of the elegy and
they can transfer to other
allergies that have approved for
transfers in.
I should say up front that by
law no transfers of under the
previous law you can't transfer
a a license into Gallup per
McKinley County so they don't
have package in the average sale
price of those is about three
hundred fifteen thousand dollars
to obtain so in canopies that
are kind of dispensing license
they're kind of stuck as well
but can't be licenses would just
just a a hook of a long time ago
what would happen is if you had
let's see a strip mall and you
had a a smis were a safe way at
you know or anchoring that any
that mall they used to allow all
the other businesses under that
canopy that was connected by a
roof to actually operate off of
that primary license.
So a long time ago the
legislature said that's probably
a bad idea but so what they did
was they granted a one time deal
that any canopies that were on
license would be able to be
eligible for their own license
and so there's about eighty
seven of those
they cannot transfer of L. O. D.
and and they go for about four
hundred thirty five lottery was
another mistake a long time ago
we we had a we have a.
We have a quota in New Mexico so
it's a.
Yeah and currently we're over
quota by on the state partly
because of the canopy and
lotteries and of ready
historical reasons there and but
it was supposed to be one
dispensing type license per two
thousand people and so
so what happened was we we had
stopped doing
Issuing new licenses because of
the quota and then somebody just
forgot about it and they started
doing the lottery and they
thought that lottery what law
gave them the opportunity to
issue new licenses so they
issued eighteen of them before
they realized that they can't do
that we're over quota so those
got grandfathered in but of
course they can't transfer out
of the L. O. D. I don't know why
we don't have a number there but
but I'll just move on to
retailers retailer there's about
seventy one retail licenses
these are package only and they
can transfer out of the L. O. T.
and you know they have package
and the average cost on the
resale market the resale market
when we're time that average
sale prices the resale market
you know you know what we get
it's about one million and the
reason is because there's great
demand for packaged in the rural
parts of of New Mexico there's a
lot of dispensing licenses in
the City of Albuquerque for
example and so if you want to
open up a convenience store in
Albuquerque there's plenty of
licenses available to you if you
want to open up a package store
in Deming
there's not many dispensing
licenses there so what would
happen and because of the in our
local statute by law stripping
away the package the only way
you can get can of package into
these rural parts of the state
that didn't start with a lot of
of of licenses was to obtain a
retailer license there I I
acquainted to a queen moving on
a chess board this is the most
powerful license it because it
can move anywhere and so that
the changes to the are of you
know local statute will sort of
help with that because that will
because if this bill passes you
would be able to move a full
dispensing license anywhere that
is that allows it into into the
county
without having to pay a million
dollars for
we.
The things that we we just have
we have twenty six rural
dispensers
rural dispensers are just a
quirk of New Mexico law I don't
know why he's got it was to get
some economic development to
rural parts of state but these
come the roll dispenser and the
rural retailer really come with
a big limitation on this and
that is that they cannot be
within ten miles of another
liquor establishment so they
really have to be out in the
Moonies so most people really
does use these at a summer of
like the in like about your
state parks for the summer you
know there might be a fishing
tackle and a rural retailer
their rule dispenser that a you
can get a six pack of beer with
but in our bill the kind of
deals with them a little bit as
well by allowing them to move
within the county and taking
away that ten mile your
restriction.
with that I think
this stopped there that's sort
of the the the the snapshot of
where we got in so this bill is
that it's hard with both liquor
delivery and the changes to the
of license types in the creation
of a restaurant plus license are
all aimed at economic activity
these are all things were not
taking away any privileges were
actually adding privileges to
people in so that they can pivot
this is been a hard year for a
lot of the hospitality industry
and you know a lot of places you
know like for example if your
night club you know it may be
another year before you start
opening up in the with the
vaccine and you know they're not
going to be big dance parties
you know you know in your is
that your business model what
this bill does is give give
those existing business owners
the ability to pivot to new
business opportunities by
allowing them to buy back a
package if you're in our local
if you're dispensable dispenser
now you can move that within the
state much easier you know to
where the demand is and it's
ironically the demand is in
rural New Mexico not really
Santa Fe or Albuquerque those.
Those areas are so over quota
you know its that you want to
get away from that competition
want to go to rural New Mexico
where they really want to the
package in in in the restaurant
plus I'll just say this is
really yes it is really aimed at
those people that have been
because of high prices on the
right have been locked out of
the hospitality market and enter
at a structural disadvantage it
really just it allows people
that can't afford a liquor
license to just serve margaritas
with Mexican food allows them to
you know have have some spirit
spirit you know restaurants have
notoriously of.
R. O. margins in five to ten
percent at in spirits liquors if
we do it safely and I believe we
can do it safely in this bill it
you know allows those
restaurants to actually improve
those margins yet within with a
non perishable product and so I
think it hits a lot of demand
and again that the the
restaurant type B. idea is not
new it's been of floated several
times and task force and in the
legislature before it really
gets at the heart of of what
we're talking about there plenty
of restaurants in Deming there
are not there not many
dispensing licenses in Deming
there's a lot of restaurants
into can carry but there's not a
lot of dispensing licenses this
allows those main street
economies to diversify create
entertainment districts and
should really help speed
recovery out of this pandemic
with that I'll just I'm here to
answer any questions the
committee may have thank you so
much.
Okay great
All right so come back to a
Senator Wirth and Griggs
anything else.
Mr chair that's all we have up
front I know that Senator Griggs
has.
One amendment we worked on page
you can do it the right time
point two one nine three four
five point three you may want to
go to public testimony before
okay do you yeah we'll go ahead
and the go to a public testimony
at this time on the Senate bill
six.
Of we have with the folks who
would do the folks are in
opposition to Senate bill six.
Yes thank you Mr chair first
we'll go to Mike Cheney for the
opposition.
Go to Mr Cheney.
He's muted attendees yourself.
Mr Cheney again if you can you
yourself or leave.
All.
Ordered.
Mr Cheney are are you the phone
number at the bottom.
Okay Mr chair can you hear me
now.
Thank you very much for the
opportunity my name is Mike
Cheney I am a native New
Mexicans.
you married a native New
Mexican democracy we purchased
the when question show aren't
package store and result in the
Mexico in late twenty eighteen.
We paid six hundred thousand
dollars for liquor license that
price is validated by recent
appraisal that I just got my
head to refinance the loan.
that same appraisal identified
in our local licenses in our
area at three hundred twenty
five thousand so you know
there's a little bit greater
difference in Lincoln County and
then the numbers at the.
Well that that that the device
was reported but from my
perspective I just want to share
you know we spent that money but
the existing wallet place on one
of the seven hundred ninety
eight winter licenses.
I've been hit hard as well we
are revenues for twenty nineteen
down over fifty percent I have
borrowed you see the money.
I have access to care grant.
Local grant those so New Mexico
grant I have a title grant and
then I have and I love.
And we still have the doors open
we are selling to the package
store our bar has been closed
for three hundred seventy eight
so we're continuing to do the
best we can the issue that I
have with this or that there may
have been more research done
that I don't know about but it
feels like the seven hundred
ninety eight license holders are
gonna be impacted usually
negative way.
The values are gonna go down in
our local license holders and
pay fifty thousand dollars and
now compete on the same playing
field and as the director stated
will be moving into live rural
market to compete with committee
so it just doesn't feel
equitable I I really appreciate
a balanced and level approach to
having the free market do its
thing thank but I think that
this bill as written it's going
to have such a negative impact
on license holders like myself
on another note my bank loans in
their.
Or three to one ratio if you
take away the value of my liquor
license my dad worked ratio will
find a seven and a half hello
the classified and possibly
going to be all so that the
negative impact on the left.
Thank you Mr Cheney your time
was up we will now go to Ruben
Baca.
Muted.
Yes I can hear you.
Thank you your December that are
provided testimony we're giving
you two minutes so if you can
and make remarks I won't even
take that long
good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee thank
you for the opportunity to come
before you.
This is not the first time that
I've dealt with this issue of
deal with this issue for
probably twenty years and every
year gets a little stronger and
stronger as.
You know people trying to get
into this business into the
package businesses that's what
we're in the convenience stores
and grocery stores where
Representative are in the
package business we're not on
premise sales the only time we
have on premise sales is when
one of our employees steals and
drinks at their work but you
know.
That does happen but I'm just
saying that we've made the
investments we've gone ahead and
and bought.
Our property hired our people's
built our buildings and built
with.
The potential of having a
license there and it's not our
all of our business but it's
part of.
And all I gotta say is is a I
think it's totally unfair.
Totally unfair for us to be
singled out and the.
You know maybe not whole I wish
I wish there was another way but
I can't think of one right now
thank you very much.
Thank you.
Thank you very much Mr Baca we
will now go to mark Rhodes.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
and members of the committee I
appreciate the opportunity to
speak
let's do some very quick clean
up what Mr bios testified about
was quota licenses or licenses
in the state only represent
thirty eight percent of licenses
the majority of license that
will be granted delivery
privileges are non core licenses
those a restaurant license
distilleries wineries and things
of that nature my primary
emphasis because I
Representative.
The New Mexico package liquor
license folks is package liquor
and when I see this bill is
essentially a dominant in a
domino that falls hard on the
package liquor holders without
any incentives and my
explanation is pretty simple if
you tack on hard liquor.
Beer and wine licenses they
becoming quite because of the
Nile delights they can now have
full service by the drink then
to basically accommodate the
I'll do licensees were losing
value by virtue of making the
restaurant licenses their
license you allow them to tack
on privilege.
Privilege the problem with the
formula is very simple values
across the state very wide.
Currently I'm an attorney and I
do some brokerage work of
licenses for my client the
current I'll do is about three
hundred thousand if you act the
thousands of that that means
that for three hundred fifty
thousand you can compete against
any dispenser package license in
the state that is grossly unfair
as the gentleman for rate also
pointed out his licenses are six
fifty Albuquerque seven hundred.
Los crucis is somewhere between
a hundred and a million.
Rockwell is summer about seven
hundred thousand each of those
places they are being adversely
affected if you can pay three
hundred fifty thousand and make
a I'll do on steroids to go.
With the dispensers it's grossly
unfair and the only other thing
I would add is the package
people have already paid because
they were closed down New Mexico
package liquor were closed down
for two months last.
Thank you Mr roads that was your
time my apologies next we're
going to go to Ramon Sanchez.
Mr Sanchez.
excuse me just a minute he's not
going to show up he's he's a
doctor's appointment right now.
Okay thank you for letting me
know Mr Baca let's go ahead and
move on to chef Fernando only.
He's available.
One more call for chef Fernando.
Then we'll move on Jenny of home
wanted to make a statement as
well Jimmy are you available.
Hi.
My name is Jimi Palermo on the
third generation owner of the.
And operator of Chinese
restaurant lounge we serve great
New Mexican food.
And my grandfather tiny first
open this place in nineteen
forty seven my father joined
soon after my merry my mother
Betty.
Together they formed a great
deal.
And a great family owned
restaurant lounge.
I was when they purchase their
first liquor license I've sold a
license to help pay down on a
loan that was used to purchase a
property that is now Tony's I
replaced it with another that
permits me to sell alcohol by
the drink I considered a
privilege and a serious
responsibility to sell and serve
alcohol.
Responsibly with your local
dispensers license that I
currently operate under I have
been serving alcohol in New
Mexico for forty years.
We know we all know how easy it
is to run a restaurant.
Much less compound the issue to
include serving alcohol and
offer delivery of alcohol.
Anybody anybody can do it right.
There are already enough places
to consume and buy alcohol not
to mention the logistics of
enforcement.
Making the drink is the easy
part.
Keeping an eye on those that
purchase and consume alcohol the
hardest part.
By delivering I'll call the
customer away from your business
location you lose control over
who is doing the actual
consuming of the alcohol.
Who knows who's in.
In it who is it who knows who's
consuming and how many are
consuming and if minors are
intoxicated people are inside
the delivery location get the
idea.
The valuation of personal
property and expanding access of
alcohol sale to restaurant be
license and allow deliveries of
alcohol ten seconds is no good I
urge the committee to vote
against Senate bill six thank
you.
Thank you now we will move on to
Nick Clovis.
My name is Nichola honest.
And before I start talking to
you guys I wanted to let you
know that my father was a World
War two.
Is the face of war war pool and
he's on the United States down.
When he came back from Greece
because
When we were in this for a
little while and we came back my
father put his house as a
collateral in order to purchase
their liquor license would would
treasure with all our hearts we
were in there day and night only
the family I lost my
professional soccer career one
down.
The drain and I said I wanted to
help my father he has a broken
back from World War two and I'm
gonna be there behind him.
For forty two years straight
ahead forty days all to try to
prevent rel and the legal lashes
to be without citations and
allow anything against it the
liberals are very hard and right
now they're just ability of
liquor.
To so many people and let me
those on the not being behind
the bar fifty years and I still
don't know the job is a hard job
I'll tell you right in make you
all right in the bill does not
make you a professor I have
lived it and I look I have lived
there so harlequin Evans.
Being able to be alone with my
children.
But thank god you know I thought
leisure some kind of a just as
my father used to tell me we won
the war because we thought it
was not given the V. thirty was
not given.
You guys want to give to
somebody something that doesn't
as a gift don't try to compete
with somebody that has invested
all his life he's looking down
the line for a retirement enough
to last this bill passes my
retirement and everything else
and all the effort that my
mother my father and my brother
that would put inside the bar is
going to be gone and second.
So I'm up eight every one of you
to understand and if you guys
want have any questions about me
I give you a phone number okay
have a long discussions thank.
Thank you now we will be moving
on to Pamela.
If thirty years and my husband's
life entire life has been
devoted to building this
business with a liquor license
we've given up other
opportunities to
for our life in towards towards
you know it.
retirement or.
We've invested everything into
this so it would be devastating
absolutely devastating to our
family to take that L. you away
and just give it to others it
just does not seem equitable
whatsoever it's as if you have a
house or do you have something
and then no now it's gone it's
not yours anymore it's just not
right another thing is it it
would also exponentially
increased CSS ability to liquor
there by with New Mexico in that
problems with alcohol and that
drunk drivers once once COVID
opens and it's just open more
widely it'll create terrible
consequences with alcohol
accessibility and drunk driving
the state as well
I have an idea about rural
delivery areas if there's a
problem with not having a
license there then it may be the
state to look at purchasing
licenses for cell and transfer
them back we're local areas may
have transfer them to the our
cities and the state can get
those and and just on an
individual basis address that
issue and transfer them back
then is they become available
I'm to address the rural areas
issue I don't do like a sweeping
planet
wipes us out ten.
And that the address that with
COVID going on help reopen our
businesses we're able to
function thank you very much.
Thank you and next we'll hear
from the nest.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
and members of the committee my
name is Vanessa levied and I
Representative Garcia Erreway
LLC we have to into local
licenses one dispensary one
canopy a craft distillery in a
wine growers license in the last
several years we've invested one
point five million dollars for
I'm our licenses and the
investment into this industry we
still owe money on those notes
I've had multiple conversations
with Mr firehose and although I
appreciate the in service and
incentivize Asian language of
subsection D. of section five
I'm I will say that lines two
through eight certainly do allow
for us to purchase back our
package if it's been stripped I
would like to request of the
committee and the Sanchez and I
will follow up with you all as
well that we make an exception
to those individuals who
purchase licenses and I don't
know say the last five years or
so we've made a huge investment
and we're very concerned about
what is going to happen with
this investment thank you.
Thank you next we will hear from
Rick Reese.
Thank you to the chair and and
the senators and the rest of you
who are are participating I we
have I'd like to echo the
concerns expressed by the
preceding them speaker ms
allerede
I represent a group of five
people who acquired and I'll do
for a restaurant because like Mr
by the a whole sense of.
Many people were locked out and
four of us wanted to help of a
young entrepreneur who had a
successful restaurant in Los
Alamos we couldn't exactly move
something around in the county
that only has nine licenses
total because eighteen thousand
people in spite of the fact that
would grow by ten or so thousand
during the day and into the
evening
I'd I'd like to say we bought
ours from the last five years we
are paying a widower who carried
the note.
The license have been around for
a long time we're good to have
good relationship with with the
lady but she depends on our
payments and this is that the
value of the value our license
and I'm afraid we're gonna have
some issues in meeting our
obligation with the retiree
As it was mentioned the licenses
of dropped to three hundred
fifteen at three hundred twenty
five we've already got a fifty
thousand dollar hit on our a
license based on those numbers
and I find the fifty thousand to
recoup something that we had no
alternative but to have stripped
from us
remove some of our opportunities
to recover some of our cost
later on and I am sympathetic to
those who buy bought the
dispenser license and for much
more money but it seems kind of
odd that I would that that we
would lose the gains and then we
would be.
requests to pay to get it back
the the package part thank you.
Thank you and now we will hear
from Antonio Maestas did you
raise your hand in opposition.
I'm not in a position to but I
wish to speak we're only
listening to opposition at this
time Robert about and did you
also want to speak in
opposition.
Mr chairman.
Yes Senator Padilla Mr chairman
I I I do believe that our
webmasters doing a phenomenal
job helping us coordinate and
stay on top of everything going
on here I know that
Representative my Estes from the
house chose to participate in
the conversation today maybe
maybe the time to come here
I think you would be import to
hear from him he's he's
interested in the topic and with
your permission I'd like to hear
from at least some of the other
committee members feel.
we're in public comment and he
is the an active member I I'd
like to get to the public
comment first that's okay and
then after that before go to the
committee for questions will
have Representative Maestas to I
really appreciate that Mr thank
you Mr chairman okay thank you.
So anybody else.
Roberts was on the phone I asked
him to in mute looks like he's
on needed now Sir are you ready
to speak.
Robert.
Yes hello.
Okay it doesn't look like he's
able to get his phone going so
we will switch to support Mr
Boeing ten I see that your
first.
Mr Clinton has no comment at
this time thank you.
Thank you Pat block.
I get afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee on that
block and I to them speaking on
behalf of the New Mexico retail
association and Walmart and I'm
speaking to the delivery aspects
of the bill.
We live in a rapidly changing
world and home delivery of
groceries and other goods was
already on the rise pre COVID
the pandemic is greatly
accelerated that rate of change
and a significant portion of the
public expects delivery of goods
including beer wine and spirits
retailers large and small either
on their own are the ones that
use third party services are
currently providing home and
curbside delivery not only to
offer better service to the
customers but also to allow
these customers to better follow
I would safe practices if Senate
bill six is enacted retailers
would be able to include
alcoholic beverages these
deliveries.
We're convinced of the bill
provides a solid framework that
enhances convenience and safety
while providing sufficient
controls to prevent sales to
minors or too intoxicated
persons so we support the bill
and closing I'd like to thank
the sponsors for bringing it
forward thank you for your time.
Thank you for anyone who wanted
to make a statement but was
unable to please submit them to
the email up for this committee
for public statement that way I
can provide a copy of your
statement to the committee now I
believe we're going to move on
to Antonio masters Sir would you
like to speak.
Thank you very much Mr.
Sorry about that that was my
fault.
Mr chair.
Just keep going to the support.
No that was the last public
support person of.
Jason Espinoza.
No I'm sorry.
That was the last person for
Senate bill six for public
support okay.
Okay so I'm sorry.
Representative my Estes you're
on.
Thank you so much Mr chairman
thank you honorable members I
think I believe is the first
time I've spoken in a Senate
committee as a member of the
public us I mean no disrespect
but I haven't had a chance to
visit with everybody on such a
incredibly important issue
liquor licenses as a commodity
to be bought and sold in the
private sector even though it's
issued by the state is a
horrible public policy is
horrible for our economy and
it's horrible to the very nature
of our economy which is
hospitality food services
hospitality tourism hotels
restaurants bars taverns you
know where the only a city of
our size that does not have a.
A company called for example so
so I support our and an opposing
alright this bill
I think the delivery needs to
happen I think that some
languages problematic section
eleven on page four I don't
think that's necessary I think
the restaurant be licenses is
great language Mr chair on page
fifteen and seventeen I think
that's fantastic to give relief
to restaurants because we we
need to open up licenses to
restaurants all over the state
to spur back and build back our
economy better the
We up on page twenty five the
the granting of the of the
package.
The last thing the state needs
more package liquor Mr chairman
honorable members eighty percent
of the alcohol drank in New
Mexico is from package there is
a direct correlation between the
percentage of package liquor
drank in a community as right as
in relation to the liquor by the
drink that leads to the social
ills and the high social cost
about callers in the home and
elsewhere we were misled to
think that liquor by the drink
causes more social ills because
of do you have the I. but it's
actually the opposite and so
anyway Mr chairman the
the concept of a local option
district is archaic less than
one point five percent of our
state is a dry county we need to
have statewide laws that
supersede the whole state with
regards to this loss privilege
Mr chairman I I disagree it's a
misnomer if you sold me a
license Mr chairman and I bought
it knowing I was only going to
get
liquor by the drink license I
didn't lose anything the license
may have lost its package but I
didn't lose my package if I
purchased it from from another
county granted if you move it
that may be different but
there's three ways to undo this
problem one is but the granting
more liquor stores is not it
running more liquor stores is
not it what I'm proposing and
I'm gonna introduce a bill
probably early next week is
maybe a two hundred dollar
deduction tax deduction over
four years I know it doesn't
recoup all the losses but it
gives folks a little bit of a
soft landing an even better idea
but it's harder to draft is to
create a liquor Fund and
essentially legally.
Buy back the licenses so to
speak with this fund by
increasing license fees and
taxes of which we can raise
because no one you know you
don't have to fork out a million
dollars to get the license if
two thousand restaurants
purchased a license of fifteen
thousand dollars a thirty
million dollars
to buy back the license is a
market value would be somewhere
in the neighborhood of two
hundred fifty million so this is
a large large task before us I
asked that the if this committee
does wish to move this bill
forward that it move forward
with with the liquor license
delivery that we take a step
back of this this license
honorable Hochman Vigil slices
will probably hurt in house
commerce on Wednesday along with
another bill house bill one
sixty forty with licenses but I
think us as the legislature can
work out this policy initiative
over the next fifty one days our
work I'm really appreciative of
the executive and the chief
executive of time into this
conversation with I did not get
a message on my liquor bill nor
did anyone else during the
thirty days but I think what the
governor's leadership and our
great minds I think we can come
up with a situation that gives
folks a soft landing and moves
us forward as a state thank you
Mr chairman.
Thank you representative my
Estes.
Of with that the committee we
have a.
Two of amendments.
So I'll go with the Senator
Griggs who are introduce your
amendment.
Thank you for sure I'll move
The amendment to to Senate bill
six.
We're calling it amendment one
or or what.
And then went bounces around.
Give you give you some.
Okay thirty years on on that.
No that's the that's the wrong
amendment that that amendments
not going to be introduced to
that.
Are the amendment is.
Can change.
Fourteen fourteen items yes
there that that.
On the screen what it would be
primarily to.
This is on on page two line to
ten it says it decreases the
amount of.
Cost of food you have to buy in
order to to get delivery service
throughout the the bill you'll
notice there the word spirit
alcoholic beverages the change
throughout the bill is change
alcoholic beverages to spiritus
liquors.
Then on page eighteen line ten
again there's that spirits
liquors but after premonition.
Online can we in.
Sure to language except for
delivery of alcohol as provided
in the liquor control act which
is the delivery part.
Then on line seventeen page
twenty one.
The cost for the liquor the
third party liquor delivery
permit goes from three hundred
to one thousand dollars.
Then on page twelve line twenty
two H. we strike lines seventeen
through twenty and on line
twenty one we strike the word
designation and that's that I
believe is.
That is the ten ten licenses
being able to move into a local
option district.
And in the annual period show
your strike that that language.
In on page twenty four line
twenty two.
That speak the language that
says that the rural
dispenser rural retailers were
club license can't be within ten
miles of another licensed
premises so that languages is
struck.
Then on page twenty five lines
seventeen which is the buy back
number of twenty five thousand
it is reduced of fifty thousand
it's reduced to twenty five
thousand so Mr chair that's the
amendments that the but I guess
I'm.
Okay thank you Senator bricks
for moving to have a second on
the cement Mr chair server and a
second okay thank you have a.
Ocean of second by Senator grant
who we are.
I guess we'll have both for the
minute or.
Good of.
Any discussion on the amendment
the committee.
Mr chair representative body.
Thank you did you know obviously
a very complicated matter and
this amendment is this really
does a lot to the bill and I
apologize can I get maybe just
a.
executive summary of what the
amendment does Senator Griggs I
would really appreciate that
want to make sure I understand
what you're doing here.
Thank you
Mr chair Senator Padilla it's
it's actually the the amendment
is is less complicated than it
appears.
Language in the amendment which
says alcoholic beverage is
changed spiritus liquors then
there's old language in the law
that says a certain type of
license which is a rural
retailer rural dispenser we're
club can not be any closer than
that ten miles from another
licensed premises I think on the
on the list that Mr bios again
there's around thirty of those
licensure is statewide and they
ran in as a say rural areas the
the other bigger change there is
a there's a provision in the law
that was placed in nineteen
ninety six or nineteen ninety
seven that said no more than
ten.
Retailer and dispenser last
insurers can move into a local
option district in any given
calendar year that language is
being struck.
Then there's the provision that
shares
We're gonna charge you fifty
thousand dollars to buy back
the.
Package privilege if you're in
in our local dispenser and that
licensure is lost that privilege
so instead of charging you fifty
it's been reduced to twenty five
and that's that's the amendment
in New Mexico Center.
I appreciate that I appreciate
that Mr chairman let me get some
clarification I don't know if
you're gonna have comments from
these folks that spoke on both
sides of the original bill you
will be doing that okay.
So I have.
Mr Mr chairman and senator if if
they didn't like fifty I doubt
they will write twenty five.
Thank you okay Senator Wirth Mr
chair I just wanted to to weigh
in and and I and I support this
amendment as does
Representative Hochman Vigil OB
the work number of of tweaks and
things brought to us by the
restaurant association and again
I think Senator Griggs amendment
addresses some of those and
that's the purpose of it so I
just want to make that statement
I do support this.
On okay Senator Tallman.
With that.
I
didn't
wish to speak.
All but but we wanted to speak.
I'm just kidding
Okay
we have a moat any other anybody
else looking at the list here
and.
I don't see any other hand up so
we do have a motion we have a
second so lady can you take
role.
On the amendment.
Senator Brandt yes Senator
Griggs yes.
One yes Senator picnic yes.
Yes Representative.
Yes okay on the left okay
Senator had a meal.
Senator Kernan yes the
representative no.
Senator Corman yes Senator Wirth
yes Senator Padilla yes.
In the.
Yes.
We have a the motion passes to
go ahead.
Nine four one again one.
Okay.
Okay great so hello to passers
who will go back to the.
The bill.
Mr chairman I move the do passed
as amended.
We have a motion for to pass.
To have a second second.
Second by Senator Wirth.
Roll call please.
Yes.
Yes.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Hamblen.
had a meal.
One Senator Kernan now.
No.
Senator common.
Yes.
The word yes Senator Padilla.
Yes Senator Shendo.
Yes.
Eight yes to nail and one
excuse.
Okay thank you we have a to pass
a Senator work great Hopman so.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Mr chair thank you Mr
chairman.
Okay
We're going to Senator Pirtle.
I believe the.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Right so leisure to be in front
of the committee I appreciate
you I can see that you're
sitting the attacks of you know
that I was up
today I have before you Senate
bill twenty five it's relating
to taxation providing a
temporary waiver of penalties
and interest on certain gross
receipts and compensating tax
liabilities do during and after
certain public health order so
essentially what this does is is
we've had a lot of businesses Mr
chairman and members of the
committee that had to make a
hard decision do I pay the gross
receipts tax I or do I pay my
mortgage do I buy groceries for
my family you know what do I do
and so this would allow them the
ability to use that money
especially you look at the FY
are from TRD very understanding
as to what the intent of the
bill is and and so that's that's
really what this bill does is it
allows them the flexibility to
do those things and then once
the health order is lifted they
have two months to pay that so
then as revenues start coming in
from new sales they they can use
that money and then pay their
taxes doesn't eliminate the fact
that they owe the tax it just
says we're not going to charge
you a fee since since for the
public health and safety you
were shut down so this is a way
we can show the respect that the
small businesses deserve and and
give them a little bit of a
break that will have an
immediate positive effect on
them and and their financial
situation with that all state
for questions Mr chair members
of the committee.
Okay Senator a.
Okay before we go to committee
do we have anybody
I'll ask you the public
testimony.
At this time we don't have any
opposition from the public but
we do have support Mr Boeing ten
was on the list to speak.
Mr Billington are you still
available.
Staff.
You still in the meeting but it
looks like he stepped away from
his computer and that would be
it for the support if anyone
else wants to raise their hand
in support from the public.
At this time Mr chairman it
looks like that's it from the
public okay thank you at this
time we will go on to the.
The committee.
Does it look like the Senator
Wirth.
Thank you Mr chair I think you
Senator Pirtle I do have some
concern about to hit on local
governments.
As you know and I think we we
had a bill actually that I'm
caring with energy and our
Senate bill one
which does have a I G. R. T.
deduction for restaurants and we
actually put in a hold harmless
provision for the local
governments just as an example
and you know this I think local
governments G. R. T. is their
primary revenue source and I
know you're in Santa Fe I'm just
concerned that that I realize it
delays it for a year and I get
that and I think that's a
discussion the state that makes
sense I guess I'm just concerned
about it from a local government
standpoint when they're already
in such serious trouble delaying
that per year could be a real
issue some just can you address
that issue.
Thank you Mr chair and senator
and and that is a very important
issue that you know I appreciate
you bringing up and and the main
concern that we have that if we
didn't do something quick these
businesses would be lost forever
and this tax revenue would be
lost forever so that's something
moving forward that we need to
work on some type of hold
harmless our our reserves look
very strong so that's something
that I think as a state we could
afford to do many of these
businesses are only having a
small amount of gross receipts
tax revenue compared to what
they were doing when they were
full open and so I think the
amount of money would be would
be fairly low it that's
something we can work together
Mr chair senator hold harmless
aspect of this bill I'd be more
than more than happy to put that
in there because that is the way
they budget is much different
than the way we budget and are
required our reserves are very
strong as FIR indicated so is
that something we need to do I'm
I'm definitely willing to to
work on that yeah I would just
say Mr chairman and senator
Pirtle that is to me that's
that's key because again I just
I don't think we can.
You know here are hit our local
governments for the next year so
so we need to look at that if
this moves forward I just one
other question
I think I carried a bill which
is Representative Chandler in
the June special session that
did something along this line
you know we went ahead and
allowed for waiver penalties and
interest for.
A shorter period of time so I
just want to I want to
understand how does this does
this does this tie into I mean
is there any kind of look back I
guess or something in the FIR
that cost me a little concern
there may be a constitutional
challenge in the sense that
we're forgiving.
You know something that's
already been paid I just can you
just address how these all play
together and and also I think
that one finalists three
professionals that wants one
final thing I I think this this
is the end date is at the end of
the emergency water is that
correct.
Mr chair senator that is
correct.
but but to address your other
your other questions so
essentially the the area that
overlaps is I guess what you
would call redundancy it's
similar language in the same
language have the same effect
so that wouldn't be an issue
there is a there has been a
question of the
constitutionality I I I really
don't see it that way we've done
that in the past I think it
would only apply the way I read
it to taxes that have not been
paid
in those that have not been able
to pay their tax that we're
going to kind of get them again
right we close down their
business for the public safety
and then they were not able to
pay their tax because they chose
to pay their rent and and all of
those and then now we're adding
on all these fees and fines as
we discussed in income.
yesterday so I think this is a
way that we can help ease those
so that we don't have have
people end up spiraling and
losing their businesses I mean
that's that's the idea if
there's ways we can work on this
and fix it I'm more than happy
to do that but you know I don't
see the constitutionality part
of it that was brought up but
again I'm I'm not a lawyer or an
attorney I don't confess to be
one so if there's any input or
any of anybody out there that
that has some input on that the
way that we could do it to
ensure that there isn't one I'd
be more than welcome to do that.
Mr chair will take a take a look
at that again we're not the
Judiciary Committee here sell
you're on the Judiciary
Committee now center part also I
think you're gonna get a an
incredibly valuable lesson on
all this stuff and we're glad to
have you over there but I
appreciate you you know bringing
this this bill again it's a it's
a continuation of of what we did
in June and I just think it all
ties together
in our efforts to deal with
recovery and and and the fact
that this is a bipartisan
discussion is really important
to all of us because it's a
bipartisan issue for sure so
we're working on it I appreciate
bring it thanks.
Thank you Mr chair and senator.
Right I don't see other hand up
hello I'm sorry senator Sanchez.
Thank you Mr chair Senator
Pirtle.
Say the business you're given
about two months extension say
they need to more for a total of
four months or so is there are
they gonna penalty and interest
on that if the.
What's the
I guess what are you gonna do if
they need some extra time say
they you know they need four
months instead of the two months
or a six total is there a cap of
how long they have to repay
that.
You know say they don't start
going right away and they do
take some time to bring that
gross receipts back up and start
paying those bills.
Mr chair and senator I
appreciate that question
essentially what what I see
happening is you're gonna give
them that two month grace period
after the order is lifted and
then once that happens then
penalty and interest would start
to accrue at that point in time
if it's the will the committee
we can always change it the four
months or six months or or
whatever we we just felt that
two months was was a a fair
amount of time it would allow
two months to have some more
money coming in and and
hopefully be able to
pay it back I mean this is a way
basically to do alone
essentially bye bye for giving
the penalty and interest
so that these these businesses
are not having to choose between
their their mortgage and and in
those things paying these taxes
but I mean that's the will of
the committee Mr chair and
senator as to that I'm at your
mercy but but we felt in in in
writing that's that two months
was was a fair amount of time.
Senator Sanchez you still have
the floor.
Thank you Mr chair and this
really answer the question I
just figured if they needed an
extra quarter something to catch
up
to see if they did have that
penalty and interest so thank
you for your answer Mr chair.
Mr chair representative will be
back in September October and if
this is still going on will have
another opportunity I believe
the the make some changes and
fixes and help businesses as
I've I've heard the spirit of of
the Senate is been to do what we
can for the businesses so I
really appreciate that.
Thank you senator Senator
Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator I
want to thank you for bringing
this bill I think it's really
important yeah we're
we've got people who have.
Gross receipts tax it needs to
be paid you're not eliminating
that tax you're saying yes
you're still gonna have to pay
it but for the time being we're
not going to charge you a
penalty or not short interest on
what you owe Intel you're able
to get back to business is that
correct.
That is correct.
I think that's important I think
it's it's it's it is just a good
policy we've kept you from being
able to earn an income and so
we're gonna let you have that
opportunity get back on your
feet and get that pay back to
the state without incurring
penalties and interest I think
it's a good idea thank you for
bringing the bill I think it's
very pro business bill.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator.
Okay I go see other hands up.
So with that would have the
pleasure of the committee.
Do passed Mr chair okay we have
a motion to pass Senator Griggs.
Thank you a second promo Senator
Brandt.
Of Secretary can follow please
Senator Brandt yes Senator
Griggs yes Senator Hamblen yes.
Senator Hickey yes Senator how
do you feel gone Senator Kernan.
Improve.
She for a.
The census.
Yes.
Senator Tallman.
Yes.
Senator Wirth yes Senator
Kernan.
Yes thank you.
Senator Padilla yes Senator
Shendo.
Yes loss in one excuse the new
ones.
Your no excuse so Senator you
have a two passed.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee thank you for your
time thank you
committee members of.
Before we adjourn I just.
What you just are are are full
analyst Elizabeth Jeffries are
you are you on.
Jefferies
this is my second year and what
was the transportation committee
and I'm looking forward to the
changes this year and yeah I'm
really happy to be here thank
you very.
The Sheila brown we are.
The medical appointments issues
not on okay all right thank you.
Thank you also committee members
I know that community is going
to be a procedure trying to.
Without some recommendation I
know that the Senator call then.
Was part of the discussion and
heard ever can be debate on the
two Senate bills the the.
The Senate bills from the last
committee meeting unfortunately
here technical problems and when
it came to voting
you are able to hear so of a
year.
The peer review or Senator
current.
If you don't have.
And handling of Ferrary.
Mr chair did you want to call on
more you with someone ahead of
me.
I would like current.
Well at you know I I had the
same issue just as we were
getting ready to vote my
computer it wasn't anything from
your end up I lost connection so
I think maybe we need to have a
discussion on what to do most
folks we won't have a problem
but sometimes that one that's
going to make a difference one
way or the other so I don't know
if we want to maybe take that
back to
all the chairs to see what
everybody's doing Senator Wirth
we need to have a an answer to
this because I was very afraid
that my vote would be counted
and I took me a minute to get
back on so I would be happy to
to resolve this and why one or
the other yeah if I could Mr
chair I think the the committees
have been doing a really good
job of understanding when you've
got a member that participates
and it's a connection
connectivity issue I think it's
certainly up to the committee to
allow a we can stand in place
and again we all have cell
phones and so we all know how to
get a hold of each other and I
really encourage step number one
is to just let's stand in place
and and and make sure you know
there's communication with the
member which typically there
would be but I I just think
given given what we're dealing
with we do not want a situation
where somebody participates in a
meeting and then gets popped out
like you did Senator Kernan we
watched it happen and then it's
a close vote so I just think
step number one is to just stand
in place to try to get the
member back on and then really
step number two I I have
actually no objection you know
if someone participated and they
were kicked out and dance again
they can't call in for some
reason I think that that's a
discussion that we should have
within the committee and and my
vote will be to allow that
members vote to be recorded and
so again I think that should
always be that the defaults
position.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chair Senator
Kernan.
That that's all I.
Okay.
Just more students.
That so Senator Hamblen.
Thank you Mr chair and this is
actually just more of an apology
on behalf of our colleague
senator Leo how to meal he also
had a medical appointment and
needed to step out and senator
Wirth I've already emailed to
Senator how to me I was going to
talk to you about his concerns
about one of the bills today
that will have amendments but I
just wanted to apologize on
behalf Senator how to meal who
had stepped out because medical
appointment today.
Okay thank you Mr chair do we
need to sell Senator Tallman I
think there were votes on
Tuesday that he was not recorded
as voting I mean is this ample
where can we as a committee
allow him to be shown given to
the committee report is not
moved I think that's in part or
station it's a committee report
is move the committee no longer
has jurisdiction what is that
yeah that that's why I wanted to
have this discussion with the
committee so that we can if we
okay reporting his boat.
Then I'm happy to make a motion
to allow Senator to all and to
be able to the vote however he
would like on those say if any
participate at.
Also.
All right.
I will also third third that
motion.
Your is a cultural German I I
think if we just do a unanimous
consent that the one objects
that we would need hello the
wise I think we're fine okay Law
Center Tolman to the
since he was part of that
meeting and got disconnected I
do think that we would put in
place I do say that we're
supposed to stand in place and
then you're trying to get him re
connected and then if we can't
then we have to I mean the rules
would say that we wouldn't
although could easily be
resolved as I bring it up and
rebuilding so that the simplest
thing to do is if no one objects
to it we can allow Sir Tom to
the national for all okay
appreciate that Senator Brandt
so any objections to the motion.
What.
Okay we're fine thank you
committee members and thank you
that's great thank you senator
Cormann.
Thanks committee for their
understanding.
And compassion thank you.
I heard that Senator almost did
I a new laptop now he the the
factor wrong.
The.
Connection Mr chair just a point
of order we do still need to
have Senator told vote.
On that bill okay one all.
Senate bill one Senator Tallman.
Yes.
Senate Bill to Mr Senator
Tallman.
Yes thank you.
Of the.
All righty got it.
Thanks thanks again thank you.
with that
We will adjourn next Tuesday we
have eight bills.
So hopefully we can get through
all of that will roll over but
the you know I know there's a
lot coming in I don't know how
many more bills will get
assigned on Monday but will what
we're gonna be busy Committee
appreciate all this time and the
Mr chairman Senator Kernan I'm
sorry Mr chairman could you send
us those numbers this afternoon
so we can take a look as I
mentioned the other day I'll be
on the road traveling home and I
just would like to take a look
and see if there's anything that
I'm gonna miss because I
sure don't want to miss anything
so if you can.
What.
The agenda with all the bills
updated the body thank you very
much okay thank you with that we
will see most of you hopefully
on Monday.
We are turn.
Okay I'm sorry Senator Padilla.
Thank.
Or I was just waving goodbye
yeah I really like all of you.
Okay as.
All righty we all have a
wonderful of a.
Thursday evening thank you Mr
chairman you as well thank thank
you.
You for the work.
Mmhm yeah that would be for.
