H. B. two seventy five.
And H. B. eighty nine.
I have a.
Discuss those with
Our ranking member and we're go
with those so we'll go ahead at
the end of the on the consent
calendar so that'll be house
bill one of five to seventy five
and house bill eighty nine.
With that we believe we have
House Bill to ninety one as a
man as amended and I believe we
have a Representative Chandler.
Of of.
Presenting the bill.
Thank you
thank you very much Mr chairman
nice to see all of you committee
members I do have an expert
witness amber Wallin yes I don't
know how do you elevate people
injured.
Yes so yes that'll be fine and
it is she the only one or is
there yes I unless Stephanie
Schardin Clarke is on she might
be helpful it just in terms of
answering technical questions
Mister chair if she is here
there are bills that that she's
she would be here for so if
she's available be great if she
could be admitted as well Mr
chair secretary Schardin Clarke
and Representative Matthew
McQueen is also a co presenter
Mister chair and if that's if
that's alright
thank you for hearing this bill
I think many of you know that of
the tax committee has developed
a tradition of putting together
what one might consider serving
on the best package to address
various tax issues in the state
on my first year two years ago
on the tax committee on chairman
Trujillo lead our effort at will
along with vice chair so this is
my first experience in
presenting so I hope you all
will be coming
the proposal that we have before
you is sort of a comprehensive
package that addresses
it it addresses elector it
dresses the working families tax
credit.
There's a property tax valuation
for proposal Mr chair that
Representative McQueen can
describe in some detail we
there's also a capital gains tax
modification that the tax
committee is proposing and I
think I will touch on all of
these items lightly as I imagine
all of you for the bill and and
have questions so the tax
committee the house tax
committee is proposing to add
some progressivity and the tax
code starting AT Task brackets
one hundred thousand dollars to
one fifty six hundred fifty
seven five hundred
and we would propose to increase
at a bracket of five point five
percent.
And then from five a one fifty
seven five hundred to two two oh
seven five hundred we are
proposing to add a tax bracket
of five point nine percent and
in in the next tax bracket it's
it's two oh seven five hundred
but not over three hundred
eleven and that tax bracket we
proposed to be six point two
percent and lastly over
three hundred eleven thousand
we're proposing a six point five
percent and that is for
individual filers and I will go
through all of them but there
are similar sorts of changes for
joint filers.
The second
Also that we're making is that
we update the low income prop
comprehensive tax rebate and
this is a program that was
developed decades ago and I
think it's really innovative for
the state to adopt it as all of
you know well we rely very
heavily on G. R. T. as our main
revenue stream that that system
of taxation is very regressive
and what Lichter does it inject
some progressivity into the
income tax system by allowing
lower lower income individuals
and families to receive a tax
rebate based on the number of
based on income and the number
of exemptions that they may
claim we're proposing to up that
update that by inflation from
nineteen ninety eight when it
was last updated and to add a
cost of living adjustment that
that would happen annually
the third up change that we're
proposing is increasing the
working families tax credit from
seventeen percent which was
adjusted to seventy percent two
years ago two thousand twenty
percent.
we are proposing changing the
capital gains deduction and
limiting a deduction of up to
one thousand dollars for for
capital gains that a taxpayer
may claim except in the cases of
What we we are attempting to
find a small New Mexico owned
businesses and in that case we
propose to allow I think it's up
to forty percent of the capital
gain and certain criteria need
to be met to be able to qualify
and lastly and I would like to
now defer to my colleague
Representative McQueen to for
him described the part on
resident the valuation of
residential properties and
increases.
Thank you Representative
Chandler Representative McQueen.
Thank you Mr chair so I'm here
to talk about the property tax
piece a section five of the bill
section five corrects the
mistake that we made twenty
years ago twenty years ago the
legislature adopted a policy to
protect homeowners from steeply
escalating property values in
consequence Lee consequently
property taxes and this is
something we've very simply
called the little lady on canyon
road problem so if you're at all
familiar with the Santa Fe area
canyon road is a very high value
area and yet they're families
who live there literally for
generations so we didn't want
people get priced out of their
homes based on the property tax
but when they adopted the policy
they essentially made a mistake
and and we've talked to people
who are involved in the adoption
that's that's how they describe
it
the language was written quite
broadly to apply to any
residential property.
Which included second homes and
vacation homes in investment
properties so this bill fixes
that.
in.
Let me let me describe to issues
that come up first also we're
lifting the three percent cap
rates of property any property
currently submit a residential
property subject to the three
percent cap your property taxes
can't go up by more than three
percent a year.
So we're lifting that if it's
not your primary residence owner
occupied primary residence.
And we're putting in a ten
percent and I've heard advocates
say
they're gonna reduce your
property taxes ten percent a
year and that's not the point of
the ten percent figure the ten
percent figure was actually
requested we were working on
this bill for has tried service
soft landing for properties that
are currently under valued by
the assessor so with ten percent
that means it will come back to
current and correct over a
period of years instead of all
of want.
Second point I want to make was.
This this change will have
regional difference I think it
will be a significant thing in
Santa Fe in the same area where
there are a lot of second homes
and where the property values
have gone up quite steeply.
In areas where the property
values or more stable you know
that three percent a year
already applies.
In quite possibly already
captures the current incorrect
value of those homes so their
areas of the state were you
probably won't see an impact
from the so.
Then Mr chair and members the
committee to me this is this is
tax fairness policy I think the
people who own second homes and
vacation homes investment
properties does probably should
be taxed at their actual value
rather than then at an
artificially low.
Thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Representative
Chandler state Mr chair thank
you if I could just share with
the committee you and the
committee.
Yes my thought process and and
how I'm doing this bill in the
philosophy behind it I I'd very
I'm very excited by this bill
for a couple reasons when I
joined the tax committee I
specifically asked to be on the
tax committee it was my goal to
try to improve on that
progressivity of our tax code so
that those who earn a bit more
pay a bit more and that's what
this our proposal does and also
that those individuals who are
low income or the working poor
have the benefit of certain
breaks in the tax system and
that also is part of our bill
that we're presenting by
updating elector I think you
know we're really achieving a
great goal and and and helping
people by giving him a rebate
and of course there's the
working families tax credit
the changes to the capital gain
again is philosophically
People generally who have access
to those kinds of deductions are
a relatively well off and are
able to afford on
the impact of paying paying on a
regular income type tax instead
of getting the staff of the
capital gains deduction and with
that Mr chair if I might
introduce amber oil and voices
for children if you could just
give us a brief statement I
would appreciate it very much Mr
chair.
The sure go ahead.
Mr chairman members of the
committee and representatives
Chandler McQueen thank you so
much for the opportunity to be
here today my name is amber
Wallin deputy director New
Mexico voices for children and
we believe H. B. two ninety one
is just enormously important
bill makes a number of practical
needed changes that will provide
immediate relief and also
strengthen New Mexico in the
future so by expanding and
increasing the working families
tax credit the bill is going to
help those essential workers
keeping the state for.
Meet their basic needs for their
families by updating elector
provides crucial relief for the
families and especially the
seniors who have special
preferences within elector of
inner communities for really
struggling right now not only
will these changes improve
equity and progressively in the
tax code and live thousands of
New Mexicans out of poverty the
research shows that these two
types of credits will be state
quickly locally the benefit our
local economy is our local
businesses as well and then by
raising revenue from very high
earners to really measured
increases in personal income tax
rates by reducing the capital
gains deduction H. B. two ninety
one not only very responsibly
raises revenue to pay for those
tax credit rebate increases but
also diversifies and stabilized
with our revenue streams
something that we know is
crucial for a future where our
revenue streams are not as
dependent on the volatility or
long term decline of oil and gas
revenues it's really a key bill
a bill New Mexico needs right
now and we're really happy to be
here and support of the Sanchez
and answered any questions thank
you.
Thank you.
Representative.
Mr chair and committee with with
that I think we've concluded our
initial presentation thank you
at this time we will go to the
the public and you will have a.
We're.
Each
or committees of the house bill
two ninety one.
We have we will first go to
those who wish to speak in
opposition beginning with
Tiffany Rivera.
Next up we have Randy trainer.
You may go ahead I heard you.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee to hear
that registered lobbyists New
Mexico part of my staff
respectfully stand in opposition
to hospital to ninety one New
Mexico farm and livestock bureau
represents twenty thousand
members statewide many of whom
run agricultural businesses.
Once this building in the
capital gains provision which
will negatively affect our long
and farmers and their families.
The property tax provision also
concerned many of our
agricultural producers have
secondary residences which are
used for helping our employees
and the personal income tax
division is also concerning many
of our farmers and ranchers are
structured LLC's and pay taxes
on their business income
individual right which person
direct hire people to get.
For these reasons we oppose
house bill two ninety one.
Thank you next up we have Randy
trainer.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee members Randy trainer
representing the department so
she should New Mexico I want to
address the property tax portion
of this far reaching legislation
the effect of the property tax
changes will be significant on
housing specifically portable
health those who owned it and
those who need it I'm not
referring to the newer larger
complexes those properties are
functionally not impacted there
you were intended change
ownership more frequently
therefore.
Return correct values.
What is impacted are the smaller
lower income properties which
are essential for those
struggling to locate in four and
four housing.
In those whose retirement income
is supplemented by these rental
properties these properties are
the front line in the dressing
homelessness and affordability
people of lower income of those
less fortunate will carry the
burden of house bill two ninety
one.
Thank you next up we have John
Garcia.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is John Garcia
executive vice president the
home builders association of
central Mexico are concerned
about the is really about the
property tax provision and
second homes from three percent
to ten percent there's a lot of
issues but among them are this
led to devastating impact on
elderly families in New Mexico
and it will definitely deter
retirees income in Mexico some
economy trying to attract I hope
you can't support this bill
thanks.
Thank you next up we have Joshua
Smith.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for this opportunity to speak
and I have a long day's altering
keep increase this is regarding
the approval of the three
percent cap on a multifamily
properties.
Although the the keystone it's
single family residences fairly
clear the same cannot be found
this that's multi family
properties I did attempt to
bring most family properties to
true correct it will ultimately
effect on older working class
properties because often they
are there as we discussed only
by the second all smaller
families so you know
sentimentally I increasing the
three percent cap to ten percent
this will be borne by working
class families by seeing
increases in rents and are
seeing out.
The ability of the of the multi
family to not only have to pay
those rents increased property
taxes I potentially also not be
able to improve the properties
so again thank you to
Thank you next up we have Steven
I am.
Good afternoon Mister chair
members of the committee my name
is Steven and I am the CEO The
New Mexico association of
realtors we stand in opposition
the house bill two ninety one
and the issue we have with the
bill like others have spoke as a
property tax provision beginning
was twenty twenty three the
three percent cap will apply the
to Owneroccupied residential we
believe this would be unfair and
detrimental to buyers looking at
investment properties that would
also discourage second home
investment.
And what also be difficult to
implement if somebody has to
residences who determines the
principal place of residence for
these reasons we would urge the
committee to not support house
bill two ninety one thank you.
Thank you next up we have Carlos
on time.
Good evening Mr chairman and
members of the committee on
Carlos on tech president of the
New Mexico business coalition we
are respectfully oppose house
bill two ninety one.
The income tax brackets that
you're looking at are going to
affect small business owners the
most their revenue is passed
through and that's going to be
detrimental to businesses.
And I want to share with you
that we have a United van lines
study about Y. Pino seconded the
state fifty seven percent of the
people leaving have incomes over
a hundred thousand I think this
is going to be a higher
detriment to our state and our
help so for those reasons I hope
you won't support this bill.
Thank you next up we have Jason
Espinoza.
Chairman members of the
committee Jason Espinoza state
director of the national
federation of independent
business.
The service the voices small
business advocating on behalf of
America's small and independent
business owners we do stand in
opposition to the legislation
I'm gonna focus my comments
today on the personal income tax
rate increases first eighty five
percent of small businesses are
structured as pass through
entities to hear us corpse LLC's
sole proprietorships or
partnerships and they pay their
tax business income pay their
taxes on their business income
at the individual right not a
second tax rate that means a
personal income tax increase is
a direct tax on New Mexico small
business owners this is
especially impactful because the
lessons learned from the
pandemic one of things that they
learned is the need to increase
their is operating reserves to
withstand economic.
Basis is this today in order for
them to do that they're gonna
have to hold on to their
operating reserves which is
gonna be disincentive by by the
increase in personal income tax
which means less money for
reinvestment and wages I can
thank you next up we have Alan
Mussack.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee members my name is
almost second I'm the executive
director of the apartment
association of New Mexico we
represent over sixty thousand
rental units across the state
and we are in opposition to this
piece of legislation because the
property tax increase in section
five including the words non
owner occupied here including
the entire I entire rental
market over forty percent of New
Mexicans live in rental housing
the people hurt most by this
bill or older properties you're
small operators your mom and pop
shops your family members who
have brought home for their kids
to live in or home for aging
parents are folks that use the
right one second for their
retirement and who already live
in some on slim margins this
bill includes all rental units
apartment communities big and
small new or old all the provide
the workforce housing in New
Mexico owners may be forced to
make choices about upgrades to
their properties are passed the
burden of increased costs on to
the exact people that this bill
seeks to help for those reasons
we stand in opposition of house
bill twenty two ninety one and
recognize that it has the
potential to negatively affect
housing and the livelihood of
over eight hundred thousand New
Mexicans.
Thank you next up we have Terry
Cole.
Afternoon Mister chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Terry Cole I am president CEO
for the greater Albuquerque
chamber of commerce we're
opposed to this bill because the
state shouldn't be raising taxes
on families and small businesses
in New Mexico especially during
a pandemic these tax increases
are also not necessary the state
is projecting a sizeable budget
surplus these tax increases
would make current workforce
shortages even worse especially
in details like health care
where it's already difficult to
recruit.
To our state and keep them here
one final point we do not oppose
changes to the low income tax
rebate for working families tax
credit you should pass them and
absorb the cost in our growing
budget there's plenty of room
but it is a false premise just
say that the only way to pay for
these charges yes to raise our
income taxes and create a tax
code that pushes jobs businesses
and workers away thank you for
letting us share our point of
view.
Thank you next up we have Cade
Riggan.
Next up we have John Thompson.
Mr chairman members of the
committee John Thompson I would
like to wish all my commented so
after the potential amendment is
adopted if that's possible and I
will see my time there thank
you.
Next step we have children.
Chairman.
My name is Chuck Sheldon.
I'm the owner and manager of TMC
management we have about two
thousand units that we manage
for.
Majority of people that are
elderly.
And we all we manage older
properties this bill will raise
taxes about three hundred thirty
three percent per year on gross.
This is trying to escalate
region current correct in
somewhere less than five years
this is a true.
This is a true imposition of low
income people that we're trying
to support and help and that's
going to raise rent on them and
makes that even more harder for
them to sustain a living.
I would recommend no on this in
this part of the bill I is not
fitting with the with the idea
of how we're going to help our
low income people with the New
Mexico thank you for your
consideration.
Thank you we will now go to
propose raising their hands and
in addition if you do wish to
speak in opposition to this bill
please raise your hand now Scott
Scanlon.
Mr chairman I too would like to
up reserve my time until the
amendment is discussed thank
you.
Mr chairman Chris goes on are
asked to pass my time as well
and speak on the amendment if
the amendment and up being
sustained by the committee thank
you.
Ashley Wagner.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I'm
Ashley Wagner director of public
policy for the New Mexico
chamber of commerce we are
concerned that raising taxes on
business especially taxes like
personal income tax and capital
gains during a time when thirty
seven percent of New Mexico
small businesses have closed
since January twenty twenty is
not a recipe for recovery this
call may New Mexico less
competitive to recruit and
retain a high tech workforce
needed to diversify our economy
thank you.
Thank you Gregory Conley.
Good evening chair members of
the committee out also like to
reserve my time in the event
that there is an amendment
discussion thank you.
Thank you very much whether any
other members of the public who
wish to speak in opposition
please raise your hand.
We will now move on to those who
registered to speak in favor
beginning with current Rader.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee my name
is Kurt regular on the director
of lizard have the staff because
the minister of New Mexico with
an advocacy ministry also speaks
on behalf The New Mexico
conference of churches I'm here
today to state our strong
support for H. B. two ninety
one.
As we know the state government
tax policy could certainly harm
the common good especially the
most vulnerable in our New
Mexico communities and this is
been the case for the last
twenty plus years in our state
we believe that H. B. two ninety
one makes great strides in
addressing regressive tax
structure that currently exists
in moves us towards a system
where people are impressively in
relation to their ability to pay
likewise the updates to elector
in the expansion of eligibility
for the working families tax
credit are absolutely overdue
and necessary for these reasons.
Why I urge you to support HB ten
I do want to thank you for this
time to speak.
Thank you next up we have John
Brown.
Charles good more.
Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you very much
for the opportunity to comment
today R. I'm speaking on behalf
of policy solutions Institute
urge your support for this bill
as amended
I'm actually speaking for even
though I'm gonna be Amman what
the.
One of the few New Mexicans is
our pocketbooks will get hurt by
it but I believe myself with our
family our community will
benefit enormously by all of
this let me explain the capital
gains portion of the bill you
know New Mexico's only wonder
one of only ninety.
Giving an unnecessary break for
capital gains it goes to
to those who only earned the
highest amount so we're giving
away three million a year as
three million here that we don't
have for children we don't have
money to protect the environment
public health we hear that when
there is a budget shortage we
hear there's not enough money
now even with huge reserves we
need more income and we need
more diverse income to get off
of oil and gas roller coasters
thank you very much.
Thank you next up we have Eric
Riego.
Thank you Mr chairman create go
a state director New Mexico
working families we have two
thousand members across the
state and we spent a Spanish
transport of this pretty
comprehensive legislation I
think it does three things that
are important for our state and
diversifying our revenue first
yeah that's the wealthiest among
us to pay their fair share and
as Charles others attend that
will affect many of us on this
call on who should be willing to
pay their fair share to make
sure that our tax system is fair
for everyone definitely it
invests those revenues in the
human capital that we all need
thirty second prize Lichter and
working families tax credit I
see no benefit did the work the
hardworking Mexicans across the
state who need help in these
tough times but always and
finally as others have said this
is a way for us to diversify our
revenues and move away from this
deep dependence we have on offer
also feels no gap of me so I or
the committee to support the
subs to HB ninety one thank you
Mr chairman.
Thank you next up we have a
common case.
Mr chairman I cannot here miss
Mr Simon.
She's muted I believe she's
muted and she's using a
translator so.
On.
Are you all.
You.
Fiscal time.
Janick.
And it worked out.
Okay at the.
Yes.
Thank.
Okay.
Number level may see so you left
the level since early whether
that the that issues you're
having and you'll be in the game
and what it thank so this is the
elderly baseline.
Will I mean at the when those LA
list going to tell you what will
you assess it Amanda black the
available money that in will
make you cool and they get a
look on the F. one was stripped
of a whole little but again with
with that look in less than five
million screens but in one
school and yes is that Monday
ma'am if I may yes you affect
that if we miss it I meant it
you must be an element that you
economic I'm in the yeah can I
get you in as the address you
provided that the program must
that you left but a frontier
media this type of makes this
okay but almost access okay but
almost that that that's them of
their own and you'll get better
they need to have a whole.
I think when was struck when you
have those things you don't want
that in a sense the product a
list hello you've gone that'll
thank god must form those
resolution that is a let the
look that alleges that in the
know that when they could just
only take a single COS but I can
was testimony that is whether
perhaps but that is not a given
that a step on the well we're
not informed that the access it
well include yes when did we get
this game the lead I'm most most
of the west coast where need be
is some possibility to extend
product which are SSD when asked
that a piece.
Lucy.
He noticed that in in the
opponent's of the committee that
that okay misspoke about this
without alcohol in on the stock
thank you your but the the paint
this.
The canonical I think if the
minimum scan and then with
legislation sentences
most of the list.
The pandemic.
I mean
Madam Ackerman that in it'll go
I in that instance that I'm and
thank.
This is the imposed CENIC's them
was going to stand.
I am the.
We must on fundamentalist double
expected.
In
for listening given a face
familiar asking Muslims to see
that.
Mr chairman I think reading
audio problems again.
We are.
Good.
Most.
Now we have ten Davis.
Thank you Mr chair this is
tenderness within Mexico Center
on Law and Poverty.
We need to seek stable sources
of revenue to invest in vital
services this bill will
diversify revenue will improve
equity and fairness in the tax
code so that everybody pays
their fair share and we are to
support thank you.
Thank you next up we have Dick
Mason.
Members of the committee my name
is Dick Mason chair the action
committee of the league of women
voters of New Mexico the
petition states that the tax
system should be progressive
inequitable taking into
consideration relevant
differences in annual income and
the tax system to generate
adequate revenue to be to
central needs also the vagaries
of the legislature consider new
aggressive Revenue generations
HB two ninety one is consistent
with all those positions of the
and the status of the program
that's a correction to reject
regressivity about tax system
that has grown over the last
eighteen years so we are Judy
give a do pass to H. B. two
ninety one thank you.
Thank you next up we have to
pour in the past.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee good evening my name
is Secora Nefish New I am the
registered lobbyist for New
Mexico thrives the state
nonprofit association and we
stand in support of H. B. two
ninety one because it improves
equity in the tax code and helps
those people that need it the
most thank you.
Thank you next up we have amber
Wallin.
Mr chair again might get my
comment as an expert thanks so
much you can still have the.
Thank you next up we have
Reverend Carolyn Wilkins.
Next up we have page night.
Mr chairman members of the
committee at my name is Paige
knight with Mexico braces for
Children and we strongly support
house bill two ninety one I
first want to thank their
sponsors for our layer Act
timing commitment in developing
this package that ultimately
brings more equity and revenue
stability to our tax code this
bill left that many of our
families by providing an
increase to elector and by
increasing
and ending unfair exclusions to
their working families tax
credit both of which will put
money in the pockets of
hardworking families who will
spend that money locally and
quickly and the second giving a
boost to our economy this bill
also raises reliable revenue to
meet the needs of our
communities and our classrooms
and now and in the long run and
it does this in a progressive
way by asking only those who can
best afford it so those with
high incomes and those with
wealth to pay just a little bit
more in taxes each we can anyone
supports are hard working
families will serve as our
economy and diversified revenue
so we strongly urge your support
thank you.
Thank you next up we have Bill
Jordan.
Next up we have been around.
I now understand this the number
is eleven that is a member of
this almost axion if you don't
always know Mexico forty six
Daniel they look at is the host
is both for you also most
percent of Santa hello yes your
update yet are up on them yet
but they need that level he
is the closest Center than rest
that for now and then we end up
with this that I should be those
moment I do not but gives you
money fecal David M. was of
these guys come together levels
in this is going on with that
are you ready M. which will I
was just committee that is which
other assets but what this
young.
Next up we have a little bit on
this.
Mmhm where.
Your best number of ethical okay
the numbers and this is my
number is called sex young it is
improper for murdering Daniel
the business also and then
there's a Yemeni passing account
and look at we are not we're
gonna speak annual
it was one of the following
after media and that will help
with the brand that is already
on Daniel is Daniel you're up on
them yet you have the records
information for liability
agency spokesman of your
personality then thank one of
gas utilities you mentality at.
And yet by we're gonna so that's
the and one of my mentors as
missiles and I listened very
those in the lotus.
Those in Bogardus looking for a
Boston area our reserves and the
primary opponent of us was open
like a right yes I lay there in
a few minutes exams that are
also advocating mothering
you know here in a minute and
then this is a new study animals
are you all right what about
a police check identities
battles but I will be happening.
Arsenal medical yes those are
your pharmacist or west of the
great okay then they can also
come down mother like that in a
given recessing for granular
level as senator Bernie Act
yellow welcome other meeting
stand for anything from the
funniest
guy last gap or families where
you know there was anything else
but I think I'm hearing may
I'm very very very west coast
one million plus your yes Sierra
million when years before that
yes you must not miss them but I
spoke about the post university
level is not installing or make
you feel
seem
very very impressive Espanol Law
Center most part of you
might be a good boy and the
desserts the national rate
listed online I know that.
Yes I
would choose to finance.
The number is find them we when
a status symbol this almost
action on any such unit
amendment this almost one point
you need to so my mother when I
David thanking you come with
unlimited hot water incident
that'll ideal right those so it
does look at me thinking I did
want implants they met the phone
is that it's fine to me yes
also your in most how the bottom
which we'll sign you see in a
most paneling where does the up
with that one was their
community that dentist deputy
says Gallup would happen the you
know for the most happy that
they simply only temple to see
most it check it is the model
for that no so those as a man
those those invoice does going
to middle eighteen what the what
one siempre most see the screen
does that and it features
bicycle skills and these on the
list I have like in order for me
to come Landel sold at the CENIC
I got it was posing with those
keep in it when I got it K. U.
S. economy can happen then maybe
not those that will not desist
economic up at almost then why
would be Alamos total after the
meeting is going on here the on
the nose apple yes but part of
the little will be no look at a
sonus castles yeah level you'll
find that it will be an office
that is hello hello Gillespie
look at for you let me set the
by the lady act it does not mean
that you know I think the last
time you asked about how the
lotus Gaskins was in place those
when we don't eat being sent in
three that's in is the committee
bills and place the which is
that S. yes.
Yes yes
I'm not mandates.
This may number someone on this
so you members of sex you don't
we will be able to make the
state sign you that often result
but the idea Representative well
you know I should be doing thank
you.
I mean if each about a funny yes
but I'll hold us yes this would
mean alignment taxes are you
ready yep this so they'll that's
in the state that a test like
this I mean this and I think in
this up and then you get cable
to affect all of us have been
assisted office going to like
what they they want to
just gone through most are going
to be at that is the only but
almost access you want to look
at that and see what associated
about apple you must ensure this
is the money that you know your
for your must have been like you
that yes yes.
Mr chair if we could it seems
like the interpreters are both
talking at the same time.
I don't know if I'm the only one
getting that but I'm getting two
different voices on the same
message.
Which number one page on our.
Well thank
the number the number already
one thousand New York for those
with the most bad news I'm
already thank you and I know for
four you say I know how.
this was
the most important part of that
is there also an email show
almost yet mandalas for
House of.
Yes thank you so much hello this
is yes while you're with us one
the line thank you for both
I you madam I think the office I
yes you are the average you
don't fall for that part of you
that'll be our goal is that if I
with the funding.
Well the building.
For
everyone with those with those
with the most.
I used.
For this order your poor your
huddled you are a special moment
that your not your next you know
I I work very the state funding
which has lasted
for the because the new one.
Yes I would have been able to
have a well you'll notice.
When this and yet this event
thank you members of their on
the day Menon oriental this
sorry ma'am.
Latest so most excellent very
well in this fun your app for my
of that is just trying else.
This battle they say the is
still trying your solo me just
postdoctoral scientist make on
the go the.
Ago so this happened then yeah.
Level more chill ET your hand
you don't pay
enough I know that.
Well but I mean the us okay just
open the work that you all thank
you.
Okay well again that the.
Action in those moments that
you'll know as and then then
those plans I think the more Joe
you're not.
He's
act as well yeah.
Well there's only that in the
long.
This
yes.
Out of the name of federal seal
I'll grant that.
Thank you very much thank now we
will go to those who have their
hands pressed.
Beginning with Paul Gibson.
You mentioned on committee
members my name is Paul Gibson
co founder retake Our Democracy
an all volunteer organization
with twenty five hundred member
statewide we strongly support
support HB two ninety one we
take the use tax and revenue
decisions as moral decisions
three four three prior
administrations the legislature
has bestowed on proven and
effective tax giveaways to the
wealthiest new Mexicans to
industry with roundhouse
connections into our out of
state industries we're trying to
lower here instead of generating
the revenue thirty seconds our
own sustainable economy that was
a moral choice hundreds of
thousands of New Mexicans in
many small businesses are
reeling from COVID this put bill
puts money in the state treasury
to help to rebuild our economy
and puts money in the pockets of
our neediest New Mexicans so
they can put food on their
tables and the rebates and
credits going to working
families will be spent and
recirculate in the local economy
having a multiplier effect we
take our democracies thank you
next up we have Camilla I will
and.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee I'm speaking on
behalf of the Rio Grande chapter
of the Sierra Club in support of
H. B. two ninety one New Mexico
voices for children research has
shown that tax cuts in two
thousand three and two thousand
thirteen maybe our state more
dependent on oil and gas income
and that concerns us given the
nature of the boom and bust
aspect of of of the oil and gas
economy we think that relieving
low income New Mexicans of tax
burden and then the economy are
key to our path forward in a
renewable future thank you for
the opportunity.
Thank you next up we have marked
the ram.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee our program and I
represent the city of Santa Fe
at today and specifically
speaking on behalf of the mayor
and the city council and
specifically on the section of
the beyond that has to do with
the three percent cap of of Mr
chairman members of the
committee this was I stopped at
one time it is antiquated now of
course investors want to come to
high market places like Santa Fe
and invest in second.
They can't get the benefit of
only payment three percent cap
on taxes and all reminded
committee this is very important
there are services on the other
end that property taxes paid for
those services that support all
of that second homes this
doesn't exist anywhere else in
the country it was meant to help
a few now it is helping so many
were wealthy we really ask you
to bring thank you very much
next up we have the right now
Sanchez.
Hello chairman and members of
the committee my name is Antonio
Sanchez and I have been living
in Roswell since I was three
years old at the age of thirteen
I had had surgery because I
could possibly go blind and have
serious complications in the
future since then my parents
became ill and as soon as I
recovered from my surgery I had
to get a job I have been working
since I was fifteen years old
and and have been filing my
taxes since then I've been
working at dollar general's or
four years I just got married
and have been waiting for our
tax returns to help us get
through this pandemic.
We don't always qualify for tax
credits or rebates for low
income workers and families but
when our home hours are cut we
need a little extra support as a
lot has not been modified for
over two decades it is time we
update the low income
comprehensive tax rebate for
that thousands of workers in New
Mexico who struggle when times
are tough as a young young
family we are I am asking that
you passed H. B. two ninety one
to help our young and older New
Mexican workers.
Who may be in the same position
as we are thank you.
Thank you next up we have to
people who do not have their
names on display and so
unfortunately I will not
We have some user Maria and I
phone if you're able to please
display your names by using the
rename feature and in the
meantime I will ask for if there
are any other members here of
the public who wish to speak one
final
please raise your hand if you
wish to speak in favor.
Carlo crew had for.
Then number three you.
Okay.
You hi y'all
what is the.
Okay.
No one knows what this president
this man doesn't make that may
number is at high to me you'll
Simeon brothers almost sexy on
you we want to know they have a.
Sorry the comment you said that
in that this one uses a reliable
what is that then we'll go see
you say modest on that on them
as you can I have it in this
issue so much as you love them
the five thirty.
Travis county that whatever
money you have brought in thank
you for making.
We just what what lesson within
me hope.
One your opinion which is pretty
mothers.
Thank.
Yes what is okay.
Important I thought.
Good lesson.
The company and I look at on the
basis.
We understand was
it was a bit of enrollment that
you're not.
You too.
Some of the more.
Well yes I'm actually while.
I neon isn't only god knows what
they end up going.
Why thank you you know
is what is most of us see our.
This
right.
The end.
What then.
I'm.
Wespac to read those moment that
you thank you very much.
Yes yes.
When they are.
This is in your president that
you but make them enormous money
about Dennis Fung member us
almost every December.
In yep what the Senate's W. L.
up on them and.
I don't.
Is that
the CM but in.
The number that you want to buy
that so at this point.
Thank then it then it must get
by that this class is good.
To pay for the most part taking
out all I look at yet and this
up but it's you know.
All
of it just that one though is
how wonderful this that late
given if you set up a hello
to state that it's in the lotus
elan you with that in the.
Let us to fund needed and and
the thing.
All.
That said you let it slide that
most of the LESC almost just a
homeless.
With yes the late most have come
together in muzzin those that
what Mr.
It and most of them yeah.
Welcome.
And then the thank
H. B. done and one budget part
of the stuff from me to escalate
the fiscal.
This next up we have Carl crew
have for.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Carla
Cruz for and on behalf of the
centre for CENIC policy we stand
in support of H. B. two ninety
one we fully commend the efforts
of raising revenue by including
little long overdue categories
for high earners we believe this
approach is conductive to a
conducive to diversification of
our economy which benefits are
working families additionally we
commend the improvements to the
working families tax credit and
the elector I and to updated to
current standards with that we
are to do best thank you thirty.
Thank you very much that
concludes public comment at this
time.
Thank you all this time.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you our representatives I do
have an amendments that I would
like to propose to this bill now
at this point to two OO six own
nine point two.
Of this amendment this.
No.
The number of the person
discussion thank you Mr great
thank you Senator Padilla.
so this amendment does a number
of different things some people
are gonna like it some people
are not going to like it I think
what it does though is built on
the extraordinary work is been
done by the house on in the tax
committee in the house many of
the things in this amendment are
things we have discussed in this
committee and so it builds on
the work we have done in this
committee the real intent here
is to keep
the bill.
To be either revenue neutral
order generates a revenue and so
are there some additional
expansions on some of the things
in the house bill others some
additional things that are added
to the house bill and then there
are some things that are removed
and I want to start right up
front on this ammendment is the
result of input from well this
is the Senate democratic caucus
a lots of discussions about tax
policy
I want to state up front that
the amendment does remove one
provision of house bill two
ninety one and that is the
provision that deals with tax
lightning this is a very
important discussion and one
that needs to continue what
we're suggesting that this
really needs to be a standalone
piece of legislation I have
struggled with this issue for
the seventeen years I've been in
the legislature the problem is
Representative McQueen is
absolutely right we created a
monster when we did this we did
it for good reason to again
prevents.
The situation where folks are
displaced from neighborhoods and
I agree we we also did it with
with commercial property the
problem is trying to unwind it
is very very challenging and
there's lots of unintended
consequences not only for rental
properties but for second homes
owned throughout New Mexico and
and issue this would brought up
by many members on our side our
families that have been in New
Mexico for generations who own
their family homes their family
ranches are up north on in
particular but really throughout
the state and this bill would
have the effect of potentially
forcing them to sell those
properties so I'm in no way am I
you know disparaging the the
conversation it should happen on
this and I and I would note that
you know the city where I live
Margaryan certainly represented
the position of the city and I
respect that but this ammendment
takes that provision out.
The amendment also on addresses
in in kind of shape some of the
personal income tax rates to
raise a bit more revenue.
It creates three different a new
bracket starting at taxable
income over a hundred and fifty
thousand dollars for Merrick
married filing joint at five
point five percent and then as
additional rates at six point
two percent and six point five a
marginal tax rates it's similar
to what the house I did what is
designed to raise a bit more
revenue.
On this amendment accepts on the
capital gains change that was
done by the house I will state
that there has been some concern
about the the current exemption
to the forty percent reduction
for New Mexico businesses on
both Hamlin hacked who is is a
tax expert I believe with
multistate tax commission and
and Richard Anklam and indicated
we need to look at that language
we need to get that right so
that there's not unintended
consequences but the general
framework of that is acceptable
and that's that stays in this in
so nothing changes with this
amendment this amendment accepts
the changes to elector and I
really want to give
Representative Chandler shout
out for the work she's done on
that this is a discussion that
is long overdue and we certainly
feel strongly that that should
stay this amendment increases
the working families tax credit
from twenty percent to twenty
five percent of the federal
earned income tax credit
in our caucus I wanna give a
shout out to senator Candelaria
who is really kind of been the
champion for the working
families tax credit he believes
very strongly that this is an
incredibly important tool for
those again most needed help and
so this increases it to twenty
five percent it keeps the itin
filers all language in the
language for eighteen to twenty
five year olds it does add a
requirement that employers
provide information to their
employees on a fail ability of
these credits when mailing out
their W. two forms this is
specifically designed so that
those who can take advantage of
this I have the information
about all the.
It's that are there.
On this bill then does two
additional things three
additional things up it
contains eight point eight and
increase in the corporate tax
rate on this is similar to the
bill I was caring Senate bill
two eleven it faces those in
over five years and basically on
lines the the corporate tax
reduction that was done in
twenty thirteen as I stated on
the testimony when Senate bill
two eleven was presented in
twenty seventeen corporations at
the federal level on a forty
percent tax cut the rate went
from thirty five percent to
twenty one percent so this is
small increase phased in our we
believe make sense how the one
difference from the twenty
eleven from Senate Bill two
eleven is that we eliminated the
middle bracket as it gets phased
and we're three brackets we have
limited the middle bracket for
cell put simplicity our final
the final two pieces to this
there is a one eight percent
decrease in the state gross
receipts tax and compensating
tax it is a this is an ongoing
issue it's the most regressive
tax we have in this bill
contains that additional one H.
decrease in the G. R. T. E. R.
and to pay for that it includes
an increase in the taxes on
cigarettes at a dollar fifty
impact on this is a slightly
lower amount than that Senator
Lopez had proposed in the bill
she presented to this committee
but again that the idea here is
to not be doing additional
reductions in taxes without
being able to pay for them and
so this is an attempt to.
Continue the work done done in
the house committee and move it
one step forward.
So I want to say that
this this remains a work in
progress and this bill if it
passes out today would move to
the Senate finance committee to
again really look at the fiscal
impact we have the different
fiscal impact numbers and and so
again I I just want to reiterate
the importance of trying to make
sure that this bill either
raises revenues or the minimum
is revenue neutral that is
something that I think you know
we talked about a lot of this
committee and that's an
important issue so Mr chair that
is what this ammendment does I
believe on Kelly o'donnell is
our our analyst is on and can
certainly answer question as
maybe Janet peacock was the tax
analysts for the Senate finance
committee we also have our tax
secretary so that is what the
amendment does Mr chair.
Thank you Majority Leader at
this time I'm going only to call
on the folks that reserve their
time.
for public comment and then
we'll go to the committee for
questions so
Go ahead I believe the.
You know we are reserve your
time.
Mr chair go ahead.
Mr Chairman Scott Scanlon
registered lobbyist for bowling
travel center and all Trea Mr
chairman and members of the
committee I know that house bill
two ninety one as it cleared out
of the house is a historic bill
as it moves towards equity in
our tax system because it
provides tax relief to many low
income and working New Mexico
families this ammendment however
increases three sets of taxes
and provides a very very modest
tax cut I suggest that many of
your adult constituents will be
forced to absorb the regressive
tobacco tax increase of over of
over forty million dollars much
more than they would benefit
from the small G. R. T. decrease
I think this ammendment hurts
the underlying bill it hurts New
Mexico families and therefore we
stand opposed to this on
friendly amendment thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you.
Mr chairman members of the
committee John Thompson I'm a
registered lobbyist for the New
Mexico smokefree Alliance which
is a nonprofit trade association
independently owned Baker shops
Mr chairman and and with all due
respect to the Sanchez
Representative Chandler and
Leader worth my concern
specifically why is on page
eleven paragraph D. O. where
there's a S. three hundred
percent increase on on the Baker
liquid Tax Mr chairman that
would equate to five dollars and
sixty cents on a ten dollar
purchase so ten dollar purchase
would be fifteen dollars and
sixty cents Mr Chairman added to
my clients have been good
partners and supported
regulation bills tax bills in
the past raising the age twenty
one we we very much look forward
to some future conversations
with the Sanchez and thank you
very much for your time and the
opportunity to comment on the
amendment thank you.
Mr Chairman are Chris balls on a
on the register lobbyist for
always is vape and C. B. D. we
we support the same statements
that the previously stated to
the committee we just ask please
that the sponsor of the
amendment in the sponsor of the
bill if you we could work to get
on come up with a equitable
distribution among different
tobacco products rather than
heavily force and just one
product and that's all really we
ask that act will distribution
Mr chairman thank you very much.
Mr chairman members of the
committee share this on behalf
of Swisher international and
blue sky distributors
are we to respectfully oppose
this amendment and we understand
this is a very complex issue
with lots of moving pieces from
a tax policy perspective
reducing G. R. T. is definitely
a great goal but it's unclear
how you can make a tax reduction
revenue neutral also we increase
the tobacco tax only two years
ago currently we're at about two
dollars a pack with this
amendment we would be at three
fifty a pack and if you take a
look at our surrounding states
Colorado's at one ninety four
Packers on the two dollars a
pack in Texas at a dollar forty
want to pack so we'd be
significantly higher and we
believe this could just harm New
Mexico businesses and drive
consumers to our surrounding
states so for these reasons we
respectfully oppose.
Good evening my name is Gregory
Conley I currently run a
nonprofit called the American
vaping association I want to
strongly urged committee to
oppose this amendment due to the
newly added regressive tax
language on pages ten to eleven
this will negatively impact two
hundred fifty thousand plus
primarily low income adults
smokers who deserve affordable
access to safer alternatives
what this amendment would do is
a fifty percent increase in the
cigarette tax in about a three
hundred and fifty percent tax
increase in the vapor products
tax with no corresponding
language providing for a
decrease in the tax for drugs
that receive authorizations
through the food and drug
administration's research from
the national bureau of economic
research and other non tobacco
funded industry rather research
centers have shown the end
result of taxes like this will
be more cigarette smoking even
with the additional tax you're
not hurting big corporations
with us you're gonna hit the
final nail in the coffin for mom
and pops and keep smokers
smoking thank you very much for
allowing me.
Robert full.
Later.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you ladies and gentleman as a
New Mexico native in a small
business owner of prestige
distribution I believe that this
is an unfair and overly
aggressive tax.
Nearly five times a tax on
clothes cartridge systems
is not going to help businesses
during already tough economic
times I believe you know seventy
five cents or dollars more down
to earth.
this will affect my company jobs
and wages.
This bill will negatively affect
lowincome New Mexicans and force
them to traditional cigarettes
and I think the state to look to
previous success in traditional
tobacco distribution and have
the stamp or a tracking system
placing the distributor licensed
by the state to only sell brands
licensed by the state to
retailers licensed by the state
and make distributors the first
line of defense as we have the
most to lose and and get away
from fly by night or day guys so
that we can of course this
taxpayer we correctly.
Thank you.
But my hash.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee and you know up you
know we we strongly support this
amendment and the I'm sorry most
of our coalition members could
be here today but we're more
than fifty coalition members
that strongly support this bill
and you know this will have a
long term impact already using
our smoking rates both among
you.
And among adults and this will
have a long lasting impact
especially you know you
cigarette use among you so I
think that this is this is a
good step in the right direction
and and we strongly support this
bill and as you know that
there's a lot of misinformation
being.
You know panel by our friends on
the other side there is no
evidence you know raising taxes
you know shuts down businesses
in fact on the contrary you know
research has shown you know.
Convenience stores and retail
stores have gone up because
speak people spend.
Money instead of spending on
cigarettes they spend on other
items and there's also no
evidence that this would you
know increase smuggling black
market you know on the contrary
that is not true and every state
that has increased taxes as seen
their revenues go up so we we
strongly support this.
Amendment the.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee thank you thank you
that that concludes our public
comment now I'm gonna go to
committee for questions Mr chair
back to work are you just I want
to clarify one thing I said is
just to make sure that it's
correct on page eight at the
bottom of the amendments which
is the cigarette tax it's
fifteen cents for each cigarette
soul so as increasing it from
ten cents to fifteen cents for
each cigarette sold as per
cigarette not per pack so I just
wanted to clarify that thank
you.
So Mister chair we going to
allow the Sanchez to respond to
the amendment.
Yes.
That's a good point thank you
Senator Kernan.
Go ahead.
Representative Chandler thank
you very much I'm just verifying
that to tongue to number first
if I may Mister chair it's point
two to zero six zero nine point
two is that correct trying to
look thank thank you very much
Mr chair we like a number of the
proposals within the proposed
amendment however we also have
some disagreement so at this
point it is not a friendly
amendment and if I could just
explain a few things few items
of the chairman and I have to
have discussed in terms of what
what we objective not mentioned
in the floor leaders
presentation was and the item
relating to small cities
assistance fund I'm not really
sure what that's about and you
would need to have a better
understanding of why that was
included in and how that
promotes the tax policies that I
hope we're all
jointly sharing secondly the
Changing of the tax brackets
where the income level is
dropped from for individual
filers I think from.
Hundred thousand down to seventy
five thousand we're at this
point not convinced that's
that's the correct direction to
be going in and I believe it's
also dropped for joint filers
from two hundred thousand two
hundred and fifty thousand
it concerns us that those income
levels that we're getting into
into working working folks and
income levels and we we would
like to have a better
understanding of how that
advances our tax policy of
trying to increase
progressivity the cigarette tax
we did not discuss in our
committee and we would like to
have a better understanding of
Of the revenues that would be
generated by this and what it
would make up for I and I'm
assuming Mr chair and for leader
the effort here is to address
the point of the one eight
reduction I'm assuming in the
G. R. T. as well as increasing
something that we are happy
about the working families tax
credit we're very pleased to it
to see that included in the bill
so it's a it's a bit of a mixed
bag for us and of course
I if I may Mister chair defer to
Representative McQueen I imagine
he has something to say on the
subject of the probe that
lightning tax issue.
Thank you Representative
McQueen.
The Mr chair thank you yes
certainly all due respect to
senator Wirth
I appreciate his perspective I
do think the the property tax
fix is both a good fix in a
timely six I under I don't do it
as a tax lightning fixed because
some aspects of the clinical tax
lightning remain and I would say
that a lot of the public
opposition to the property tax
piece is really built on false
assumptions I won't the interest
of time I won't go into that
right now I I will just say once
again I think the property tax
fix is both a good fix given the
problem we have in this is the
right time to do it thank you
Mr.
Thank you a Representative
Chandler.
I think that's my summary it's a
gentle on friendly at this point
and we are of course we do a lot
of gentle things in our tax
committee I don't know about you
all but we we try to be gentle
in our objections.
Thank you thank you so now will
Senator of Majority Leader
anything else will go to yes
Mister chair if I could I just
like to address the issue of the
small cities assistance fund and
small counties assistance fund
this is a hold harmless type
provision as I understand it
because again when you lower the
G. R. T. of course it affects
our local governments and these
days in particular especially
for municipalities
municipalities don't get the
property tax
and so you know there the the
bulk of their.
Their revenues come from G. R.
T. so again it's part of when
you start making changes in this
area which is for sure so that
that's what that is that's all I
have Mister chair okay thank you
now will go to the members of
the committee I have Senator
Padilla Brandt and current.
Well thank you Mr chairman thank
you to the sponsors of the the
bill I know on the amendment
right now all right Mr chairman.
Yes yep so just the hard work of
the sponsors of the bill and I I
want to talk to that at some
point but okay a few things
there but and and to senator
Wirth
So Senator Wirth when when their
leader worth went when when the
amendment was developed
what was their consultation and
it seems like I I got a lot of
feedback on the amendment by the
way over the last period of time
versus the actual bill and
somehow it was out there and and
and a lot of people seem to know
about it was just put put out to
the to the community and to and
to the to the sponsors of the
original bill doll Mr chair
there was there was definite
discussion with the chairman of
the house tax about kind of the
thinking of what we were doing
and then you know as once this
amendment was practice it was
get it again soon as we got it
cracked gone into the members
and I think that's when you know
the the word got out that these
changes were what comic Ezzell
that's that's the answer to that
to your question.
Thank you Mr chairman and so was
the.
Was the the amendment scored you
had to talk about that nonsense
doing with a high school in my
district just outside I had
spent months doing seventeen
things like we all of these
tickets
you get we get a scoring model
on the on the amendment yes
because I've I've had messages
text to me Mr leader Mr chair Mr
leader that you know that that
so in the neighborhood of forty
million two hundred and sixty
million so I don't know I don't
know where a role that's coming
from so and and it's a very good
question and there are new FIR
is and and revenue estimates
that are flying all over the
place we were being handed to me
as I came off the floor and so
again we have an original you
know when we when we put this
together and I and I might be
able to miss miss o'donnell
about this but when we put it
together we were working from
from some different numbers and
and a little bit lower number
for the cost of the G. R. G. R.
T. are but they let me do this
let me yield to miss o'donnell
because she she's the one put
together the side by side on
this that we we shared with the
house members then we'll have
the latest updates on exactly
where that is and and again I
think this will certainly be an
issue as it moves forward for
Senate finance to look at if it
us.
Thank you.
Mister chairman Senator Padilla
R. D. what what Senator earlier
works that is is absolutely
correct the numbers have been
sort of flying around all day
wits with changes coming from
TRD and refinements coming from
LFC and so I I think that we're
very close to having a full a
firm number however there are a
couple of places where it's
likely to change
once we for instance flesh out
the exemption for New Mexico
small businesses in the capital
gains
The the changes to the deduction
for capital gains that that
needs a little bit more work and
we won't know what that number
is and so we actually have that
those that take those technical
fixes in generally speaking what
we're shooting for was revenue
neutrality or something close as
the fiscal impact you fiscal
impact numbers came in the
store.
altered our model and so we're
gonna have to go back and and
and play with the numbers a
little bit more some kind of
reluctant to give specific
numbers just because they've
been changing so much and I
would hate to put it out there
and have that be the number when
in fact we are it really in the
in the in a dynamic place where
the number is changing
At as a as we are working tell
you by the minute.
Yeah well thank you Mr chairman
and leader and Dr Donal so
that's why I'm having a kind of
a little bit of indigestion here
because I'm hearing with the
sponsors of the bill are saying
and that I am hearing with Dr
Donal is saying and Mr chairman
and and leaders did I hear you
say that you thought this was
possibly another another bill or
did you not say that I'm sorry I
was doing about seven things
when you were going through the
initial part of your
conversation so thank your
introduction I'm sorry yes thank
you Mr chair Senator Padilla no
that was that was specifically
the tax but the issue that
Representative McQueen the
property tax issue on second
homes because this ammendment
dollars take that provision out
and I think the thanking one is
that that really is it's it's
own uniquely complicated issue
and there are a lot of
unintended consequences by that
was the thinking behind with
moving at the rest of this would
be an amendments to the overall.
Bill it came over you know well
thank you Mr chairman and leader
with your with your you know
full in full respect Mr leader
in and with the with your
agreement I I don't think I have
an issue with this I'd like to
hear big just a little bit more
from the representatives and why
they they're feeling that this
is unfriendly
so Mister chairman with your
permission I guess I'll just ask
Representative Chandler.
Chandler if you're if you're
you're can jump in here
our tax committee we just think
the bandaid just completely off
no matter how painful it might
be and deal with it we're just
we're all about matter of fact
over here we want to get the
work done can you can you tell
us a little bit more about wine
I need to hear a little bit more
about the committee this bill is
a little bit more about why you
feel this way about this
ammendment so it really has had
an effect on you I'm.
Mr chair and senator thank you
for that question I'm not sure I
know what affect means I we we
have some issues with some of
the substance of that one of the
items that I mentioned in my
earlier remarks was
increasing the tax on
individuals between seventy five
thousand it's individual
learners and hundred thousand so
we're increasing the tax on that
income bracket and for joint
filers I think it's between one
fifty and two hundred
we but we we just saw I just saw
that we just saw this draft
today your own lunch time and
maybe that's when you receive it
as well etcetera but
we're we're wondering about the
what affect the one ace
adjustment in the G. R. T. we'll
have and whether it's really me
truthfully meaningful for
working level working people
lower income or middle income
people
the impact of such a small drop
on on the wage earners and that
in the lower brackets is going
to be minimal in terms of what
they're purchasing power is and
and people buying large luxury
item certainly my field of but
so the lower income folks won't
won't I think really benefit
that to the same degree I'm
trying to think of what other
parts of this bill we do like
the twenty five percent on the
working families tax credit
absolutely we appreciate your
Liking our elector changes I
think that that's a real plus
and then of course there's the
tobacco tax and this is
something I'm just speaking
about from my perspective and
that is if the tobacco tax.
The tobacco tax from our
perspective always been
something like
An effort to try to get people
to stop using the you know
smoking at you know a
disincentive kind of a approach
to things if the philosophy is
now is it just a revenue
generator then maybe we need to
look at it in a different light
but that's how it seems to be
using in this case and the
question is if it's supposed to
be for supposed to be if it's
intended to help people cut back
on snow.
Of smoking it's offsetting on
other items in your proposal and
I and senator Wirth proposal
will have some I assume
diminishing returns and so those
are just initial reactions Mr
chair and and senator and of
course we be happy to continue
conversations that we have a
better sense of the scoring
which of course we don't have at
this point in time
so that's just as a general
sense from the chairman and I.
Thank you.
Thank thank you Mr chairman
Representative I appreciate that
so the original I still was
there
Trying to find can you take me
to this page of the section that
had anything related to tobacco.
Mr chair Senator in our bill to
ninety one we have nothing about
tobacco.
Okay.
I think you might be a little
tired of driving to and from
home every day and am I gonna
retire twice received text
messages today about that very
point I thought well surely that
person's you know just looking
at the wrong number and I was so
busy I don't know what that
consists person talking about
because I told your bill up and
I couldn't find anything so
that's I'm trying to figure out
if this is if this amendment
belongs on this bill so yes yes
I'm Mister chair and Senator I
think that is one of the points
that the chairman chairman
Martinez and I we're we're
discussing today to we were
without a care is that it was
dropped into the into this bill.
So Mister chairman gonna dress
that.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
leader yeah so I I think it's
really important to and I want
everyone go to go back to twenty
nineteen because essentially in
twenty nineteen we had separate
bills we had a tax bill from the
Senate and a tax bill from the
house with with a lot of
similarities but a lot of Ripley
fundamentally different policy
agree issues and what happened
is we ended up at the very end
literally on the last night and
the last morning in a conference
committee.
Taking pieces from both
different bills and putting
together a conference committee
report
on one end up I think it was
house bill six and a passing so
again you had both chambers
working on tax policy so the
mechanics of this are a little
different Senator Padilla you're
right now also the G. R. T. was
not discussed in the original
bill and so I just want to so so
again I'm going to recommend
that we put this ammendment on
and move this bill forward to
the finance committee for the
next stop in the discussion
because I want to make sure it
just as you said that everyone
is able to understand what's
being discussed and the scoring
issues to have inputs and then
we've got a number of different
steps that are going to happen
before ultimately we're gonna be
back to where we were.
Before in twenty nineteen
because remember if the Senate
finance committee.
You know again they're going to
shape the some more if we pass
something on the on the Senate
floor of course the house can
decide not to accept our
changes.
And if that happens then we are
back in that conference
committee a situation so I I
just want to lay out the
mechanics of this because it is
a little different but it also
is being done now versus being
done.
You know as an amendment on the
floor or in a conference
committee so really obviously as
people begin to figure this out
and and the impact of this it
will go to the next staff
assuming the committee decides
to adopt the amendment.
I appreciate that Mr chairman Mr
leader I think that's kind of
the crux to why I'm I'm kind of
a little trying to figure this
out because this is the tax
committees I think we should you
know that as we redesign our
committees so I just feel like
we should have you know.
I know I already did it it shows
us what this does to this bill
do we do we are we gonna have
this maybe we already do I just
you know there's a lot of stuff
flying around Is Your we talked
about two thousand nineteen we
have a we need we would need to
conference committee on this
because we don't have our own
Senate bill with the Senate do
we are.
We actually would so if if the
house doesn't accept our
amendments okay so it's on the
concurrence that's right that's
exactly right and so again those
discussions are there I think
the the challenging thing you
know we are the tax committee
we're not the finance committee
and and I think what we've been
trying to do is make sure you
know that we do have a balanced
approach so that we're passing
something that we can pay for
and it's possible that something
may need to gather sanded a bit
or changed
as it moves forward again that's
that's kind of where it is at
this at this at this moment Sir
Senator Wirth took to this point
this is Thomas.
This is going to be treated like
any other like.
The other tax bills we're just
going to Scott said in that
building we gonna vote I'm
confused.
So ms Mr chair that's certainly
up to the committee chair yes up
to it's up to the chairs to what
to do again given where we are
in the in the session I mean I
think that's that's a question
to be determined.
You know there's different
options we could move it forward
but the tech but the finance
committee then really look at
the fiscal impact and try and
shape it some more we also
another option would be to you
know potentially hold it here
and then wait I do think there
is a time issue we got to be
careful with that given where we
are some sensitive to that too
so again this is the discussion
that we need to have as a
committee.
Thank you.
Yep Mr chairman so yeah because
we have a whole other you know
staff about this big of of of
credits and whatever that we've
already talked about throughout
the session I'm I'm I'd like to
see some numbers again I I
walked in here.
Virtually walked into this
committee pro
in full support and a hundred
percent behind to ninety one
even though one of the groups is
out running TV commercials
trying to encourage me to vote
for this bill I told I was going
to vote for this well before the
session began I'm really shocked
to see that but that's another
day another disk discussion
remember that I can't I don't
know where that came from but
I'm fully in support of house
bill two ninety one I'm just
trying to figure out what we do
with this very you know
meaningful but then.
Because it changes this bill
quite a bit in my opinion that
we don't have the numbers so I
wouldn't really know that for
sure.
That's all I have Mister
chairman okay thank you a I know
I have Senator Brandt but I
believe Senator Kernan and wants
to speak on this point.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
I do think we need
clarification.
We we have a lot of bills
sitting in this committee that
involves a tax credits and and
and issues such as that I think
we need to either stick with the
rules that we made at the
beginning of of this committee
and either we are going to hold
the bills were a leading all
right now I mean I think that we
have not taken a photo many tax
bills because the decision of
the committee was that we would
hear them all and then we would
determine which ones native art
now if is this bill different in
some way that we would treat it
differently.
And I guess it's a question for
the chair.
Thank thank you Senator Kernan
now this is a this meeting this
is a tax bill that that's come
to us and one of the special
that we had you know as you said
is to hold all the tax bills
here
I've had a discussion with the
the chairman of the Senate
finance as well to see where
we're at in terms of their work
and.
Part of my discussion with with
with Pam this morning was to
perhaps move this along so that
at least they can see what's in
it and and shape it and so forth
and then I know we're holding of
some of those of of credits and
so forth and and based on what
the you know.
How much we have the capacity
that we collect some of those
out may be of and a vote on
those and so forth so that was
kind of the idea of this morning
but the you and I know we're
we're this is our tax committee
and and if if people feel that
you know we should treat this
the same as other stand then
though we could all tobacco till
Saturday we're gonna be back on
the floor on Saturday give this
people a chance and then at that
time maybe the finance chair
we'll have a better idea of
where we're at as well so so
thank you Mr chairman I think
also one of the reasons why till
Saturday would be a to get to a
real live.
Responsabile F. I. R. scoring on
this I'm confused I think it's
important for all of this to see
the impact that this is going to
have either positive or
negatively and and we're talking
about revenue neutral and yes
much of the testimony are
accesses this is going to raise
a lot of money so I'm a little
bit confused and I think we need
that information before we met
this bill on.
Okay thank you.
I have a Senator Brandt next on
the.
On the list.
Thank you Mr chairman and before
I ask my questions on the
amendment
I I wonder if I may make a
suggestion.
On the issue we were just
discussing I know that the
Senate finance committee have
put together a subcommittee that
had met together and worked on
the budget.
in bringing back some
recommendations to the entire
finance committee and I'm
wondering to be quick moving but
we may be bill the put together
maybe a three person
subcommittee that could meet
maybe tomorrow
in the in the in someone's
office and kind of look at all
the tax bills and and bring back
a recommendation to the whole
committee about which ones the
committee might want to consider
what the impact would be on our
tax policy and I guess I'm a
little bit confused as to what
the the goal is with this
committee are we looking at the
tax policy side so what we think
is the best policy for the state
I mean I know those dollars and
cents that always play into that
but maybe what we ought to think
about is the policy side and
then let the finance side think
about the dollars and cents
signed I don't that makes sense
or what you might think about
that Mr Chairman.
Thank thank you yeah I know it's
it's certainly want to look at
the policy side but the policy
always has you know dollars and
sense attached to it and if the
finance doesn't feel that we
have the capacity to or or what
that looks like we don't want to
be you know kind of off on that
as well so it's it's kind of a
fine delicate dance I guess as
we try to put these things
together and so forth but.
It is and this is my first year
Mr chairman of this committee
but I will tell you being on
other committees I've always
been very frustrated with the
fact that we seem to just move
everything to finance for them
to make the final decision like
they're the only committee of
that matters in the legislature
and so you know we could always
put together what we think is
the right policy for the state
and then Senator finance and
they can always disagree just
like any other Canadian but it's
just a suggestion think about
that you know we've got plenty
of time we got you know eight or
nine days left of the session
we're good anyway.
Little bit of sars sarcasm there
as you as you realize for learn
from.
Thank you Mr chairman first rig
that the with that being said I
have to ask to yield almost
asked the the sponsor of the
amendment to yield.
Senator Wirth
So I'm.
We we've got that **** why these
policy discussions do we want to
use the tax code to change
social behavior and you've
you've done this huge increase
on the cigarette taxes
and especially the vaping taxes
and so I I guess I'm wondering
and is that really the intended
purpose of that huge increases
to curb social behavior.
So Mister chair and senator
Brandt so we heard this bill
this is Senator Lopez is built
so we we went we heard all of
the the pros and cons and I and
I think it does two things one
it definitely particular all
whole number you heard a.
Kind of some some testimony
about the the impact of smoking
and changing behavior R. but
also there's there's a revenue
piece to it so it kind of does
two things and I think that's
that's that's how I would would
Representative and I think
Representative Chandler said
when you tackle the G. R. T.
we've created this monster you
know we've near the base so much
the rates are so high to trying
to lower it by even eight is
really challenging and so that's
that you member in my and next
in the corporate tax bill we've
been having these policy
discussions which is what this
committee is for I really I I
really appreciate the pro tem's
decision to to really add tax as
as the policy part of of our
discussion one more if you
remember the the the bill I
carry.
Was lowering the G. R. T. by an
eight and the cost to do that
was pretty high so I mean I
think there's a policy question
if we if we believe that
lowering the G. R. T. is a good
thing and a direction we should
go then I think we need to pay
for it and the challenge we have
in this is the this is the
intersection between this
committee in the finance
committee if we don't put every
tax bill we've heard.
You know if we run of all out
here and there's no ability to
pay for them and the budget is
gonna set you know number that
scored for certain things we got
a huge problem so that's that's
kind of the challenge of the
tension that's that we're
discussing and I think.
You know it's a good discussion.
Thank you
Mr chairman Sir worth appreciate
that so I'm guessing the
question was the answer was yes.
Share the answer wasn't does
multiple things.
We learn as politicians not to
directly answer any questions
that way.
But the I appreciate that I
guess that and I think that's
the the issue.
Is that we hello all these bills
and I think that was the right
decision to do that for awhile.
But at some point we have to
take a vote in other words we
have to make a decision at some
point we can't just hold
everything forever we've got of
the site is this the policy we
want as a state or not.
We from this committee we don't
represent the whole state we're
just a committee within the
legislature I think a very
important committee whether
someone we have to make that
policy decision as a committee
do we want is this what we want
to recommend.
Do pass to this the finance
committee so then they can say
well dollar wise it doesn't fit
we may agree with the policy
decision dollar wise it doesn't
fit so we're not gonna put that
in.
We're not gonna sit on the floor
and so that's where I guess I
just I see that working out is
we're on the ones that we agree.
to send forward as a committee
would send those forward on the
ones that we don't we wouldn't
and that's where the policy I
think decisions come in anyway
on your on your bill if I could
have Representative Chandler.
Made a statement I'm just trying
to figure out what she meant by
that if you could answer for me
you've talked about
when it came to the the I think
it's the reducing of the income
tax levels you had talked about
getting into working folks at
those income levels could you
kind of explain that a little
bit more what does that what did
that mean.
Mr chair and senator the
amendment that Senator Wirth
proposes changes the income
ranges a bit and are are Bill
proposes a range of a hundred
thousand over but not a hundred
thousand but not over a hundred
and fifty thousand and I believe
my mic if memory serves me the
amendment proposes to drop the
hundred thousand to seventy five
thousand so we're increasing the
taxes on seventy five thousand
two hundred thousand and my
concern is that's we're getting
into the kind of a general
working class a person and in
the joint filing the different
is a hundred a hundred a hundred
and fifty thousand is what is
proposed by senator Wirth I
believe in our Bill proposes two
hundred thousand as that as as
as the end of the of the margin
there of the tax bracket so
that's my concern lowering it
put put increasing the tax on
seventy five thousand dollars
salary person.
Okay.
And and yeah that was a little
bit confusing to me as well
so what we near meeting the
working class can you kind of
give me your definition of that
because I want us all to be on
the same definition I'm just.
Trying to figure out what what
does that mean does that mean
that anyone that makes over a
hundred thousand isn't working
class.
Mr chair and senator I you know
I'm sorry if I'm using
terminology that's just kind of
lay terminology
the that when the chairman and I
were talking about it we were
thinking out what you know what
maybe that's the manager of the
store or something like that and
I don't I don't know that that's
kind of what I'm thinking and I
thought maybe we didn't want to
drop that low in terms of the
the tax increase and that's kind
of a salary.
I I can't give you a definition
of working class B. on that
other than I know my parents
were.
So.
Well thank you Mr chairman and
and I've always not like the
classes I so one of the reasons
I ask.
Last system was one for three
years they are it's not a good
system so just I'm sorry this is
one of my things I don't like.
That.
Terminology
and so when I heard you say that
it kind of perks my ears up so
and then.
Nothing wrong with that it's
just one of those things that.
You know I like the fact that we
don't have classes in our
society I think the policy
decision and I think that's what
you're bringing up is the
policy.
Do we drop that the seventy five
thousand where is your policy
was to drop it to a hundred
thousand at that level because I
think that was still a drop in
the bank right now two hundred
fifty seven.
I'm all three of the amendment
and so this is the for married
individuals filing separate
returns this is the first one to
have the tax break down income
tax so right now it's two
hundred fifty seven thousand.
In.
Senator Wirth amendment has
lowered that to.
Seventy five thousand and then
added another bracket is that
the way you see that.
Mr chair Senator and in a sense
remember the.
It at currently is twelve
thousand dollars but not over a
hundred and fifty seven I and so
we we created and interim
bracket in there so it's now
twelve our bill of the regional
bell is twelve thousand two
hundred and a hundred but not
over hundred fifty seven the
growing need to pull your bill
up and throwing up on the screen
so right now I'm just looking at
the amendment so trying to
figure that out but but yes so
so we're creating a new bracket
yours does that as well them I
didn't realize that sorry about
that
and then we added.
So that we left the hundred
fifty seven thousand in the
amendment at the five point nine
percent and then did a couple of
other smaller increases which
again I appreciate the smaller
increases instead of going back
to the eight point nine percent
that we.
Originally in some other bills
that we have seen in this
committee don't really like
raising the income tax at all to
be honest with you I think a lot
of states are getting rid of
their income their income tax
and that's making us less
competitive
we did hear testimony but that's
getting on the the bill so I
think I'll stay away from that
until we get to the bill I
appreciate that from you and it
helps me to understand kind of
where we're at on that thank you
for that if I could go back to
the Majority Leader.
So Mr.
Mr Chairman I was right Senator
Wirth
So the I think you get us a
policy discussion the policy
issue on E. cigarettes
Help me out with that one is you
know I I kind of have a
disagreement policy on that even
though I don't like either.
if someone's going to do one or
the other I would prefer that
they do E. cigarettes but yet
we're increasing that tax.
by three hundred fifty percent.
Mr chair Senator Brandt I think
this is the discussion that we
had
with Senator Lopez is bill it is
a policy decision about where
where the taxes currently are
where we want to set them what
this amendment is left the
language out of.
Out of center Lopez is.
Proposal.
Mr chairman of the server they
can't remember what her rate was
with that was at the same rate
on the cigarette side because
you on the cigarette side your
about your about half of the
increased you want to do she was
gonna jump at the twenty cents a
cigarette you did it at fifteen
but on the E. cigarettes I don't
remember what she was going to
I'm sorry I just I can't
remember every bill.
Well Mr chair again I'll I think
I'm with you on this one in
terms of the specifics might
when this was put together it
was lifting it out of Senator
Lopez this bill so we can
certainly we can look at that.
Thank you I appreciate that it
just really.
I'm again it's one of those
policy discussions and I and I
think that's one of the things
that that if we did have a
subcommittee that would meet and
just kind of hash this out I
actually like some of the things
in your amendment that that
that's being done better than I
like the bill
but I think there's some things
we do that could be modified in
their.
My concern is that we're wanting
to I and I I totally agree with
you on reducing the G. R. T. the
question is how do we pay for.
And I think that's where we've
got to figure out is okay we
want to do that but how do we
pay for what I think you and I
also agree on another thing and
that is that our tax code is a
mass that what we really need to
do is actually get on the bus
tax bill that actually just
completely fixes our tax system
this actually would have been a
really good year to do that
with the fact that we have a
really good income stream right
now and we know that's probably
going away.
so this would have been the time
let's get this fixed why we have
a little bit of question what we
have a little padding so that we
can kind of land where we need
to as a state but we've blown
out opportunity that's in the
past maybe we can figure out how
to fix that next year so I I
just think there's some things.
I really struggle with the E.
cigarette side of this
I think the the of I can't
remember his name I think it's
very of I probably misspelled it
from the cancer center I think
he's wrong about the black
market we already have thirty
five percent of our tobacco
products in our state are
already sold on the black
market.
The only thing raising taxes is
going to do is increase that so
what we're gonna do and this is
the way I see this what we're
gonna do is is legalized
marijuana.
Right at least you are hoping.
To help get rid of that what
market but we're gonna raise
taxes enough on tobacco.
That those groups that used to
bring in marijuana.
Right now I'm just going to
switch over to bring in tobacco.
so they're probably sit back
going well I really hope both of
those past because we'll just
make our money on tobacco and I
think those are some questions
we need to ask already thirty
five percent do we really want
more than half of our tobacco
products being brought in and
sold illegally because that's
where we're going so thank you I
appreciate the discussion I
don't think I can support your
amendment the way it is but I do
think we need to talk about it
and see if there's some tweaks
that we can but for me to
support thank you.
Thank you Senator Brandt I'm
Senator Kernan.
Well thank you very much and and
I want to backtrack just a
little bit and and just make
sure the committee understands
that.
I'm not opposed to to going
ahead and
As soon as we can once I do
think we need to FY are we need
to have haven't scored but that
thinking about Saturday maybe
taking action item and put this
at the bottom of the stack of
what we're doing but certainly
just need a little bit more
information and I think we can
do that by Saturday and still.
Get this on up to finance it if
that's the will of the committee
to consider but I'm so so I'm
not suggesting that this is that
we we have to delay for very
long I'm gonna do have some
questions again just sort of.
Going back to the policy because
as I heard the.
The presentation on on the the
original bill and even as we.
I think about the amendment that
if there is dispense suggested
so can you tell me Mr chair and
senator to work is the purpose
of the bill are we raising
revenue with the amendment about
what the F. R. the FIR states on
the regional bell because really
doesn't raise a lot of revenue
with regard to the regional
dealt with it with if not
correct on that.
Though Mister chairman Senator
Kernan are you looking at the
FIR on the current bill in on
any of these there's gonna be a
reduction in FY twenty two and
so exactly yeah we see a fifty
five million dollar reduction
and then basically it's about a
five million dollar revenue
generator.
The challenge the challenge that
we're facing by tackling the G.
R. T. which.
You know we I just believe that
we we have to do this at some
point.
Is that it's darn expensive even
even a one eight and so you know
again I think that that what I'm
trying to do is make sure that
that what we put together is
kind of in the nav and Revenue
neutral range or or does raise a
little money I think the
amendment does increase the the
working families tax credits
twenty five percent that takes
it up to about fifty million
dollars at the same cost as
elector so you know you're
looking at a hundred million
dollars to help working families
it's it's the amendment were to
go on so that in itself is
another increase it needs to get
paid.
Some of that could come from the
corporate increase that's part
of this
so again in in response to your
question.
This is about it it's about
choices and and that's why the
policy piece that Senator Brandt
correctly highlighted for this
committee is so important you
know what.
Who are we gonna put some
progressivity back into the
personal income tax do we think
that the C. corporations which
mostly are not The New Mexico
corporations there's a big multi
state corporations should they
be contributing a little more
versus having a flat tax that's
a policy decision we to make you
know obviously we've opened the
door into the issue of the
cigarettes and that's one we
need to think about what I do
what I think is important is
that as we shape this we're not
sending a bill to Senate finance
that's going to go costs a
hundred million dollars.
That's how we've gotten
ourselves in so much trouble
over the years and you and I
have done this for a long time
and can remember those you know
those Christmas tree bills that
that feel great easy of all from
when when it's when it's
reducing taxes but then when we
hit those really hard times as
we did in twenty seventeen it's
really hard to kind of put it
back together so I do disagree
with some of the the committee
on on the bill that having this
discussion now when we do have
decent revenues it we shouldn't
be having to discuss and now I
actually think the exact
opposite I kind of know how hard
it is to have the discussion you
know when there's when there's
not revenues but that's a very
long answer your question but
it's important I think to just
frame it and put it in
perspective to what what we're
thinking what I'm thinking and I
think really quite frankly what
that what the house what the
house did with this bill which
was put into kind of a revenue
neutral place which I think is
there's that's a good thing.
Well thank you Mr chair and
senator and I appreciate your
honesty because I would agree
with you that this is not a bill
that is going to replace revenue
from oil and gas and I heard
that multiple times during
testimony from the proponents
and I think it's important for
them to understand that this is
revenue neutral and basically
we're just shifting the burden
of taxes from one segment from
the working at it again I
presented Brandt let's be real
careful about that because
search we're not mention you
follow up into that higher
category you can be thanks more
tax but I would consider that
you consider yourself a hard
working person and I want to be
really careful because even
those people that aren't quite a
bit of money.
There there are many times
because of how hard they work
and I think we have to be really
careful having raised that so
just want to mention that I want
to again thank you for saying
this is revenue neutral this has
nothing to do with
diversification are are
supplanting oil and gas revenue
and I agree with you I think
down the road and at eight this
would have been a better time to
do a really big tax overhaul
because in about three four
years I don't think we're gonna
be in the same place with regard
revenue I want to just clarify a
couple things because I do have
some questions I was I will I
was interested in your comment
about capital gains at I don't
are you changing that from the
original bills are just the
language describing that so
Mister chairman Senator Kernan
there's no change from the
original bill but I think it's
something we need to look at.
Again I appreciate what they did
in the original bill they didn't
just eliminate the forty percent
capital gains tax across the
board that's a discussion we
could have but what they did is
they actually had they they
allow certain New Mexico
businesses and Representative
Chandler can give the exact
language that came across.
They allow certain New Mexico
businesses to still be able to
to to get that forty percent
capital gains tax and I think we
just it's been flagged for me
that there may be some issues
there are we get answers to
those as well soon.
Well I think Mr chair and
senator Wirth I agree with you I
think the language in the
definition are there it's very
thank I don't think it clearly
identifies who's going to
benefit from that and you can't
and I think that really does
need some work
course and.
We believe that it I leave them
alone I'm Senator Lopez is tax
cigarette tax bill currently.
Do we what do we do with that
bills here right Mr chairman a
yes Senator Kernan it's still
here it's on hold just like all
the other of bills.
Okay and so thank you for that
Mr chair so if we wanted to we
could actually if that's not
something everyone agreed on I
just part of your bills and then
that Senator worked at actually
have an opportunity to take
action on that separately if we
wanted to because that may be a
plus or minus for some people on
this committee with regard to
the amendment so just want to
make sure and know that that's
still here I'm in in I do
appreciate the part about
removing the tax lightning at I
agree that should be a separate
issue and I do think it's
different in Santa Fe then it is
across the rest of the state I
know in reinvested in
particularly there are a lot of
second homes there most of those
residents live in tax in Texas
and they're they're used to
paying high taxes but I will
tell you those homes turnover
pretty regularly and and I just
think every part of the state is
a little different and I do
think there were some issues
with our at.
Apartments and and people that
rent so that probably was a good
maybe even though I think it
could be addressed separately as
we've done in the past I just
want to say one thing about.
Getting this right before we get
to the end of the the session
because I remember at that
midnight meeting
to fix house bill six and what
happened that we really didn't
know what I hope the new
membership paying attention
because it just happened number
numerous times during the
session where bill come to the
floor and in the last fifteen or
twenty minutes of the session we
make a decision on something
that's pretty critical and I
hope that we avoid that I think
it's so important for
transparency for whatever
happens with regard to these
major tax bills that it's done
much Senator in the light of day
so everybody knows exactly
what's in that building for they
take about and I really
encourage at Mr chair and
Majority Leader worth it that
that is your goal that we don't
end up in a conference committee
at the night before the end of
the session and then nobody
knows what we're voting on so
that would be something that
would really urge you to get I I
don't really have any more
questions on the amendment and
maybe on the bill but I really
hope we can get a score on this
before we take action and then
move it all so that's all I have
thank you Mr thank you senator
of Kernan I have Senator Griggs
and Senator Hickey on the
amendment.
Thank you Mr chair.
Couple couple of things Senator
Senator Wirth and you know I I
appreciate the you know the
property tax.
Alright because I've got a
community called Cloudcroft it
really has a lot of second homes
and and all that.
But the rest of the bill I'm
just you know H..
It's a tax increase coming and
going.
but I want to I want to talk to
the committee a little bit when
we talk about gross receipts and
we say that okay we're gonna
reduce gross receipts and it's
going to be a big deal and you
know overall for the state it's
a big deal but if you've got an
eight percent.
Gross receipts tax.
You buy a thousand dollars worth
of staff.
You pay eighty dollars in tax.
If you've got a.
Gross receipts tax of eight an
inmate.
Spend that same thousand dollars
you spend eighty one dollars and
twenty five cents.
So on a whole.
It's really not very much money.
And that's what that part of the
beauty of the of the gross
receipts tax even even though
you know we talk about.
Yes Representative regressivity
and the fact that you know it's
too hard to hide which is too
high in part because we gave too
many deductions so those things
need to be looked at and
addressed and that needs to be
handled differently than then
that.
You know I'm I'm really
concerned about the you know the
the changes that the Senator
Wirth made in the the income tax
because.
All of Alamogordo.
Bunch of small business owners
most all of our S. court so what
we've done is we've put all of
those guys in a higher tax
bracket.
And when we do that.
And I just I just want to
continue to to kind of hard on
them when we when we do those
that when we increased minimum
wages on employers.
What they do is they stop.
Supporting little league
baseball the stock given to
their church they stop given to
other charities because they're
trying to continue the same
standard of living that they
have.
And so regardless of all the
stuff we think we're we're doing
sometime.
No we're doing other things
which have a a real negative
impact.
And I think the amendment has
more of a negative impact than
the then the builders even
though I appreciate the property
tax for.
But you know I'm gonna I'm gonna
differ from Senator Brandt at a
bit and I'm appreciate that
Mister chair I I'd be happy if
we want to hold all these bills
until on March twenty first.
If you if you like do that be
just suit me just fine so
whatever whatever you want but
but anyway those are those are
my comments I won't I won't ask
any questions of of either the
the for later the bill sponsor
out I may wait to we can really
talk about the bill so thank you
Mr chairman and that thank you
Senator Wirth.
Thank you Senator Griggs I have
us Senator Hickey.
Thank you Mr chair and for
leader Wirth for bringing these
amendments I am very much I
Recchi at this not just of being
a Senator but in terms of tax
but I did want to sit on this
committee to start to get a
sense because I do agree that
the tax structure in the state
is it's a friend and and it's
it's and it's it's a friend here
is and some having a lot of fun
ten a consequences and
particularly the unintended
consequences I is a business man
in my previous life having to
work with the G. R. T. which I
found to be so convoluted
confusing
and as I said on the committee
finding multiple the directions
that are going and also the
application as it's applied
probably being and even as I had
to look at the decisions written
by different judges which
conflicted with each other in
and whether or not a tax and
small situation and also as a
business person in the peer
mentoring impact of that tax and
how it holds back particularly
our entrepreneurial economy so I
want to commend you for the
courage in coming forward to at
least start to deal with this I
understand it's going to take a
significant amount of work and
understanding and when you were
in health care we always have a
saying when your question here
it comes out over there and and
and and that you know looks to
be the same here but at some
point we have to start looking
at the G. R. T. and begin to
understand that and and and this
may be a time to do it today
president Biden signed the
American rescue act and as our
at share finance announced today
that would come to him any of
the benefits as we work through
our bills the.
Because it's all going to the
cities and counties and in the
state in fact the cities and the
counties are going to do very
very well with that and I know
the G. R. T. are is something
that cities and counties depend
upon so again this is a start
but perhaps over the interim and
and next the next year we can we
can dig into it for this I just
I want to make that observation
that I think
we've got to start somewhere and
that so I I appreciate your
bring and amendment
in regards the cigarette tax I
would actually hope that my
colleagues we keep and that I
believe we raise it that two
dollars a pack
and it's and and yes there is a
black market the reason we want
to raise it is to stop
teenagers from starting to smoke
and while when they were going
to learn about the negative
effects of vapor we've already
seen some of it
and it is getting more regulated
cigarette smoke.
Yells and we we really need to
try to discourage our young
folks from starting I think all
the folks you know that their
their frontal lobes are enough
developed as they get to make
better judgments for themselves
are judgments anyway and whether
the better not for the state
have the capacity I just a
couple of other things I'm just
pointing out again I don't
understand tax policy but I
think it's a shame that we in
the state still continue to tax
social security and as that
plays into this bigger picture
however it plays out would
certainly like to see that stop
I think the state is a potential
haven for retirement but older
people are going to come here if
they're paying that's going to
be a deterrent for them coming
into the state and so I don't
know where where that plays in
the Kansas and working and I
think that that has a role
yes it to other observations and
I'm hoping that maybe some
subgroup is Mr grant said can
get together or as we get to the
bill we can find out how to of
come up with with one of bills
but I agree that purpose seventy
are is important to build into
the system that's not going to
win me a lot of friends who I
know I'm probably going to hear
about that tomorrow but I think
it's absolutely fair and people
in the state in the higher
income areas and had an
incredible break for the rich
some tax breaks that needs to
get back more to normal and then
the other thing that I was
dumbfounded to learn is that C.
corporations and national
corporations are getting away
Scot free and they're not just
getting away Scot free they're
getting away from the point of
view of they got a huge tax
breaks you at.
With the of.
From trump administration and I
don't know if any of you been
checking the market the last
couple of days
we're setting records again.
We're setting records in
corporations are doing very very
well and corporations ultimately
are going to work if the system
doesn't work but many back into
the hands of the middle class we
want to talk about classes for
those who are earning less.
It alternately what's so I
commend you for putting that in
here and and putting it on the
table to discuss so those are my
two cents so you can say well
right you can tell is a rookie
human doesn't understand this or
that but I do think that we're
starting in the right direction
and then
we we need to find one of those
brand name medications that yeah
with psychotic situations which
is what this tax structure is in
the state I've worked on that in
the and see if I can help you
thank you
Majority Leader and thank you
chairman and fellow senators.
Thank you of I don't see any
other hands on the amendment
that's what we're still at so
senator Clemente.
Your muted Senator central thank
you.
Thank you Mr chairman.
And the.
Thank you.
Representative chairman for
bringing this so for just want
to
I contradict to.
Something that Senator Brandt
said he says is a states are
moving away from income tax
that's not true.
Every time a.
The opposition doesn't like
something they say people are
going to move.
Well look at it and our goal.
Put up by the center on budget
and correct and policy
priorities the first sentences
differences in tax levels among
states have little or no effect
on whether or not people move
contrary to claims by some
conservative economists people
move for other the move to be
closer relatives a movie have
opportunities they move for the
climate.
So that the very negligible
impact on people moving.
Based on the taxes just want to
the current that argument that
we hear all the time income
taxes are the fairest in the
most equitable states that a
total there's a few states have
done away with it so what
happens is.
Lower and income and moderate
income people pay a higher
percentage of their income when
you're relying on a property tax
and the sales tax because those
are more aggressive the income
tax is a lease regressive
property taxes the most
aggressive in sales taxes are in
between their less regressive in
property tax and more regressive
than the income tax so when you
do away with the impact they
think are consequently income
taxes Affairs in the most
equitable because hiring you're
paying based on your income just
want to make that that clear I
agree with that Senator.
The.
That we need to get the than FIR
on this ammendment I do I have
some problems with it myself so
thank you.
Mr chair and that's all I have
thank you.
Thank you senator Coleman of
we'll go back to a sponsor of
the amendment Majority Leader
great thank you Mr chair and and
I certainly don't want to push
this forward until we have the
information so the committee can
make an educated decision about
where we are I I do think the
reason for.
Kind of presenting this now with
the time we have left in the
session is is to have that
discussion on and make sure
justice Senator Kernan says this
is something that's out there
and people are seeing that we're
discussing it and you know we'll
see moving forward I do want to
say for our house members that
are watching because I think
this is important because
obviously that the panic buttons
go off when things aren't moving
but the reality is whether move
this amendment was put on or not
it wouldn't make any difference
tonight based on the Senator
Kernan said that really has been
a policy that we've been
following this committee to hold
back the bills and so
I think we need to make final
decisions on Saturday because
basically what and it's it's
only a one day difference if we
pass the bills tonight a report
out tomorrow if we pass the
bills on Saturday report out
Saturday night our floor session
is going to be in the evening so
it's a one day difference but I
just vast I I want to make sure
all house members that are all
with their bills understand that
in by presenting tonight's and
having all the public comment
will be in a position to take
take action on Saturday so.
With that Mr chair I I'm I'm
happy to stop and and and I
apologize to to Representative
Chandler McQueen for dominating
this discussion because I that
wasn't the intent but I do think
there's a whole bunch of
agreements on many of these
issues and I and I just want to
invite piece by again commending
the house for the work they have
done this year which is a
continuation of the work done in
twenty nineteen and I just I
couldn't agree more that having
this discussion about.
Kind of the decisions we make
with tax policy and who benefits
it's it's something that that is
very healthy and important
happened so thank you Mr chair.
Great thank you so we won't take
action on this amendment to
Saturday and so we're back on
the.
Mr chairman I think just you
know I look through all the
paperwork that we were given I
can just show the folks watching
this is just tonight by the way.
But I don't have the amendment
all the giants we get so much
email during the day but Lane Mr
chair with your permission why
did you send this to us
electronically or can you send
it to us so we can start
analyzing it and a lot greater
detail I did send about senator
I send it out around twelve
thirty this morning I mean this
afternoon I will search through
my email it send it again why
you guys are talking how's that
perfect thank you Mr.
Okay thank you Senator Brandt
and Senator Kernan.
Thank you Mr chairman I think
we're back on the regular bill
right we're we're back in
regular bill that's correct well
I can't move the amendment now.
But that.
You can send a referral little
on their you know so we can have
some fun on Saturday with the
amendment there know what we're
working with the you know
the thank you Mr chairman of.
Representative Chandler
can you help me on the
understand the capital gains
income portion of this bill.
it's it's saying your base you
make a thousand dollars on
capital gains you have to pay
This tax can you explain that to
me.
Mr chair and Senator I will do
my best
Under the provision that we are
offering
the taxpayer can claim a
deduction to the taxpayers net
capital gain for the taxable
year for which the deduction is
claimed but not in excess of one
thousand dollars and this is in
change this is a change in law
and then recognizing that there
the small the many small
businesses in the state and and
sometimes those are sold and we
don't want to adversely impact
small businesses we find a foot
forty percent
deduction
with the cap not to exceed one
million dollars and and that's
the sensually yeah and it has to
be a small in New Mexico
business.
And then there's a different
definition of what a New Mexico
business and I have a suspicion
that it's the definition of what
a New Mexico businesses that may
be the issue that senator Wirth
has been alluding to in terms of
issues we did amend the
definition of
Of the of small business and I'm
wondering whether or not
Senator Wirth when he was
speaking was conscious of that
amendment that
I hope that helps Mr chair and
senator.
Thank you and and we also
sometimes wonder senator Wirth
is conscience because I'm just
kidding that's a joke and you
know well they also wonder that
a lot about me so I I didn't say
that I did.
so so with the capital gains is
that is that really just because
the plan on the cell the
business what about the sale of
your home.
I'm I'm I'm Mr chair Senator I
don't profess to be a tax expert
I wish I were but my
understanding is there is not a
capital gains on a principal
residence and I know there are
tax experts available such as so
secretary Schardin Clarke could
be answer that question better
than I but that is my
understanding in terms of homes
unless unless it exceeds a
certain amount the is the
secretarial.
I believe so.
Could you tell us the secretary
what's included in capital
gains.
Mr chairman members of the
committee and as Senator Brandt
I I believe that Representative
Chandler is correct it was just
looking at that and and what the
changes to this to this
deduction due mainly it's a
limited like I think of capital
gains is is being either gains
from passive income like
investment income or from the
sale of the business and so it's
preserving to some extent the
forty percent deduction for the
sale of the business but
limiting it to one thousand
dollars for that passive income.
So
Mr Chairman
Secretary I believe it also
includes your home if it's over
five hundred thousand dollars
per single individual or million
dollars for Americo.
at least that's what it is
federally and I only know that
because I'm going through this
process right now and it was way
under that and so they said well
you don't need to worry about
that.
So and yet Mr chairman Senator
Brandt let me do a little
research on that I don't want to
give you the wrong answer if you
want to speak also with the they
also those investment income.
a lot of our retired people no.
No investments used to be they
all the that the only if you
were rich did you make
investments.
nowadays especially with younger
people
they are actually much wiser
than we give them credit for
financially because a lot of
younger people are already
investing in the stock market.
now for some of them as they see
it as a challenge but some of
them actually see it as a way to
get ahead financially in life
and so if we're charging capital
gains on anything you know that
is over a thousand dollars for
seems like that would be rolled
into your gross income when it
comes to your federal system the
way we do it but we've put in.
What what's the percentage of
forty percent.
What's the tax rate on that is a
discount as your regular New
Mexico.
Mr chair I'll defer to the tax
secretary if I may Mr chair
thank you I'm happy to answer
that
Senator Brandt Mister chairman
Senator you have to kind of
differentiate there's the tax
rate that sets your tax
liability and then deductions
and credits that you take after
the tax they.
Sorry current deductions and
exemptions you take before the
tax liability but the right so
they reduce your your taxable
income basically or is credits
reduce your tax liability after
the fact so you have your income
or your receipts and that the
gross receipts tax than you
deduct part of your income or
receipts and then you apply the
tax rate and so the tax rate is
really just a different question
so where you fall in that in
that marginal tax bracket
depends on your income.
Thank you I'm just trying to
figure how remember how that
works because our system for
income tax is very dependent on
the federal system.
And so if you're putting in
capital gains on the federal
for.
And you know I I depending on
which form you use some of this
line item forty some of the
other line items that you just
kind of move over to the state
important.
Is the capital gains on your
federal form come in before
that.
There is a gentleman final for
being here for double taxing
people on capital gains.
Mr chairman and and Senator
Brandt I I can't speak as much
to the federal treatment of
capital gains but we wouldn't be
double we wouldn't be
they would be double dipping in
capital gains for their state
and the federal.
Okay it could be if we're
including it in the state and
the federal is already including
that in the gross and then we're
adding at another time thank you
so I'm saying so I think that's
something we need to look at it
just concerns me because I do
know that again used to be Mr
chairman and secretary the only
fairly wealthy people invested
directly in the stock market but
now it's this is not the case
anymore a lot of middle income
families a lot of younger people
invested as one of the things
that actually really impresses
me with younger people is how
much more they seem to be about
finances at least in the
investing for the future
then I definitely was when I was
younger
Thank you for that I appreciate
that I think it's something we
need to pay attention to.
Representative
The tax lightning issue that's
in here
okay can you kind of explain to
us what what we're so you're
taking that out where we're
going to have an increase in
property tax or property value
every year whereas right now I
think it's pretty much only
changes when you either do major
updates to your home or when you
sell your home is that correct.
Mr chair and senator I would
like to defer to Representative
McQueen is these areas.
Mr chair Senator no you
properties can be us properties
can be assessed and
does this thing can increase on
an annual basis the the formula
is currently there are
residential property will go up
more than three percent and
there is language in the
existing statute that I think
it's three percent in one year
and six percent in two years
which I you know I think assumes
that maybe you don't changes
every year but every maybe every
other year that's not my area of
expertise.
Thank you and I think you got
that right on the more more than
three percent and I was I I.
Our exactly how they did that
because we won thank you same
last couple years is pretty big
increases in property value
and so if you're not able to
adjust for that then you're
you're leaving some income on
the table what comes property
taxes is that the reason you're
taking that out.
Yes the if that reason combined
with the you know the results of
the the policy was to protect
homeowners you know and you know
I just don't consider the
vacation home you know in the
resort community in New Mexico
to be that thank homeowner that
we wanted to protect and I think
those property should be taxed
at it's called the current and
correct I think that's the fair
approach to tax second homes
vacation properties investment
properties at current and
correct value.
Okay so are we leaving that in
place that Mr Chairman
Representative for the property
that is occupied by the owner
I merry primary residence
owneroccupied stays at three
percent okay.
So in other words if I if I buy
a vacation home don't buy it New
Mexico by another state that
doesn't do that and looks
actually center if you buy
vacation on you're gonna be
occurring correct because you
just bother right so it's
automatically going to go to
current and correct so unless
you're worried about buying a
vacation home and holding it for
thirty years you know maybe that
gets factored in but what I hear
from in formally for realtors is
people who are buying vacation
homes to live in Texas who live
in California they're amazed how
lower property taxes are they're
not worried about the property
tax increase they think they're
getting a deal is this.
Mr Chairman compared to
California everything here
street and that's my home state
so I can say anything against
that I want.
I made that decision to look to
leave their so yeah there to
their you know their their at
five dollars a gallon for
gasoline I don't think we want
to be like them
so.
Okay so that makes sense on
that.
I do think we need to look at
the situation and maybe figure
out there some language for that
family home.
that's been yeah that family
rancher family property that's
been passed down over
generations what we don't want
to do is just tax them.
Keeping their property unless
you've already done that see you
pulling some papers out so.
Mr chair Senator there are some
constitutional limitations on on
how finally we can slice it yeah
we're limited on touch the.
Taxing the characteristics of
age income and owner occupancy.
So if its owner occupancy we're
good if it's how long is our own
the home we're we're probably
and shaky ground there and and
that's why the the bill as
written as is because it would
satisfy the constitutional yes
what is the age part is that the
person's angel properties H..
Mr chair Senator ugly with the
person's age we often give tax
breaks you know there there are
various things we do tax rates
for the elderly tax rates for
veterans yeah and those are
those are considered aspects of
of the owner occupancy.
Thank you very much for sharing.
Well this gentleman.
Thank you Senator Brandt I had
Senator Kernan I have heard next
Senator Kernan are you still on.
I don't see your hand up any
longer at my hand down I think I
I think I'm good for tonight
thank you on that thank you
thank you senator do we have any
other members of the committee
on the bill.
I don't see any others
So here we are hi here we go
Senator Griggs your next.
Thank you
by share sometimes getting all
the buttons pushed is a little
bit of a trick but I I did want
to to ask Representative
McQueen.
Why we picked ten percent are on
the on the property tax for out
of state guys and not say six
percent or so so if
Representative McQueen could
that could answer that I
appreciate.
Mr chair Senator Griggs so that
there is no bill a couple years
ago just lifted the cap the
three percent cap for the how
the state owners in the
content in certain was that if
you did have a property that was
assessed well below its current
value you can hit really hard
the next year could you go the
current and correct all at once
so the ten percent is actually a
soft landing.
Vision did you would gradually
go back up to current and
correct not all at once in the
explanation to me of the math
and I and don't ask me to repeat
this because I I don't know how
works but the expectation is
that it would go back to current
and correct over the period of
about seven years.
Okay thank thank you Mr chair
thank you Representative I you
know I don't I don't know how
that would be and and you know
some of it some of it wouldn't
be impactful at all is the
assessor has somehow managed to
catch up and there's you know
there's gonna be properties that
have sold and I believe when
they shall.
You know the next time property
taxes is usually higher because
they re evaluated based on the
sale so you know they catch up
but the you know the guys that
have been there and held it for
a long time which is why you
know the tax lightning.
Provisions came into effect in
the first place is in order to
in any primarily appeared
Sanchez in order to protect
those folks who had lived in
those properties for years and
then the escalation and values
around.
Really we kicked him in the in
the **** our show I'd I
appreciate that answer I you
know ten percent maybes gooders
riders anything it just.
It is when you're on the end of
it regardless of you know what
anybody thinks of of that when
you're property intact property
tax increases ten percent that
next that make sure you are
aware of.
For dang sure when it happened
so sure thank you Mr chairman
thank you Representative
appreciate that.
Thank you Senator Griggs I am
just double checking the
committee to see if there's
anybody else that wants to.
Chime in on this very important
piece of legislation I don't see
any others
This coming all the way down
because about a quarter.
Gentleman can I come in for a
second time absolutely Senator
thank you Mr chairman
if I could go back to
Representative McQueen on the
the
The property tax issue
there's some concern about how
that will affect multi family
dwellings so your apartment
complexes special year low
income ones could you address
that please.
Mr chair Senator you know that's
a good question and we actually
looked at whether or not we can
we're trying to figure out how
the slices whether or not we can
address the renter issue
because investment properties
like that with your own
apartment building a multi
family housing that's likely to
be investment property is likely
not to be owner occupied primary
residence and we were told by
the council service that we we
can't print slices that fine
that would pass constitutional
muster I will say you know we we
hear a lot of public opposition
based on that issue
the actual affordable housing
advocates like this bill they
think this bill is a good thing
for long term affordable housing
and one thing they note is that
the current structure favors
older housing stock so if you
have a thirty forty year old
apartment building that's been
held by corporation for a long
time you're paying a lot less in
taxes than the guy that wants to
build a new apartment building
and bring new housing stock
online so you're essentially can
subsidize their.
And there is a disincentive to
build new apartments.
Okay so Mr Chairman
representative with those tend
to be the least expensive.
Housing options for people's in
those older apartment complexes
and I have no interest in
apartment complexes just so
everyone's clear
so I just I I guess.
I'm a little bit concerned and
wondering why the out because I
I I understand what they're
saying about the new apartment
complexes but I will tell you
knew even middle.
A corporate complexes
there were at least in the metro
area is through the roof you
know for two bedroom apartment
you're looking at a thousand
dollars which is a really
affordable for low income
individuals so
I'd love for you to address that
if you will or maybe maybe you
that that's all you really have
to say on that no Mr Senator at
you know I I don't disagree with
that I don't think the entire
rent increase would be passed
through I think some percent of
it probably would be to the
extent you know market forces
allow that in you know I I do
think that if everyone if we
have a level playing field it
provides an opportunity not only
to build new apartment buildings
but also the to work with people
to get them into home ownership.
And I personally think
homeownership is a great thing
for people in terms of only a
personal stability but wealth
building.
and that's something I'd like to
see so if we you know we have
people currently running all
departments and they're paying
through the nose you know we
need to we need to look at that
at some point.
And I appreciate that and I
always encourage anyone I know.
To by I have the I have done
quite well buying and selling
the homes I've looked at and in
fact the one place I was
pastoring that having a
questions I don't know if you
know what that is but the church
owned the home that I lived in I
bought the house in that
community and rented out so I've
been a landlord once in my
lifetime.
So that I could gain equity
while I was there pastor because
the worst thing you can do is
come out of the housing market
for several years and actually
did very very well with that
So I always encourage people but
the you know a lot of people
that read not everybody some
people just like to read because
they don't like any kind of Mr
maintenance or any kind of
building maintenance.
I don't think that's the best
decision but that's why some
people do but most say most lot
of people that rent don't have
the credit.
Built up yet.
To buy because you have to have
a pretty good credit rating to
buy a home
and of course now we sing this
explosion and housing prices so
I think it be very difficult for
someone to buy affordable home
as their first home right now so
I I think that's a that's a
concern I have in that area I
think it's something we really
need to look at maybe study what
the effects would be on
affordable housing for people
but that that's the only other
question I have thank you thank
you Mr chairman percent.
Thank you senator rent the
Senator Padilla necks I thank
you Mr chairman I know with this
bill now for about
I don't know while over fifty
minutes yeah so so well I just
wanted to ask the secretary is
still online with us Mr Chairman
representative is right just ask
her quick question.
Good evening secretary so nice
to see you
are doing an awful job by the
way we just love the work that
you're doing thank you up so I
just wanted to do the transition
in the FIR
from FY twenty two FY twenty
three the fifty over the fifty
six million dollar
I guess cost to make this
package work in that we go to a
fifty five million dollar turn
around in the very next year can
you just give us the highlights
on how that math came together I
just want to make sure I fully
understand.
Yes Mr chairman and senator
I'm kind of bear with me because
I'm looking between the FIR
that's published and then the
the table for appreciation of
tax you have the time that I was
going to ask this question I
apologize no problem I think
there's a couple different
reasons for that the first and
the most important is that in FY
twenty two the pip bracket
change is a half your impact so
the pet bracket and that would
that would be the case if you
there the H. tier C. sub board
the amendment that you consider
tonight so you have a half your
impact adding to revenue in FY
twenty two and then a full year
from FY twenty three on out
another issue is that the
capital gains deduction doesn't
start raising revenue at all
until FY twenty three.
I think those are the two major
things they have the revenue
raisers that don't kick in fully
but the things that diminish
Revenue like elector and working
families tax credit
those Kickin for a full year in
FY twenty two so that's
basically why you see that in
the FIR okay thank you Mr
chairman thank you madam
secretary and so I'm looking at
the document that I that I see
right now that was given to us
today and it says that it was
last updated on March tenth
so is that going to be the most
current one.
I'm sorry Mr chairman Senator
Padilla I don't have what you
have.
I'm sorry so it's the FY are
that was produced with this bill
is a produce first on March
second and then it was produced
again on on March tenth which
was just yesterday so I don't
know if this.
That Senator is the version that
only incorporates the house
floor amendment it does not
include the amendment that you
considered but didn't get adopt
today.
Yes I I I I figured I was
thinking I was going to be my
next question Mr chairman so
this does not at all reflect
that amendment this evening okay
just wanted to make sure because
I think we might have if it did
I was going to want to go back
to that discussion spoke with
thank you for clearing that up
and and that's that's basically
all that I had Mr chairman I
just want to restate that I'm
fully supportive of the bill and
and and also made that clear
known ahead of time Mr chairman
and I I do want to say also I
think we've had a very robust
conversation on this this is
probably one of the more
robust and complete and and
comprehensive packages that we
look at all the others that
we're going to discuss I think
on Saturday that's Mr chairman
Greg if I'm wrong they're the
one officer the ones that you
know the individual decide right
right several of them or
whatever but this is pretty
complete as a lot of really good
information to it I hope that we
spend.
I don't know how you're going to
prioritize Mr chairman Saturday
but I hope that you'll put this
at or near the top because it's
pretty comprehensive it it
affects a vast majority of the
state so I just wanted to on
behalf of the advocates say that
I hope that we make this one a.
The top of the list discussion
because I know we're gonna have
sounds like a very busy Saturday
and then of course whatever if
we can push really hard to get
the the effect that that the
amendment senator of the arrests
amendment is going to have all
these numbers here I think we
really need to see those ASAP
thank you Mr.
Thank you Senator Padilla
I think the questions that I
have all been answered by now so
We are not going to take action
on the amendment nor the bill.
So
I'll just return it back to
Representative Chandler for any
thoughts.
Mr chair thank you very much and
thank you committee for that as
the as many of you mentioned the
robust an interesting discussion
it's hard to believe that tax
policy can be so much fun but it
really I mean there's a lot of
there are a lot of moving parts
that I think make it very
interesting I do want to point
out one last thing and then I
know you need to get on to your
agenda and that is.
The way we structured our bill
is it pays it essentially pays
for itself and that was by
design and that is typical of
our committee likes to work and
so I just wanted to point that
out to you Mr chair and
committee and and thank you very
much for your time and your
interest in our bill thank you.
Thank you of Representative
Chandler and Representative
McQueen so with that we will
conclude this portion of the
discussion on the bill and the
amendment and we will see you
back on Saturday.
Mr chairman I just just want to
make sure thanks under current
header and maybe it was just not
taken down yet I don't know
what I'd I just have a comment I
don't think we can do this to
nine because we have a lot of
advocates out there who want to
speak on many bills but we spent
almost an hour and hearing from
from a testimony on this bill
and we have nineteen more bills
and I don't know if as a
committee we need to look at
what judiciary is doing and what
finance is doing and somehow
compact the testimony and and
certainly not calling for that
tonight because I know they're
people waiting to do that but I
think going forward if we don't
do that all the people that are
advocating for the bills we
won't even hear their bills so
could we have that conversation
maybe
sometime tomorrow with members
of the committee to see what the
preferences with regard to
testimony thank you Mr chair
thank you Senator Kernan I know
you you and I've had kind of a
going back and forth about
trying to figure out how we do
that but but I appreciate that
let's let's meet tomorrow and
school forward if we may adopt
the what the the other
committees are are beginning to
do.
Thank you.
Thank you thank you Mr chair.
Okay so with that we will now
move on to of house bill
fifteen.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee I before we get
started Representative or yes
and I think Lujan.
So it's like the our policy has
been to since anything that has
impact on we're not gonna take
action on this tonight we'll
we'll do that on Saturday so
just go ahead and a presenter
bill and we'll go to questions
and input from the public as
well.
Thank you so much Mister said
thank you so much Mister chair I
I there is an amendment would
you like me to read that to to
number now and make comments on
on the amendment now and
yeah I believe of the ticket the
amendment so.
We have somebody to move the
amendment for discussion
purposes Mr chair Senator how to
me I move to hear the amendment
it also acted for discussion
purposes okay thank you.
Representative go ahead thank
you Mr chair I I will discuss
some of the the at fifteen the
amendment at the I'm toward the
end of my my statement
thank you so much I I really it
I'm I'm a freshman.
At any any grace it you couldn't
you can give that would be I I
would be very appreciative
so I'm here Representative HB
fifteen which replaces the
sustainable buildings tax credit
that was up from twenty fifteen
that was passed by Senator Wirth
who also introduced the original
tax credit in the early two
thousands that twenty fifteen
tax credit has really been
instrumental in transforming the
market for new buildings in New
Mexico just a few years ago The
New Mexico energy conservation
code was updated and now we need
a new twenty twenty one
sustainable buildings tax credit
to be adopted so that our
policies are up to date and we
can encouraging really of reward
energy efficiency and
sustainability.
So this is what the bill does
it creates tax incentives for
new homes and commercial
buildings that include a new
requirements such as broadband
access we think that these new
requirements are are really the
best way to move the market
forward toward the back of the
very best energy efficiency and
sustainable technologies and
building science and the
building the something I think
is really important for for New
Mexican families right now HB
fifteen includes a new tax
credit for energy efficiency for
existing homes and buildings
this is for things like energy
star heat pumps a new windows
water heaters doors insulation
you know there are nearly a
million existing homes in our
state so this new credit will
help those homeowners and
business owners a really able to
invest their dollars in the
latest technologies to make
their of their buildings more
sustainable and efficient and
it'll also have an added benefit
of helping to lower some energy
bills for many New Mexicans and
also improve community health
through reduced emissions
there's an extra incentive
though for our most vulnerable
New Mexicans low income New
Mexicans can get double credits
that are that are refundable
transferable on this applies
also to builders of affordable
housing I think this is a really
important way to get benefits to
low income New Mexicans who
would otherwise not be able to
invest in politicians say and
comfort and safety because that
the up front cost of some of
these measures are just so high
so the bill has an annual cap a
sunset and includes annual
reporting requirements and now
Mr chair members of the the
committee would you like me to
go through the amendments now up
please explain the amendment and
if there's any questions from
the committee on the amendment
will what we're on the amendment
now.
Okay okay so what the amendment
does it extends the tax credits
for the twenty fifteen tax
credits for an additional year a
new buildings that are
constructed before April first
twenty twenty three are eligible
for the old for twenty fifteen
tax credits this is a request by
by the home builders and to
allow the and sometimes meet the
new standards and and we think
it's that we think that that
this is a good one only those
projects that are completed on
or after April first twenty
twenty three will be eligible
for the new twenty twenty one of
credits that way in the folks
who manages program will be
dealing with two different tax
credit at the same time
existing building credits will
begin with the effective date of
this legislation so that that'll
started you for existing homes
that will start right away on
this these men makes the credits
transferable on and we are also
terrifying then you construction
residential project projects
must meet the thirty percent
energy savings threshold
regardless of the type of
certification and use whether
it's need for homes are built
green New Mexico and we're also
making the credits for
installation of air source heat
pumps the same as those for
ground source heat pumps right
to counsel a cold climate
differences is that I do have an
expert witness Tammy people corn
with the southwest energy
efficiency project and I I stand
for questions okay at this time
what will
Go to I don't know there's
anybody that wants to speak on
the amendment.
From.
I think we have an.
Yes William with different.
No I'd like to speak on the
amendment go ahead.
One.
Thank you this is Camilla I
woman with the Rio Grande
chapter of the Sierra Club I
strongly object to extending the
current tax credit for an
additional year.
Over the summer the construction
industry board updated the the
building codes for energy
efficiency from the two thousand
nine codes the two thousand
eighteen we were ten years later
close to ten years late in
updating the code and I see no
reason that builder should be
given a tax credit for complying
with the most recent code and
for those reasons we object to
this one year extension thank
you.
You.
John wall.
Thank you Mr chair members the
committee my name is John Garcia
executive vice president home
builders association of central
Mexico I know we're at
commenting about the amendment
at the with these amendments
it's the acceptable to the the
home builders here in central
Mexico into state New Mexico a
lot of work was done on this
bill with the with with the
advocates and and others and we
come to a good place with these
amendments it's a very technical
bill the large bill but we've
adjusted the codes thirty.
We've adjusted the values to
match the new codes so we help
you support these amendments and
then we could accept the and
support this bill thank you Mr
chairman.
Yes.
Yes okay I would like to speak
in favor of this bill with the
amendment
the size.
Verifier.
But the current tax
levels the twenty eighteen I
used to sit here over and over
again and it's.
False of the twenty eighteen I
used to see which is the stop it
does not take into account the
chemical
Services warriors water heaters
second air conditioners that
they you cannot get to the
person who took the silver level
which is required for the tax
credit by building a total home.
It's it's not possible on the
other thing with the.
Posted over certification get
water efficiency right this
minute your quality third party
testing
it is far above code it it's
just false to say that not to
coach
the state.
Thank you.
Okay thank you I know of.
Committee members on the
amendment thank you Mr Mr
Chairman apologize well actually
are we going to allow the
sponsor to respond to some of
the committee.
sure.
Mr chair and center for the I I
don't know if I
We we really we worked really
hard on on bringing folks
together to to get this right
and and it it took it took a lot
of work and I'm I'm grateful for
the support and action and
senator Wirth to to bring us all
together so I think at this
point we have a bill that is
going to work for you for
builder for home builders up for
manufactured homes for existing
homes you know I I feel I feel
really good about it and and I I
hope senator Wirth feels the
same
thanks and that's that's my
response thank you senator and
just to check thank you Mr
Chairman representative as we we
do allow you know the the
Sanchez whenever there's
opposition committee thank you
Mr chairman for a lot of the
represented speak on the record
that thank you so we'll go to
Majority Leader and then I have
Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman members
and I just want to thank
Representative Ortez for all the
work done on this bill and you
know this amendment was
negotiated
last weekend's.
and I just I really hope that
those that are opposing this
look at all the provisions in
the amendment because this
actually does a whole bunch of
really important things
including extending the tax
credit to twenty thirty so we
are giving it I believe three
more years we're also putting
back in something that was
critical to the whole
negotiated.
Agreement over the years on this
tax credit which is transfer
ability why is that important
well if you are a senior and
don't have income you're getting
this tax credit will what good
does it do you because you don't
have income to use it against
well the transfer ability that
has been part of the state of a
building tax credit for all
these years will allow that
person to go to someone who
brokers these tax credits and
gatt a percentage on the dollar
for the value of the tax credit
so it helps seniors it helps low
income folks and remember part
of the part of the beauty of the
sustainable building tax credit
is that also applies to the
manufactured housing industry
and so transferable to comes
back in and so again for those
opposing this I think they need
to go read all the amendment
because yes it does extend by
one year and only one year the
twenty fifteen tax credit but
again we need if you're just
looking at silver lead you can
make the argument well this is
just giving a tax credit for
what's already required but the
fact is this very complicated
tax credit involves another
program bill green New Mexico
and and I do think there needs
to be a transition from the
twenty fifteen to the new twenty
twenty one tax credit so this
does that as well I just I wanna
I wanna just end by saying you
know this this bill I carried in
two thousand and seven for
governor Richardson and then in
twenty thirteen it was gonna
expire we extend it for two
years and then it took a heroic
effort and I want to give a huge
shout out I see John down there
the the home builders and the
environmental community we all
came together and in two
thousand and fifteen we got
there was a ten year extension
of this tax credit at five
million dollars a year.
Which I think governor Martinez
signed about eleven fifty five
on the final window of the
twenty day signing period to
make it happen so bringing all
the parties that work so hard on
this back to the table I just
think he is win win win a
hundred times over and and the
home builders I think I
understand that the new
provisions for existing housing
is it is a huge deal and so
rather than have you know the
potential of losing losing the
new bill which is really
important for all the reasons
stated this was a compromise
that was reached and I very much
appreciate again Representative
Ortez and the advocates behind
this bill for reaching that
compromise and so I think the
amendment gets this done antics
actually extends the tax credit
a couple years more so I just
would ask all those that oppose
this to really go back and look
at every detail that we're
adding here because I I do think
that this is a really a good
thing self thank you Mr chair.
Thank you of Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman and and up
talked a little bit this Senator
Wirth and his office about this
bill and there isn't a conflict
of interest but I do want
everyone to know I'm actually in
the process of buying and having
a home built for me that is a
LEED certified home
trying to figure out what the
home builder right now if they
got the tax credit or I get the
tax credit because Intel today
that even though this tax credit
existed so so thank you for
bringing the bill.
Yeah I know.
But it would would be possible
Mr Chairman just for a minute to
if Adam Walker still on since he
actually does the certifications
I really would like him to be
able to address.
The one minute did not give him
time to address the
certifications because the
argument out there is that the
current building code is the
silver LEED certified code and I
don't believe that's a hundred
percent correct would that be
possible Mr chairman.
Sure is a Mr row of as Adam.
Yes can you hear me yes I wanted
to go.
Of answer that.
Yes without getting too
technical to the twenty eighteen
energy code.
involves the shell of a home if
you well so the insulation.
It does not address mechanical
equipment so how your heating
and cooling your house is and
how your.
doing your to miss water and so
when you look at the overall
energy efficiency these homes
you can you can meet the twenty
eighteen coated not be nearly as
efficient as a whole built to
the silver level and hers which
is a home energy rating of sixty
if you built it just the twenty
eighteen code you you you're not
going to get there so these
codes even if you're just
talking about energy efficiency
they're not.
Up to the standard of these bill
Greene Mexico but sober homes
there's also other categories in
the songs that you've got water
efficiency these homes are
you're gonna have that low flow
showerheads workflow.
Toilets low flow kitchen faucets
energy star washers that kind of
thing you have you know if
you're right on some one which
is county by county if you're
not on some one you need rate on
medication you need tested and
verified ventilation because
we're building is home so tight
now you want to direct quality
you're getting so much more than
energy efficiency so I it's just
been a huge misconception and
it's been very frustrating
Because I hear over and over
that now that we're on the
twenty eighteen energy code it's
this is why we incentivising
sober homes because the same
thing it's it's just not I do
absolutely agree with this
ammendment I think you know to
phase it out slowly make sense
and we do need to push the
envelope on I think this bill
has
You know the hard to the right
place I'm all in favor of this
but
yes that's why this amendment I
think makes sense that that kind
of it's a nice compromise I
think thank you Adam and I just
wanted to to get a little bit
more clarity since you actually
do the certifications
as to that issue because that is
the one thing of the bill is is
ventrally phasing out I'm not
against that.
What is that so over level and
so I I thank you for being
willing to clarify that for me
that's very helpful thank you Mr
chairman for allowing him to
clarify that for me I also
support this amendment I think
having that time to face this in
is why he's
I think allowing this credit to
be transferable will really help
our retired people who were
wanting to build you know my
situation is is probably what a
lot of retired people situation
as you know I have a home to
actually one all that old is two
thousand four home but it was
almost three thousand square
feet it was two stories it was
way too big for my wife and I so
we're downsizing they're getting
out of a two story home for me I
didn't like I said I didn't
realize there was a tax credit
out there but what I was looking
at is how much money I was gonna
say when my energy bills and how
much money I was gonna say when
on you know because I'm cheap I
think I've told people that you
know I really am you know try to
my dad says it's frugal not
cheap but it's the one trait of
his that I got I I am a penny
pincher and I do that both with
the state's money in with my own
money and so why I put a little
bit extra into the up front cost
of building my house was so that
my utility cost forever.
Would be significantly less
and that's that's what we want
to encourage right you want to
encouraging the less usage of
energy because that helps in all
realms that helps with bills
that help make things affordable
now what we do have to be
careful of is making sure we
maintain affordability in our
homes cost and that is we're
we're kind of stretching the
envelope right now then I'll get
on that a little bit more in the
bill but I do think that this
amendment is important and I did
want to let everyone know that
that even though it's not a
constant conflict because.
It already applies to me in this
doesn't change it for me one way
or the other
I am in the process of having
one bills that we're gonna be
moving into in just couple weeks
so thank you Mr Pritchett.
Thank you Senator Padilla on the
amendment.
Thank you Mr chairman I've been
in the Senate is you have Mr
chairman with Senator Brandt the
exact number of days and I've
never known him to be cheap I
don't have to be very thrifty
though
what I will I don't really have
after we heard from the home
builders are very comfortable
with with the amendment because
I know that that's a critical
elements what they're they're up
to isn't there brought to the
table and working on the
amendment so with your
permission I'll move to pass on
the amendment unless you have
other questions Mr chair right
no no I think we're fine with
that so do we have a second
second by Senator Tallman we
have a opposition to this motion
from any of the committee
members.
See none the moment women is
adopted so now we're back in the
bill.
Mr Chairman what's with seeing
no other I think we're gonna.
Think we do.
Sorry Mr chairman I did try to
keep my comments not on the
bill but I'll be really quick
so.
Representative
I'm coming to everyone whether
you're a freshman or not so
that's just you know if you
could just kind of explain
we are why are it is it because
the.
So we're is so close to the
current building standards that
were phasing them out are we
just trying to really push
people up to that goal level.
Mr chairman and senator Gramm I
think that's a really good
question and Mister Walker X.
explained a lot of it but you
know I think what what we're
looking at is here they're
different certifications for
median and Garfield green New
Mexico that those three New
Mexico certification requires a
hers rating of sixty
the new state energy
conservation code requires and
on average the R. I. for New
Mexico of sixty there are those
two things are not exactly the
same but they're based on the
same standards as I understand
that they're both on a scale of
zero to sixty and our our within
a few points and and the
resulting levels of efficiency
but we we had some conversations
with that would mark West
National labs
and they they talk to the EMNRD
which is the state agency that
runs this program and they can
they confirmed with EMNRD that
the we'll be New Mexico Silver
levels equal to that twenty
eighteen international energy
certification program
conservation code international
energy conservation I think are
right I'm learning a lot of new
things Senator Brandt Mr
chairman very very quickly
that's that's that's how I
understand it.
Thank you
Sorry that's okay thank you Mr
chairman thank you
Representative and and I think
in some ways that's correct.
but in other ways as we heard
from Mr Walker that's not
hundred percent correct you have
what's called the envelope of
the home and that's everything
on the outside that goes to the
elements in my previous life I
built homes with my uncle so I
do know a little bit about
construction and so your
envelope is what's exposed
elements so it's that you know
the outside walls the windows on
the roof all of those and that's
where that's one rating.
and then you have all your your
components are your mechanicals
in the home and that's a
different thing so you've got
your seer rating on your air
conditioning units which I don't
remember what the ratings are
some of the old ones are like a
seven I think we're up to like
eighteen or twenty no somewhere
up in that level for some of
your most energy efficient
My home's gonna have a tankless
water heater so that wouldn't be
considered and one of the state
in the in the building code
doesn't require that yet.
But your lead us and so those
types of things can really save
a lot of energy
and so your mechanicals actually
can be a huge energy saver and
in fact if you've got a home you
know that's that hasn't updated
your air conditioning unit or
your water heater you probably
ought to look at the incentives
in this bill and within PNM and
the gas company on doing that
because it can save you
significant amounts of money
again my motivation is the
dollars and cents your
motivation is different.
Yeah we're probably you know
right you you're you're you're
on both issues I'm on the one
issue.
Because and I really appreciate
Senator Padilla called me
thrifty thank you that that
meant a lot to me but I I do
believe that it's important.
For us to manage what we have
and so I I I'm not against us
taking it out I think at some
point we're gonna have to I just
kind of want to know where that
this decision was coming from so
I thank you for that I do think
that that we're not adding a tax
credit we are extending one and
that's why I normally would not
vote for a new tax credit with
our system and that's one of the
things that Senator Wirth that I
talked about but I am leaning
towards supporting this one.
Because I do think it's it's
something that could really help
us get much much better quality
homes much better quality places
for people of the one thing that
we have to be really careful
about though is whether or not
the cost increase to the home is
worth the savings and is going
to make our homes unaffordable
because I will tell you it is
getting to be worth almost on on
affordable to build a new home
anymore.
and so especially for our young
people.
To get into homes they can't
hardly get home that's going to
be lead energy efficient because
they can't afford it and so we
have to be careful that we don't
increase the cost so much that
we we push all of them into the
older homes and some of those
older homes you're just never
going to get up to standard in
less you got them and bring them
up to standard so thank you I
appreciate that percent of time
and I do appreciate bill thank
you Mr chairman.
Okay.
It's a Mr chairman I was just
gonna ask if we could move this
move move to move forward of
this piece legislation to the
parking lot with the rest of our
work for Saturday that
Representative but I will job
presenting for bill and it's
just another one so I hope that
maybe we can stick to Arjun and
at least get her well there are
built out here tonight.
We are now.
Moving on to us House Bill two
oh six as amended.
Thank you Mr chair and and
members of the committee and and
I'd like to just Madam I I
really appreciate all the
comments that you made Senator
Brandt I I I I share those as
you points and I I hope you feel
similarly about about this bill
our house bill two six is that
is a pretty special bill we've.
We've learned a lot last year.
One long.
What co that is doing to our
families it's shown a pretty
bright light on what's happening
with our families our neighbors
financial health we've heard a
lot of stories terrible stories
from families all over the state
many my district inTaos had to
make really really difficult
choices
because of under employment or
unemployment whether they're
going to pay their rent all
whether they're going to buy
groceries whether they're going
to pay their utility bill
and COVID these choices that
they would have that would have
been tapped challenging anyway
has been even more stark and
what what we're seeing is that
are most vulnerable New Mexicans
are going into deeper debt.
So house bill two oh six you
know addresses a has three
different parts of this to
address the issues of of utility
affordability the first part of
this bill is a COVID relief bill
that really gives us a standard
way across the state to address
the debt that's been incurred by
folks who not been able to pay
their utilities during the COVID
this bill gives low income New
Mexicans or those New Mexicans
that are experiencing hardship
the opportunity to repay some of
that that was W. this is how it
works regardless of income if
you owe money you can get on a
payment plan and you get two
months for every one month to
pay back you will not get cut
off from utilities if you're
experiencing hardship for our
low income and and qualify you
enter the program and you'll get
some debt forgiveness so for
every dollar you put in you get
a dollar forgiven of your debt
you must qualify for this
program if you do you will not
get cut off.
Without the current moratorium
in place and we're so grateful
for this and that is ending soon
all around the state at least
sixty thousand people may sixty
thousand houses maybe more like
seventy thousand households all
around the state are at risk for
disconnection and of of their
you to of their energy bills
there Electricite and about
twenty seven thousand families
would have gotten the gas
disconnection notice these
families just don't have the
means to pay their bill this
program is set up so that
utilities will first happens at
any federal funds that are
coming our way and we know that
there are a lot right now five
point three million come in
another two hundred million at
TSA and millions more through
the American rescue plan and.
Coops can tap into the speed
that they pay the PRC and as a
last resort the very last resort
the rate payers will come in as
they do already with uncollected
that.
Many of you on this committee
and then the audience may have
experienced poverty I I know
what it's like to grow up in
poverty I was raised by a single
mom I know that feeling at the
the experience of having to
choose between the rent bill for
the light bill it's it's a it's
a pretty terrible feeling and
tens of thousands of our
families are experiencing that
right now you've got to act
right now.
The second part of the bill
set up a fund that will empower
local governments and tribal
entities to implement energy
efficiency programs in their
communities this is called the
community energy efficiency
development block grants of
political subdivisions you know
municipalities towns counties
can tap into these requests to
do energy efficiency projects on
a neighborhood basically with a
total focus on affordable
housing that's how you will
qualify for these grants this
will give low income New
Mexicans the opportunity to make
their homes more energy
efficient because it's expensive
to install efficient windows and
and insulation and things like
that and and we we will now be
able to give them the
opportunity to make their homes
cozy and efficient and save some
money on their utility bills
there have already been federal
funds for this kind for these
kinds of projects and we
anticipate many many more.
The third part of the bill
establishes reporting
requirements for utilities so
that we can have a better
understanding of who's being
disconnected who's being
reconnected who has utilities
who doesn't this is going to
help us at this stage for
utility affordability and equity
I'm gonna point out here that
we've worked with a lot of
utilities and various state
agencies to reduce the barriers
for success of these programs I
I have to experts with me so I
just wanted to let you know who
they are and they maybe if they
can be invited to speak if there
are some technical questions
again the city after the
University of New Mexico Law
School intended people born from
a southwest energy efficiency
project and with that Mr
chairman and and that members of
the committee I stand for
questions.
Thank you the joy expert witness
to make a comment or just there
for questions Mr Chairman I
think there for questions okay
thank you all right now we'll go
to a.
Okay what will go to public
comment I know that the.
We do have a.
Folks on both sides but but
first of all before we go to
public comment on this
particular bill I just want to
apologize if we got to go to
public comment on house bill
fifty.
We we didn't have anybody listed
as opposition but we do have a
quite a few folks that were
listed in favor of it and so
maybe I'll just read those names
that were in favor of a hospital
fifty so that the.
At least you'll know who they
were a joint brown.
Amy am a Miller Camilla
available then page night John
Garcia Sascha Anderson Randy
trainer Charles good marker
Michael bario roots struggle
kart of governor can Hughes
Marting Perrott.
Angela to mediate Jason Thompson
more often Stephanie Hahn Amato
Stephen I a JT will attend Steve
hello Chris Mexico Lori and
Kerry Brander so.
And I don't have anybody listed
as opposition so with that we'll
go to opposition first on house
bill two oh six.
On house bill two oh six
beginning with opposition we
have Mike Miller.
Next up we have missing career.
Good evening Mister chair
members the committee Mike and
Tony with Xcel energy I want to
first thank the sponsor and
read expert witnesses for
working with us on this
legislation it's over time we
wanted to still does it however
we think there's a false premise
that customers we shut off as
soon as possible I excel in the
other utilities have a long
record of working
collaboratively with customers
that are are are you rears we've
done that over and over several
decades and if you don't know
the second the New Mexico public
Regulatory Commission came out
of order for every four is very
generous to residential
customers.
and we have we also opposed to
low income rates a portion of
the bills the and we think it
should be separate separately
dressed in separate piece of
legislation.
Thank you for your time.
Thank you next up we have Rico
Gonzalez.
Leaving Mr chairman and
committee members Rico Gonzales
without pasal electric I'll go
the words that might be Antonio
just used in describing what us
as utilities and in particular
I'll pass electric have as
guidelines for our customers who
have been affected by COVID we
do not have plans to cut them
off the PRC from a regulatory
perspective and.
Own internal guidelines do not
have those plans we do plan to
work with customers and we've
been doing that in Texas quite
success.
Thank you.
Thank you next up we have kind
of lost loose at all.
Good evening chairman Shendo
members of the committee Carlos
to Sir with the Public Service
Company New Mexico we appreciate
the Sanchez addressing PNM few
concerns of the latest Committee
or the the the the last
committee since two by having
the PRC qualify because
customers who fall below two
hundred fifty percent of the
federal poverty level and
determine determine economic
hardship as well as make it
optional for utilities enroll
customers based on our ship PNM
doesn't necessarily pose the
bill but still prefer addressing
bill relates to the PRC's
disconnection moratorium process
PNM is work to comply with the
A. R. second word order since
March twenty twenty and I've
already put payment plans
assistance programs relief funds
and
fund programs in place including
our good neighbor fund and the
COVID relief fund with with an
additional two million dollars
to shareholders.
again we think Representative
Ortez and her team for taking
time to discuss about our
concerns and house bill two oh
six thank you very much.
Thank you next up we have having
grown one.
At technical difficulties so we
will now go on to those who are
raising their hands and again
this is your last opportunity to
speak in opposition to house
bill two oh six so please raise
your hand if you wish to speak I
thank you very much Romero in
part for.
Good afternoon.
Committee my name is our initial
Romero you cover on here is a
spokesperson for yucca youth
United become Crisis session
where you flick COVID justice
organization with membership
throughout northern New Mexico
we stand in support of HB to a
six not only do we work on
energy issues we many of our
leadership and membership come
from low income and by packing
unities and many of our members
have experienced significant
economic hardship to the due to
the pandemic and economic
recession we support utility
bill that relief in fact we were
working at the PRC to address
these issues we participated in
hearings that you shut off
moratorium and we were working
on utility debt forgiveness
rulemaking to address the
outstanding bills many of many
of our members face we are
grateful to Representative
parties for bringing this bill
forward it has a lot of a lot of
strong member measures the only
thing that would like to see
changed about this bill is the
current the allows utilities to
receive financial return on
those bill credits ideally we
would.
Have like shareholders to absorb
some of the losses from unpaid
bills.
Thank you next up we had no of
vitamin.
I had raised my hand thinking
you were gonna accept public
comment in favor of HB fifteen
Max so sorry about that.
Thank you next up we will go
with those who registered to
speak in favor of house bill two
of six beginning with George
McGraw.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
committee members for the
opportunity to speak in favor of
HB to a six my name is George
McGraw I'm the founder and CEO
of the nonprofit organization
dig deep.
Most people think you that water
crisis is a problem in places
like sub Saharan Africa but in
fact two point two million
Americans don't have access to
running water and New Mexico has
one of the highest
concentrations of these innocent
individuals among states
you may be familiar with some of
our work on the Navajo water
project which has served
thousands of New Mexicans with
hot and cold clean running water
since two thousand fifteen
seconds sections eighteen and
nineteen of this bill are
important and critical first
step to ensuring that every
single person in the state has
access to clean running water
you can't manage what you don't
measure and right now we only
have estimates of the number of
New Mexicans without running
water there's no actionable
state level data on how many
people lack water access which
this bill would help begin to
collect we absolutely support
this bill again as a critical
first step to counting the New
Mexicans about access to water
and to my knowledge this bill
thank you next up we have read
strike.
Mr chairman and senators my name
is Ruth struggle I serve on the
board the board of New Mexico
interfaith power and light and
live in Albuquerque.
As we all know the pandemic has
been especially hard on low
income New Mexicans it is our
moral responsibility to help
those people who have lost jobs
or wages make their way back to
a stable situation this is
especially true for families
with young children as a public
school teacher I've seen the
toll poverty and unstable living
conditions take on children.
We need to help our neighbors
who will soon be in danger of
thirty second acted from
electricity and gas H. B. two oh
six provides a mechanism for
that in addition the C. E. D.
block grant Act component of the
bill creates a program that
would help improve the
efficiency of affordable housing
lower utility bills lower
emissions and create jobs thank
you for allowing me to speak.
Thank you next up we have then
very done.
Next up we have current record.
Good evening Mr chairman members
of the committee again I'm
Gregor with Lucerne advocates
ministry of New Mexico.
I'm here tonight to offer our
strong support for the committee
substitute HBs the two oh six
we're certainly living in very
extraordinary times and it's
clear that thousands of New
Mexicans are incredibly
vulnerable to the economic
devastation as a result of this
ongoing pandemic we support the
state of New Mexico and all of
its efforts to help and protect
those most vulnerable in our
communities and believe it to be
good public policy for this
reason and the others already
stated earlier support for
committee substitute it for each
B. two oh six thank you for the
sake speak.
Thank you next up we have Amy
Miller.
Good evening Mister chair and
committee members my name is Amy
Miller and I'm representing the
southwest energy efficiency
project encouraging you to
support house bill two oh six
this legislation is so needed
during these challenging times
to protect thousands of families
who have fallen behind on their
utility bills the bill provides
the the perfect combination of
of short term solutions to help
provide immediate assistance to
these families but also long
term solutions related second
they should see to help these
New Mexicans reduce their energy
bills and hopefully help them to
not get in this type of
situation again I just want to
reiterate that the work on this
bill has been an open
collaborative process so
FirstEnergy efficiency projects
started discussions with the
Mexico utilities on this but
bill many months ago and we
thank you for your consideration
of support of this bill.
Thank you next up we have
Camilla I went.
I am not signed up to speak on
two oh six.
Okay thank you very much next.
We have page night.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Paige may
with New Mexico voices for
children to stand in support of
house bill two of six I want to
thank the sponsors for this
legislation which provides
critical support to thousands of
New Mexicans in need of utility
assistance due to the pandemic
so that they don't have to
decide between keeping their
electricity on or buy needed
groceries the bill also provides
long term assistance in
improving energy affordability
and efficiency for families
through the block grant program
so we urge your support for
house bill to a six thank you.
Thank you.
Next.
We have the we scattered all.
Good evening.
Chair and members of the
committee.
We just got our I'm with the
Sierra Club November chapter
representing thirty five
thousand members and supporters
across New Mexico we strongly
support this bill the COVID
nineteen pandemic has brought to
light a lot of inequities that
exist in our society people have
lost I'm not just jobs but also
loved ones just a representative
uses mission and I want to thank
her and Representative Ferrary
in rural middle for.
I mean this bill today there
have been over fifty seven
families that would be eligible
for disconnection of electricity
if the PRC moratorium is not
renewed I just want to say real
quick if there is any impact on
other ratepayers at all it will
likely be less of five cents a
month and right impacts will be
felt of these people that are
shut off and therefore never pay
anyway I do urge you to vote yes
on this bill today thank you for
your time.
Thank you next up we have.
Sascha Anderson.
Chairman and members of the
committee Holly go too much.
So what you for yet session
Anderson hello my name is Tasha
Anderson I am the acting
director of policy solutions
institute and we stand in strong
support of house bill two or six
as a child I remember well going
without gas or electricity when
my family couldn't care bills
having water for pastor we to
food and so many families across
New Mexico are struggling not
just with keeping a roof over
their heads but with basic
utilities like hot water the
ability to call party second
keeping the lights on and
keeping their homes heated H. B.
two oh six would provide not
only immediate ongoing solutions
including bolstering energy
efficiency we are to do passed
by this committee yeah Cokie
thank you.
Thank you next up we have
Michael body all.
Next up we have Carla creating
Hector.
Can use.
Mr chair members of the
committee on economic issues
with the coalition of
sustainable communities we stand
strong support of this bill I
really wish I just was in place
when I work for the energy
department I have eight vessels
to take money and distributed to
local governments and so nope
asked how to use funds to help
the poorest with Syrian G. bills
would be a great service and are
you a nominating.
Senator yes for freshman of the
year for these two bills thank
you.
Thank you.
We have my lan I wrote.
Angelo Committee.
Ono Porter.
Good evening members of the
committee my name is a reporter
and I'm with prosperity works
and I'd like to speak directly
to the issue of the block grant
because the block grant is
actually based on work that
we've already done in the south
valley of Albuquerque we
provided energy efficiency
resources to two hundred and
eighteen homes in ten weeks
reducing the cost of their
energy recruit reducing their
greenhouse gas emissions and
also increasing the health and
safety and comfort of their
homes the thirty second ad for
this is enormous we replace
refrigerators in about seventy
percent of those homes as well
and it makes a huge difference
this is a community to community
approach community folks reach
out to members in their
community and therefore we get
access quickly and efficiently I
urge your support of this bill.
Thank you next up we have Jason
Thompson.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name's Jason
Thompson and the register
lobbyist for Preston resource
advocates that we like to thank
the sponsor and stakeholders
here for all of their work and
put on this particular issue
for all the the previous reason
stated that we stand in full
support of the bill additional
provides important solutions for
these tens of thousands of
families that have been affected
by this pandemic and find some
solutions to lower the burden
for those families going forward
as a we are the second thank you
thank the sponsor for the work
on this and we stand in full
support of the bill thank you.
Thank you next up we have more
Hochman.
All right member of New Mexico
interfaith power and light and I
am for the bill this is the our
membership but I do not have
anything prepared to speak.
Thank you next up we have
Eleanor Bravo.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
and members of the committee R.
I am Eleanor Bravo I am chair of
the board of directors of new
energy economy new energy
economy stands in support of
this bill and especially
encourages energy efficiency and
we were instrumental in
obtaining the utility shutoff
moratorium during the COVID
emergency order set by the
governor we thank the sponsors
and but we have one significant
change we ask that you make on
page fourteen section seven B.
and the line and investor owned
public utility may retain its
costs for the utility bill
relief program as a regulatory
assets on its books we ask that
those that we that you insert I
boards that need to be added our
quote without a return on equity
unquote after the words
regulatory asset in seven B. of
it by referring to the rear
edges as a regulatory asset the
utility will be allowed to
collect a return on equity
profit from their shareholders
we believe that.
Thank you very much next up we
have ten Davis.
Thank you Mr chair ten days with
the New Mexico Center on Law
poverty and this is the center
supports this bill.
Thank you next up we have
Stephen Fischmann.
The minute there I'm Steve
Fishman of the chair of the New
Mexico public regulation
commission of course we regulate
utilities I'm speaking on my own
behalf I like this bill because.
I think many customers are in so
deep they'll never be able to
pay back their rear edges and
this bill provides a mechanism
to address that issue.
The other thing that really
captures my attention is it
allows.
And utilities to establish a
special rates for low income
customers that's not a power
that we have currently and it's
creating lots of problems
so for those two reasons I
enthusiastically support this
bill.
Thank you next we have Christian
because yes.
Kerry.
Hello Mr chairman and members
the committee I will yield my
time as policies and thank you
or do it signified their support
of the bill thank you so much.
At this time if there are any
other members of the public who
would like to speak in support
of house bill two of six please
raise your hand we will begin
with Joan brown.
Thank you a sponsor and chair
and committee members I'm just
add Elsa said two points we're
very much in support of this
bill I'm with New Mexico
interfaith power and light the
executive director
To add to our support we're very
pleased by the into the future
the energy efficiency and see
that also as a matter of health
and well being for our families
that are most in need and
secondly many of our houses of
worship that we work with
throughout the state offer
programs to assist those in need
of paying their utilities and
that money only goes so second
of this bill will greatly help
that money to be extended to
help more of our brothers and
sisters in need right now thank
you.
Thank you and finally we have
someone will get it.
Our.
Madam chair members Madam
members of the committee my name
is Senator it is and I'm here to
represent the Santa Fe mutual
aid network.
I am the creator of the network
the Senate the mutual aid
network is a neighbor to
neighbor in network with over
one thousand four hundred
members primarily from the Santa
Fe County though we also have
members in the three RD round
San Miguel County most of the
aid we have distributed to our
members is to our families who
have been hit the hardest by the
pandemic both economically and
in terms of the higher rate.
Because many of our members are
frontline workers most of our
members are from the Spanish
speaking community
we support this bill I'm this
really fills different
desperately needed many of our
members really really need this
because they cannot afford any
utilities I'm we have help them
apply for lye heat many other
things and they cannot access
these things because of language
barriers the Juul devices and
red tape being required thank
you very much that concludes
public comment at this time.
Mr chair I know that Kevin green
while trying to get in and he
was not able to do so I don't
know if they can problem with
time or
or Mr Graham are you still on.
The webmaster see if you can get
in.
I believe he is no longer on
the.
On this page Madam.
Thank you yeah we we saw his
name pop up but it looked like
he was having technical
problems.
From working with.
We'll go to the members of the
committee I believe I have
Senator Brandt Senator Padilla.
Mr chairman I think certificate
was first okay R. as in W. I'm
happy to go either way but let's
just we'll just keep moving so I
know we have a hard stop at nine
I'm not sure how long were you
want to answer chairman and and
Representative Ortez so it was I
have an amendment from any here
that was this put on on the
house floor of this this but I.
I'm sorry what what was this
ammendment put on.
Mr Chairman center could be I
could could you do me a favor
read that two oh two and revenue
not sure which amendment you're
you're referring to so there's
an amendment Mr Chairman two two
zero three six zero one it so
from Representative T. Ryan lane
white not met yet but it was
where was that but on.
At at Mr chairman answer by the
end that was put on the house
floor so I.
It was a friendly amendment okay
thank you just wanted to make
sure
in in I guess so with the
amendment.
This is for ever address with
where does what does this
prevent the length of time with
this amendment on when someone
can come forward to seek the
assistance.
Mr Chairman is there by the it
it at eight serve constraints
the the time that that customers
can can seek relief from their
arrears for for that payment for
the for the
You know for the payment program
for the relief program of
between that within the dates of
the public health order during
the time of it.
Mr chairman I see in the
amendment that it says two
thousand nineteen when did we
begin the.
Health emergency in nineteen we
began it actually began in
twenty.
Mr chairman and chairman of the
I believe he's referring to the
that Corona virus.
Pandemic coronavirus twenty
nineteen I think that is is how
we're referring to the COVID
nineteen.
But please I I I would like to
invite my my experts to to
answer this you write it it's
not the constraint of the year
it's the name of the public
health emergency okay you know
what I don't think I want to
take the time of the up to the
committee of this and I think
I'm glad you have your experts
here thank you very much I I get
it now okay just want to make
sure that this wasn't going to
change what you were trying to
accomplish here
by removing the availability at
some point now it now I get it
and then the next question I had
was on the
on the FY are is this budget now
this is what would we know if
this is been budgeted for.
Twenty one twenty two or twenty
three.
Mr chairman and senator by the
there the the the FIR I think
initially addressed the
the funding needed at EMNRD to
administer the seed program
initially and that and that we
sort of we we worked that out
where they they they they let us
know that and we we were to
through the the language that if
there were there was a cost to
supporting that Graham.
it would it could be it could be
taken from any of you know
federal funds that were coming
in now again Representative
Representative that that Mr
germs center how to be I just
wanna let you know you're you're
not muted thank you go ahead
Representative Roger.
And we you know what what I
think that we we need to be
mindful of is that you know the
Mr chairman and center by the
it.
The PRC the PRC need to be fully
funded to it and to do all of
its programs and I think at this
is the kind of program that
footfalls within the C. R. D. PR
PRC's of core mission and values
so that's that's I hope that's
the that's the answer that
you're seeking.
But we.
Appropriation Mr chairman and
senator by the out
there's no preparation in this
okay thank you Mr chairman and
we did hear from one of the PRC
members of the chairman to
speaking on his own behalf I
certainly have a ton of fun when
I go to the PRC with all my
stuff as well so.
This this to see what else they
have to say so Mr chairman and
and Representative Ortez looking
at this and I think we heard
from several of the utilities
that they're doing a lot of this
anyway are you are you doing
this so that they we ensure that
it's getting done or that we had
cases or incidents were were
there with this is not being
worked out with consumers.
Mr Chairman said about the other
thank you for that question I
want to clarify something I I
don't want anyone to to get the
impression that we're
castigating and anyway the
utilities or the PRC I think
everyone has done a really
remarkable job keeping families
connected but there are some key
things that that this bill does
that would allow the PRC to and
and the utilities to to to do
some significant things you know
the utilities are providing are
are able to provide payment
plans but they can't find debt
relief that's not something
that's allowed in the PRC can
make that happen only
legislation can make that happen
and we're in an extraordinary
time Mr chairman and senator the
where we of people are you know
I think it is commissioner
Fishman is you said it best that
you know some are some families
are so are in so deep that
they'll never be able to get out
of this so what what this bill
allows is is for that relief
that debt relief to happen right
now you know there is a
moratorium I understand that
moratorium is is ending very
very soon in may at which point
you know the utilities will work
with with customers to you know
arrange a payment plan but if
your if if you're in debt the
the the way it happens is you
get disconnected you and then
you work out you work at your
payment plan so the bill ensures
that people stay connected which
we know is so critical and I
know that some children are
going back to school but my
children have been home for a
year many many children have
been home for a year it's been
so hard on on families and and I
think that this you know being
able to have a little bit of
time and to get a little bit of
relief to dig themselves out of
that hole it is so critical the
other thing that this
legislation does Mr chairman and
senator by the is that it sets
up.
That that program at inner for
you know for local communities
to tap into to to invest in
energy efficiencies that's
really what we the PRC can't do
that and there can do that
themselves legislation needs
needs to do that so that that's
that's what what we're
addressing here Mr chairman
center for the.
Well thank you Mr chairman and
and and Representative I guess
I'm still a little a little
concerned that there's no
appropriation because this is
going to cost in order to to to
to provide this assistance or
needs to be a ponder are money
somewhere how do you how do you
propose we handle that part.
Mr Chairman is there by the this
is how the the program is set up
to run you know we we've already
received at the state
Representative has received
about five million five point
three million or so for utility
assistance that went on a three
hundred dollar payments to folks
that are in arrears there's
another two hundred million
dollars that is is coming from
that has already come from the
federal government that sitting
at the if they right now while
they're they figure out the the
guidelines that for renters
assistance and for utilities
assistance utilities assistance
for renters only of the American
that the new users of the the
new cares Act three point three
point no American rescue plan
act that also has money for
COVID release of the what what
the bill says is you know we do
we tap into those funds first.
And for co ops there there's a a
special situation co ops pay a
fee to the PRC every year and a
co op is will be allowed to use
up to half of their of that fee
that they paid to the PRC to
take to tackle some of those
arrears payments for you know
for for those folks that you
that are in the program and at
the very last you it will roll
you roll into ratepayers but we
really want to make sure the
look the legislation stipulates
you tap into those federal funds
first you tap into that the co
op fees for that next and then
the rate payers but what's
really important to notice you
to note here is that we're
providing an option for folks
who would not be able to pay
their their utilities back to
pay it back they're paying half
of that that and you want to
call why Mr Chairman.
You Mr Mr Chairman
representative I am very excited
about our freshman class who are
all much more knowledgeable than
I was when I got a question like
that back in the back in the day
I see a reference to the
mortgage finance authority in
the FY are it's so they I
believe they have a program
already at the I don't know if
it it's exactly what you're
you're doing here but I I'm not
gonna hold up the committee any
longer my question but I hope
that you'll take a look at that
in because I know that when we
pass legislation was Chairman
representative when I created
the early childhood education
and care department that's the
sort of became a whole other job
for me to help them off the
ground for about a year by the
way so you're gonna be called
upon over time to help with this
if this gets all the way through
so I would encourage you to take
a look at what they're doing
just make sure there's no
duplication of like that
There's anything else yeah in
just again thank you
Representative for doing this I
like you grow up in extreme
poverty as well and my sisters
I'm not how the heck they did it
will start working really young
but they may try and close major
at Boone hall at well we're
someone's always working at
restaurants we would eat pizza
for all three months one point I
can remember that
but the utility bill could be a
knockout punch for a family it's
an eye condition so thank you
for the work that you're doing
I'm really really grateful for
you being thank you.
Thank you Mr chair Mister
chairman Senator the act thank
you Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman I only
have about two hours referred
questions so no no big deal
I I have the ordered everyone
some food it'll be in my office
years kind are come in and out
just getting on board.
Where.
No I'm sorry.
Representatives are not allowed
in my office and that's that's
kind of hard roll for me not
seriously let's uh I do have a
few questions so.
In in one of my previous lives
and I've had several I'm like a
cat I think of the nine lives at
least in this lifetime
I actually ran like he.
Are you are you familiar with
like he Representative.
I it Mr chairman and and Senator
Brandt I I am familiar with like
he.
This so in Oklahoma I ran the
light he program
there was the salvation army
that kind of manage the program
there and that was my job while
I was going to college.
and so that is one program that
helps to take care of these type
of situations it's actually a
very good very effective program
that's one of the things all of
you see that on your utility
bill I would encourage you to
check the box and and given to
it it really does help people
and it is managed very well well
at least it was when I was
managing it
I'm guessing it probably still
is but how besides that how do
you see someone's got to pay the
bills right so how are these
bill's going to be paid is it
just the the utility companies
are just gonna have to bear that
cost I'm not sure how the bills
get paid.
Mr chairman and Senator Brandt
that that's that's a that's an
excellent question I want to I I
do want to address Senator by
the S. question very very
quickly if I made it very very
closely with the MFA was MSA on
this they've they're very
supportive of the C. part of
this program and I think that
all that all really fits
together on and that's that's
really important for folks to
know so why he support for life
which we you know which has come
in already in which we imagine
is coming back in that will you
know that that goes to that that
lie he eligible.
Customer.
Before you know that the arrears
starts you know starts starts
getting added up so you know
whatever's coming through for
for like he you have folks can
can tap into and I want to say
one thing one one thing about
this to Mr chairman and senator
rand there there is money right
now and that the programs that
exist through PNM and other
utilities are are under
subscribed so I think it's
really important that that we
use this opportunity right now
to let you know let people in
your in your districts now that
that there is funding that exist
right now so that they can tap
into to start paying back paying
down their debt that's that's
one way that this is going to be
on this debt these arrears that
accumulation will be will be
tackled folks need to you know
go go out find some of those
programs that are our existing
right right now the thank you Mr
chairman and I don't mean to cut
you off Representative but if
you so one of the things that
took me a little while to learn
is short concise answers or the
best answers and if you do
actually continue to answer
twenty minutes on each question
it will take two hours to get
through the questions I'm sorry
I am not trying to be rude it's
just something it took me a
little while to learn so passing
on a little bit of information
That's.
And it's already passed or in
time so.
You mentioned that there's are
that the programs that exist or
already under prescribes so your
December I wanna town for a few
weeks and I forgot to pay my
electric bill.
Just stay still off one of the
cation for three weeks I was
having a great time and just
totally forgot so the next bill
I got.
I was surprised when I didn't
have a late fee.
There wasn't one.
And I was surprised when there
was a phone number on there that
said if you're having
difficulties paying your bills.
Because of COVID nineteen.
Call this number for help.
And that was right there on my
bill how to get that assistance
so I think the utility
subscribers have the information
and yet it's already it's still
under prescribes so I guess my
concern with at least the
utility portion of this bill is
that it's a solution looking for
a problem you don't think the
problem exists no one's getting
cut off right now B. or C.
already saw to that.
And even without being ordered
to do that I was in charge a
late fee and everything the
information was all in my bill
on how to get help if I was
being affected by COVID nineteen
so it's already being done we
don't need to put into law when
it's already happening in so
that's just one of the things
that that I still think we need
to be doing this the other
concern would be that if we do
put this in law now everyone's
gonna decide ones will pay my
utility bill.
And someone's got to pay the
bill at some point otherwise.
They're going to go back to PRC
for the way I read your bill.
And they're gonna ask your C.
for rate increase on everybody
else to cover all the bills that
were paid isn't that what is
meant on page fourteen.
Mr Chairman center where would
you like me to answer that
question that would be great
thank you.
Okay so that what happens now is
is that you are under without a
moratorium if we didn't have
COVID folks would pay if they
didn't pay their bill they would
get disconnected and they you
know they figure out how to get
back on or they would just be
lost as a customer and and the
utilities would would roll that
on collected that into a
regulatory asset right and and
that ultimately the ratepayers
would would pay so what this
bill does is that allows people
to pay back their debt in this
extraordinary time only under
COVID only during this public
health order for for for
payments that that they missed
they were unable to make only
under the time of COVID if they
qualify and there's some pretty
significant factors in
qualification.
Thank you.
Thank you very much that's that
was really helpful I appreciate
that so okay so on the the
Energy block grants area in
nineteen where you're you're
talking about that program
so you're setting up the
program.
Without funding and what I was
reading.
Was really kind of looking at
possibly funding comes in at
some point in the future just
tell me if I'm getting this
right
like with the cares acts or
whatever they're called
the federal money might come in
that could be put into that
program if it was then that
program would come in the places
that I get that section right.
Mr chairman and senator Brandt
but that program could be funded
in a variety of ways including
better any federal funding that
comes in or philanthropic money
that comes in from our found
from national local foundations
or you know at some point you
know with with what whatever
funding that we could find
within that into that into that
funds would be used well by
local governments thank you so
at least right now there
wouldn't be any state.
Money out of our budget going
into that but of course at some
point in the future if we wanted
to we could fund that thank you
very much for **** thank you Mr
chairman.
Okay thank you I have a.
Senator tall man but I don't see
his handout anymore.
Of so we'll go to that thank
you.
Separately today I think yes my
questions okay all right so
Senator Kernan.
Thank you very much and you
mentioned that this would only
be in place during the public
health order and so
Is that and that's in the bill
with in my correct I don't.
Where that is.
Mr chairman and Senator Kernan
it it is four under under the
time of COVID the arrears relief
program is only during the time
of COVID and I'm gonna have to
ask
my expert witness strips in the
act to help help us guide us
quickly.
Where where exactly is.
Well thank you because I think
that's important you know the
public health order I hope
will end course that's up to the
governor and we have no control
over that that it I think that
needs to be really really clear
because even now as we see
unemployment dropping we know
people are going back to work we
know that can.
Currently yes they're protected
so so I guess I'm concerned that
this is so open ended and COVID
gonna be around for a long time
in fact we may much like the flu
even though we realize that
Senate greater impact and that's
what I'm not suggesting that
enhance and but we know it's
going to be around so I think I
think you need to have a really
tight end time for this program
and wonder if you would great.
I believe it's on section ninety
page thirty five for a or maybe
expert can be.
Is is Mr Zinni Act yes as
chairman Shendo Senator a direct
you to page seven where it's a
different definition of who can
rules can be enrolled its
utility bill relief program it's
only open to residential
customers we have arrears
encourage during the Corona
virus disease twenty nineteen
that's on page seven and eight
and the going back to an earlier
question by Senator Padilla that
definition of Corona virus three
disease twenty nineteen is
defined in section two to make
it clear that extends during the
public health order but so the
the the problem with the bill is
trying to solve is that there is
a a a PRC moratorium right now
but there are around seventy
thousand families who have
incurred arrears and some
utilities those arrears average
average one thousand dollars and
so once that moratorium goes
away there is that disconnection
cliff this utility arrears
forgiveness program only applies
to those arrears that were
incurred during the moratorium
during the public health
emergency and again it's not a
free pass people have to pay
fifty percent they only get
arrears forgiveness for each
month that they pay on their
installment plan.
Okay so thank you for that and
so what you're telling me what I
think I hear is that the money
that they will be paid back
correct or is it for given.
They can they can earn up to
fifty percent forgiveness they
in order to get forgiveness they
have to enter into an
installment plan they get a
temporary credit of fifty
percent of what they owed I'm
only during the the Corona virus
period and then for each month
that they pay they get and a
matching payment it is a
permanent credit on their
account.
And so Mister chair and and
it thank you and so that the
credit is allowed so that's
covered by the utility correct
so so that's the will cover that
part know that that there is a
as as Representative Ortez was
explaining there's a there's a
hierarchy first there's
substantial federal dollars
already in the state but they
don't apply to everybody there's
more on the way from the
American rescue act so for
example we anticipate that all
renters who experience hardship
should have one hundred percent
of their rears forgiven is
already two hundred million
dollars in the state that's
available for renters who
qualify me in income
qualification and experience
hardship there's more on the way
it is that amount could be
doubled
so were so first any federal
funds will be applied to that
for a given amount the utility
has incurred there's also
requirement that any
philanthropic contributions
including we've heard PNM
shareholders have already made a
contribution of two million
dollars intended for that to
apply to any for given amount
to the extent that there is some
amount left over at and I'm
sorry before that as
Representative Ortez mentioned
because cooperatives are member
owned to non profits there are
special provisions that apply to
them that capped their exposure
they have they can cap the
number of people that go into
the program so that they don't
exceed I generally one percent
of annual customer bills and
then.
Coops are allowed to defer a
portion of the fee that they
would normally pay this is a
mechanism that's already in
legislation it's it's a
mechanism the cops can use for
the energy and conservation fund
they typically do not use that
but so they can use up to fifty
percent of that fee to apply to
any costs from forgiven funds so
the goal is to minimize costs
and if there's anything left
over then utilities can seek to
recover from customers just as
they do every time the
disconnect the customer who
can't pay under normal
circumstances.
That was that was a lot to
explain and and so just circle
back around at the final
question on when this
this will end because when you
talk about COVID we're always
going to have COVID so I I wish
that we could see a sense that
we're already seeing people
coming out of this I understand
that there's debt that's on the
book but you've also mentioned
that there programs that are
going to help with that it some
point we have struck the line
you have to say this is we're
we're always going to have
people that are not going to be
be able to pay their utilities
and and that's why we have
launched keep and that's why we
have other programs that are
really worried I don't sense
that that there is an the stop
time for sure other than related
to cope it so I'll keep
listening to that in in how much
money is actually coming with
the the most recent federal
program and how much of that we
get into these kinds of programs
and coming into New Mexico just
Mr chair representative do you
have an idea on that.
Mr Chairman representative
excuse me Senator Kernan I I
don't know exactly how much are
but I I think that that was just
an article in the Santa Fe New
Mexican if the any of my.
It was a lot of a hundred
million dollars coming into New
Mexico I don't know exactly know
how much is dedicated to
to this kind of of relief but
this program for those who
qualify the the the debt relief
arrears relief programs will and
when the public health
emergency it ends that is that's
the sunset of this program okay
and and so Mr chair and
representative course.
We we have no idea when that's
going to be and that that's one
of my concerns because that's
out of our hands and we don't
know when the governor will in
that that thank you for your
answer separate shaking doing a
good job.
Thank you Senator Kernan senator
bill.
You Mr chairman Representative
Ortez good to see you even if
it's virtually now I have a
question one of the co ops in my
district is owned by customer
service customer owners that run
the coop do you by any chance
know which funds are
Are nonprofit cooperatives could
tap into to cover uncollected
utility bills that's one of the
concerns I've heard about.
Mr chairman and center how to
meal you know
the as as Mr ups and yet
mentioned coops are are in at in
the special category you know
they're they're treated little
bit differently because they're
member owns us so they're in
they're able to use your some of
the the fees up to fifty percent
of that the that they would pay
the PRC to to kind of to cover
some of those arrears but they
also you know will we'll be able
to you know work with their
customers to tap into
to tap into the funds that exist
already for like even for
renters and all you any new
funds coming our way so I think
that's really important it's
what Mr Bissonnette also
mentioned Mr chairman and that
etcetera have a meal you know is
that the the cost can can stop
enrolling people in the program
if if the if the total cost of
customers is going is more than
one percent of the annual bills
I think that's that's really
important so that's a little you
know that's a measure to ensure
that the co ops you know are you
know are are are not did members
of the calls are not badly hit
and the number of a call up you
know and one thing that's
happening in my community is
that in the coop is working with
the local municipality to a
boring and you know some of that
American rescue Act money that's
I think that's really really
important and that's that's the
way that the calls to in the
lower at some of this debt for
you know for those who are
struggling on and that's that's
in that we can tap into right
now thank you Mr chairman thank
you Representative and then just
one last question one that was
also brought up by one of those
at member clubs and and you know
this is something that I hold
dear to my heart because I know
how many people have been
affected but do you by any
chance know how much at the PRC
the range of the PRC to help
these coops.
Is it a one percentage is that.
Mr chairman and senator had a
meal
The co ops at I'm not exactly
sure you're referring to but
with the co ops that can rate
that they pay a fee right to the
PRC every year and and what can
help Mexico up members who are
in debt and to qualify for the
program is that the court can
use can tap in to half of that
funds that fee that they paid
the PRC to to help manage some
of those costs and if the and
the co op has innocence and
special there's there's they're
treated a little bit a little
bit special the they can cap the
program you know if if it's
getting if it's getting to be
too burdensome for the members
at one percent of the of the
total cost of the program that's
that's what I was looking for
that's what you have and yet
okay thank you Mr chairman thank
you Representative thank you
Senator Hickey.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Representative
I have been listening and we've
been getting a lot of questions
and some advice and the new of
the as well
most advice is good that
sometimes we is questioners go
on and I'm like I'm doing right
now but I'm gonna be very brief
I want to first state that I am
not Dr David Scrase I know
doctor did stress very well for
over thirty some odd years we've
been working together but I'm I
would hazard to say that from my
viewpoint as a physician who has
been following the COVID very
very closely
that this formal epidemic is
going to be and did some time.
By mid summer I believe that New
Mexico will have vaccines for
everyone by the end of may and
then that's the logistics
between now and then and getting
them into everyone's arms and so
there will be a defined and to
the public health emergency
within months and I hope that I
can persuade my colleagues that
that should not be something we
have to worry about are there is
always the very end but there is
good news about the number of
the vaccines being able to
handle the British and south
the.
African variants so there are
there may be some uncertainty
but I think mid summer will be
there thank you and the thank
you for tolerating need to keep
everyone from dinner tonight
thank you.
Thank you Senator Griggs.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Representative you know we've
been spending a lot of time.
On the.
Utilities being like PNM New
Mexico option but also ideas in
your in your bill a public
utility is also defined as a
water and waste water provider
show are.
Mr chair representative I guess
that means almost every shitty
in in the state will be subject
to this bill is that is that
correct.
Mr chairman and senator at
Rick's that that's that is
incorrect it's only those
utilities that are regulated by
the PRC I think that's really
critical here so most water
utilities are not regulated by
Garcia somehow but but not all
some some of these
That you know utilities are are
are are not as well.
Municipal not municipal manager
Mr chairman and and senator it's
not Municipal managed utilities.
Okay and and our reshare and and
Representative so what what
you're telling me Madam is.
I mean I don't know who actually
manages water wastewater.
Other than cities but do you
know or do you have a an example
of of who that who that might
be.
Mr chairman and senator Griggs
an example of the water utility
that is regulated by the PRC.
Yes you're correct that is a
question I'm going to ask a hi
there Mister sea Act or miss
market in.
Okay.
Mr chair Senator there are there
are a few utilities a few water
wastewater utilities that are
not municipal or county
utilities epcor is one of them
but most most water wastewater
utilities are managed by
municipalities or counties and
therefore not regulated by the
PRC.
Okay and I and I guess that
which you need for me to see
that in there and it's just to
provide.
It says it's defined in the
public utility act.
But it doesn't mean I won't that
I guess in that act it must say
that the PRC has regulatory
authority over this.
This utility or that.
Because you know a definite just
defined in the act then tell me
that the act regulates on or
not.
Mr chair Senator as the reader
the rationale is that the act
specifically exempts County
managed or municipally managed
utilities under the the theory
that those jurisdictions would
provide oversight to those
utilities so whether there's
also a few electric utilities
that are managed by
municipalities or counties those
are also exempted from PRC
regulations.
Okay and and thank you thank you
expert thank you Mr chair and
and thank you Representative.
Okay thank you Senator Griggs.
I think the most of my questions
have been answered as well I was
interested in the water utility
because I one of the.
I believe that of people that
supported this talk about water
so that kind of pick my
interests and so forth so that
was been clarified so I don't
see any other ands.
For questions from the committee
so what is a pleasure Mr
Chairman although that you
passed a motion for the past by
Senator Padilla second written
by Senator Hickey lane can you
please take role.
Senator Brandt no.
Senator Griggs now.
Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Hickey yes Senator how to meal
yes senator Sanchez.
Senator Kernan.
No.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator Tallman.
Yes.
Senator Wirth yes.
Senator Padilla.
Yes Senator Shendo yes.
Seven yes three no and one of
excused.
Thank you so you do have a due
pass a representative of or
tests.
Thank you so much chairman and
members of the committee thank
you of the members
what we're gonna do we're not
going to start any new bill but
we the ranking member and I did
agree that we have a three house
bills.
That we want to put on consent
and we want to take care of
those before we get done that's
house bill one oh five.
House bill two seventy five.
And then house bill eighty nine.
Mr chairman would you pass on
house bill one of five is
amended.
A second second by a Kernan any
opposition to that motion Mr
chairman I would just like to be
shown voting no please.
Okay.
So we have one vote no on H. B.
line a.
Mr chairman I move a do pass on
house.
Wirth substitute for House Bills
two seventy five I'll second
check my current.
Any opposition to the motion.
I see none.
Motion passes send then the
house bill eighty nine.
Mr chairman of the U. pass on
house bill.
It is not.
Almost second by common.
Any opposition to the motion.
I see none motion passes so
thank you with this concludes
our our session I know it's late
I don't think all of you and I
want to thank our staff as well
the hanging in there with us and
so forth so we will see you
tomorrow on the floor at eleven
o'clock.
Thank you have a good night.
Thank you Mr.
Good night.
Is it still on.
