For the.
There.
Well that we are all getting to
the end of session fifteen start
seen as committee.
J. all right there you go.
Three.
Thank you Mr chairman the
members so with the Senate bill
three ninety three this is so
the land valuation agricultural
use and this would amend the
property tax code involving the
land and primarily for the
agricultural purpose agreements
falling within the definition of
the agricultural use now
encompasses a natural resource
conservation program in
alignment with change in federal
law and with state agencies and
Mr chairman and the vice
chairman members so hello a real
true expert witness and I want
to yield to her because I know
we're also looking at trying to
be expedient on time wise and so
with that out all have our
introduce herself and.
To push a button for two seconds
go ahead all right thank you Mr
chair members the committee my
name is Leslie Allison I'm the
executive director of the
western landowners alliance
based here in Santa Fe I'm going
to make this a lot shorter than
I wrote it out for your benefit
today Senate bill three ninety
three amends the definition of
agricultural activity under
seven thirty six twenty two
include payment or other
compensation pursuant to a
natural resource conservation
program under an agreement with
an agency of the state or
federal government when seven
thirty six twenty was originally
written in the nineteen sixties
the U. S. department of
agricultural soil conservation
service offered farmers
compensation to consider fragile
soils through the conservation
reserve program seven thirty six
twenty currently provides that
enrollment in conservation
reserve program is a qualifying
agricultural activity and this
is an able participating
producers to protect New Mexico
soils while maintaining
economically viable farms but
since that time the soil
conservation service has been
renamed the natural resources
conservation service to reflect
its broader mission to help
agricultural producers improve
their environmental performance
with respect to soil quality
water quality air quality
wildlife habitat and greenhouse
gas emissions today the USDA
along with the natural resource
management agencies in New
Mexico offer a range of programs
that compensate producers to
Conservancy to rid these
important natural resources a
twenty twenty one study on
property tax policy commissioned
by the legislature from the
university of New Mexicos bureau
of business and economic
research maybe the following key
recommendation that providing
local support for New Mexico
landowners to participate in
federal conservation programs is
an important component of
increasing reserves Ecker
cultural working and natural
lands in New Mexico the same
study also highlighted that New
Mexico is a land rich cash poor
state with one of the highest I.
The rates in the nation
disproportionately impacting
Hispanic and native American
producers of the twenty five
thousand farms in New Mexico one
in three have Hispanic or Latino
producers and one in four have
native American producers the
ability to enroll in state and
federal conservation programs
which provide both income and
enable producers to improve land
health and environmental
outcomes is important across
many communities so just be
three ninety three provides
clarification that agricultural
landowners may participate in
such programs while maintaining
their agricultural property tax
valuation it does not require
any state or federal agency to
maintain or create any new
programs it does not add any
additional administrative
requirements to any agency thank
you.
Without all Mr chairman we stand
for questions thank you Senator
I will go to the audience for
the bill.
Okay all of a.
The couple people this for this
site because one stand in a used
to my introduce yourself so the
public is listening can also
hear.
sure we'll give everybody about
a minute that's not a part of it
that.
Good afternoon.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Paula
Garcia and I'm executive
director of the New Mexico sic
Association we represent close
to seven hundred seconds across
the state of New Mexico in
twenty three different counties
and we sentence in support of
this legislation because it will
give our farmers and ranchers
more options to do conservation
planning on their property and
we thank you for your support
consideration.
Good afternoon members of the
committee my name is Gillian
Joyce I am with fracking farmers
you we stand in strong support
of Senate bill three ninety
three
this bill updates statute has
written more than fifty years
ago to reflect the current needs
of our conservation community
and our agricultural producers.
Thank you so much.
Mr chairman committee members my
name is Pam Roy I'm here
representing the New Mexico food
and agriculture Policy Council
and farm to table we stand in
full support of Senate bill
three nine three and in a couple
of additional things to add to
it
so as we said I have to let over
the last fifty years there are
more conservation program
opportunities at the federal
level where we the farmers and
ranchers here New Mexican
benefit at the same time we now
have state programs in the
department of agriculture like
the healthy soils program that
will benefit farmers if we're
able to get the statute to
change just a little bit to find
these options for farmers and
ranchers will be offering a lot
to them and you'll be building
on our food system and our
agriculture system here in the
state thank you.
R. Mr chair and members of the
committee my name is Lawrence
guy have goes and I I
Representative the New Mexico
foodbank Policy Council and also
the national Latino farmers and
ranchers and
We we've been losing a lot of
land Ag ag land according to the
the census of mass Census into
for the the two thousand
seventeen Census New Mexico lost
more land Ag land than any other
state in the union except for
Texas and it was still even at a
higher a lot higher percentage
than Texas so the this
bill will will can help give
farmers and ranchers the ability
to to keep trying to stay in
agriculture and in in more
different ways and so we stand
in support of it and and we hope
you all for thank you.
Whether anyone else.
Is anybody in opposition.
Go ahead come up in the.
Mr chairman for the committee
members my name is Bronson corn
I'm here representing the New
Mexico cattle growers and we did
talk with miss Leslie Allen
about and we it we expressed
some of our concerns but the
problem that we have with that
is whenever you bring in sorry
the state program into it you're
gonna have the healthy soils but
you have to realize that the
health school program runs off
of the year by year contract and
this is going to be able to take
in.
And make it to where if you sign
up on your one year contract and
you're only paying a quarter
percent of the value of the land
that's not right.
The the other big problem that
we have with that is going in
and taking out production land
as you just heard there's more
act production land that have
been taken out of the state of
New Mexico nearly than any other
state in the union but the
problem is is where we take
production land out your taken
the livestock property that are
the livestock value out and
you're taken away from the full
value that that land should be
put in for the tax roll.
If you have the livestock on you
are not paying the full value of
the land but you're getting
compensated through these
natural resource programs.
That totally lost for the county
the counties are the ones are
going to be affected by this all
the schools everything else and
all the county tax dollars going
to they're the ones that are
going to be affected by this
thank you.
But I also sent off.
Okay all right no committee for
questions just turn.
That issue because.
that is our.
Taking out that would issue a
lot of stock portion does affect
our counties with regards to I
to the back of the property.
Related that peace can you tell
me the difference between.
Decently in this life.
And then you add a lot of stuff.
Mr chairman and senator yes I'd
be happy to there there is a big
difference between the property
tax you pay in agriculture and
the property tax you pay if
you're not in agriculture can be
quite substantial this is
actually designed to support
farmers and ranchers that are
agricultural in participating in
natural resource conservation
center part of an agricultural
operation and let me give you
there's many examples of that
the conservation reserve program
though is already authorized in
the current statute it
recognizes that that is an
integral part positive part of
of of many agriculture
agricultural operations the same
with the grasslands conservation
reserve program the formal
wetlands program most of these
are US department of agriculture
programs and U. S. department of
agriculture requires that the
party should be enrolled as a
farmer rancher these are bona
fide agricultural operations
they're receiving compensation
support to do some changes in
management to help protect
fragile soils conserve water
resources improve agricultural
productivity so these are not
programs are taking land out of
agriculture generally the only
exception to that is that there
is a state program for example
it is called hang on a second.
the groundwater conservation
pilot program because in certain
cases New Mexico is struggling
to meet its water delivery
requirements under state and
federal law and there is a
program that is paying some
farmers on a temporary basis to
follow fallow lands to help
offset the water shortages we
are in a period where we're
going to have to share water and
so we want to make it very clear
that if we're doing a rotational
following ensuring water that
that land is not going to be
then taxed out of business
because that producer has been a
call operator in the program so
these are state and federal
programs are paying producers
and people don't just pay
producers randomly to do nothing
and to come out of agriculture
this is for farmers and
ranchers.
Here is for the Congress and
ranchers and it's all interior
that gives the states often in
at first I have been in that
particular county or community
it is going to have an impact on
the and revenue did that
counties can be generated my
correct on that one.
Mr Mr chair Senator thank you
for that question the funds that
are available for both federal
and state programs are extremely
limited they're very targeted
and there are temporary so their
time limited program so you
might inner program for a five
year period or ten year period
to do a rotational following but
they're very limited so the net
effect on agriculture in the
state would be extremely limited
and the net benefit is that we
actually can restore
agricultural productivity and
keep productive learn farms in
production because we now have
the water resources to sustain
that agricultural production if
we don't do this I think we're
gonna end up with less
agriculture in the state over
also it should be in that budget
for agriculture and for counties
in the state.
Thank you.
Senator Griggs.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
etcetera but I guess the.
The follow up to that point four
to be clear.
Is that if.
This program is put in place the
way you envision.
The county government who relies
on taxes property taxes
primarily
will lose in these instances.
The case is there there Matt
property tax will be lectures at
is that correct.
Mr chair Senator the.
The farms and ranches that would
participate in this are already
paying the agricultural special
method evaluation rates so
they're already being taxed as
agricultural lands participation
in these programs would not
change that.
So if the intent for the
counties would be that if
somebody participates in a state
or federal program state to
conserve water if the intent is
let's raise their taxes to a
point where they can't afford to
stand businesses of farm then
maybe this would be a problem
but right now it keeps the tax
the same as where it it stands
it doesn't change the tax.
Thank you sure.
Experts so.
You don't envision this as being
something that is going to
expand the use to were someone
who right now has.
Have property is agriculture
with the with cattle and show
the the property taxes is here
to that.
That branch that important moves
off native cattle often
disclosure eight two and and
we're cultural usage I yes
without the.
Without the the cattle.
That our taxes welcoming so rich
Mr chairman and senator Pat it
had vision that or have I mean
are we you know when when the
camera or or are concerned.
That's kind of what it looks to
me like in in that testimony is
that their concern that value
property tax value for the
county's going to go down so I'm
just trying to.
Okay.
Mr chair members the committee
there could be very occasional
times in which you have a
reduction of livestock.
However most of the programs
don't generally work that way
and the best example I can give
you is a grassland conservation
program conservation reserve
program where it is compact
grazing is considered compatible
with the conservation directives
the landowner manages under a
plan grazing plan to meet those
conservation objectives and gets
an annual payment for doing so
is a very popular program it's
something the national
cattlemen's beef association
strongly supported is being
supported in a big deployment in
Wyoming right now by the way
only stalkers Association so
it's a change of the way you
manage in some cases in some
cases yes in some cases you
might reduce your number of
livestock in order to achieve
its on a temporary basis in
order to achieve a particular
outcome that the state of the
federal government believes is
important enough to pay for that
outcome and and so for example
New Mexico's economy and tax
base is going to hurt a great
deal if we don't do some things
about water right now today and
the agricultural community has a
role to play in doing that but
without some support financially
in doing that it puts all the
pain in the agricultural
community so I think that's the
best explanation I can give you
I could reduce some of the
examples have a how the programs
work if you if that's helpful.
K..
If you're.
Instead of four Greeks thank you
leisure centre I appreciate it.
K. R. Senator Tallman.
Thank you thank you Senator for
bringing this up for with.
So.
Rate of the conservation reserve
program Senator.
Programs the.
And out of agriculture is here.
The federal pension for farmers.
Mr chair Senator thank you for
the question for clarifying yes
the conservation reserve program
is probably of all the programs
on the list the one that would
do that the most it's the one
that's already authorized under
existing statute that's already
permissible in New Mexico that
was to conserve fragile soils
and water quality and what that
generally does is ask farmers to
leave areas of highly relatable
soil out of production along the
edges of streams for example so
that the settlement doesn't wash
into the streams of these are
buffer strips if you will in
most cases that program also
contains a limits on the amount
of land in any given County that
can actually be enrolled in that
program so it's a very limited
amount of application and you
see the same thing in the formal
and then the wetlands program
where the farmers and ranchers
are receiving annual payments in
return for restoring wetlands
and establishing plant cover so
it's really in most cases a
shift in the operation there is
some limited change in
production.
In exchange for natural resource
value and again those are
temporary contracts are C. R. P.
contracts for example are ten to
fifteen years and that's that's
among the longest.
Thank you Mr thank you for that
answer.
This program conservation
programs for from.
Preservation of.
What is the states who.
Two thousand.
to hire.
Categories.
You're able to.
Is the name of the tax at the.
This is the work of the
conservation program Mr chair
Center members committee that's
a really great question as a
matter of fact is there's some
ambiguity in New Mexico's law
around the conservation
easements
and we've seen assessors
interpreting how we handle land
that is under perpetual
conservation easement
differently in different
counties so to clarify a
perpetual conservation easements
is basically a termination
retirement of the development
rights to that property he can
no longer build homes for
example on that property so in a
place like Colorado.
When you take the development
rights off Colorado says we will
then forever tax the land it
whatever right it was being
taxed at the time that that
happened and so if it was an
agricultural production and you
remove the development rights it
will forever stand or cultural
production New Mexico again a
gray area as to how we we do
that but it's really a
different it's a different
aspect than what this is trying
to address.
So we don't have.
Conservation easements here
Mexico.
This man Mr chairman members
committee senator we we do have
conservation easements
throughout New Mexico and we
have a program through the
energy minerals naturally
sourced department that oversees
that.
So hello and thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you Senator mail.
Thank you Mr chair just wanna
talk briefly about northern
we're reasonably as you know
Senator we're seeing the effects
of climate change I think yes I
matter of fact for example that
community of them this doesn't
even use the water for
downstream more so they can no
longer water that's become a
major issue for our farmers
fortunately County and so we
have to see the benefit of this
bill for farmers and ranchers
focus one billing job.
because water is coming on the
major issues New Mexico Senator
I think about in order to.
And so it's not a question is
one of the thank you for reading
the school board and for
definitely see the benefits for
farmers and ranchers in my
district thank you Mr chairman
thank you for.
Thank you.
That is great thank you and what
else.
The questions from the committee
members.
in my question was answered the.
In terms of of the questions
that have been as previously so
what is the pleasure of the
committee motion for the motion
passed by the Senate Bill second
by Sierra.
Call the roll Senator Brandt
that's.
Senator creeks action.
Senator had a meal.
Yes.
Senator Kernan yes.
Well get ready for tonight yes.
Senator Lopez.
Want to increase to assist.
Pointer.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator Tallman yes.
Senator Wirth ski yes Senator
Hamblen.
Senator Shendo yes.
We have I yes is and when I
start.
back to Senator Brandt.
Senator Griggs goes more formal
for.
Senator Kernan better support my
team it.
Okay so we have five yeses and
board knows of a do pass
recommendation five to four
thank you thank you Mr drive
Senator Hickey over here.
The.
Yes Representative.
All righty thank you Senator.
icky go ahead that we have sent
a bill for all to.
Thank you Mr chair and Senators
it's my honor to have sitting at
the table with me the venture
capital fund team and head of
the New Mexico finance authority
merry I'm sorry Ryan Marie
decker.
And Marquita Russel and last
year we proposed a bill I did
with three representatives to
create a venture capital fund
for entrepreneurs in New Mexico
and the insight came from some
members of the S. I see you said
S. I. C. has to generate a
return but as we know capital
really grows economy grows when
you make investments a little
bit like we talked about the
bio science this morning every
you have to make investments in
you have to take risks but as
you look around at the
surrounding four corner states
are other states did that back
in the nineties look at them
today we haven't had the
resources or whatever to do that
but last year we did pass this
bill and I want to commend the
team for the work they've done
and getting the program set up
they had to go out to bring it
to interview and bring in
expert firms in venture capital
to do the vetting of what would
and would not be invested in and
they have that now gone through
all that process in set up is
due to S. three three firms are
to get to firms all together sun
mountain capital and mission
driven finance and next right
to broaden the the the
capabilities of what to invest
in now last year we had some
restrictions on the bill and
through experience we realize we
need to loosen some of that up
to attract the appropriate
capital so that day private
equity doing exactly matching
funds
does hold back and number
private equity firms from
potentially putting cap more cap
putting capital and in
particularly in partnering the
we did say that.
That last year okay no more than
ten percent in any one industry
well there's some industries
that are really growing the
bioscience and what have you and
so we want to raise that to
thirty percent and we want them
to be able to take some
appropriate rest again with the
vetting of these professionals
so sometimes the investment
rates might be a little bit low
initially in terms of what the
market is put into it and get in
there is risk reward risk return
but again done well you can have
great success is many have noted
in the private equity world it's
the jockey not the horse per se
and so having the team that
really knows what they're doing
is going to get too ahead rather
than the idea many people do not
know that Google was in nineteen
search engine put on the market
when the idea came up they went
out and got the top jockeys and
that's where it is today and
that's what this team is doing
for our investments in New
Mexico so what we want to do in
this bill is to hear and those
the limiting issues and also
assure proprietary technical
trade secrets and we want to add
another thirty five million as
we're now ready to go and there
are you know the state New
Mexico is great for incubating
ideas as we come out of the labs
more P. H. D.'s in any other
state but we incubate them and
then we don't have the money to
keep supporting and once the
idea seems to be reasonable
maybe will work where we where
we get round the C. Indian
sometimes the the you have to
actually you don't have a a top
Kentucky Derby jockey but you've
got one who could probably get
there and so you want to be able
to back them and their ideas
well so this bill.
it gives them a little more
latitude and adds another thirty
five million dollars and as we
look at our future the recent
that I've really got behind
economic development as I begin
to understand in my now Ivete
presented didn't understand how
much money in the state budget
comes from oil and we know that
in time I mean just so going to
be a demand for oil but in time
we've got to build a revenue
based on income and taxes and
Madam about vice chair I know
I've gone over my time but I
just want to make a compelling
argument so it's easy for you
all the state to pass thank you
and to do my experts have
anything else I want to add or
do you think I think.
This time Senator.
Percent.
The final one there was
Mister chair I think you might
want to have a little caucus
meeting with your colleagues
about that.
Okay of.
Thank you so we'll go out to the
audience anybody here in support
of Senate bill four oh two.
Good afternoon chair members of
the committee my name is Chelsea
Canada and I'm the director of
public policy at the New Mexico
chamber of commerce we support
SP four oh two as we work to
diversify our economy away from
its dependence on oil and gas we
need to invest in and grow new
industries in the state we
supported the creation of the
NMFA venture capital program
last year and support the NMFA's
feedback on changes to make the
program more successful both the
chambers recent economic
competitive analysis driving New
Mexico's future and the state's
twenty year economic strategy
highlight the need to increase
venture funding in New Mexico in
order to build out our
entrepreneurial ecosystem and to
create new businesses and jobs
nationally the amount of venture
capital type disbursed by one
million dollars of GDP is six
thousand one hundred fifty nine
dollars and in New Mexico it is
around twenty four hundred
dollars we only have about a
third as much venture capital on
average as the rest of the
country if we want to leverage
our laboratories and develop
small local businesses just
before to help us make New
Mexico start ups more
competitive thank you.
They also nobody on the.
All right anybody in opposition.
Okay go to committee for
questions.
Senator Kernan thanks so much Mr
it removes the requirement for
bond what do is have.
For that there are other.
Doesn't seem concerned.
I are you still there.
What was that there in the first
place.
Thank you Mr chair and Senator
Fund we I my understanding is
that is that it was originally
included introduce yourself and
who you are so just for the
record and they're listening
thank you my apologies I'm Ryan
decker I'm opposing capital
strategist at NMFA and I'm
working on this program on my
understanding is that language
was initially included just as
part of the initial stop
comparing the statute that was
already in place guiding the US
I see program on NMFA does not
require the need to purchase
bonds related to fund
administration to protect state
interests as NMFA's covered by
the NMSA nineteen seventy eight
section forty one of the New
Mexico tort claims act.
Imagine one more question Mr
chair there's no prohibition
against investing in any
particular industry here are our
top this I mean everyone the.
That's all.
Then Senator just bear with me
one minute actually it they do
focus on rural areas and
minorities in particular if they
can so there isn't anybody that
can't but there and at the end I
wind it you know learning this
morning about the geo thermal I
mean I think there's a whole lot
that's going to come out of the
oil and gas they're going to be
great ideas just like come out
of the land that this would be
for you know after years of
great ideas and some jockeys to
be able to get in brand and get
close to that I finish line
thank you.
Senator Brandt.
Chairman Senator.
Do you have a fascination with
resources.
Jockeys are is it the jockeys.
If you wanted to be a joke at
one point in his life thank you
Mr chair you hit it on the spot
honest to god I was quite small
growing up I used to go to the
race track all the time and I
didn't really want to be a
jacket one point.
And and then I got fat.
The next the rules that will be
it will raise.
With issue with the.
In okay good chairman Senator
thank you I just wonder why we
kept referring to.
Jockeys in the Kentucky Derby so
yes that was your lifelong dream
of stories got squished
so I guess.
How are we gonna make sure that
that.
That you're making investments
there's a lot of risk.
So how do we make sure of the
state that we're not putting the
taxpayers money at risk.
Thank you Senator Brandon Mr
chair
investment is about risk I can't
tell you that there isn't risk
that's why I'm I'm sorry but
that's why you get great jockeys
or or the the other thing I want
to do Mr chair was to play
football hello wrong number but
you get great person if you want
to be able to win but there
there is always risk I mean the
the the common lingo is that
nine out of ten VC startups
don't make it but those who do I
don't know that's quite and this
isn't just a particular start up
this could be round the round C.
that's brown B. is when the idea
is practical and you need to
know if there's a market for you
prove there's a market you get
more money and you prove you can
scale up that creates the jobs
and at I think I failed to
mention that these in these
start ups and growth has to stay
in New Mexico this is to this is
really in New Mexico really well
paying job growth plan.
This presents are actuals one
question I was going to ask you
about staying in New Mexico how
long do that stay in New Mexico.
My recollection is a I I don't
the the company has to build in
New Mexico and I don't know if
there is an out date per se I
don't remember that there is so
I think they've got a state.
Am I correct.
Yep Mr chair and senator they
there's not a specific terms of
requirement outlined in the
statute however there are
requirements around the majority
of employees being based in New
Mexico and eighty percent of the
firm's assets being based in New
Mexico this gentleman serve but
that would be when the money's
invested.
Because I don't think
constitutionally you can require
a firm or company to stay in any
one place.
I think the Supreme Court
ruling.
Is going to Judiciary.
In finance.
And so so this certain amount of
money who's gonna make the
determinations of of where that
support businesses they're
investing in.
That will be the New Mexico
finance authority and I don't
think I don't know that you have
it the team who is running this
program it did reads that are
like an all star cast in terms
of experience and then again the
firm's that they have contracted
with the sun mountain capital in
mission driven finance and again
the success breeds success in
investment and those who have
had been in it no it really know
how it's done that's where you
want to invest and and have the
possibility of the greatest
return so Mister chairman
Senator so we've already been
doing this.
We have what I don't I I have to
ask my team if they've actually
started on one night I know some
people have been approaching but
I don't think that they have
made an award yet today to.
Mr Chairman no we have not yet
made any awards we selected the
two investment managers that
will run different a diversified
programs and we expect to have
our first
of round at the end of the
beginning of the summer.
Mr Chairman
Why are we wanting to make
changes before you even.
Instead of making sure that we
had some success I think we pass
this in twenty two it was you
know we're going to see if it
was successful and then come
back and make changes as
recommended why are we are
making changes a year right.
Thank you Mr.
Your thank you sorry Mr chairman
what we had in depth
conversations with these
investment managers we've been
coordinating with other
investment venture capital
programs in New Mexico and we
want to make certain that we can
complement the programs that
already exist and are are and
that are coming online and if we
all have the exact same
requirements for for instance
matching funds from other
investors we're going to find
that we're not able to allocate
all of those funds in a timely
manner so our concern here is.
We believe we're being asked to
run an alternative B.C program
one that's not just solely based
on return and to do so we're
going to need to get new
partners and and and that's
where that matching funded
particularly becomes difficult
for us.
Mr chairman Sir thank you.
The woman.
Thank you.
For this purpose from the.
Program for.
Briefly.
I think I can answer that the
bioscience is in bioscience for
sure it is specifically a two to
one match to what we put forward
here this has much more latitude
than the that bio science does
in terms of types of investors
that complements I don't think
you have this the economic
development department how they
approach it the SI see actually
dozens come forward now with
some venture capital money but
in a different way so there are
many different approaches in in
investment and this kind of goes
all the way across the board the
bio science again that's a with
that stock holding what have you
this is as a co investor again
would get the stocking there may
be a sale later on down the line
the money would come back and
same kind of principal but that
is specifically bio science.
Thank you for the answer.
And just that quick comment
Is
Senator of of on set for the
other day Mexico.
This is locked in to take risks
more so the days.
Nine of the state's provided a
recent so I'm not.
This is a great program for.
Thank you thank you senator
Sanchez thank you Mr chairman
so.
So the Appropration is thirty
five million for a one time.
Yes so our business comes to Mr
chair Senator business covered
what is there a cap on what each
business can get a hundred
thousand five hundred million.
That that depends on how the
form is applied and I'm going to
defer to my experts.
Mr chair Senator the statute has
a ten percent in one business
cap and that's ten percent of
the funds.
So.
Explain that one more time.
Ten percent of the fund the
total fund cannot be invested in
any one single business.
Mr chair Senator.
You up.
Senator Brandt second I'm sorry
to go second time but didn't
want to are we changing that to
thirty percent in this bill.
I think I can explain this
thirty percent is in that type
of the industry like bioscience
ten percent is in one specific
investment one company thank
you.
Thank you
On the thank you senator on the.
Phase three way talks about the
accredited investors and then
the.
Of the current talks about
federally recognized tribes
nations pueblos.
These five million dollars in
over investment assets can you
explain what that means.
Okay yes.
Page what is right here section
for.
Section four of section three
section two of.
Number four.
The line eight.
President yes.
Thank you senator Sanchez.
Question.
Okay.
Already yes please.
Mr chair that's the the same
language that was in the
original bill and that's
defining accredited investors so
the requirements in order to be
to be an investor.
So so what a new survey so when
it.
Speaks to the provision tribes
so the need to have at least
five million.
That's what the statute says
the.
Is that just a tribe or is it it
also
Because I know some tribes of
like section seventeen
corporations that new ones that
speaks to that or is it just
strictly tribes.
Mr chairman I believe if it's a
like a chapter seventeen
corporation would fall under the
first portion but yes it as long
as the of a investments of five
million dollars or more they
qualify as a partner to the
under this fund.
So with that or they also of
defined under accredited
investors on their federal.
Mr chairman I believe it's in
addition to the accredited
investor definition that's put
out in the public securities act
of nineteen thirty three.
Thank you of senator Sanchez.
Okay.
Don't have any other okay just
for the past Senator Kernan.
Senator Brandt.
Any opposition to do best
motion.
I see none it would do pass.
Nine two zero.
Thank you senator and committee.
The.
Senator my nose.
This you.
All right we do Senate bill four
ninety one for stating facts.
Senator Representative Senate
bill four ninety one thank you
Mr chairman prior to twenty
twenty the superintendent in
insurance managed a premium
collections distributions in the
distributions to law enforcement
protection fund range between
six and twenty million
assignments down as side
distributed that law enforcement
protection money included live
health in general casualty
insurance premium taxes the law
enforcement protecting.
Law enforcement protection fund
governing statutes do not
include health insurance.
Health insurance premium taxes
twenty RD took over the the dish
collection distribution of
insurance premium taxes in
twenty twenty and updated the
health insurance premium taxes
in quarters with a house bill
twenty in twenty nineteen the
exclusions of the health
insurance premium taxes because
the law enforcement pretty
protecting fund for decreased
revenues by sixty six percent.
The legislature increased
distributions to law enforcement
protection fund twice based on
revenue that was improperly
included in health insurance
premium taxes and the
distribution coupled with the
revenue decreases as because the
current and projected shortfall.
The pros proposed legislation
will authorize T. L. TRD to
include health insurance premium
tax revenues returning the
revenue to pay for it to
previously anticipated levels
that can be supported in the
legislative the approved
increased distributions for
currently in the short of it the
fund was not collecting the
space under funded this is a fix
that needs to happen in order to
make the funds all with us
putting back general fund that
will stand for questions.
And then there's this is an
agency that.
Thank you of.
I will go up to the audience
anybody here in support of
Senate bill four ninety one.
They were in opposition to the
central for ninety one.
They will go to committee
questions.
Two passed.
This is an agency best motion
with so we'll go ahead wait for.
A little bit any questions.
I have one
branch.
At least one yesterday to the
floor.
I
already there's no question that
thank the state forward of.
This this this in the HB.
Four or.
No currently it is H. B. two
because we have to back fill the
dollar amount so the so law
enforcement protection fund as
income under funded in Salfit
which statute requires as far to
be solved so what happened in
house building twenty nineteen
house bill one sixty two when
they switch from excited TRD T.
R. A. D. did not include the
portion and that's what because
a premium taxes to shortfall and
so we need to correct that in
order for it to be.
R. make sense already splitter
also for the past with Senator
and seconded by Senator Brett.
Opposition to the two passed
motion.
I see none of the of the past
nine two zero and you want to go
you're there Senate bill forty
five all the little bit of work
but I want to explain it to
people currently in in the cause
of the liquor law changes in
McKinley county we created a
statue where you can either
choose to sell beer and wine
with gasoline or just straight
alcohol there's one
establishment in McKinley county
that has been a problem for
twenty years people have died on
the road matter fact you there
was a wreck on in front of the
establishment well helicopter
landed in somebody hit the
helicopter when it was well as
on the ground and so we know we
need to fix that problem this
bill is a little bit more work
to excludes on to the state fair
so that's where that does come
from so people understand.
Most of the thank you thank you
Senator Hamblen.
And then I think we have well as
a more responsible.
That's my understanding duplex.
The second.
Okay.
All right.
go the next and then also.
Already.
The for the Senate bill four
thirty two.
All right thank you Mr chair and
committee there is an amendment
to Senate bill four thirty two
would you like me to go over
that before we address the bill
yes it is in your books.
Some of the discussion for.
Second.
Okay any opposition to the
motion.
None.
For the purpose of this question
purposes all right go ahead.
All right thank you Mr chair and
committee and I'm trying to
figure out ways I can work in
air supply their X. into my
presentation.
Save on home so lost without you
you're welcome for that stick in
your head.
Yes my goal for the rest of the
session
so thank you Mr chair committee
of the Senate bill four thirty
two
is the low income solar bill and
what it does is you know as a
state with over three hundred
forty days a year of sunshine we
I think we can all can agree
that we have at least one energy
resource that we can maximize
for uses in our homes and our
businesses schools and every
building or structure in our
state however as we've been
talking about here and we talk
about in our communities access
to full solar systems on our
homes our businesses still seems
out of reach for a lot of low
income folks and and residential
building products that projects
and so this bill as before
thirty two takes advantage of
the federal inflation reduction
act monies to enable tax credits
connecting affordable housing
units to the statewide clean
energy movement and this happens
by enabling on site net energy
metering for qualifying low
income building projects now the
amendment does clean up some
language what it does is it
inserts on page six in search
utility we've had some
conversations with utility
companies and wanting to make
sure that this exempt them and
covers them so that they're good
I think when we have public
testimony we might hear a little
bit more about that and then
also changes the name on page
changes the date on page ninety
two July rather than January so
it's a little bit more
reasonable and the time.
Basically this bill what it does
is it allows tenants to receive
the benefits of the twenty
percent Attar of that's on top
of the thirty for thirty percent
investment tax credit authorized
by the IRA for solar
installations basically what
we're doing is we're we're right
now we're missing out an
opportunity to cash in on
federal money to put solar
systems on building projects
where both the landlord and the
residents can benefit from and
so this bill will allow us to do
this I do have two experts with
me Christopher Morley who is the
director of public policy
percent run and then Jim
Girardin who is the executive
director of the renewable energy
industry association and so just
as the sum up before we go to to
public comment for single family
households as B. forty for the
four thirty two would ensure
equitable tax rates for on site
solar upfront costs for solar
system continuously range from
fifteen thousand to twenty
thousand dollars and unless you
have access to a financing
system it's really out of reach
and so what this will do is this
will allow us to help them do
that and then ultimately reduce
utility costs and so at this
point Mister shade Mister chair
I open it up certainly welcome
public discussion and then
discussion from the committee
for you all you expect to make
any comment for this for
questions or.
If you'd like to make sure
comments.
As you know I'm will and
retentive about that this.
thank you Mr chair and Senators
and we
again my name is Chris Worley
Ellis on run the residential
solar installer we think this
bill really create some tools to
unlock solar on affordable
housing and we we we think
Senator hand once the leadership
on this.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
members of the committee
foundation down with renewable
energy industry association of
New Mexico just one quick
comment on this is that what I
really like about this bill is
that it provides on site
generation at the place where
people are living and I think
that's a very very important
feature of it thank you very
much.
Ready to so I will go up to the
audience in support of a Senate
bill forty two.
Just come up in.
To be a minute each.
Sanchez time any of the.
Hello okay.
Thank you Mr chair members the
committee in the Sanchez my name
is Camilla I am and I'm the
director of the Rio Grande
chapter of the Sierra Club and
we in our thirty five thousand
members and supporters support
the bill we think it does too
simple things that help
lowincome New Mexicans access
solar the first is that in
enables virtual metering on
affordable housing developments
to unlock as they said irate
budget ensuring affordable
housing tenants can benefit and
insurers third party owned solar
systems receive the property tax
exemptions just like customer
owned systems to ensure equity
regardless of how a person can
afford to pay for the system so
we hope to earn your support
thank you.
A good afternoon Mister start
good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee L.
Parke representing project vote
solar well we want to thank the
sponsor and I stand in strong
support of the legislation I
think legislation stand speaks
for itself but we also strongly
believe that this legislation is
a very nice compliment to the
community solar program that
this legislature has recently
passed I think it'll work well
together to ensure affordability
and access for energy for all
New Mexicans thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you chairman and the
members of the committee my name
is sandy Kalyan be claim and
energy advocate with
conservation voters Mexico and
for reasons you've heard we also
support the bill our mission is
to achieve a dress and a global
transition away from oil and gas
and this is an excellent Avenue
to achieve that and it also
incorporates lowincome language
I can help our most vulnerable
communities thank you.
Mr chair members of the
committee of Charles good marker
speaking to you on behalf of the
MVC action fund right now and we
urge your support for this bill
their so many challenges for
lowincome communities when it
comes to energy low income
families are far more likely to
have outsize energy bills for
several reasons low income
families are more likely to rent
and renters typically foot the
bill for electricity low income
families are also more likely to
live in what are called heat
islands where there's extreme
heat you know within cities this
is often because they're they
generally live closer than high
income people due to areas that
have a lot of asphalt and large
buildings you know industrial
areas and so on and landlords
with renters have little
incentive to upgrade homes
energy efficiency but this bill
provides incentives for them to
do so so we fill our hope you
will support this bill thank you
thank you thank.
Everybody at opposition of this
bill.
But.
Mr chairman and members the
committee Mike d'antoni with
Xcel energy we serve electricity
to the eastern part of the state
we stand and slight opposition
to this bill we the concept is
good for low low income but you
know we just passed low income
solar last year it just went
through the rule making process
at the commission it the bids
are in at the commission for
evaluation it's was a two
hundred megawatt pilot program
to see how this would
health community solar could be
dressed in New Mexico the the
issue here is that the and that
program thirty percent of the
exist on existing act required
required to be low low income
residents so this is kind of a
confusing thing for utilities
there's gonna have to be another
rulemaking that goes through the
commission on this because it's
a different
instead doing of got credits to
the customers bill you got to go
through a net metering issue we
see it problematic and confusing
the same community solar
entities that have been into
this plan to the R. F. P.
probably have likely had many of
these multi family projects
under contract already it could
be don't know that for sure
until that on to the budget
released so if you look at the
FIR to do additional two hundred
thousand dollars for the next
year and the year after so four
hundred thousand dollars in net
cost to the PRC who's been
willfully under funded for many
years so for most of those those
reasons we stand in opposition
to the bill thank you.
Mr chairman members of the
committee Robert Romero on
behalf of a past electric again
for the same reasons just stated
we just passed the community
solar bill we're trying to get
those policies in place and we
think this of this bill is a
little bit premature.
They also.
Opposition.
Okay part of a.
Go ahead you have a minute.
Hi Mr chairman members of the
committee I am Carlos on tech
with the New Mexico business
coalition and we respectfully
oppose Senate bill four thirty
two you know when you look at
these issues of trying to help
the lower income people in the
state we appreciate that however
somebody's going to pay for it
and it usually goes back to
increasing rates for others and
because New Mexico is such a
party stricken state those
people that don't qualify for
this who are not getting the
benefit can ill afford to pay
for it and so.
That's one of the reasons we
oppose it we also think that
there's a problem with business
owners they're not going to have
much of an incentive to do this
it doesn't increase the value of
the property and then you've got
to figure out how are they going
to pay for it so for those
reasons we respectfully oppose
this legislation thank you.
Okay I know that we of need to
act on the amendment and if you
okay so with a motion to.
A motion for the amendment that
second all right so that is our
focus.
Any opposition to the motion.
I see none of amended bills
thank you Mr back on the bill
now okay
any questions so from committee
members Senator Representative.
Chairman Senator thank you okay
so help me understand how the
tax credit works is it the a
relatable on someone's saying so
like if you're like me and don't
have a tax liability.
One of the reasons I've never
done solar on my house.
Mr white Mr chair Senator go
ahead let my extras were leasing
the answer the question thank
you Mr chair and and senator for
these sorts of projects on on
affordable housing units there
generally what's called a power
purchase agreement so the solar
developer develops the project
they pay for all the up front
costs for the system and they
own the system they have to
maintain that over the life of
the system date use the the the
tax credit to essentially buy
down the cost of that
that up front investments the
power is then set sold
essentially to the to the to the
building owner to the landlord.
So Mister chairman.
Also maybe get up so early Mr
Worley so that is then you're
really able to make the
agreement with the landlord
right the the whoever owns the
home is you have to make the
agreement with
not the person living in the
home is that is that correct Mr
chair and senator that's correct
it's you know the the the the
agreement is with the solar
developer in the building owner
and it's on behalf of the the
tenants in this the system the
benefits accrue to both
attendance and to the to the to
the landlord the building owners
well it offset some of the the
energy use from common areas.
This
chairman of the swirly sorry I'm
getting tired
Also the tenants change though.
So maybe on behalf of the
tenants but it's those maybe
totally different tenants in a
month.
well on the in six months or
years
and so that just that that stays
with the landlord does it ever
become a landlord's property
years always the developers for
all.
Mr chair Senator so the bill
crediting that the the tenants
receive is tied to the tied to
the meter or the the billing
address so if that customer if
that tenant leaves and a new
tenant comes in the new tenant
gets those those benefits
you had a second question about
I think the the ownership of the
of the system
the project developer the the
solar company owns it for you
know twenty twenty five years of
the life of the project at the
end of that in sometimes the it
could be purchased by the
building owner it just depends
really on the arrangement
between the developer and the
and the building owner.
Hello Mr chairman Mr really at
that point they're usually have
pretty much spent their life
cycle correct.
Mr chair and senator
in it no
you know the solar panels
degrade over time
but over twenty twenty five
years you know it may be at
seventy five percent
effectiveness or maybe seventy
percent but you know it's it's
still producing a fair amount of
of electricity.
Mr chairman the the the
technology is getting better
those are less than what.
They used because that used to
not be the case that would be
great much faster okay so so
this would allow the and.
If I had a duplex or a
quadruplex than I could put this
on there.
Advertised it up by Tennessee
your budget range are going to
be less because these are these
have solar panels on.
Mr chair and senator if the
duplex or quad plex is
specifically an affordable
housing projects.
I thank you I think I understand
Senator Kernan.
Mr chair and.
The one thousand projects for
instance that would be something
that yes house and one of the.
Those developers and come in and
and get those the funding to put
together four four housing
apartment buildings it we have
an economy.
Senator they're fortunate to
have so it does come projects
have people I.
I see the this is.
Mr chair and senator I don't
know enough about yes housing
I'm it sounds like the that is
the case the the bill lays out
specific qualifications in the
federal investments their
apartment inflation reduction
act it's basically
federally supported affordable
housing projects like like HUD
supported projects and there's
some other categories as well
but generally speaking I think
the most mostly federal programs
that support these buildings Mr
in senators so.
Yes.
The.
What was it or not.
Yes.
Chance to do the full some of
the projects like this tell you
to our facilities and you know
there's that cost their with
their so that.
Have.
It didn't have a kind of back
for second line right then Mr
chair and and senator in my my
experts can confirm but I I
think it's because we've got
this opportunity at the federal
level through the IRA the
inflation reduction act is like
this is money that is just right
there for the picking that we're
losing out on and we didn't have
that before
and so if I could though I'd
also like to answer the the
answer the question about the S.
housing that my other
expressions of concern.
And I'm sorry that the question
was about the test housing.
Mr chair but you know what I'm
talking about those before has
gathered between communities and
and not available funds from the
state well yeah I would think
those would be perfect of places
for this type of arrangement
absolutely and as Mr really
mention they would qualify for
this twenty percent and our
that's what we call from the
inflation reduction act so
typically developer would get a
thirty percent federal tax
credit but with the twenty
percent at or they're getting a
fifty percent tax credit
essentially which makes it much
more
doable defense on a project in a
place like that so yeah I think
there would be plenty of
opportunities for this to to to
work out.
And so Mister chair we have a
couple of just slight concerns
from the utilities because you
know kind of here we go again he
said something implies that we
come back we keep adding on the
vineyard of the bill present
where you know we've.
We have something in place
around and go back and change
the rules I don't think this is
so much the problem that I do
think we have to be really
careful when we pass legislation
that would come back and change
it trying to reach the doubled
which you know maybe our goals
are simple setting thank I do
think that.
He said it was PRC and bills
we're.
To the job in.
We why did we do what we do our
center.
That could do this without.
To do it.
That that I worried that.
They need to do that I didn't
worry our utilities
I probably get it.
It's going to be paying.
Customer utility in my area and
I think they've done a fabulous
job moving to renewables and I
give them credit for that but
it's it's not cheap it's costly.
Those thankful so happy for the
people that get a reduction in
their files that that possibly
stemming increase another state
I do appreciate the fact that
low income individuals I have an
opportunity and so provided.
Thank you for calling.
Thank you we'll do this.
I have a question of.
They also question.
Of.
I I know the issues brought up
and and maybe just for my
clarification to in all.
The PRC put our P. four to two
hundred thousand there were two
hundred megawatts of the range.
And so now we're at in this on
to it isn't that also part of
that aren't those companies or
developers also eligible for the
federal tax credits are
available under the I. R..
excuse me Mr chairman members
the committee thank you so the
community solar is it's a very
different concepts and so this
it's not part of that and and it
it would be a separate docket at
the PRC should it pass out of
this building
the settling it to give me when
you say different I mean this
will okay so thank you again Mr
chairman members of the
committee so community solar is
essentially a subscription
system so for example as long as
you build the system on the same
utilities cell PNM for example
has
customers in Deming their
customers obviously in Santa Fe
so I could build a community
solar system in Deming and sell
subscriptions to that two people
in Santa Fe.
So it's a very different concept
where as I mentioned my opening
comment what I think is really
unique and very promising about
this bill is that you have on
site generation about having on
site generation there's a number
of manages your by generating at
the point where you using energy
there's less energy loss there's
a resiliency aspect to it
because we're not relying on big
generators
another aspect is to what I
think is simply having the
generation on site is is very
important people can see the
system there's an educational
component to it and there's also
more economic development
related to this because there's
gonna be jobs building those
systems in effect could be some
of those very people living in
those
places that might be building
the house so so it's a very
different concept.
Set into your question of.
The social we talk about low
income so we're talking about
multi family units we're not
talking about.
Individual homes that low income
people might also be living at.
Mr chair and an committee is if
there's a landlord to that home
recipes it has to be owned by
somebody else so the right
person.
You know live in a rural area.
That.
House as passed on to them very
low income so they're not
eligible for this at all.
No.
No Mr chair they're not this is
this this is forces mainly for
folks living in the city and
landlords and and the so those
those four areas we're still not
gonna have any.
That's where our for level four
people or as well on the and and
so I I think you know we.
Anyway so of.
About point that would be my
concern too because of northern
New Mexico we have houses that
are traditionally passed down
from generation to generation so
if you think about let's talk
about moderate where the fire
happened a lot of those homes
are covered by insurance just
because the fact that they're
passed down the generations the
state within the family that's a
lot of northern New Mexicans
would qualify for this program
it's homes are owned and stay
within the family that would be
my concern thank you Mr thank
you appreciate that you know
because we always talk about low
income but you know what in this
case we're talking about people
live in urban areas you know
that districts harmless I know
everybody else we do have some
clarification on that for that
Mr Mr chair thank you for the
question yes the qualification
is really for federally backed
affordable housing so that could
be in in rural areas that could
be in urban areas that could be
anywhere as long as that that
building as long as.
Does it supported by one of
these federal programs.
Okay of the.
The I. I see tribal housing
authorities in here.
But we don't have too many of
those tribal Housing Authority
usually are building individual
units not necessarily you know
multi family homes so
This will start to what your
life first of twenty twenty
fours with yes Mr chair and
committee that's what part of
the amendment moved it because
originally the original bill was
January and we moved it to July.
Yeah all right but that's the
question.
You know I I kind of think we're
we're going with this I think
all of us who want to do solar
energy but it seems to me we
talk about luxury cars will talk
about solar projects I don't see
anybody my district.
All rural areas you know put up
solar spending fifteen twenty
thousand solar units I don't see
a lot of my you know the folks
running to buy electric vehicles
right you know and getting tax
credits and and and you know so
in that we create and own its
own inequity and and and and and
that's the part that doesn't sit
well with me because I think you
know it's it's a it's important
we want to talk you know we we
want to go for everybody but you
know in overly there's a large
population and it's not going to
benefit right Mister chair I
agree with you that that's you
know one of the reasons why is
that you know when we talk about
this we usually think of a
particular demographic that is
able to afford solar I'm very
fortunate that I'm able to
afford solar system in my house
and then I see other folks on my
street who who are not going to
be able to do that because
they're their own home owners
but I do view this as a step
toward that and I I do agree
that there is the inequity and
it's not necessarily something
that is appealing to everybody
but I said I see this is an
opportunity to start those
conversations and trying create
other Pat Peck plans or roadmaps
so that we can because there are
those that would benefit from a
great deal but it's still yet
not as affordable as it should
be and I think the more that we
continue to engage in the
systems the more we continue to
to install the systems we can
eventually get that down towards
much more affordable and
practical for a lot of folks and
realistic.
Okay.
But it.
Reporter covering the comments
from energy minerals and then I.
The other comments are
concerning I mean they're
talking about that there can be
certain that the lack of
incentive for property owners to
participate in the program
they're concerned that if they
do then they're gonna probably
turnaround rabies the rant in
order to pay for it and so what
we're what we're looking at is
what we want to put in some or
all right but the low income
tenants cost to be there.
Is about the shank and that's
that's the concern that they
have and I mean that that looks
pretty validation and and I
don't.
I don't have to get it get
around that you know we don't
have an Alamogordo we've we've
got some low income housing and
they could come in there and and
a real one apartment complex
then we have
you know Google would people
would call projects in the past
those are like single family
unit H. I I don't know we're
would really fit in those things
and when with these guys are
talk and the way they're talking
it just looks like it's a little
bit of a challenge to accomplish
the goal that you're trying to
reach sure thank you Mr chairman
thank you senator.
What else up Senator
Representative.
Thank you and I don't have a
problem with this I think.
That's fine but I do know that
that for we do need to do
something.
For lowincome doesn't have a tax
liability that can put solar on
their homes.
If you have a individual home
like.
Center our meal was talking
about Senator Shendo talk about.
Yeah that's where the more the
focus needs to be
my oldest son his wife bought a
home.
Seven years ago I kept pushing
on like the one you need to buy
a place that you know the real
estate market about to explode
it has they got at the right
time.
But their credit rating.
Had to be over seven hundred and
something because there were
solar on the home to qualified
to take over the solar.
And they only needed it to be
six hundred by the whole.
So there's there's a difference
there right so somehow if we
want to actually make it
available for low income.
Fortunately you know my son
works for Rio Rancho school
districts yes good income have
good credit but lot of people
have that starting out
and so we you know if if we
really want solar to be
available for everybody and not
just a rich because really right
now it's mostly available from.
Let's be honest solar is mostly
available for people have a high
tax for.
All the tax credits take off
your tax liability.
If you don't have a tax
liability so we're going to help
you tax what's.
I hope you and your bill but
that's it I get any any of the
tax benefits so we really want
to be equitable for low income
for people and Senator Lopez is
district and and people in some
in some of my district
we've got to figure out
something for those lower income
people this is an at a lot of
lower income can I can finally
afford to buy a home.
They can afford solar.
Just kind of crazy.
Right I can I can have a
mortgage of three hundred
thousand the by my house but to
qualify for solar panels I can't
qualify because my credit rating
is not a hundred and something.
It's a little bit ridiculous and
so that's something that needs
to be dealt with so I just want
to put my.
Senator Kernan that I've Senator
home you said.
Just Mr chair just one is.
The developers of the.
The original some computer
somewhere.
Because.
I'm not sure.
Exactly.
Sturgis the regional the seller
those developers and those that
will be pushing this competition
for.
Mr chair and and senator I I I'm
gonna turn that over to Jim but
I do want to to thank you all
because we are absolutely right
we do we aren't in a position
yet where people who are the
majority of our state are able
to benefit from what is an
abundant resource in our state
and I look forward to those
conversations to like how can we
do that that's our job as
legislators like how can we do
this and and I hope that that
sparks that conversation that
you know those of us here on
this committee are really
interested in trying to explore
and and reach that solution
because there isn't inequity and
when we do need before going to
if we're going to walk the walk
or talk the talk we need to walk
the walk and so I'm gonna go
ahead and to answer your
question.
Not sure it's even a good place
to sure yes okay Santo Domingo.
Thank you Mr chairman of the
joint statement we need this
bill in order to qualify for
federal money.
Mr chairman committee yes this
is what we need and we we have
how much in the money from the
I. R. A. that is available for
these projects that if we didn't
have this bill we wouldn't be
able to have access to that
money to go ahead and put it in
the first place because that
adds the twenty percent that are
to the thirty percent already so
that in essence cuts the cost of
those systems in half.
The reserve.
This is if we don't vote for
this bill will go federal
dollars of this accident so.
Yes Mr chair that point all okay
I'm trying to get and get
confused I can see if we have
the New Mexico of Housing
Authority tickets federal money.
Aren't they the entity also that
are going after these funds or a
meat tell me a little bit of
help how that works with our our
our house in the what's it
called Mexico marquees finds
Authority project that there you
go that's that's the one.
Do they even play a part of this
or not or how does that work
thank you for the question Mr
chair the Housing Authority you
wouldn't take the tax credit or
in most cases they're really not
in the business of of investing
in building a solar project and
so it wouldn't folks that have a
tax liability basically
so it would be a solar company
that develops the project the
solar company would would take
the tax credit monetize the tax
credit so that it lowers the
project cost so that it's just
it's it's it's essentially
offsetting the the build costs
for that project stand at.
Federal money is there but.
I just don't know if we're just
pushing to hard because you know
we have you know but the notice
I just don't know I I I I wish
you know I know this the federal
money is driving us.
Of.
So I I don't know I don't know.
To have this conversation I
think that really includes the
people that needs to benefit
absolutely from what you know
this could be and and and and
the rush to do this because you
know it at this.
Mr chair and committee I the the
the way I see it I can
completely understand the the
conflict of this
is that I I feel that if if we
are able to offer solar and
reduce utility costs right now
what we're also able to do is
gather that information from
those communities to see where
we can target that I mean you
know that in terms of your
community center how to me knows
that in his community their
areas throughout all of the
areas that we represent what we
know that this could work and I
see this is more of a of a model
of how we can we can us as
legislators can justify the
conversations that I think are
still going to come out of this
discussion today.
Okay
What is the pleasure of the
committee.
Do that well that's right we
have a I'm sorry yeah we have a
due pass motion we have a
second.
Mr chair.
Second the.
Senator Lopez any opposition to
the resolution.
From the call the roll Senator
Brandt.
Yes Senator creeks.
Senator how to meal yes it to
briefly explain about.
Senator Kernan no.
Senator Lopez yes.
Senator Sanchez yes.
Senator Tom.
Senator Wirth Senator Hamblen
yes.
Senator Shendo yes.
Almost.
Your vote yes we yes.
Okay have a.
Some explainable center how do
you plan on mill rate I don't
know how a vote on the floor
because any listens more
constituents but if you could
start a conversation to later in
the interim how we really target
rural New Mexico as the issues
that Senator Pinto and I
exceptionally that we
Representative rural communities
have a huge part of our
districts are rural New Mexicans
we can talk about twenty but I
agree that we have these federal
dollars is money to be brought
into Mexico for solar.
Thank you Mr chair committee and
I do think that this is a very
valuable conversation that
everybody's contributed to
because we've all got a stake in
this for this so thank you very
much for your vote thank you Mr
chair yup to questions seventy
two.
All righty I'm going to.
Representative Zamora I know you
got the folks come from out of
town going to go to.
Expert witnesses that travel so.
The one
of the.
A little that the.
Okay our.
Sorry say that.
Representative more a.
Senator Ingle.
What.
Are you ready Mr.
Let.
Mr chair and members of the
committee good afternoon we have
so house bill two fifty three in
front of us today relating to
gaming changes operating hours
for nonprofit or organization
gaming operator licensee change
in the next take percentage for
nonprofit organization and
gaming operator license I'd like
for.
You give me a little chance to
for my expert witnesses to
introduce themselves please for
chairman members poll back
generally came forward given Mr
chairman my name stays noted in
the audit director for the in
control.
Mr chair Senator.
The need to work.
Thank you Mr chairman if I may
I'll make a comment on the bill
and then we'll be ready for
questions.
And I forgot to introduce
Senator Stuart Ingle.
Your introduction.
Maybe Mr chairman and and
members of the committee the
reason we're here today is
because in New Mexico we have
been seeing non profits.
going I guess you could almost
say bankrupt but they they've
been going broke and they've
been selling their buildings and
trying to survive in running
their non profits under other
buildings and stuff.
And this is affecting our
veteran communities of the state
and we're looking to put it back
on track and let him keep more
of their profits so they can pay
their utilities and upkeep their
buildings and what that we stand
for questions Mr chairman thank
you system go to the audience
anybody here support of the
bill.
Realism anybody in opposition.
Okay committee questions.
This motion for the press was
Senator Brandt second by Senator
Kernan.
Any opposition to do pass
motion.
So you know we have to pass.
You Mr chairman members of the
committee.
Yes to the nonprofit's.
And and.
Already a Senator of me the
Stefani X. there you are.
Good afternoon Mister chair
members of the committee this is
Senate bill four fifty six
energy storage and planning one
of my expert witnesses former
representative Abbas the keel is
quite ill and could not come but
today I do have Nora Roberts who
is from Colorado and a member of
the American clean power
association so today Mr chair
members of the committee this
bill deals with both right grid
modernization and energy storage
there is a an amendment that we
gave to the committee that
addressed some of the concerns
of the utilities the investor
owned utilities and our last
committee
hearing that can the I use were
concerned that they could not
recover their costs and that is
in the original bill so the
amendment just repeats the
language from the original bill
saying they can recover their
costs and so that was that's all
the amendment does and it was
from a concern that the investor
owned utilities have.
Okay.
What is the.
Motion to approve the amendment.
Most.
Discussion purposes only.
Second by Senator Lopez.
Okay so you let me go to the
bill no additional again so if
for a moment yes on the in the
amendment what we did is on page
two line twenty two.
We struck four thousand and
thirty three thousand five
hundred and on page three line
to we struck eight.
And inserted the in lieu
thereof.
Let's see page three line eight.
For him to see right.
Well I'm looking at the wrong.
Yes it is just a Senate
conservation committee
substitute.
So yes this is correct and it's
straits eight answers in lieu
thereof seven and then it
inserts the qualifying utility
the number takes energy storage
system projects approved
approved by the commission may
recover it's reasonable cost
through an approved tariff
writer or in base rates are
through a combination of both
and that is in the original
bill.
On page four we went back to the
we struck twenty twenty three we
went to twenty twenty two
because that goes back to the
standards that were set.
That.
And so if we have questions on
the amendment for the bill I'm
going to defer to Mister Miller
Roberts who is with me today.
And you are with again can you
did merit can clean power
association there are their
national organization there are
over seven hundred members
nation wide and Representative
Abbas Akhil who was going to be
with me today is one of their
consultants in a system
utilities in helping to reach
our grid modernization in our
goals for the state he spent
several years working at Sandia
national laboratories and also
it PNM he is also written in
some publications regarding this
he's a well known expert and I'm
very sorry can be here today he
was so impressive in our last
committee.
Much more impressive than me.
And then Mr Nora Roberts one
explained about the organization
in your certainly certainly.
Honorable chair members of the
committee thank you for your
time today my name still Roberts
I'm the director of energy
storage at the American clean
power association as a senator
noted we represent over seven
hundred fifty members who build
own and operate a clean energy
projects that includes a wind
solar transmission and energy
storage companies from
manufacturing construction
businesses to developers owners
operators and utilities it's a
pleasure to be here and I'm
happy to answer any questions
about the amendment of bill
thank you right K. this time go
to the audience anybody here
support of the bill.
And go ahead in the sent.
One minute each.
To.
We on the bill at the amendment.
Okay I'm sorry I'm sorry I'm
sorry okay because I didn't
explain the billion the billing
I'm sorry I'm sorry I'm.
Thanks for the car of I
understand.
You can make a lot of shots.
Article it we're on the bill.
We have an amendment so can we
get.
To
Right time right I have
questions on the amendment okay
what so it's been moved for
discussion purposes sorry Mr
chairman Senator.
basically what the amendment
does this possibility maybe.
Is put the bill on the.
So what it does is it allows the
utility company to go back to
the PRC and let them put a
tariff on my electricity which
is already doubled in the last
year.
Because of clean energy.
So what point do I leave the
state.
Mr chair Senator it is in the
original bill that right that
way so when we presented this
bill and did not have the
language the in investor owned
utilities opposed the bill
because they said you're not
guaranteeing us that and we
indicated it is in the original
bill if we have it in statute so
this was put in to accommodate
or reassure the I. O. use so
Mister Roberts you want to
comment on this very very very
briefly Sir Senator Mr chair
members of the committee this
line it simply reiterates what
existing current statutes and
what occurs to the standard
integrated resource planning
process so through that process
utilities will work to identify
the most cost effective resource
mix this just research for the
for the sake of transparency and
assuring the the members who
spoke out with this concern that
this is part of this bill in
addition to current statutes
Mister chairman Senator and with
all due respect to your expert
that's what we were told.
Is that this was gonna be least
expensive and yet our utility
rates double.
So someone's line.
That same thing happened
California where my family lives
they were told to clean energy
was going to be more affordable
and yet they're utility rates
have more than doubled.
So everywhere that we force this
at this transition.
Our utility rates of double.
And the ones of us who live on a
fixed income.
We're just gonna leave so you
want to keep driving people out
in New Mexico is a great way to
do it people lined the the
utility companies to push this
charge on the rest of us and
we'll just leave is a lot of
other states are doing this with
is still there but that's what
you're doing and so I will
support this amendment I won't
support this bill.
You any other questions on the
amendment.
We have what would.
And sisters Representative thank
you the amendment Mr chair
the changing.
The twenty the effective date
from July first twenty twenty
three.
What.
Why the change.
Mr chair.
The twenty two well
Mr chair members of the
committee the state was a change
from twenty twenty three to
twenty twenty two for the
purposes of counting qualify
projects towards the target so
what this would do is for
projects that are brought online
between December thirty one
twenty twenty two and when the
bill passes those would count
towards the megawatt total so
that that was the intent behind
the original legislation and
this is a technical fix so that
is page four line one line at a
not the last line right correct
just asking why it's so thank
you to current well so you're
backtracking and then reducing
it the that number is our
portion there the change in from
eight to seven but you're
backtracking so does that make a
difference is coming up.
But that has to do it connected
Mr chair Senator I'm going to
defer to Mister Roberts thank
you Mr chair members of the
committee those are not a
correlated the the reason for
the change in the may go on our
target was due to a technical
considerations of proposed by el
Paso electric about what a
standard energy storage facility
would be able to deliver based
on its megawatts and so it
simply to recognize that if
there is an energy storage
facility that could deliver for
our duration
that that would be maxing out
the output of that facility and
so this recognizes that that
likely would not be at a
scenario that would occur.
Thank you.
In questions on the amendment.
The best.
We don't have all right so
We're on the amendment the
motion for due process similar
to pass an amendment since our
meal the second.
Senator Lopez.
Hello Senator Brandt the.
Senator Griggs yes.
Senator had a meal yes.
Senator Kernan yes Senator Lopez
yes.
Senator Sanchez.
Pass.
Senator Tallman yes.
For.
Senator Hamblen yes.
Senator Shendo yes.
That to Senator yes.
So we have
this one now okay all right so
we have the best motion
amendment rolled back in the
bill okay thank you Mr chair so
this bill requires an investor
owned utility but not rural
electric coops to periodically
file of grid modernization plan
with the PRC which includes how
the plans are consistent
consistent with the state's
roadmap for grid modernization
it establishes a statewide
target of one thousand megawatts
of new energy storage capacity
by twenty twenty eight.
It requires the PRC to determine
the amount of energy storage
capacity each I you would be
required to procure or develop
but also gives the PRC greater
latitude to establish additional
energy storage targets it
requires I used to incorporate
yes to incorporate their
assigned energy storage capacity
obligation into their integrated
resource planning process each
year and it directs the I'll use
to seek PRC approval I did have
a conversation today with the
chief of staff for the PRC and
that newly couldn't
Important PRC and confirm PRC
has a very specific process in
which they would continue
consider bills to approve or not
approve and so there was not
time for this but they are aware
of this bill and I'm not sure if
he's in the audience Mr Choi
curry and she indicated they
were interested but she could
not say that they supported.
Thank you.
Already so what this does is it
too soon we'll go up to the
audience on the amended bill
anybody in support of the bill.
All right start again it.
Thank Sen.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
members of the committee Jim day
showdown with renewable energy
industry association of New
Mexico.
Known as re up at Rio our
mission is to support is to
support promote and advance the
transition to renewable energy
in New Mexico.
As we transition to a renewable
energy grid energy storage
whether it is behind the meter
or a utility scale will play a
pivotal role in stabilizing the
grid and ensuring energy is
available when we needed.
Setting real targets for the
deployment of storage over the
next ten years and directing the
PRC to oversee the process
should help to ensure that we
have adequate storage available
for a safe and reliable grid we
also think it's very important
to.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee and the sponsors
this year coupled like to stand
in support of this legislation
which would require the
inclusion of storage and I or P.
processes and position New
Mexico as a leader in energy
storage behind the other eight
early adopter states something
we might think about in planning
our will these projects go where
will these projects go and and
what communities will they serve
with the projects benefit
environmental justice
communities which is important
because the projects can
actually promote economic
development and cleaner sources
of energy for communities that
have historically borne the
brunt of dirty energy production
we hope that I. R. P. planning
can answer these important
questions and strengthen our
grid.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee Charles good
marker speaking on behalf the
natural resources defense
council or NRDC and we strongly
support this bill for the
reasons previously stated in to
be stated thank you.
Mr chairman members committee
Mike d'antoni with Xcel energy
we think the sponsor for
bringing this legislation what
some of the things we like about
this bill it's permissible the
written in the fact that it
doesn't have mandates in its
targets the targets are
established on a statewide basis
and with input from the
commission's would which we
think is very important one of
the issues we've always had with
storage is that it's not we
don't really know with pricing
or performances that creates
some issues and just to maybe
lay some fears is that utilities
will and we just let a R. F. P.
out for requests for proposals
for all energies for for Xcel
energy nine or forty megawatts
in our service territory and we
expect to have for oil tanks
with storage bit into that
project we don't know that'll
give us some visibility on price
we still have performance kind
of questions on that but we go
through the take that
information we go through an
integrated resource planning
process and and and and they're
virtually look at thousands of
different permutations on on
resource allocations we'll get
to the point where we we'll see
whether it's the most effective
or not and so just to allay some
fears on that it is this this
legislation will help with with
with the process we've got going
so thank you.
If.
What.
Mr chair members of the
committee thank you so much
Laura Sanchez the executive
director of the government and
public affairs department at PNM
and we want to thank the sponsor
for bringing this we worked very
much with the of on the grid
modernization well the
criminalization bill a couple
years ago and then the grid
modernization plan recently we
filed with the commission is
currently pending so I know this
is a big part of this bill but
in addition we want to thank the
sponsor for the amendment that
she brought because that allows
us now to count some of the
projects that we have currently
in the pipeline that would not
have been able to count towards
the school with the previous
state so we want to thank you
for that and we appreciate the
opportunity to speak in support
thank you you.
Now I.
Help anyone in opposition.
Okay.
Where will give me a minute
each.
Arthur Furstenberg is here yes
that hold that button down
please.
Well you
are the first to birth.
You're obligating what's the
first part of the Mexicans for
utility safety we oppose the
grid modernization plans section
of this bill which was added in
the Senate conservation.
Many of the committee substitute
we did not know about it at that
time.
Great modernization plans have
smart meters as their main
component smart meters are
supposed to be part of grid
modernization which helps the
environment but they are turning
out to be added five it'll
catastrophe.
With smart meters are installed
on the property full of birds
disappears the insects disappear
with the four meters removed to
the birds come back a lot of
people have been injured some
killed by smart meters we oppose
this bill we have a couple of
experts here to testify a
medical doctor and.
The former childhood injury
prevention coordinator for the
state of New Mexico I will pass
that likely to that.
Thank you sorry I push a button
okay
Mr chairman committee members
good afternoon my name's Jerry
Goldberg of practicing medical
doctor in Santa Fe I'm associate
professor of medicine at UNM and
I am a medical expert in the
obscure subject microwave injury
as Arthur said the bill mandates
grid modernization plan which in
plain English mandates smart
meters this means involuntary so
smart meters for New Mexicans
would need involuntary twenty
four seven irradiation of
everyone with radio frequency
radiation which is a broad
spectrum toxicant there would be
no informed consent and no
protections for vulnerable
populations such as the young
elderly pregnant or chronically
ill you've made may have been
told by industry experts the
smart meters are safe but this
is a life
I was see I I teach and I peer
review in the subject and I was
also course director Freeh
enough medical conference which
was attended by over eight
hundred health care
practitioners from over thirty
countries because people need
health care practitioners want
to know how to take care of
electromagnetic field injured
people they're seeing it all
over the world and smart meters
are a big part of of why people
are being injured so there are
three facts that really prove
that smart meters are dangerous
first.
First there but so many people
harms that we have clinical
practice guidelines teaching
doctors how to treat these paste
patients second there are
mechanisms harm there now well
described and that we've okay
it's all wrapped up so this bill
is a very smooth road for some
smart meter deployment in New
Mexico smart meters are disease
and symptom causing as proven by
the medical literature and New
Mexicans have enough chronic
disease we don't need anymore so
please stand up for your
constituents right to health and
vote no on SB four fifty six
thank you.
Mr chair members of the
committee job for you I was to
consumer product safety
commission representative for
the state of New Mexico for
twenty three years.
the problem the central problem
is of smart meters are different
frequency from human frequency
edges all wifi
we had regulations all set to
put in place Congress never
never did them they took EPA out
of the project out of the
process there is no regular
regulatory authority the FDA FCC
is not doing anything about this
for why provide schools in
addition to you know it's more
meters and all these other why I
suspect we sensually just a
different we have a different
frequency from from that causing
insomnia depression and and a
host of many it cancer many many
thanks
we can in terms of modernization
we should be going to
underground fiber optics and not
not continuing to add to the
amount of wifi in in the process
I'm trying to get now so there's
twelve hundred hours last of
wifi exposure for kids in
schools its way too much and the
smart meters are dramatic
dramatic of exponential addition
in the if you have you know the
average a hundred ninety two
thousand of beeps every it on
each meter everyday so that's
like every five houses
generating a million of
generated beeps and it's it's
it's a quantum leap in exposure.
You do need Representative yeah
and wrapping up I would like to
we we've not approach anybody I
would want to request to the
committee that actually we table
this this bill because it's so
complex and they're so much
engineering issues involved in
really like to see another
entire plant in great great
modernization thank you.
Thank
sorry to be late but I had other
things I had to attend to the
south
I've lived in New Mexico for
fifty years Monica Steinhoff my
dad was actually part of the
military industrial complex he
was head of white sands in the
seventies and before that in the
sixties and so I grew up with
nuclear weapons and all that and
you know that that that as we
know they are just so many
things that are endangering all
life on the earth and we ought
to really slow down and examine
what we're doing instead of
there always has to be progress
like progress quote is not
always good and it's has speeded
up incredibly and I myself have
experience I have nine
grandchildren three I have three
adopted kids nine grandchildren
six of them have genetic
impairment and it isn't diet I
mean my you know my husband has
created plus affluence for
family at cetera he's and he's
an attorney that does personal
injury and is reading Arthur's
book for the first time which is
really helpful and what I what
what you know what has what
happened earlier with with the
gas company they let people read
their own meters you know and so
that would you know if if it's
too complicated to send people
out people will be glad to read
their own meters you know so I
just think we should slow down
because as everyone else has
said it's a very complex problem
the earth is endangered by all
these things and profit should
no longer be the primary thing
that motivates everything thank
you.
Okay go ahead.
It I want to talk to participate
on this okay are that's fine of
committee.
Questions.
just you know we talk about
storage in maybe I don't
understand what exactly what all
this is but.
When we put this all of this
renewable energy that we're
producing for some of the issues
that New Mexico equipment
serving areas in my community of
I think.
Exela symptoms fifty percent of
their
It's it's all renewable and and
we did all of this the ETA and
it seems right now we just keep
coming back in adding on to what
we did several years ago and so
how much renewable energy that
is produced in Chicago is
actually.
Is it leave New Mexico and
supply other other places then
is I'm just curious about the
reason for storage and why this
investment needs to be made in.
I it is it to support what's
being used here in New Mexico
for that in in if I don't
understand Mr chair Senator
that's a great question so if
you know first of all just to
refresh we do have grid
modernization in energy storage
in on the books in statutes and
the point is that we haven't
really laid out standards to
keep moving towards it my
concern is that we are producing
a lot of renewable energy that's
leaving the state and not being
used here so I do Representative
eight community Rio communities
in Valencia that has a lot of
solar and they utilize it within
their entire community and they
have so much more solar that
they could bring in more
businesses to be there but it's
it's wasted and it's not even a
sold to the rest of the Valencia
County it because it's just bank
right there so there is some
renewable energy losing so
that's one idea for having
energy storage is some of this
could be back up but Mr Roberts
of course is going to be the
expert not me so I'm gonna turn
this right over to him quickly
yes.
Mr chair members of the
committee I'll just add one
thing that energy storage is
also uniquely capable at
maximizing the benefit of the
the energy that's produced by
solar and wind
during the day that's
particularly sunny or windy
there maybe too much energy that
is produced that the
transmission and distribution
system can handle and if you
store that will it's cheap and
abundant and then discharge that
later when electricity prices
are higher and it's the energy
is more scarce that's a way to
keep costs low and and maximize
the efficiency and in the use of
renewable energy.
Thank you Mr chairman and I
guess you know we're gonna pay a
price to be able to do that when
actually maybe for producing
maybe that percentage should be
fifty percent of it this I don't
know it just it just seems like
that the costs keep going up and
up and up and that's concerned
certainly in my area and we do
appreciate you know excel that
brought on board we did
everything that they could do
and now they can be just to
continue to make changes in I
don't know I just in the service
thanks that's all.
You a Senator Tallman.
Thank you Mr.
Chairman thank you for bringing
this bill forward so be
interested in.
Expert witnesses
Reaction to the.
The contention of these are.
To help.
Mister chair Mister Roberts.
Mr chair members of the
committee
I certainly.
I have not encountered that
issue in my line of work but
what I will say about the grid
modernization plan is that
includes a variety of
technologies that are I supposed
to enhance the grid including
advanced inverters energy
storage
upgrades to to transmission and
distribution systems and and so
it certainly isn't construed as
a mandate in the bill to deploy
a certain amount of metres that
something this determined an
individual plan submitted by
utilities to the commission.
Mr chair.
So there are other options.
As far.
There are four Mr chair members
of the committee there are a
variety of technologies that
the.
Are included within grid
modernization plans and and it
doesn't necessarily have to be
smart meters but those happen
technologies that have been used
in the past.
Thanks for your question so
ordered.
The technologies behind start
use issues and what other
applications.
Question Mr chair Senator could
you repeat the question I'm
sorry.
The hikes marketers.
Is it use in other applications
so what are those obligations
yeah we're we're looking at
thank you.
Mr chair members of the
committee as.
I bet this is where I I I wish
of Representative Akeel is here
to address your question but I
will say that
the technologies that are used
to have a communication between
the meters and phones and other
technologies are used in the
phones that that we use today in
computers and other electronics.
This is.
This is a problem.
Mr chair members of the
committee yes it is that's all I
have Mister thanks again for
bringing this bill for.
Thank you for sharing center I
I'd feel better about this bill
if I are you know on page two we
decided.
To get away with get away from
the arbitrary shortage in ship
and leave it up to the you know
the PRC on page three to
identify the targets and set
them instead of you know what we
what we do you know and on page
three researchers say that
commission can stab wishes
divisional dark age.
But they can't if the target was
too high currently they can't
change that so Mr chair Senator
that she did recommend.
On page three line for.
A one word change from may be
increased to may be adjusted.
So that could go up or down that
is that is that in the amendment
no that's not in the amendment
that would be a new amendment if
you wish to have a.
Because of the.
I would.
The I would make that a man.
For.
The.
The opposition of the amendment
to change the work on page three
line for.
Two of the.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
and and center of the cage yeah
I really.
I really would feel more
comfortable if they had to
control and we we've reached out
there and with the gesture we
would maybe fix that but would
we set that arbitrary one
thousand page we don't know
whether that's workable or.
show I I appreciate you ship and
then.
Thank you they also.
The best that number.
Hello.
Of.
Yes Senator huh.
Yes Senator Kernan.
Senator office yes.
Senator.
Yes.
Center this.
Just the yes.
Have six.
Thank you thank you very much Mr
chair members of the committee.
Yes.
For.
Yes he Hickey does this quick Mr
chair thank you
Mr chair I'm presenting Senate
bill four four four the demands
in New Mexico life and health
insurance guaranty association
at based on current version of
the model developed by the
national association of
insurance commissioners thirty
seven states have already
adopted this Senate bill forty
four changes the method of
assessing long term care
insurance to reduce the cost of
these insolvencies to the health
insurance industry and
additionally Senate bill four
four four as additional concern
of protections by expanding
guaranty association membership
to include HMOS and provide
coverage to their subscribers
Mike that who is the former
chief actuary in the west side
is here with me today and he is
head of the New Mexico's life
and health insurance guaranty
association.
The.
Yes Mr chairman my name is Mike
that you just introduced I'm
sorry
the the this bill is sixty two
pages long but it's it's not
controversy ill it's a
these are changes that are
trying to get our law up to
and in a I see model to make us
consistent with other laws
it we it's been heard the it's
very similar to house bill two
ninety one which is been heard
in the house health and Human
Services commission a committee
as well as House Judiciary
Committee and so far we we
haven't run across any objection
or our opposition to the bill.
And with that I'm I'm here to
assist Senator Hickey.
Of.
Support of Senate bill four four
four.
Mr chairman members of the
committee Marla shows registered
lobbyist BlueCross BlueShield we
support this legislation and I'm
also here.
To representative United health
care and Mr mark Duran and Keith
Gardner was cigna and we all
believe that this is important
consumer protection bill and we
do support thank you.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Roy Moore
I'm a registered lobbyist for
America's life.
America's American council of
life insurers sorry the life
insurance trade association we
stand in support of the bill
thank you.
But in opposition.
Okay.
So something just that Mr chair
come on in I just need an
explanation when I.
I saw something about changes
submitted versus in long term
care insurer insolvency top of
the long term care policies and
what that does and how it
protects consumers.
Mr Chairman
About six years ago we had a
very large
Long term care insurance become
insolvent and some in some of
your constituents may have been
affected by the insolvency it
was Penn treaty it was the name
of the insurance company is the
largest insolvency that has ever
affected the state of New
Mexico.
And
so when a long term care company
becomes insolvent our
association becomes responsible
for taking care of those policy
holders and one of the ways we
take care of those policy
holders is to make up the
monetary shortfall in the in the
assets of the company and try to
find those benefits in the
future
we assess our members is one of
the sources of our our money of
our source of revenue in
the health insurance industry
Took took a hit took took a
pretty good hit on that
insolvency in they went to the
life insurance industry and
discussed with them is there a
way we can mitigate this cost.
And so in negotiation with the
life insurance industry and the
health insurance industry
together they sponsored model
legislation that would spread
the cost of a long term care and
solvency not just on health
insurance companies but across
the life insurance industry as
well so it basically is going to
cut that assessment costs in
half for our health insurance
companies so Mister chair and
this is what's happening in the
real.
And that is that long term care
insurance that was purchased a
number of years ago about me and
my constituents has doubled and
in some cases to the point where
people that have invested for
years in the long term care
insurance can no longer afford
so that investment is worth
nothing because now they can't
pay it they have to drop the
insurance the the insurance
companies are responsible so the
actuarial sedated years ago to
put people in these policies
that they no longer can afford
to pay out because they didn't
do it correctly.
This is going to fall back on
the state of New Mexico is
people can for those policies
they spend down their resources
and then they're on Medicare and
we're the ones foot the bill I'm
not happy about it and when I
talk to rest of told before he
retired he was concerned about
he was able to stop some of
these companies from increasing
those premiums to the point
where people simply can't
afford.
And I don't know that this
resolves anything just as people
come in other companies but the
premiums are still going up.
And I don't know if this is a
solution.
But it's certainly I'm not
hearing the premiums of mine are
going down there going up and
people will have to determine at
some point after years of paying
in for these policies that they
no longer can afford to pay.
And so what does this do to help
the person it's paying those
premiums does it just help the
insurance companies spread the
cost I don't understand how this
is health.
Mr chairman.
Mr.
Which was.
Thank you
Mr chairman
I share of the frustration as
the chief actuary for the
department of health and for the
department of insurance
I left there about fifteen years
ago but while I was there a long
term care was an issues in it's
still an issue nationally most
of the long term care insurance
companies are in difficult
trouble financially and you you
can't find a new policy to buy
it's very difficult to find a
long term care health insurance
policy to by and the main reason
is the cost of long term care
and to fund it the policy
premiums are are are pretty high
pretty expensive.
So this bill tries to address
insolvencies of insurance
companies and tries to address
that it does not have anything
to do with the regulation of
long term care insurance or the
issues it's been raise that's a
major issue I know our
superintendents of insurance for
the past twenty years have had
to deal with it and the tools to
deal with that are lacking and
there probably should be
something done but this bill
isn't intended to do that this
is this bill is intended to
strengthen our guaranty
association and help us perform
was required under the law so
this chair so if an insurance.
Premiums eventually just can't
they go there it's often so
you're telling me that their
responsibilities then picked up
by perception of the nation of
insurance companies that pay and
try to provide that service
because that company since all.
Mr chairman that that's correct
that's the purpose of our
association is to protect
insurance policy holders of
companies that become insolvent
Cellectis Mr chair the best
thing for those that have
purchased long term care
insurance would be for their
company to become insolvent so
that at that point they would
have some coverage at some point
is that pretty much the way it
is what what.
Mr chairman I would I would hope
that most of the long term care
insurance companies continue to
stay healthy and solvent
that doesn't appear to be the
case of but it would be my hope
that there wouldn't be any more
insolvencies and that those
policy holders could eventually
receive their benefits from
those companies Mr chair.
They are that's the only way
they can remain some.
The race.
Keep them solvent that at the
end of the day you're not
getting what you paid for from
the beginning that for decisions
are made all the time about
people when they purchase
insurance and this is one
example of probably many people
brought into that of I don't
know what board to use that
certainly paid for years and at
the end of the day when they.
Get themselves in this situation
actuarially and people can't
afford the premiums I don't know
what can be done from a
legislative standpoint that
appreciate what Mr till did in
saying to insurance companies
I'm not gonna let you raise your
rates a hundred percent so it's
a real problem and I'll support
this bill certainly going to
help some of that I think it's a
legislature to try to do.
Bring this for the health
committee and have a
conversation about whether we
can do.
As a state to to protect some of
the people that have this policy
so that's all I have.
This.
I'm gonna do passed Mr chair of.
The
the civil.
Zacks.
Thank you Mr chairman committee.
The
other.
I have here.
Walking in.
It would have been much sooner
but senator Wirth tied.
Mr chairman this is a bill
twenty simple in concept it's a
bill that would allow non
emergency transportation
utilizing over the call.
Network companies essentially
left over those kind of
companies who allow them to use
to transport patients to non
emergency situations
we go into the details but
that's the concept of the bill
and Carrie Britcher is my
experts and the.
I think unless you have
something you want to add we
can.
Thirty years I Mr chairman I'll
just say really quickly there's
a really specific problem that
this bill is trying to fix so
under Medicaid managed care
organizations have to meet
network adequacy standards for
non emergency medical
transportation of patients and
their states across the country
that in order to help those NCOs
meet that requirement have a
allow rideshare companies
actually do non emergency
medical transportation so this
is an ambulance ride this is I
gotta go get my check up so we
need to fix a conflict in law
between the motor carrier act
and the transportation network
company act in order to allow
those rights are companies to
use the certification that they
get from the PRC to then go to
Medicaid and go through the
Medicaid process actually get
approved to be a non emergency
medical transport provider so
that's what this bill does it
just fixes that little conflict
and what the what allow Medicaid
to make those decisions under
the and CIOS.
into the years ago.
Thank you Mr chairman the single
for the American.
Network and
we support the bill because it's
a particular problem in rural
parts of the state where there's
just not that much accessible
transportation and I hope that
there would be lift and uber
drivers there thank you.
That's Scott Scanlon registered
lobbyists for lift and we to
support this bill additionally
transportation managers in New
Mexico included mo including
motive Care are in support of
this bill and work with TNCs
across the country and we urge
your support thank you.
Good morning chairman members
good afternoon sorry Matt
Thompson a registered lobbyist
for over
as Mr Stanley just said that
there is capacity with motive
Care we're happy to fill that
void there's approximately four
thousand four million
appointments missed annually by
folks trying to get to see their
doctor we believe that is we're
lifter capable of filling this
void would like the opportunity
please thank you.
Madam chair members of and time
Mr chairman members of the
committee Marla shows registered
lobbyists BlueCross BlueShield
and for all the reasons stated
we support this legislation
thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman Katie
pulling have a greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
with this bill we are filling a
transportation gap that exists
for many people to Mexico this
will help reduce no shows for
appointments and the tendency of
all local populations to delay
getting the medical care they
need we're also helping Medicaid
patients get a reasonable
lowcost ride to the doctor and
we're ensuring that ambulances
are available used to transport
those with serious critical
medical conditions the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
supports this legislation.
Thank you.
All right anybody in opposition.
Okay all right committee.
That would be by Representative
six percent government.
Any opposition to that motion.
I see none of us.
Chairman.
Eight two zero.
house bill one seventy.
This care now here.
The one we two of those
Representative Martinez or for
one eighty six twenty six good
Representative Martinez.
Good.
Mr chair representatives or Mr
chair you members of that right
because of it might be
a motion made here pretty soon.
Mr chair members of the
committee hi my name is Alan
Martinez and I am here with
house bill one eighty six it's a
technical fix to existing
language dealing with the
disabled veterans property taxes
are under current law of
disabled veteran.
if they sell their house for the
registrant's certificate they
have to wait sometimes up to a
year to get that benefit
this bill fixes that and with
that I stand for questions the
great anybody here support of
bills.
Okay if you don't want to say
anything that's fine okay all
right good okay.
All right anybody in opposition
of this bill.
I see none questions from the
committee.
Mr Chairman not really a
question just yes like
exclamation we we've always
thought the hundred percent
disabled veterans didn't have to
pay property taxes are supposed
to there's been an argument
between the assessors and the
state assessor as to how that
supposed to work and so this
actually happened to me when I
have my house bill I had to pay
the taxes from the time I bought
my house in March to the end of
the year the tax year because it
was blank property and house was
built on it that's not what we
had always intended actually
Michael Sanchez actually was the
last one to make a big change to
the section and the intention
was that when you buy your home
it's tax exempt and so that's
not been happening and so this
just clarifies that that's
what's supposed to happen.
Thank you.
Pleasure the.
That also for the best
sentiment.
Second by Senator AUMENT.
Any opposition to do fast
motion.
I
see none.
Yes eight zero years thank you
very much thank you.
And to student to Kate Senator.
Okay.
Mr chairman members of the
committee I am bringing this
bill forward on behalf of
Representative Lujan thank you
for having us today with me
today that are three of my
expert witnesses Victoria Bach
at the licensing bureau chief
but I saw the hisses the
licensing manager and Jennifer
catches the interim
superintendent of insurance is
joining us of the as of now this
is an agency bill this bill is
the language cleanup bill that
will assist the agency with
modernizing processes reduce
physical paperwork and eliminate
any unnecessary bond requirement
now currently independent
adjusters are required to obtain
and file an insignificant least
small bond with the OSI will
having their liability covered
by the insurer who hires about a
much greater amount there are no
fees collected for this
requirement and requires the
aside to dedicate one staff
member time collected maintained
and achieve the paperwork for
fifteen thousand plus bond per
year at a cost to the agency of
approximately twenty five
thousand dollars and so this
bill would eliminate the
unnecessary bond while still
protecting consumers save a room
full of paper and save New
Mexico thousands of dollars
every year and with that will
stand for questions.
Okay.
Are there any folks here in the
audience that are in support of
this bill.
I see none of.
K. Center had a meal can you say
the name of your expert that's
supposed to be online sure
Jennifer catches the interim
superintendent of insurance.
I thank you very much thank you
us or anybody in the audience
opposes legislation.
Anybody on.
The best we have to pass some
incentive grants to have second
from Senator Kernan.
Any objections to the past
motion.
All right.
Three hundred dollars once of
which I believe is an exact
duplicate is ramming bill we
passed out of this committee
that I just moved to pass on
sure.
That.
Senator okay any objection to
that to pass known then that was
very easy peasy for you.
Right on okay that we have one
more.
While.
do we have anybody representing
house bill two fifty three the
nonprofit gaming changes.
What we're.
We didn't want to duplicate of
the one thousand four.
All right so at this point then
I believe we are adjourned I
believe the chair had said that
we will be meeting on Saturday
so just keep an eye out for that
otherwise we'll see you all the
basketball game tonight at seven
o'clock we're during.
