So those are the three bills
that will be held today. The
rest will be voted on. I do want
to let everybody know that we
will be rolling Senate Bill 481,
um, until Saturday.
And so we are going to start
with 4:18, and then we'll go to
Senator Scott right after that,
and then Senator Grisel.
And then, uh, we will continue
on going down. So, um, if I can,
uh, Senator Padilla, you are,
well, we have to do the roll
first. I'll eventually get the
hang of this. Thank God for
Rebecca.
Senator Figueroa.
Because
Senator had a meal.
Senator O'Malley.
Oh, Senator Paul, Senator Ramos
Sanchez,
Senator share 7 words. Senator
Bergman,
Senator Hanson.
We have 10 presidents.
OK, thank you. All right.
Center video. Go ahead and
You're good? OK, set up for you
go here you go. Thank you, Madam
chair and vice chair and ranking
member and um thank you very
much for uh hearing us today. I,
I appreciate all the work of the
committee that's gone in to help
craft this piece of legislation,
almost everybody in the room has
had a role in putting this piece
of legislation together at this
point.
So thank you very much, um,
I essentially uh SB 418
establishes the micro qualified
microgrid grid tax credit, uh,
this legislation aims to
incentivize the construction,
um, and installation of
microgrids and underserved
communities across New Mexico by
offering this tax credit to
eligible taxpayers, it also is
going to be a key element, Madam
Chair, and and members of the
committee in the development of
projects, much like the uh uh
Borderplex project that was
announced last week.
I was a part of that
announcement, a $5 billion
investment in New Mexico. How
exciting is that? Uh, and then
it can also apply to other
things like subdivisions, you
can do this in your home, uh,
whatever you may want to do
there, but essentially what the
legislation does is it um uh
provides eligibility criteria.
Um, the tax credit amount of
$100,000 per micro grid, and
then uh lays out what the
application process is going to
be and how to apply for that,
uh, transferability to carry
forward provision. And, and
again, why would we want to do
this again, it's the
encouragement of renewable
energy infrastructure, the
economic development aspect, uh,
energy independence, as we know,
is a goal and it's been a goal
that's been set by our our state
as as a as a strategy, and then
the environmental benefits that
come along with it. I do have a
Institute that was presented to
your committee, Mount Gerard is
231-1391.2, and that was
delivered to your committee and
it was, uh, well, um, well
distributed amongst the
committee members, including the
minority, and so I just want to
let you know that. I am also
here with, uh, Jennifer
Bradford, who is a New Mexico,
uh, business owner and attorney.
Committee, hold on just a
second. It was sitting on
outside your binders, it wasn't
in the binder.
Before we move on, Senator PDR,
we want to make sure that
nobody's confused.
I don't have it.
We'll get you one.
I have an extra,
OK.
All right. So, um, so on that we
do need to move the committee
steps, so Senator Bergmans.
Madam, do not pass on send a
bill 418, but I do pass on the
committee for Senate Bill 118
for discussion purposes. Thank
you.
So whenever you're ready, I'll
go ahead and explain why the
substitute was necessary. Please
do. So essentially we have a 6
reasons why we needed to do
this. And this is really where a
lot of the great feedback came
from several members of the
committee, as well as interested
parties outside of the
legislature. Uh, section 1, Part
A, uh, removing distribution
cooperatives, making the bill
applicable just to investor own
electric utilities?
Uh, new today that we did add
based on a lot of the
conversations we had with
several members of the committee
and others, uh, is section 1,
Part B, which makes changes
requested by utilities, which
changes language which stated
that utilities may acquire
self-source generation resources
to state that this section, uh,
to state that this section
authorizes an electric public
utility to acquire self-source
generation, uh, one utility
thought it needed uh authorizing
language before it could enter
into transactions to acquire
qualified microgrids.
And so that was where they the
big toss up was there. However,
nothing in this section would
preempt pre-existing laws which
require utilities to obtain PRC
approval, which was one of the
sticking points that we had
approval for such acquisitions.
Um, next point is section 1,
part C, adding clarifying
language, requesting requested
by the utilities removing
superfluous language and adding
a reference to 62-18-1 and I may
say 1978. At the end of this
subsection, we have added a net
zero requirement for qualified
microgrids, which states, and
this is what we added today by
the year 2050, the total direct
greenhouse gas emissions reduced
or produced by qualified
microgrid shall achieve a net
zero standard through carbon.
removal reductions or other
offset activities, and I know
there's some uh gonna be some
debate about offset activities
and what that, what that means
today. Uh, the 4th item, uh, and
the reason for the substitute is
Section 1, part D. It removes
distribution cooperatives and
ads and and ads language for
consistency with the Public
Utility Act, item number 5. Why
is this a substitute was
necessary at Section 1, Part E.
It adds clarifying language to
the definition for self-source
generation resources as
requested by the utilities, and
that it adds a definition for
electric public utility, which
is to limit uh application to
invest your own activities, uh,
utilities, excuse me, and then
section 2, part E, which adds
clarifying language to the
definition for self-source
generation resources as
requested by the utilities. I
would like for my expert to say
a little bit more. I just kind
of gave you the framework on
what these are, the roadmap on
what these things do, but here
we go.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, thank you. My name is
Jennifer Bradfield, and I'm a
lawyer in Albuquerque, New
Mexico. Um, I own a law firm
there that I started about a
year ago and I'm a native. I'm
from Albuquerque and my family
is from New Mexico. Um, what we
have found in New Mexico is that
right now there are power
deficits projected through 2029
or 2020 or 2030 by many of the
utilities. And so when you have
an economic development project
that wants to come to the state,
um.
Power may not be ready for that
project. And so the state would
have to forego those revenues
and those job opportunities
depending on the power demands
of the entity coming to the
state.
Um, these, these edits and
amendments were worked on with
the utilities, and we got their
input because what we wanna do
is we want to bridge a
meaningful gap, um, where we
want to have power for economic
development projects. And so we
did get feedback and tweaks to
words from the utilities and
tried to incorporate those in.
We want this to complement the
the energy transition Act, um,
which was passed in 2019 and the
public utilities are, are
subject to the ETA and nothing
in here takes
The ETA or amends it, they're
gonna remain subject to the ETA
and so building your microgrids
to a specification is very
important, and we want the right
words in place to make sure that
it, that it dovetails nicely
when you're building a microgrid
under this statute here.
And Madam Char, in addition to
the all you heard about
utilities, you know, being
involved in this substitute. I
want to make sure that I, the
third bullet that I read here,
those were, that was language
added by members of this
committee as well. So, uh, the,
the information by the year
2050, the total direct
greenhouse gasses, emissions,
etc. that did come from
committee members of yours.
Thank you.
All right, thank you so much.
At this point, uh, we are going
to go to the audience to see how
many, uh, in the audience are in
favor of this bill by a show of
hands.
Or
7. OK, 7. Thank you very much.
Uh, how many in the audience are
in opposition of this bill.
We have 3. OK. So, we're gonna,
and then we have 3 online who
are in support. So what we're
gonna do is we're gonna get 4 of
you who are in support. If you
will, please line up behind the
sponsor.
We're gonna give you one minute
apiece.
You will, the vice chair will be
timing you. Um, she will, uh,
show a 32nd warning. And then we
also do the same thing to all
three online, we'll do the same
thing with those in opposition.
So go ahead, Alicia. Wonderful.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Alicia Keys. I'm the former
economic development secretary
for New Mexico. I'm now a
partner in Borderplex Digital,
New Mexico does face power
shortages through 2029. Quick
electrification solutions are
critical to cut greenhouse gas
emissions.
and help the state achieve its
net zero goals. At the same
time, Frontier technology
companies are looking to
investments in New Mexico that
will significantly boost the
state revenue and create jobs.
We have a real moment in time
right now. The state needs
reliable electricity to drive
economic growth and its existing
infrastructure is struggling to
keep up. Microgrids are a
promising solution, and they
will be paid for by industry,
not on the backs of the people.
Waterplex Digital will
diligently worked with the
cabinet secretaries and the
governor to sign an MOU last
week. This project desperately
needs SB 418 to pass so we can
have sufficient legal certainty
to invest $5 billion and create
1000 jobs. Thank you.
Good afternoon.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Rico
Gonzalez. I represent El Paso
Electric.
This project that was just
talked about is in our
territory.
In our territory, which borders
New Mexico and Texas. We are in
the most competitive portion of
New Mexico for economic
development opportunities in the
entire state.
And we see these kinds of
projects coming on both sides of
our of our system, whether it's
in Texas or in New Mexico.
For us from a perspective of
serving, we're here to serve our
customers, but for me, from New
Mexico,
This is the kind of project that
will allow these projects to be
in New Mexico, serving New
Mexicans, having New Mexicans
work.
Providing GRT for New Mexicans.
This is the type of work that we
need in, in New Mexico and, and
we strongly urge your support.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. My name
is George Dodge Junior. I am a
registered lobbyist for the New
Mexico Rural Electric
Cooperative Association and
Western Farmers Cooperative, uh,
GNT. I'm also a board member for
the uh Farmers Electric
Cooperative based in Clovis, and
we thank the sponsor for
bringing this bill forward, and
we thank the sponsor for working
with all parties involved, uh,
to, to move this bill forward
for those reasons and for all
the reasons mentioned before, we
stand in full support.
of Senate Bill 418. Thank you.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee,
Majority Whip Padilla, Carlos
Lucero with the public service
company New Mexico, and we thank
the sponsor um for bringing this
bill forward and because of the
amendments in the committee sub,
we're able to support Senate
Bill 418. Thank you.
All right, thank you so much. So
we're gonna go to the 3 online
and then we'll have the, the 3
in opposition lineup. So if we
will, um, we're gonna go to Mike
D'Antonio first and then Devin
and then Dan, uh, each of you
will have one minute to speak.
You will see at the 32nd mark
popping up in your chat that you
have 30 seconds to go if you go
beyond one minute, we will cut
your mic. So, uh, go ahead,
Mike, if you will, you have one
minute. Yeah, thank you, madam
Chair, members of the committee,
Mike D'Antonio with Xcel Energy.
We serve electricity to the
eastern part of the state.
Uh, we strongly support this
bill, and it's nice to see New
Mexico thinking out of the box
with regards to competing with
other states on economic
development. Uh, we think, uh,
this bill allows Mexico to have
a tool to assess uh uh to assist
in economic development and and
compete for new jobs, and it
gives optionality for our large
customers that are looking to
New Mexico and even those that
want to expand within New
Mexico, uh, to be able to use
this legislation to
get power sooner rather than
later. Uh,
This, and I guess from, from our
perspective, there's a 4-year
wait time for interconnection
study work uh in the Southwest
Power pool where we serve and
that it's just hard for us to
attract businesses when you've
got that kind of uh time frame
to get an interconnection study
done, so we think this bill is a
way to uh uh help, help with
those kinds of situations. So we
strongly support. Thank you.
All right. Thank you so much,
Dan. You have one minute.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Devin Lopez. I'm
president and CEO of the
Masaveli Economic Development
Alliance representing Donanana
County for economic development
interests. We strongly encourage
you to pass this bill. I think I
mentioned in the past that the
number of advanced manufacturing
and intelligent manufacturing
opportunities we've seen in the
past 24 months is very, it's a,
it's once in a generation that
we've seen this, and it's part
of the state's strategic plan in
terms of the
target industries we're looking
at and definitely ideas for
supplemental power and on-site
solutions such as microgrids, I
think it's critical to our
ability to land these projects,
create more jobs, and attract
more investment into the states,
so we
We, uh, thank you for your
support and hope that you will
move forward. Thank you.
Thank you so much, Devin. Uh,
Dan, you're the last to go. You
have one minute. The Madam Chair
and members of the committee,
thank you for the opportunity.
Uh, my name is Dan Smith, and
I'm a concerned citizen. Uh,
I'll be brief. To me, this bill
is about bringing more power to
the state, and not just more
power, but more reliable and
clean power. And maybe most
importantly, power that's paid
for by companies, not
ratepayers. Uh, as others have
pointed out today, it's also a
critical opportunity to bring
renewed investment to the state,
uh, and that's why I support SB
418. Thank you for your time.
Thank you so much. All right,
now we're going to the
opposition, so I did see 3
hands. I want to make sure
that's still the case. If you
will come up and line up behind
the the sponsor.
You will also be given one
minute. You'll receive a
thirty-second warnings Athena
Christodoulou. I'm an energy and
environmental engineer, and I
served as an analyst for the
House Energy Environment and
Natural Resources Committee in
2023. This bill is beautiful.
I'm also a businesswoman. I
think it's, it's a great
offering and I appreciate the
amendments which, which I didn't
get a chance to see really
beforehand, but there is still
one loophole. We cannot just
look at the 2050. We have to
make
we look at the journey along the
way. We cannot have scientists
are saying, and I'm including
myself, no new fossil fuel
infrastructure, no new fossil
fuel infrastructure. So we need
to be going and making sure that
that this includes that.
Stipulation. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair members
of the committee, I'm Camilla
Feibelman. I'm the director of
the Sierra Club's Rio Grande
chapter, and from what I could
perceive from the explanation of
the amendments to the bill, it
still does not comply with the
energy Transition Act. The
Energy Transition Act requires
utilities to ramp up their
renewables over a period of
time, and the PRC oversees that
ramp up.
OK, offsets are not the ETA.
It is a laudable goal to reach
net zero by a certain time, but
to provide a tax credit to build
out new natural gas facilities
is an exact opposition to the
work that you all did to pass
the energy Transition Act and
that the utilities are meeting.
It does not mean that all energy
right now has to be renewable.
There is a period of time where
non-renewable energies can still
be used.
But to use a tax credit bill to
unwind the energy transition Act
is unacceptable in my mind,
especially given a day like
this, where we can see the
extreme weather that climate
crisis brings to us on climate
crisis day at the Roundhouse.
Thank you.
Uh, Madam Chair and committee
members, my name is Richard
Barish and um I would urge the
committee to vote against this
bill for the reasons previously
stated, um, we, we just can't
afford to be building new, new,
um, fossil fuel based power
plants, um, we, we really are in
a, a, a climate emergency, and
we really I appreciate the the
sponsors, uh goal in introducing
this bill, but I do think that
we need to, it needs to be a bit
more carefully crafted.
Thank you.
Right. Thank you so much. So,
Senator Padilla, since you've
been in this committee before,
you do have 5 minutes to respond
to public testimony. Thank you,
I think based on everything that
we heard, I think there's
probably 2 items that we
absolutely want to address very
quickly. One is, uh, you did
hear earlier that uh Mr.
Gonzalez from uh El Paso
Electric, that this is for the
project in southern New Mexico.
Well, well, it will benefit that
ginormous wonderful thing for
New Mexico. These this uh
objective will uh will affect
the entire state in a very
positive way.
So I don't, I don't want it to
sound like it's just for that
project. That's item number one.
I'm gonna ask the expert here to
talk about what we believe and
why we believe that this is
compliant with the ETA. Thank
you.
As parties build microgrids, you
are building a grid system from
scratch. And so, unlike with the
grid that exists today that has
base load on it, a microgrid
system has no base load. Um,
projects contemplated for
microgrids will expand solar
extensively throughout the
state, but they're intermittency
of solar generation.
when you have downtime, it needs
to be balanced out with a base
load generation source. Um, this
will still comply with the ETA
that gives microgrids the
flexibility that are built today
and not pre-existing to ramp up
and comply with the ETA. The ETA
requires all electrons that are
sold in retail sales to comply
with its requirements and then
it has actually long list of
different kinds of carve outs
and exceptions, um, that the PRC
can evaluate.
Um, here,
Many of those are not going to
apply when you're building a
brand new grid from scratch
without that base load. But all
electrons that go to a public
utility are still subject to the
ETA. This bill is completely
silent about that, and the ETA
is the law of the land. Nobody
is questioning that. Nobody's
seeking to amend that and all of
the utilities that are here
today fully support their
commitment to the ETA and they
have made big progress. But
without that balance, you can't
build out 150 megawatts of solar
right away and
several different areas
throughout the state, you need
the baseload to to flatten it
out and give that reliability to
the grid structure.
And I'm sure nowhere in the
legislation doesn't state that
the microgrids would be exempted
from the ETA.
All right, thank you so much.
Right, at this point, we go to
the committee.
And so if there are questions or
comments, concerns from the
committee.
Senator Sheriff.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
So
On page 2, 14.
You may have heard me talk for,
I don't know, 40 minutes or so,
about.
The impossibility of net zero.
Impossible.
Because what we all breathe.
So the only way to be net zero
is if there is no life in the
state.
And even then it wouldn't be 0
cause there's life around us.
So,
I want to
Suggest
I mean
Where we simply strike the word
net and zero.
And replace it with 99%.
Because 99 and 44 100s is as
close as we can get.
Would that be accepted.
Thank you, Chair. I'm gonna ask
my uh coast, my uh expert here
to address that one. I
When we had the discussion
earlier on the floor. I don't
believe it was presented to me
that way, but I, I, I hear you
loud and clear, and I want to
hear from our expert here.
Um, so, uh, when the ETA was
enacted, there was a definition
called a zero carbon resource
that was enacted as well, and it
does not contemplate absolutely
zero carbon, um, even though
that term has that name in it,
it actually kind of gets to the
99% of what you're stating, um,
and so 99% is completely
agreeable. Net Zero has become
an industry term throughout the
world, and so it is taking on a
life of its own that people can
reference with different netting
calculations that go along with
it.
So that would be the
consideration for the committee.
Uh, but I think, you know,
either is acceptable 99% is, is
largely in line with what the
ETA and that's probably stricter
than the standard you're going
to reach under the ETA by 2045.
So with that being said, Madam
Chair, we, we really don't feel
like it's necessary to make that
type of an amendment, we'll let
the committee debate.
OK. Any other debate on this
amendment? Otherwise, we will go
to a boat too, so, are you
saying this is an unfriendly
amendment or a friendly
amendment?
go along with the
theme. I'll go back to my
analogy or like when they shot
JR we don't know what happened
for about 9 months. All right,
so if you will, Rebecca on the
amendment to uh change net 0 to
99.4.137 20,000
yeah.
So if you will.
This is uh yes to accept the
amendment, no to uh decline the
amendment.
Senator Figueroa.
Now, and explain my book.
Senator Jamea.
In the homebound.
Yeah.
Yes
Senator O'Malley, no.
Senator Paul.
Senator Ramos. Yes. Senator
Sanchez.
Senator share. Yes.
Senator Worth.
birds.
send it your hand.
So the, the amendment does fail,
um, before.
Senator Figueroa, you want to
find your vote, yeah, madam
chair just wanted to read a
definition of net zero reiterate
what the experts said. It does
not mean zero emissions. It
means that the greenhouse gasses
emitted is balanced out by the
amount removed from the
atmosphere.
So I think there was some
confusion about net zero meaning
0. That's not what it means.
Thank you, Senator Figueroa. Um,
any other comments or questions,
Senator Sheriff. So on the bill
itself.
Yes, I know that we can have
carbon offsets, which means
buying offsets from Palo Verde
nuclear power plant, which
freaks out the people in this
room out.
Um
I know that we can have other
things like carbon capture,
which apparently freaked out the
entire Senate once upon a time.
So, uh, this is a concern of
mine. I'm, I'm gonna support
this bill.
Because of the economic
development portion of it.
But all of this talk about net
zero carbon is insane.
It's absolutely insane.
Especially when we want to stop
technologies that will actually
help.
Like carbon capture and
sequestration.
When we hate nuclear power
plants, even though nuclear
power plants really are.
Net Zero.
And yet
People in this room and all of
this town, freak out.
Very thought of a nuclear power
plant.
pretty darn safe.
We've had sailors sitting left
to nuclear power plants for 60,
70 years now.
They'll come home alive.
They still have 5 fingers and
one head and, you know.
So
It's just bugging me that we're
trying to do the impossible when
we can do the possible.
Thank you, Senator Sher. I still
think you have the energy from
the floor for earlier today
still.
OK.
I know you could. There's no
doubt there. Um, Senator
Figueroa, would you like to go
next?
You ask, did, did you have a
question?
It looks like he did
Thank you, Madam Chair. I wanted
to thank the sponsor as well for
bringing this bill forward. I am
really excited about the
economic development
opportunities, um, and, and
Trying a third way of creating
power and energy in our state.
We've only had the two
You know, the public utility and
our world co-ops, and this is a
whole new way to do it and I
think it's very exciting. Um.
I wanted to bring up a couple of
concerns that were in the PRC's
analysis, and that is
clarification that this falls
under PRC jurisdiction, because
they do regulate in different
ways the other two modalities
that already exist and
The bill doesn't say they don't,
but it also doesn't say they do,
because the PRC itself in their
analysis said it needs some
clarification. I'm wondering if
it would be amenable to stick in
as determined by the PRC.
on page 2 line 6.
Or maybe there's a better place
to put it, but somewhere here to
make that piece clear.
So
Yeah. So, Madam Chair and
Senator, we did discuss this,
um, we don't have a problem with
that, with that kind of thing,
because we feel like it already,
you, if you, if you're gonna
sell any of this microgrid
energy onto the grid or to one
of these utilities, you're gonna
have to go through the PRC
process. We don't say that you
you're exempted from that or you
don't have to do that.
So we don't think that it would
hurt anything.
So Senator Figaro, can you, is
that the only thing that you
would want, or is there
something else? Just because I
want to make sure that Rebecca,
no, Madam chair, have her hold
for a second and see if we can
talk about something else. Um,
Madam Chair, because the
sponsors stated this will fall
under the current law, the law
of the land, the ETA, I think on
page 2 line 9, we probably
should strike the word not.
And on line 15, if you can slow
down just a little bit. Sorry,
madam Chair. Good.
That is lying now on page 2
strike the word not. If we're
selling into the public grid,
the public system, it should be
considered.
Can I give you some, well, we
can take but one at a time, but
again, the PRC we already
addressed, I'm gonna ask the
expert to talk about the word
not on page 2 line 9.
H2 um under subsection C of uh
of section one.
This is addressing when a third
party, um, and we're just gonna
take the example that's in front
of us, which is Borderplex
Digital Assets. Um, they go out,
they spend, let's say they spend
$200 million building a grid.
They're gonna bear that cost
themselves, and then the extra
power that gets connected to the
grid, which we agree needs to go
through PRC approval. That's
fine. Um, then,
The ratepayers are gonna get the
benefit of that power where the
capital expenditures were paid
for by a third party. And so
this is actually C is actually
governing the use of that power
at those dedicated sources,
those dedicated facilities that
you're building the power for.
So in the case of Borderplex
digital, they are gonna be
building large digital
infrastructure and advanced
manufacturing, so they would
have an advanced manufacturing
sites that they own and operate,
that they built a grid for to.
Put the power on for their own
products with some extra power
than going to the overall grid
that would become subject to the
PRC.
Madam Cha an expert, then I'm
gonna look at 9/11 where it says
or purchased.
In whole or in part by the
electorate public utility. So
it's not just the part they're
using themselves. It's the part
that they're selling off the
extra bit that I'm trying to get
covered under here. I think that
has to be considered under those
sections of law. And maybe that
needs to be separated out then
into two separate sections.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Senators, um,
I think that an amendment could
be made separating that out into
two separate sections, um,
You're gonna have some peaker
power that happens, and so it's
very hard to plan a big grid.
These are at least 20 megawatts
in size, and it's very hard to
plan a grid that consumes all of
the power within it, um, public
utilities do that, but it's a
much bigger system. And so when
you're trying to plan it and
especially when you have just a
few dedicated sources, right?
Um, here, the intent is, is that
you have the vast majority of
the power going to the dedicated
sources that in the
dedicated sources are served by
the person that paid for the
grid. So they're paying for
their own power and then you've
got a little extra power, peer
power, that there's a legal
question of can you connect it
to the grid, and what is that
process look like? And do I know
before I spend my $200 million
that I can do that. And that
question alone can prevent the
investment in New Mexico,
because other states have
flexibility that will allow you
to do that without going through
their equivalent of a PR.
y process. Um, I, I do think
The utilities under the public
Utility Act.
are gonna have to consider that
power in their rate base and if
they purchase it, they have to
go under the Public Utility Act
through approvals through the
PRC already.
And then we added the net zero
language to confirm that
regardless, regardless of how
the qualified microgrid is going
to be used. It's gonna meet the
state's goals.
And Madam Chair, on, on that
note, that's the line 15 if
Our committee secretary is
ready. Line 15, putting a period
at the word standard.
Then it will align with the
state's goal.
We
And as we stated earlier, we're
good with that.
All right, so Senator Figueroa,
if that's all in your proposed
amendment. Do you mind repeating
them just so that Rebecca has
that information correct? And
then we will have the chair on
the page 2 line 6, strike the
period to insert as determined
by the PRC period.
OK.
OK. Go ahead and move on.
Item number 2 line, page 2, line
9.
Strike the knot.
So at the moment we're we're not
in agreement on that one, but
the other two we are.
And Madam Chair, the 3rd 1.
Page 2.
Line 15
bless you at the end of the word
standard put a period.
Strike the rest of the line and
strike line 16.
Um, and I am open to a little
more debate on the not. Um, it,
I'm trying to get at just the
piece that is sold.
Into the common grid, not the
energy that's produced
internally and used by the
builder for their own purposes.
We are, we see the first one
online, um,
6 and the one on 15 and 16 where
those are friendly, we, we don't
accept the one on 9.
And we, we can go through the
explanation again if you'd like,
why, why we don't. OK, Madam
Chair, then I'm gonna say
stick with items 1 and 3, and
let's do this amendment and then
I'll listen to my colleagues on
the nod, whether we need to
strike that or not.
Already and so.
uh, let us go ahead and call a
vote on the amendment is
repeated by Senator Figueroa.
Madam Chair, on page 2.
Line 16, you strike the period,
insert as determined by the PRC
period.
Online 15 after the word
standard insert a period, strike
the rest of the line, strike
line, 16.
In every attempt, Madam Chair,
to be friendly.
Uh, for those two items, yes.
Oh
Yes.
Senator had a meal.
Senator O'Malley.
Senator Paul.
Senator Ramos.
Senator Sanchez to share.
Senator work.
Senator Bergman's
Senator Hamlin. Yes.
Yeah
And
So 9 to 1 that amendment sticks.
Thank you, Senator Figueroa,
anything else?
No, I, I look forward to hearing
from my colleagues. I have
Senator O'Malley.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and,
and, you know, we were a little
concerned because they're
hearing from
Those, uh, you know, folks who
have worked on this, who worked
on the ETA, which was this
massive effort, um.
And uh
So that they're concerned about
this. Is it work around BTA, um,
And, and so I feel very
uncomfortable about supporting
at this point. I mean, I guess
what I'm asking is maybe some of
you who were part of it or
understand this a little better,
um, if it, if it's in violation
of the ETA and and does do a
work around. I mean, does it
make it not?
I mean, um
Hey, you know, can it even be
done? It's my, my concern.
A chair and senator, thank you
for your, for your question, uh,
again, we don't exempt this
microgrids from the ETA anywhere
in the bill, and so we don't
feel that that's necessary to
call it out and we, we would
have to do that in every bit of
everything we did, we have to
say, yes, this applies to.
But
Madam Chair, go ahead.
Madam Chair,
uh, senator.
We are working within the
confines of the ETA and so when
you go right now to a public
utility, and they say, you say
I've got 150 megawatts of new
solo that I want to build out
and add to your, um, they're
looking at their portfolios and
they're saying that's, that may
not work for me and your time
frame.
And the reason is, is cause they
need enough baseload to continue
building out the solar
electrification. Um, you could
independently under existing law
today, build a microgrid and
have it completely disconnected
from the grid.
That would give nobody extra
pink or power. Um, the only
party that would benefit from
the infrastructure is the party
that's paying for it and using
it. And so there would be no
public benefit really with that
except for the private benefit
of the economic development.
This actually provides a little
bit additional oversight to that
process and provides a stricter
standard, a net zero standard
that would be in place, um, the
ETA has several different
carve-outs in it, and exceptions
that wouldn't apply under this
law for the qualified
microgrids, but every electron
that goes into the public
utility, the public space, going
for the benefit of the public
citizens is subject to.
ETA.
Uh,
thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
again, this is not in terms of
my, you know, understand, well,
somewhat of my understanding,
but certainly not my expertise
and
Um,
And obviously there's other
folks who know more about it.
Uh, that was my concern, and I
imagine if it, if it doesn't
comply, as I said earlier, um,
you know, it could be
challenged, that's all. Thank
you.
Great. Thank you.
Senator Bergman. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Going back to what Senator
Figueroa was saying.
I, I hear what you're saying
that the ETA applies.
I guess I just need you to also
elaborate further.
of people who have a wart here
when the DDA passed.
By saying the qualified
microgrid shall not be.
Considered blah blah blah.
under sections under those three
sections.
Which are all at least section
62-18-10 is part of the ETA. So
as I read it, it says,
Ridge show to be considered
under this part of the ETA.
Can you elaborate again? Thank
you. Yes, I can. Thank you, uh,
Madam Chair, Senator, so under
these sections, um, this
section, subsection C is talking
about when you are building a, a
self-source generation resource.
And so that's companyorplex
building, uh, microgrid from
scratch, putting out those
investment dollars. Um, when
they do that, they are not going
to be putting
Those microns onto the grid or
electrons onto the grid for
retail sales.
And so the ETA contemplated
everything going out to retail
customers under a ratepayer
system. And so the ratepayers
for the good of the public, it
would go through that system
through the PRC and it would
evaluate the, the good of the
public and the rates. Here you
have a private party that's
going to be investing in the
local economic development,
spending hundreds of millions of
dollars putting the grid out
there.
These provisions in the ETA were
enacted years before these
microgrids are going to be
built.
And so you're on a scale when
you're building from scratch.
Um, that, that, that ship is
kind of halfway there. But
you've got to build an
engineering system, a grid
system that's perfectly
engineered, and the question
that companies are facing when
they invest in New Mexico is OK.
How, how do I fit this portfolio
standard from day one without an
existing grid infrastructure in
place. And so when they
troubleshoot that, you're going
to have moments in time where
you have to have the base load.
Put in and that's what services
the intermittency from the
renewables. If you cannot
physically put the base load in,
you can't build the renewables.
And so you are in a chicken and
the egg situation there.
And in order to get that massive
investment in the renewables,
you have to have a little bit of
flexibility around the standards
in these sections, but you want
a net zero goal at the end of
it, so that that brings
everything back perfectly in
line with where New Mexico wants
to be at the end of this. Uh,
this will actually allow for
more solar development
throughout the state to happen
quicker. And when we look at
things that happened like with
SB4 and we're talking
about electrification.
You know, what do people need?
They need affordable
electricity, right? That, that
is what we're hearing from
people. They would like to
electrify. If you can electrify,
you will lower your greenhouse
gas emissions. That's been
proven throughout the world. And
so how do you get to
electrification sooner.
Well, the engineering.
Analysis is you have to have
sufficient base load to build
out the intermittent load. And
so that's really the flexibility
that we are looking for in that
section. Um, in a way that
brings it fully in line with the
net zero goals of the state
established by the ETA.
OK, I know what you're saying.
I don't think I have a second
question.
Yeah, considering the dog was
unfriendly also. OK, thank you,
Madam Chair.
Right.
Anything else from the
committee?
What is the will of the
committee?
Uh, this is one that we're not
voting on. My apologies. This is
one that we are holding, so at
this point, it's being held.
Uh, we appreciate that, and it's
helpful consideration in a
patent possible tax package. We
still haven't heard a whole lot
yet on that. So we expect the
last 15 days to be a whirlwind.
So, thank you so much. Thank you
for hearing us today. Thank you
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. Thank you. Next we
have Senate Bill 230, that's a
maximum notary fees from Senator
Scott.
was
OK, Senator Scott, since this is
your first time at the
committee. Uh, we do have a
10-minute, uh, we, as we've gone
to the end of the session, so 10
minutes for you to present, and
then we will go to public
commentary. You have 5 minutes
after that to respond to public
commentary, and then we will go
to the committee.
Whenever you're ready.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee.
bring this afternoon.
Senate Bill 230.
Basically does one thing. It
rained, it raises notary fees.
From a maximum.
Of $5 to a maximum of $12.
A constituent complaints from
A couple of small bookkeeping
outfits, packing ship folks.
That the $5 fee was no longer
covering the new SOS
requirements, along with uh
The
Holy fes that their employees
are drawn.
Being a mathematician.
I looked at the 3 surrounding
states.
Arizona was $10.
Colorado was $10.
Texas was $15 I added those 3.
Divided by 3 came up with
$11.66.
And rounded up to the nearest
dollar.
With that
Madam Chair, I will stand for
questions.
All righty. Uh, anybody in the
audience, uh, in support of this
bill.
Anybody in opposition?
seeing none for the record for
either. Anybody online? Not for
either in support of that. Now
it goes to the committee.
Senator Sheriff.
A chair. I just can't believe
that a conservative Republican
is sitting out here, almost
tripling.
This fee.
OK
sacrile. I'm gonna vote for it
though.
Anything else from the
committee.
Madam Chair, I move a do pass.
We have a do pass, we have a
second. We have a second from 3
of the of the 4 of you. Is there
anybody in opposition of this Du
Pas motion?
See now, let's go ahead and
record that all those in
attendance are in favor, that
was easy peasy, Senator Scott.
Thank
you ma'am. Very welcome.
Senator I.
Stepped out of the room.
Leo, you'll put it on board.
Can you check to see if Senator
Azel is in the hallway?
Thank you.
I.
Well, there he's there in the
back.
If Senator Zel doesn't come on
in, I'm gonna pop you up. Why
don't you go ahead and come on
up, Senator Townsend.
We're gonna jump to Senate bill
for 348.
No, this one we are voting on.
The, um, just to update though,
um, after consulting with
Ismael, uh, we have a senator
Eels is one that can actually be
voted on. So the other two bills
that we will hold to put um in
uh the Q4 potential tax package
will be Senate Bill 424, that is
Senator Woods.
And Senate Bill 497 from Senator
Ramos. So, um, Senator Townsend
and Ramos, you are welcome to
start on 348.
OK
you.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
I almost said,
um of the Beaver Coalition, but
I'm not gonna go there today,
cause I'm still not over that,
so, but Madam Chair, um, Senate
Bill 348 is a payment in lieu of
taxes. Um,
It allows, uh, it would require
the state when purchasing
property in communities to make
a payment in lieu of taxes. Now,
there's a carve out.
Or highways and infrastructure
that would not require that, but
if you buy real property in town
that should pay taxes on that,
or a pay, make a payment in lieu
of taxes.
have anything else. Thank you.
All righty.
Uh, is there anybody in the
audience that is in favor of
this bill.
Recording none. Anybody in the
audience in opposition of this
bill.
See none. Anybody online?
Nobody online. All right, for
the record, so let's go ahead
and go to the committee.
Are there any questions or
comments from the committee?
So Bergmans you just elaborate
one more time? Sorry, why, why
we need this. Thank you.
Sure. Um,
Mo chair, Senator Bur, it
protects smaller communities,
basically that have um
That the state comes in and buys
the building, they lose property
tax because of it. That's all
we're trying to do is protect,
but it wouldn't affect
Albuquerque or or Artisa
equally, it's, that's all it
does is tries to
solidify that tax base.
And that also, you know, these
small counties and
municipalities and whenever
someone comes and purchases
these buildings, they lose quite
a bit of their, their uh their
tax base and it's hard for them
to continue and, and they have
to replace it somewhere. So, uh,
payment of taxes just the way
the federal government does it
with the forest, you know, this
be very similar.
I.
Great. Thank you, Senator Worth.
I'm sorry, Senator Bergman's
already finished. I was only
going to say the fund that's
being created.
In this bill
We'll just be an empty fund as
of now, right?
Um, madam chair and center, that
is correct.
It's set up so that if this
passes, there would be a
facility for the state to
receive the to transfer those
funds, and then if it is
If it is funded by the
legislature, then those payments
would be.
And onto the
OK.
Thank you, Senator. Thank you,
Senator Burke. Senator Worthley.
Mr. Chair, I know the
Cultural affairs department is
proposing to buy a $7 million
piece of property in Santa Fe
that's currently privately
owned. So just walk me through
what's gonna happen.
If it is privately owned and and
and taxes are being paid on this
today, then that entity.
Um, whoever bought it, whatever
state entity bought it would
make a payment in lieu of taxes
to the
to Santa Fe, uh, to stabilize
that income stream to the city.
And so Madam Chair and senator.
And we're gonna have to figure
out
Then before that transaction can
be completed.
That payment's got to be made in
the fund. What if there's not
enough money in the fund to
cover the cost.
No
Oh, Senator this provides for
that, and so it says in the
following year.
Those taxes would would be
remitted to or that payment
would be remitted to a fund and
And only then if the legislature
Approves and expenditure.
Then with that thund, with that
payment be made, but the purpose
of it.
is to hold a community.
Uh, whole. So when
What entity does that, um.
But
that community would be held,
but there's no provision that it
has to be done upfront. It is
the in the following year, after
approval of the legislature and
that the Senator Woods has
carried this bill for a number
of years, if I remember
correctly.
Bill's been around. I'm just
trying to, so what's the
liability to the state.
If there's no money in them. But
let's, let's go back to 2017
when we had no money.
What does that basically mean?
We're no longer able to do.
Any kind of purchase of land in
stayed any, there is a provision
in the field that says
That when those funds are not
available, that the state is not
liable. It's only when funds are
available for these payments
made and to be clear, it's only
when there's money in the fund
that payments are to be made or
when, when there's, yeah, how do
we define when the state has
money available.
Um
I have to give me just a second,
but there's a provision in the
bill.
That would allow the state to be
held harmless when they do not
have adequate funds to make the
pill payments that were in lieu
of taxes.
It's on page 2, I see it says
all payments in lieu of taxes
are contingent upon sufficient
appropriations and
authorizations being made by the
New Mexico legislature for the
performance of the provisions of
this section.
If sufficient appropriations and
authorizations are not made by
the legislature in any year, the
provisions of this section are
suspended for that year.
Some M here. So the next year,
I mean, so we're, I'm looking at
center Woods because he's gonna
have to put money in this fund
to cover.
I mean, this is for the city of
Santa Fe here, so I'm, I'm, I'm
worried about this and making
sure the city of Santa Fe is
going to get its share, but
there could be some big numbers
here. I mean, I know you're
focused on the rural area.
But if there's, if there's, I
mean, again, this, this is a
good example. This is a, this is
a house over by the museums,
that's
I think a $6 million.
Purchase and it's a private
residence, so this thing would
certainly kick in, trying to
think my guess is probably
You know, $50,000 a year in tax
and, OK, that's the next
question, Madam Chair. So how do
we determine the length of this
payment. In other words, it's a
$50,000 annual payment, 10 years
it's 500,000.
20 years, it's a million bucks.
I mean, is it in perpetuity? I
mean, how do we determine what
the amount is that there's there
to a provision for that within
the field, and um
It's in on page 2 item D, and it
talks about the the property tax
division, the taxation revenue
Department shall promulgate
rules to specify the payments in
lieu of taxes.
And so,
It leads it within the
The right and the obligation of
the legislature.
And tax division to promulgate
these rules, and Senator, I'll
be real honest with you, I am, I
It's probably more important to
smaller towns.
But it should not, um, it's it,
I think the state should make
payments and lieu of taxes when
they take over a building in
Santa Fe, Albuquerque Artesia,
Ja, New Mexico. That's, that's
part of being a good a good
citizen.
I, I, I do have to smile about
leaving it to the rules. We have
a lot of discussion about not
wanting to leave things to the
rules, and yet there's a lot of,
I mean, and these could be that,
and I hear what you're saying,
and it probably it's pretty
small numbers in rural areas,
but boy, you start.
In Albuquerque, I could just
see.
And there's a whole discussion
about
Moving things around and all of
a sudden this could become a
really big number, uh, which,
let me just say, then all these,
you know, all the taxpayers in
New Mexico are all going to be
contributing to Santa Fe and
Albuquerque to cover the costs,
which could be a huge, could be
a much bigger cost, quite
frankly, the taxpayers than what
you're saving on the small
little ones in the rural areas.
I'm not gonna argue with that.
You're exactly right, and that
Again, I think with all of the
provisions that the state has
today and all the funds that
that we have.
set up for all these different
issues.
Holding cities and counties uh
hold, it's just part of being a
a good corporate citizen.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you.
Any other comments or questions
from the committee.
Senator Sheriff. So
You know, the, the pit program
from the federal government.
It's really designed to help
small communities.
Um
Because there were federal took
over big chunks of county land,
and well, then the county didn't
have any tax base to pay the
bills.
So, why don't we put in here
that this works for everybody
but Class A counties.
Let's take the big boys out.
Would that be friendly?
I would expect that it wouldn't
beat the senator uh worse
So, I, I was trying to figure
out where we would go in here,
uh, Madam Chair.
I don't see a place.
I haven't found a place where it
seems to make sense, uh, in, in
the actual bill.
But that does make sense to me.
So,
Uh, the federal government pays
the school the central
consolidated School District in
Kinley County.
Uh, a McKinley School District
payment in lieu of taxes
because, well, there's no
property tax on.
Uh, Navajo Nation land. So
They're trying to make that up.
Uh.
In, in this, I mean, the whole
idea behind this is the same
thing.
How do you take care of the
smaller communities.
So
I guess the question might be,
where does this go next?
This is scheduled to go to the
floor next, Senator chair.
Does it get funny?
It's
so.
$5.
It goes to finance. My
apologies. So,
So I guess if this is a
reasonable amendment to
To the sponsors.
I'm willing to let it go to
finance and try to figure it out
there just because on the fly,
I'm not finding the place to put
that.
Everybody except Class A.
Man.
I typically believe that tax
policy are applied to everybody.
So
I would say that's an unfriendly
because I want it to either be
applied to everybody or not
applied to anyone.
OK. Thank you, Senator Tim.
I think Senator Sheer was
suggesting that this be if when
it goes to finance, that that
would be a consideration.
So not necessarily an amendment
done here.
So I will make that amendment
here, but
Certainly something to consider
before it gets to the floor, and
I have to fight with Senator
intelligence.
The senator is held between us.
That
she'll take you both out.
Uh, any other questions or
comments from the committee?
What is the will of the
committee?
You have
We have a do pass from Senator
Sheriff. Do we have a second?
2nd from Senator Sanchez.
Rebecca, if you will please take
the vote.
Senator Figueroa.
Pa.
And that you have a meal. No.
Senator O'Malley.
Senator Paul,
Senator Ramos.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator Sheriff.
Senator Worth.
No,
and that you have one.
Back to Senator Figaro. No.
We have 6 snows.
Or yes sir. My apologies,
senator, your bill does not
pass.
Thank you very much.
All right, we are going to go
ahead and Senators though,
you're not used to this
committee moving so fast cause
you stepped out and came back in
and we were already moving
ahead, but let's get you in the
seat.
There you go.
Uh, and just in case if you
didn't hear, I mean, we do have
an amendment on this bill, so we
will get to that in just a
second, but um I was informed by
Ismael that this is not a hold,
that this is a bill we get to
vote on today.
And here I do have.
All right, you'll make sure
you're, your microphone is on.
And if you, if you,
if you'll explain the bill first
and then we'll, we'll, uh, we'll
talk about the amendment. All
right, Madam Chair, members of
the committee, thank you all
very much for taking the time to
hear this.
Madam Chair
October the 21st, 2024, Ross
will experience the serious
flooding with substantial
property damage and two
fatalities, Madam Chair, this
theory was declared a federal
disaster area on November 2nd.
And uh
It was awful. There was over 6
inches of rain that hit and
For 4 times the region's
average.
Madam Chair, the Spring River
channel overflowed to caused
extreme flooding in downtown
Rossville.
Our first responders.
participated in over 300
rescues, getting people off the
roofs of their homes out of
harm's way off the top of the
cars that were floating down the
river.
It inundated roads and swept
away cars that damaged bridges
and buildings, the flooding left
much of the city under a layer
of silt.
It was declared a disaster by
our governor, which unlocked $1
million in state fund to help
with the relief efforts in the
president, President Biden,
declared a federal disaster,
made it eligible for federal
disaster relief.
What we're asking here is a
temporary tax deduction.
Which offers financial aid
during this recovery period,
Miss Madam Chair members.
What we're asking for here is a
bond.
That can be used to provide 25%
of the local share required to
access federal disaster rate
from the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
This leverages local funding to
unlock potentially larger amount
of federal assistance. That's
what we're asking for, Madam
Chair, members of the committee
joining me today is the mayor of
Roswell, Mayor, Tim Jennings,
and I know that he would like to
address the, the greatest will,
Madam Chair, thank you, Mayor,
thank you very much for being
here.
Man, Madam Chairman of this
committee, uh, thank you for
hearing this today. Uh,
We have a huge problem in Ros.
We have over $370 million in
damages. There are $70 million
million dollars of damages on
flood preparation, flood, uh,
A flood, uh, flood preventive
services that we've had since
1971. Bravo has had a flood
commission and uh this storm was
so bad that it uh washed.
Um, over $70 million worth of
work that we've done in the past
a way which is not covered by
FEMA, FEMA will not cover
something unless you are the
actual property owner that
hasn't, and so, um, we have a
huge
area that we still have to go
and readdress and address the
flooding that could potentially
happen again. But this part is
to put us, if we can put in this
property to our grocery states
tax of 25 cents. We were hoping
to get $5 million a year and
generate over 25 or 30 years,
generate approximately $75
million in that area, so we
would have upfront money.
Uh, to put in the service
because FEMA, if you do not have
the upfront cash for your
famous, you go to the back of
the line and uh so it became
very apparent to me that our
previous mayor went from $30
million in debt to 90, so we
don't have any bonded capacity
really left to do this, and this
was a tax that we imposed on
ourselves, our own community, to
generate hopefully we need to
get at least $5 million so we
can get
Uh, you know, a great deal of
upfront money because we lost
our civic center, uh, had 5.5 ft
of water in our museum had 4.5
ft of water and the adult center
had probably 6 or 8 ft of water
in it plus a lot of other uh
damages around our community and
um
We're probably gonna have to
move our museum, uh, you know,
Rosville has a museum with one
of the largest collections in
the state that is not owned by
the state, and we have a $300
million museum. It's right
downtown and it's flooded 4
times now, this is the 4th time,
uh, this was a very unique
flood, the worst we've ever had
and uh.
I'm trying to work a deal to
move this museum hopefully with
another institution to higher
ground because we cannot insure
our collection in that facility
anymore. There's at least 50,000
square feet in that facility. I
asked the main it cost 3 $300 a
foot to build something back, so
we'll be in the neighborhood,
well 50,000 ft times at least
$300.
And uh actually probably be
closer to 400 because if we do
the work up by one of the best
places we have is to
partnership, maybe I'm hoping we
can partnership with the Mexico
Military Institute, who was
established in 1991, and we can
provide the museum service for
the institute.
Ralph was established in 1873,
and so that would, I think if we
could make a nice joint facility
there, uh.
On
by the institute, which is above
the flood damage area, and
that's where we're going and uh.
If we don't, I'm, I'm really
afraid after watching the fires
of Pacific Palisades. If we
don't get in front of
California, well, it'll take us
forever to get money, and you're
looking right now just alone,
you're looking probably 3 or 4
years to get something really
built, um, but we can take this
money, bond it, we'll have our
money so we can replace all the
facilities that we can as quick
as we can ahead of California.
And that's, that's the.
goal of this, uh, I also have,
uh, our, our city attorney, Mr.
Hessain, uh, should be on the
phone watching us, he happens to
be in uh out of Mexico right
now, but uh.
And we'd be glad to yield to any
questions that you might have.
OK, you've got 3 minutes left in
your, so do you want to go ahead
and have him speak or just be
able to answer questions if
needed to speak, that's fine.
He, he, he's a, he's got his
hand up there. So, sir, if you'd
like to speak, you've got about
2 minutes and 30 seconds. Uh, if
you wanna go ahead and uh make a
comment and then we'll go to uh
public testimony.
Mayor Jennings, how do you say,
how do you say the last name?
Ima
Ima. OK, Mr. Ema, if you don't
want to go ahead and speak.
Yes, thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
I, I think Mayor Jennings hit
the nail on the head, but I, I
wanna reiterate the, the
structure of this is to allow
Roswell to tax itself a 25
cents, and this quarter cent tax
can be used exclusively to
purchase or to acquire bonds
that would be used exclusively
for flood recovery. So it's an
extremely limited tax with a
narrowly tailored purpose, um,
really, the, the goal is Roswell
would like to be able to help
itself as much as possible.
No.
And so, uh, I'm happy to answer
any questions.
All right. Thank you so much. We
do have the amendment and I
wanna make sure that we discuss
the amendment if you can,
Senator, and then we'll go to
public commentary, and we'll
move on the amendment.
the microphone on Saturday.
I sorry.
Madam Chair, on page 1 line 15,
the strike governmental.
On page one, line 19 strike
governmental.
On page 9919 strike
governmental.
And on page 9, line 23, strike
over mill.
And that is the, that's the
amendment right here.
Can you explain what is it
doing?
Other than just deleting that,
Madam Chair, I will let the uh
mayor explained that.
It was my understanding from Mr.
Ein about this,
and this is just in keeping and
proper rafting status that we're
talking about grocery receipts
stacks. We do not need the word
governmental in there from the
council services my
understanding.
It's just how the tax is named.
OK, so, um, it is the, I may
need you to, to come on up here
because um that might be what
keeps this being held instead of
moving through. Izzy, do you
mind coming up and
Just to inform the committee
that um I'll, I'll let you
explain as if you will.
Madam Chair and, uh, sorry to be
the bearer of bad news. The
original governmental gross
receipts tax deduction didn't
have a cost associated with it
because it didn't apply to the
services being provided to the
government. We didn't actually
estimate any receipts would
receive that deduction, so there
was no fiscal loss. If you
change this now to a general
gross receipts tax deduction, it
will have a cost associated with
it, and for that reason, would
need to be uh held to be paid
for potentially in a tax
package.
So Senator Zelle, what you
marinate on that, um, and
Senator Worth, if you want to
chime in. So I, I guess the
question is, do you need section
4?
Why don't we just take section 4
out and then, then you can.
Bond, you can
Put the tax on to pay it back. I
mean, I think this was a
different.
It was a different deduction.
I'm trying to, you know, I'm
trying to think through.
Does that really achieve what
you're trying to achieve by
having that.
So someone is selling a service,
so
So you're well, we won't use
them.
Mr. Inti up for this, but if
it's tangible personal property,
so.
As I understand this, so
someone's selling a backhoe.
Just walk through an example of
what how how exactly that would
work and, and, and would that
really benefit the city. I just
wanna make sure I understand
that. Mr. Chair or Madam Chair
and Senator Worth, um, as I read
the bill, the deduction would
apply for primarily construction
services to repairs or, or other
municipal buildings, and that
would be the GRT, not the GGRT,
which I think is why the fix,
but the contractor that is hired
would still be expected to pay
the GRT without this deduction.
So this deduction would allow,
if the city were to contract
construction services to prepare
their facilities.
To have their contractor not pay
the GRT.
Yeah, which I mean, which means
the city, the city is not
getting the GRT from the
service, so the city's losing
out on that. That's the, that's
the problem, I mean, what, what,
what are we trying to accomplish
by that part of the bill.
Well it was my understanding.
The way I see it and if
If the city was taxing ourselves
to fix flood damage. I didn't
really think that we should have
to pay grocery seats tax on
something where we are imposing
a tax because of a natural
disaster. I didn't think the
state.
really the city, either one, I
mean, should profit from that.
This would allow us not to pay
the grocery receipts tax, so we
would get all the money. We're
still gonna have to pay interest
on the money that we, we borrow
to get in front of this. I
didn't want to have to pay and
they was fair when it's
Representative Small said, you
know, every, you're the only
place that ever came here and
didn't just ask for Monica.
And we have such a huge need. We
have got to get in front of
California. And we have an air
show coming and it could have
tremendous impact for Roswell
and um so we have about a 5-year
contract, 3 to 5-year contract
with them. So we need to get our
museum back into shape. We have
a lot in our museum, Robert
Goddard developed missiles and
rockets and, and for the whole
world in Ross.
And uh that's something that's
not known, but uh
And so I just didn't really
thought that if we had to pay
gross receipts tax on this.
We're double taxing the people
who's already
Paying a tax because of misery,
and this was really a double
misery tax. If the tax
department can tell me how to
write it, where it does that,
that, that's all I'm not after.
I want the contractor. I mean,
this means a contractor can do
more work for us and we're not
gonna get anywhere close to
having enough money to pay for
the damages. We lost $370
million.
Where, you know, we have huge
issues and I
Just, if we write, we tax
ourselves to fix it, we
shouldn't have to pay it.
Tax on doing the work. Now,
anything else that FEMA gives us
some paying tax, but
I'm just saying on this part, on
where we
We're fixing our own with our
own tax. I, I thought it was.
Unfair to taxes for that, and it
makes it really easy for me to
sell in Rockville because this
will, this tax saving will pay
for the cost of the bonds, you
know, the 5% or whatever you get
off the time.
pay for the interest rates on
the bonds and they make.
makes it easier to sell for me
to sell in my community. So
instead of because the the first
part of the bill does allow you
to put an additional increment
on to pay for the bonds, but
you're, you're hoping that this
savings here will be sufficient
so you don't have to do the
increment.
Oh, no, no, just for the, I,
we're gonna have to pay interest
on whatever bonds we get, you
know, we're getting, we're
getting 5 man if we, we, we
really need probably 75 or 100
million this might only give us
about 50, uh, but
You know,
To me, I'm
That's the way I see it if the
uh
We shouldn't have to pay grocery
seats on top, on top of
something that uh
That we're taxing to fix because
You know, fix ourselves when
everybody else can.
And I, I still hope we get some
other money.
From the state, but so just
ma'am, just so we've not done
and there's no analysis on what
the impact of that would be,
correct?
OK.
Not yet. We haven't uh done the
fiscal impact report for this.
This one's tricky because I
think we all agree and support
with what needs to be done for
Roswell, um, and, in, in many
ways, and I'm wondering if
because um there needs to be a
fiscal impact if we bring this
bill back, because I think we
all get what your intent is and
the desperate need, uh, that may
or that you are expressing that
Roswell needs, and so I'm
wondering if that is amenable to
you to work with Izzy on this so
that we can try and move this
bill.
Madam Chair.
I'm going to leave this up to
The city attorney has, if you're
still listening, I hope you are,
and working with
Him and the mayor and
By.
OK.
All this working together, I, I
would like to see this go
forward because what it boils
down to its raw lights helping
Ross lights.
And we've got to get it done.
I don't think there's any
disagreement there.
We can work to do
with recruit somebody to move.
The museum's gonna
cost $30.
And uh that's a lot of tax money
and then
the
The other thing, if we can fix
it by the time we get to
finance, because when I was
going home Monday,
My car blew up.
And I don't have a car right now
and I got to rent a car to come
back.
I don't know why, but
I feel like I'm Candy as well. I
mean, she always blew her
engine. I never knew.
Well, just for time purposes,
and I do want to be efficient
just because we still have quite
a bit. Um, we can bring this
back Saturday and it can be one
of the first bills, um, that we
do if that's a reasonable time.
Um, so, what we'll do is we will
roll this bill and bring it back
on Saturday. Um, I would
encourage you to, to meet with
him outside right afterwards,
um, so that we can, we can do
that. Um, so we appreciate that
because I do feel that this
committee sees that the
desperate need and wants to make
sure that this works. At that
time, we will take public
comment.
Madam Chair, members, thank you
all very much for this
consideration. Absolutely. Thank
you. All right, so we've got
Senator Woods up next. This is
Senate Bill 424. This is one
that we will hold.
And so we will hear it, we will
go to public comment and then um
we will move on to House Bill 6.
Thank you, Madam Chair. This is
Senate Bill 424. And uh just
quickly.
Uh, this bill.
Related to taxation and expands
the rural healthcare
practitioner tax credit to
include licensed respiratory
care practitioners.
And Poly
So noni graphic.
Technicians. That's too many
syllables for me, madam chair.
So let me grab the bill real
quick, uh.
Online.
On page 1 line 19, it talks
about the taxpayer, the, the
eligible practitioner provide
service to underservice area and
make claim a credit against his
state income tax.
On page 2 line 4, it talks about
the uh $5000 credit for a higher
train such as.
positions
And on page 2, line 14, it talks
about this little less training
people getting $3000 tax credit
pharmacists, nurse
practitioners, and these
particular people I'm putting in
would be in that category, and
it also talks about uh the time
of uh hours they have to work in
an underserved area, they get
half credit if they serve
between 750 hours and 1,5008.
4 hours if they
Uh, worked the full 1,584 hours,
then they would receive the full
credit.
Uh, the Department of Health on
page 3, line 12, Department help
determines the eligibility and
provides tax uh information to
tax and revenue Service on page
4, line 12, uh, it talks about
the tax and revenue rights to
report back to the revenue
stabilization and tax policy
committee in the legislature
describing.
How this is done and who and how
and how much it costs in the
state to do this.
And on page 4 line 16 that lists
of eligible healthcare
practitioners and online page 6,
line 12, it talks about the
definition of a healthcare
underserved area and on page 6,
line 21, it's the definition of
rule.
And essentially, that's the
bill.
All right. Thank you very much.
Uh, at this point, we're gonna
go to see if there's any public
comments just by a show of
hands. Is there anybody in the
audience who is in support of
this bill?
OK, Terry.
Anybody in opposition.
Anybody online, they'll be
online. Terry, why don't you go
ahead and get on up, I'll give
you a minute.
Thanks of the committee.
I'm Terry Cole, president and
CEO for the Greater Albuquerque
Chamber of Commerce and I'm
pairing in support today of SB
424. Clearly a theme of this
session is to construct and
improve the framework for
attracting and retaining
healthcare professionals to our
state, especially in the rural
areas. SB 424 contributes to
that framework, and we urge you
to vote yes today, as noted in
the FIR, there is a significant
demand for medical care
specialists. The expansion
of the 3000 annual rural
healthcare practitioner tax
credit to these specialists
comes at a very small cost to
the general fund, yet it can do
a lot of good.
As we work in the economic
development arena healthcare
becomes more and more important
in healthcare professionals
become more and more important,
and it's not health health care
if you can't get an appointment.
So we urge you to support this
bill, and we commend the sponsor
for carrying it. Thank you.
Thank you so much. Now I go to
the committee. Remember this is
a bill that will be held to be
considered into a potential tax
package. So if there are
questions, Senator O'Malley.
Thank you. I just see that
conflicts with another bill.
Possible 52, which actually has
a higher
Um, credit.
Which actually seems to be more
favorable, so I just wanted to
point that out. Can you repeat
that, that bill number?
52. House Bill 52, OK.
So when we look at the tax
package, that will certainly be
something that will be um
considered as any double bills.
Also they mentioned Madam Chair
of House Bill 226.
So it's too close, I guess.
Thank you, Senator O'Malley. Any
other questions or comments from
the committee, Senator Berns.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Actually, that made me think of
something in here. Have you
looked at House Bill 2? It says
it triples the rural healthcare.
Practitioners' tax credit.
OK
OK,
that's fine then that, then
never mind.
Thank you.
Maybe he's gonna look at it now.
I will look at that.
Anything else from the
committee?
All right,
that was easy peasy.
We're gonna go ahead and hold on
to that one,
thank you very much.
Thank you, Senators, and just
absolutely,
uh, and just, um, to move things
along quickly and then I'm gonna
let um uh representative
Skapanski know that House Bill 6
will come up next, but we're
going to have Senator Ramos.
When the Senate Bill 497 and
then uh I'm gonna text
Representative Skapanski and let
her know.
Let's go on this. Thank you. uh.
Ma'am.
That chair members of the
committee, thank you so much for
allowing me to bring this bill
in front of you. If this bill is
related to income tax, removing
the limit on the amount of the
income tax exemption for armed
forces retirement for retirement
pay. I, I feel great to be here
representing the 130,000 136,000
veterans throughout the state of
New Mexico. Of course, they're
not all retired and they won't
all benefit from this tax
exemption unless they receive a
retirement from uh um.
From the federal government or
uh or, or they're disabled and,
and received Social Security. So
this uh bill 497 to introduce
the in New Mexico in 2025, uh,
legislates uh session,
legislative session, proposes to
remove the cap on the tap
exemption for military
retirement income, making it a
significant move for supporting
military retirees.
The legislation demonstrates a
strong commitment to supporting
our military veterans by
providing them with a tax break
that acknowledges their
sacrifices made.
By limiting the tax exemption
cap, New Mex becomes a more
attractive state to uh for
retired military personnel,
potentially boosting the local
economy with an influx of
military retirees and their
families.
It ensures that all military
retirees, regardless of the size
of their retirement income can
benefit equally from the tax
exemption promoting fairness in
the state tax system.
Removing the cap helps retain
highly skilled veterans in the
state who can contribute their
expertise to various industries,
especially those related to
defense technology and
education.
Adventure, um, Stanford
question.
All right. Thank you so much,
Senator Ramos. Uh, going to the
public testimony. Is there
anybody in the audience that is
in support of this.
And we have two folks. We, is
there anybody in the audience in
opposition?
I'm gonna give you two a chance
to come on up, you get 1 minute
a piece. Anybody online? Wanting
support? All right.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Eric
James, and I serve as the deputy
cabinet secretary for the
Department of Veteran Services
Department of Veteran Services,
uh, fully supports legislation
that benefits and improves the
well-being of our veterans. We
urge your support. Thank you.
Madam
Madam Chair, members of the
committee.
Uh, thank you for listening to
this bill today and thank you,
uh, sponsor senator.
Ramos here for introducing this
girl. I am a veteran. I spent 12
years in uh Mexico National
Guard, and a lot of time that
was active duty. Um, this bill
certainly would be an asset for
uh as he mentioned through his
testimony for veterans uh to me
and and current veterans in the
state of New Mexico.
Um, uh, when I, uh,
I always think back to the day
when I raised my right hand to
support and defend the
Constitution of the United
States.
Um, for 12 years, I, I enjoyed
every day of it, and uh being uh
ready for deployment on a
moment's notice and being a
defender for the public and the
people of the state of New
Mexico. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you so much.
Joan, you're online, if you
will, please unmute yourself.
You do have one minute, you'll
see a thirty-second warning in
your chat box. Go ahead, Joan.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I'm Joan Dickerson.
I'm with the Veterans and
Military Families Caucus, a
statewide organization of over
560 members.
We stand in strong support of
this bill, uh, one thing that
the committee needs to know is
that
Retired uh military are often
still uh quite young and often
become entrepreneurs or take
other jobs in the state
contributing to the tax base.
We, we do support this uh
raising of the limit on the tax
exemption and uh I hope that you
can find room in the tax package
to include this. Thank you very
much.
Thank you so much, John. All
right, now going to the
committee, are there any
questions or comments from the
committee. Remember, this is a
bill that we will hold.
See none Ma chair, thank you so
much and in behalf of the
136,000 veterans throughout the
state of New Mexico. Um, I
really do appreciate the
consideration and hopefully
we'll make it through the, the
tax uh tax package and get
things through and represent our
veterans well. Thank you so
much. Thank you so much, Senator
Ramos. We're now going to HB 6.
And Representative, welcome to
the Senate Tax Business and
Transportation Committee. Uh,
what we are doing, uh, just
since this is your first time,
we'll give you 10 minutes to
present the bill and then we
will go, uh, you will, uh, we
will go to public comments, and
then you will have 5 minutes to
respond to public comment and
then we will go to the committee
and we will look at public
comment both online and in the
room.
Terrific. Thank you, Madam Chair
and members. Um, great to be
here today. Um, Madam Chair, I
also do have an expert witness
on Zoom, is Kelly O'Donnell.
Um,
thank you. Um,
Madam Chair members uh House
Bill 6, addresses industrial
revenue bond projects and
ensuring that the workers who
work on these projects are uh
fall under the public works
Minimum Wage Act. So, um, the
reason for bringing forward this
bill, Madam Chair and members,
is really to ensure that these
economic development projects
that are bringing lots of
benefits for our communities are
also benefiting the workers that
are constructing those projects.
Um, it's
An important instrument uh to
ensure that these projects are
also paying solid middle-class
wages that we include support,
training, apprenticeship
opportunities, career
advancement for tradespeople,
um, and we also want to make
sure that we are having high
quality construction done on
these projects. Um, Madam Chair,
uh, I have with me, uh, Mr.
Brian Condon, who is the
executive director of the New
Mexico Building Trades and
Construction Council and also
Kelly O.
Donnell, who is an economist
here in New Mexico, uh, by Zoom.
Um, and currently, uh, Madam
Chair remembers that, uh, public
works minimum wage project
applies to public works projects
and in IRBs the uh property is
deeded to the local government
and so in essence, these are
public projects um that we wanna
make sure are included under the
public works minimum wage, um,
Madam Chair, I'm not sure if my
experts would want to add
anything to that.
Thank you, ma'am sure, I'll be
happy to answer any questions,
uh.
is necessary. Thank you. Thank
you. That concludes our
presentation. Uh, and do you
want your online, uh, person at
all to make any comments?
Yes, madam O'Donnell would like
to add anything?
Mr Oon, if you will, please
unmute yourself if you'd like to
make any other comments to the
bill presentation.
I
It might be.
Yes
which is
Kelly.
Kelly, please, if you will, if
you'd like to say a few words.
Great. Thank you. Can you, can
you hear me now?
Yes we can.
Excellent, uh, uh, good
afternoon, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Kelly O'Donnell. I am an
economist in New Mexico. I've
been working for government or
as a consultant to government on
issues of public finance for the
last 25 or so years. This bill
is about 3 really important
pieces of legislate or 3 really
important laws in New Mexico.
The first one is the
anti-Donation clause to the
state constitution. That clause
basically says that government,
state, local,
County municipal can't give away
anything of value without
getting something of value in
return. That's a really
important clause because it uh
protects our taxpayer dollars,
but it, it can create a uh an
impediment to economic
development. So there's the IRB
law, which allows cities and
counties to to enter into really
complicated arrangements that
essentially make properties the
uh the pro or projects, the
property of government for
purposes of taxes.
While they remain the property
of a private entity for purposes
of everything else. So it's a
tax abatement strategy to get
around the anti-donation clause.
The third law is the public
works minimum wage Act, and that
act says that any government
contract, um, any, any projects
that are paid for, construction
projects paid for by government,
have to pay prevailing wages. So
this bill, HB 6 essentially
says, if you are an IRB project
and are therefore a government
project for purposes of
taxation, that means you don't
have to pay property tax or most
grocers eat tax, then you should
also be a government project for
purposes of paying, paying a
prevailing wage. So it's a, it's
a, it's a, it's a, it's a bill
that is intended to improve
fairness and improve the quality
of construction projects in New
Mexico. Uh, thank you for your
time.
chair, could I just add one
thing? Sure. Um, thank you. Uh,
I just want to clarify that, uh,
this does not apply to any
projects that are currently in
place. So this would only apply
going forward after the
enactment date of this
legislation, which would be June
20th of this year to new
projects after that.
OK, thank you very much.
All right. Now, we're going to
public testimony, so by a show
of hands, how many in the
audience are in support of this
legislation?
We have 3 there in the back,
right. Uh, anybody in the
audience in opposition.
We have 2. All right, we have 3
online that are in support, so
we're gonna go ahead and take 2
from the audience and we'll take
2 from online, and then we'll
have the two in opposition. So
those of you in support, if you
will, please come on up.
You will have one minute.
OK.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Mark Trujil
International Brotherhood of
Electrical Workers, the IBEW.
We stand in strong support of
this bill.
We feel that all citizens, not
just corporate citizens, should
benefit from these RB projects.
We, uh, recommended.
Strongly support um.
this initiative. Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Stephanie
Maez. I'm a registered lobbyist
representing the New Mexico
Building and Construction Trades
Council, we are an alliance of
15 craft unions representing
more than 15,000 workers
statewide. We're standing today
in strong support of House Bill
6 because we believe it is very
important that all workers,
non-union and union, are
permitted prevailing wage
protections for industrial
revenue bond projects.
House Bill 6 also ensures that
businesses who benefit from IRBs
are held to the same standard as
contractors leading public
infrastructure projects and and
those who must comply with the
public works Minimum Wage Act.
Please vote yes for House Bill
6. Thank you. Thank you so much.
Now, we're going to go online
and we do have another one who's
turned up who's uh in
opposition. So we're gonna do
the 3 online. We'll have John,
Joan, and um, Isaiah, if you
will. Each of you will have
one minute and uh you will get a
32nd warning. So John, if you
don't mind going first, uh, you
have one minute.
Thank
you, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, John Lipshutz with
the New Mexico Federation of
Labor. Uh, we represent over
40,000 workers across the state
in both the public and private
sector. Uh, we are in strong
support of this measure and
thank the sponsor for bringing
it up. Uh, we're an organization
that will always fight for fair
wages for all workers, whether
they're union or not, um, and
especially when we're talking
about public projects, um, we
want the absolute best quality
of work that we could possibly
get for our public projects and,
uh, and paying a fair wage helps
uh helps recruit the best talent
for that, for those kind of
projects and for all the other
reasons that have been stated,
we urge your support on this
measure. Thank you.
Thank you, John. Joan, if you
will, you have one minute, you
will get a 32nd warning in your
chat box.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, um, uh, Madam
Chair, you run a very efficient
committee so I won't take too
much time. My name's Joan Baker.
I'm the political affairs
director for the United
Association Local 412, uh, we're
plumbers and pipefitters. Uh, we
have registered apprenticeship.
We have 400 apprentices across
the entire state in both metro
and rural areas and we urge your
support of HB 6. It's very
important that
When the state has said that we
value prevailing wage on public
projects on our own projects
when tax dollars are being used
or abated that we follow uh
those same values, and so I ask
you to support this. Thank you.
Thank you. And lastly, in
support, Isaiah, you have one
minute and then we will go to
the opposition in the room and
then the opposition online.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, Isaiah Zeke,
business manager and financial
secretary, treasurer of the
Sheet Metal Workers Local 49. I
rise today in strong support of
House Bill 6, a critical measure
that will bolster our state's
financial stability and ensure a
brighter future for all New
Mexicans. This bill is a
strategic investment in our
communities and our economy.
responsibly allocating our
surplus revenues, we can enhance
vital public services, support
small businesses, and make long
overdue investments in
infrastructure. This bill
reflects our commitment to
fiscal responsibility while
prioritizing the needs of
everyday New Mexicans. It
ensures that our economic growth
benefits everyone, not just a
select few, by addressing
systemic inequalities and
promoting sustainable
development.
That seize this opportunity and
make a real difference. I urge
you to vote yes on health 6.
Thank you.
Thank you, Isaiah. Now, let's go
ahead and go to those in
opposition, if you will please
line up behind the sponsor.
And then Dan, we will have you
online, uh, in just a moment.
Uh, you will be given one
minute, uh, and you will see a
thirty-second warning. Madam
Chair, and members of the
committee, I'm Terry Cole,
president and CEO for the
Greater Albuquerque Chamber of
Commerce. The Chamber opposes HB
6 because it will make New
Mexico less competitive in
attracting private investment
for industrial development. We
all know that New Mexico already
has trouble attracting capital.
So
We shouldn't make that problem
worse. We also know that raising
the price of anything generally
results in getting less of that
thing.
It's among the basic laws of
economics, increasing the cost
of industrial revenue bonds will
not defy that basic law. States
around us don't put this kind of
additional cost burden on their
industrial revenue bonds.
Developers are consumers just
like the rest of us. If they can
get the same thing for a lower
cost, they'll shop there instead
of here. The more private sector
money we can attract for
infrastructure development, the
less public money is needed, and
that stretches the amount of
money available.
the public sector. We ask you to
vote no. Thank you very much.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Marla showed
registered lobbyist for NAO, the
Association of Commercial Real
Estate Developers. We also stand
in opposition to House Bill 6,
which we believe will add more
cost to economic development
projects and there will be even
less building activity in the
state, thus making New Mexico
less competitive and attracting
private investments for
industrial development, and it
makes the problem of attracting
capital worse and the
surrounding states do not add
this additional cost to IRBs.
Thank you.
Thank you, Marla. Now we go to
Dan online. We have you, uh,
listed as in opposition. So Dan,
if you will, you have one
minute.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, thank you. This is
Davin Lopez. I'm president and
CEO of the Museavelli Economic
Development Alliance in Las
Cruces. Uh, we believe the
additional costs incurred by
this bill will negate any
benefit that the IRB provides,
thereby basically making it an
irrelevant tool and will not be
utilized. We're going to lose
projects. We're going to lose
the opportunity for more
construction jobs and we're
going to lose the opportunity
for more permanent jobs that
could be created as well as the
tax base.
Also, in terms of this being a
public project, keep in mind
that this is not funded by
government. This is funded by
the projects are funded by the
companies themselves, so I think
all we're doing is putting more
burden and opposition to them
wanting to come here and as I
mentioned, I think in my 20
years here this is the most
damaging bill that I've seen on
economic development, so we, we
are in opposition. Thank you.
Thank you so much. So,
Representative, you have an
opportunity. You've got 5
minutes to respond to the public
comments if you'd like, or we'll
go straight to the committee.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, I, I
just wanna add a few comments.
So uh IRBs are typically um
providing tax benefits to the
projects and so while the
companies are certainly
participating in the development
of the project, the local
government is also contributing
significant resource through the
missed tax revenues, so the tax
revenue that is intercepted, uh,
or excuse me, is um uh not
collected from the project.
Um, and these projects are
occurring on lands that have
been deeded to the local
government. Um, so I just wanted
to make that clear. Um, and
Madam Chair, the other thing I
would just say is that labor
costs are typically about 23% or
so of these construction costs,
so there's certainly many, many
other opportunities to provide
savings in the construction of
these projects, um, and all of
the studies of the public works
minimum wage that have been
conducted here and around the
country have shown that they
actually do.
not increased construction costs
in some cases can reduce them
because the construction is of
higher quality, the workers are
very productive, they have a
career path and additionally
they are not reliant on state uh
or other programs um to offset
low wages. So those are just a
few things I wanted to add.
Uh, and with that you would
stand for questions. OK. Thank
you very much, Representative.
Now we go to the committee,
Senator O'Malley.
Picking on the chair, um, I
think it's, it's about time that
we put some um
Uh, requirements on, on, uh,
industrial revenue bonds, uh,
and especially when it comes to
labor and, you know, we are
talking about prevailing wages
and fringe benefits. We are
talking about construction
workers who already have a high
risk, uh, job, uh, we, they
should have health care, they
should have fringe benefits,
they should be paid the
prevailing wage. That's just
only fair. As mentioned, you
know, we abate millions of
dollars in taxes for some of
these projects. Uh, it's a great
benefit.
To, to, uh, the developer, um,
and I think we should at least
get, as I said, it does, it's,
it's union union workers, I
mean, it's prevailing wage, it's
fair. So, um, I think it's, it's
the right thing to do. Thank
you, man.
Thank you, Senator O'Malley.
Senator Sanchez.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, so when we talk about
The prevailing wages so every
job that goes out, um,
Uh, Madam Chair Representative
on the labor that you're talking
about for every job that's out,
there's always a prevailing wage
that comes with that job, right?
So no matter whether union or
non-union, you're gonna make
that scale.
Manage, yes. So, Madam Chair and
represent, were we talking about
low wages?
And not on the bonds.
The billing age all the works
minimum wage.
Go ahead, Mr.
I can,
yeah.
Um, currently on IRB projects,
the only requirement is the
state minimum wage, not public
works minimum wage, which is $12
an hour.
So, on the public works
projects, you are correct, sir.
If, if, if irrespective of uh uh
signatory contractor or a
non-signatory contractor are all
obligated to pay the New Mexico
public works minimum wage.
So Madam chair and represented,
so all public workshops is a
prevailing wage.
And the one you, I, I didn't
hear the first part of on public
works minimum waged members of
the committee.
New Mexico Public Works Minimum
Wage Act applies to public works
projects over $60,000.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
representative. When was the
last time that prevailing wage
was
Raised.
It by law and administrative
code, it is, uh,
It is done annually. So January
1st, the wage rates infringe
benefits for 2025 went into
effect, and there will be an
effect until
December 30th, December 31st,
2025. Madam Chair and
Representative, what percentage
do they go up per year?
It varies by craft. I mean
there's, I represent 15
construction craft unions and uh
anywhere from 0.
2 to 3 to 4 to 5% depending on
the economics of the state and
the the the help of the
construction industry.
And Madam Chair representative
who designates those
Increases the legislator here
who, who, who, who makes those
increases the, the Brian, I want
to remind you to go through the
chair, please. Yes, ma'am. I'm
sorry, uh, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, uh, in current
law, right? The wage rates and
fringe benefit levels are
established by the Department of
Workforce Solutions, who uses
collective bargaining
agreements, uh, information
submitted from the public or or
others.
That ultimately, the Department
of Public Service
Department of Workforce
Department of Workforce
Solutions, excuse me, uh,
establishing those weight,
weight, weights and print
benefits. Uh, thank you, Madam
Chair and Representative, uh.
Um,
so,
If there's some bad actors out
there in this bill that we're
bringing and we're not paying
the prevailing wage.
Madam Chair and representative,
who is responsible for going
after this, uh, Madam Chairman,
members of the committee under
current law, um, uh, the
Department of Workforce solution
can initiate a complaint, a
worker, I mean, so if a
complaint is filed for
underpayment or
misclassification, which we
don't see as often anyway
because of the penalties are,
are, uh, they're not
discretionary.
And Madam Chair, not
discretionary.
For, for the last 2, Madam Chair
and members of the committee for
the last 25 years, uh, until 3
years ago, um, penalties, the
way it worked is if you
underpaid a work on the public
works project and the state
called you on it, all you gotta
do is pay the money back.
Right? Now, there is a 60 day
mediation period where the
Department of Workforce
Solutions and maybe a potential
either me informed, misinformed
uh employer. There's a 60 day
mediation period, after which
there is penalties.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chan
representative. Um,
I believe the prevailing wage is
great. I think it should go up
higher. I mean, whether you're
union or non-union on the public
works job. Thank you, you know,
I see the unions here and I,
I've been here 5 years now and I
haven't seen them come and ask.
They always support every bill
and support, but they never come
and say, hey, we need to get our
prevailing wage raised for our
members or for any workers that
are union or non-union on these
prevailing wage jobs. So those
are my comments, Madam Chair and
Representative.
Thank you, Senator Sanchez. I
think we have a bill for you,
maybe, a bill idea for you for
next time.
Senator Ramos, Madam Chair,
thank you and uh thank you for
bringing this bill in front of
us. Um, in the, uh, Senate
committee analysis report on
substantive issues.
There's a portion here that says
the added labor costs could
reduce the effectiveness of the
IRBs as developed as.
A development tool. If RB is no
longer provide a strong
financial incentive, fewer
companies may choose to invest
in New Mexico, leading to fewer
projects, jobs, and economic
opportunities.
What
If, if we're having
If if we have less people
wanting to invest in
Um
In these revenue bonds.
And that could really affect
our, our small our small
communities or small counties,
um, well, even, even our large
large counties.
Uh, if, if, uh, if this affects
the the person that's wanting to
invest their money and, and put
money into our revenue box.
The real detriment to some of
these very important projects
that we have throughout the
state.
Um, now, also, can you answer
What does the Davis Bacon Act
come into effect with IRBs.
Madam chair, uh, Mr. Cronit
could answer that.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Ramos.
The Federal Davis bacon wage
rate and
does not apply to to local IRB
projects with or without this
bill. OK, OK, so that's the
federal piece we have a state
version we call it the public
works minimum wage. OK, just,
uh, just a quick question
because I didn't know how that
works, so thank you for
answering that for me.
Um
Well, I don't have any other
comments, but uh thank you, Ma.
Thank you, Senator Ramos. Any
other questions from the
Kennedy, Senator away. I will do
pass. Thank you.
But we, before you get, all
right, so we do have a due pass
from Senator Worth. We have a
second from Senator Jaramillo.
Anybody in opposition of that do
pass?
All right, let's go ahead and
take the roll.
Senator Figueroa.
Yes.
Senator had a meal. Senator
O'Malley.
Senator Paul, Senator Ramos no
Senator Sanchez. Senator Sher.
No. Senator Worth. Yes. Senator
Bergman's, yes.
Senator Hamlin. See, we have 6
yeses and 6 to 4. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Um,
so, uh, I've, I've checked with,
uh, Senators Nava and uh Brandt,
and they are being very
courteous to allow Senator Azel
to come back, um, I have a
feeling it's because Mayor
Jennings is uh is uh hitching a
ride back to Roswell and really
wants to try and get this done
today.
So if you see him on the side of
the road, please pick him up.
He's actually a very nice man.
Not intimidating at all. They'll
provide good conversation. So,
um, committee this
Uh, they wanted to bring this
back because, um, through
working with uh with Izzy, um,
we might have a solution to this
bill. Um, I would like to remind
the committee that this does go
to Senate Finance after this,
we truly appreciate y'all
allowing us to come back. We
have visited with
Izzy, and we have also talked to
the city attorney regarding
this, and we have come up with
this amendment, Madam Chair, and
what this amendment does say
it's very simple, it's exactly
what everybody agreed to. I
proposed the Senate tax Business
and Transportation Committee the
following amendments to Senators
I'm gonna have you speak slowly
because Rebecca is gonna be OK,
logging that, so, um, so we want
to make sure and uh Senator
Figueroa, before we go to that,
Ma chair, I just wanna confirm
that we accepted the prior
amendment. I don't remember that
we did not because that
striking.
Completely defeated the bill
with what they're trying to do,
so we did not accept the
amendment. So this will be the
First Amendment on this. So I'm
sorry, go ahead and go senator.
The following amendments to
Senate Bill 383.
On page 9.
Line 17 strike through.
Can uh.
I can't read my own writing. I
apologize for that through page
10 line 19, strike section 4 in
its entirety and Section 5 in
its entirety. So it's page 9,
starting on line 17.
totally through section 4
continuing on to page 10.
Through line 19.
Which strikes all of section 4
and section 5 in their
entireties.
And remember the remaining two
sections accordingly.
OK, any comments or questions on
the amendments, and we also need
to fix the title, uh, line 15,
we need to strike starting with
providing
sorry Senator Worth, can you,
can you on the title we're going
to the one line 15.
Uh, the middle of that after the
semicolon strike, providing a
governmental growth, and then
strikes line 1617, 1819 and 20
up to the colon, so it's
Basically still declares an
emergency, but we take that
piece out of the title.
Is that clear? Do you need
senator to repeat it? No, ma'am.
It's something that we just
totally
OK, Senator Bergmans is gonna
scoot over and
And help just in case we want to
make sure that we get this right
for you.
Sure.
And ma'am sure
I also think we don't need
section 6.
Which is the effective data
provisions of that the first day
of the month following the date
the act takes effect.
It's an emergency clause, so
whenever you do the bonding, I
think that provision was in
there for the GRT piece. I mean,
I think also.
I would suggest you add striking
section 6 as well, and renumber
accordingly, so section 7 will
become the new section 4.
So.
You have that, Rebecca? Do you
need it repeated in case Rebecca
has that?
Is that considered a friendly
amendment, Senator? Yes, ma'am,
it is.
Given that you're like, yeah,
yeah.
Yes, ma'am. Any other comments
on the amendment?
Everybody would like to move the
amendment.
So anybody in opposition?
See you then. You've got an
amended amended bill, so at this
point.
I would like to go back on the
bill though now it's amended
because I do have a question.
Go ahead, Madam Sherry and
Senator, is there a reason that
we need to limit this to Class B
counties.
Why wouldn't any county that has
a flood, Santa Fe County has a
massive flood, we should be able
to do a bond, tax our own folks,
give the local government the
option to do that. I, I realized
why it was sensitive when it was
a, when it was the GRT.
But I guess, is there any reason
not to fix that as well.
No, I don't.
Excuse me,
it was uh
The way when I was working with
the drafting, it was suggested
that
They might think is where the
way we did it was as easy so it
just applied to Roswell, but,
uh, you know, the, uh, I
If they do the same thing in
another county, uh, Las Vegas, I
mean, we all have huge flood
issues and uh from, from all the
fires and then the
We just had the flood though.
But I don't think it makes any
difference. I think you can take
that out, but what I see, Mr.
uh, uh, floor leader and, and is
that this is really actually
setting a precedent for other
committees communities, so they
don't have to come back and do
the same thing you're doing.
If, uh, if that's where I'm
seeing that you're going
senator. Yes, I'm not sure. I
think any, I mean, again, you're
just giving the local government
the option in this disaster.
You're right. So, so, you know,
why, and, and again, was it
really intended was the on page
not, let me just go to the
section 3, page 9, line 10.
subparagraph D, which is the
eligible municipality. Was that
really was the definition there,
I mean, it's a class B county.
And then I think you were trying
to narrow me because I think we
have 26 Class B counties. So is
this, but this was done by the
census. They do that by the, the
last population count and to
strictly applies to, should
strictly apply to Chastown.
So, uh, again, I'm gonna suggest
an amendment here, um, on page
9.
Basically strike.
Section D from line 10 to line
16.
Part one of it.
And then on page 8, 18.
strike the word eligible.
I do see a frown on Senator
Azel's face, there might need to
be some explanation. You're
good.
As
you're gonna strike eligible
and municipality.
Ma, I'm sure, I'm happy that my
grammar corrected. So it needs,
we need to strike and eligible.
And and then replace the and
with an A, right? A
municipality.
Yes
Mhm
I think
this
Excuse me, are you, are you
taking out on
Do we need to have the part in
there about being a federal
Disaster. I mean, I, then you
took that out too.
Or not, show me where you are.
Well, on the page.
If you
Madam Chair and Senator Worth,
if you're taking out all of
Section D that does cover the
federal.
Decoration
yes.
So I believe
The only thing in section D,
I'll just read it for the
purpose of the section, eligible
municipality means a
municipality that has a
population greater than 45,000
according to the most recent
Federal decennial census, and
that is located in the Class B
County, having a net taxable
value for rates setting for the
2023 property tax year or any
subsequent year of more than a
billion, so I think it was only
designed to get to Roswell,
which would mean all of Senator
Armio's counties's wouldn't
cover and this would open it up.
I think we're OK on that.
That's funny.
OK.
That is a friendly amendment.
I don't think you're finished,
are you? Let's take a vote, and
then I'm gonna make a
suggestion. All right, let's
take a vote on this amendment
Is there any um any opposition
to this amendment, and Senator
Word's suggestions.
See none, let's go ahead and
show all in attendance and
support, Senator Worth. So I
have another suggestion to clean
this up, that that'll get it out
of here. What we do in the
judiciary Committee was
something like this is basically
roll it into a sub, so we clean
it up, we'll vote it now, and
it'll come out clean so you
don't have all these amendments
that will confuse everyone. So,
Madam Chair, I'm ready. I make
that I do not pass on Senate
Bill 383, but I do pass on
Senate.
Tax, business, transportation
committee sub2% Bill 383, which
will reflect all the amendments
that were made.
Right, do we see any opposition
to that?
see none. Let's go ahead and
have all in all in the, in
attendance and support.
And just one final thing. I, uh,
this other issue of the, of the
GRT in a situation like this is
something I think we really
need. Uh, it's worth thinking
about. I mean, Senator Harvey
and I were talking about the
fires. I mean, there's, should
the state be making money off of
catastrophe thing. And I think
it's, it's, that's where you
were going. I think it's
something we need to think
through, but trying to do it on
the fly. I just think it's Madam
Chair and Senator Worth is the
community being able to help the
community.
and I think it's a good thing.
It's not a burden on the state
that way.
No
If I might just point out, I
know, dealing with FEMA, they've
been real good to work with, but
it really is a problem if on
having to have the cash up front
and we didn't get a
And by saying we'll give you 100
yet. I don't know, but OK, I'm
gonna wrap you up because we've
pretty much just passed your
your bill. Thank you because
this is gonna impact a lot of
other people I truly appreciate
the committee allowing us to
come back. Thank you so much.
Thank you. Congratulations. So
now we are moving on to Senate
Bill 364. Thank you very much
for your patience. I don't know,
it might be some, some, some
crabby fella in the back.
Senator Brant feels like he's
all home here in the Senate tax
business and transportation
Committee
You.
Right, so we're on Senate Bill
364. Um, this bill does go to
Senate Judiciary after this
committee. So Senator Nava and
Senator Brant, um, just as a
reminder, uh, you have 10
minutes to present your bill,
uh, then we will go to public
testimony and you'll have 5
minutes to respond to public
testimony, and then we will go
to the committee.
So whenever you're ready to
start.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. Um, we
are thrilled to be here with you
today to present Senate Bill
364. This is a bipartisan
effort, uh, primarily
co-sponsored by myself, Speaker
Martinez, Senator Brent, uh,
Senator Padilla, and Senator
Cervantes, uh, along with 16
other members, um, and
essentially this bill, Madam
Chair and committee members.
This bill recognizes that our
immigrant family members,
neighbors and friends are an
integral.
va lu able part of our community
and our workforce.
It does so by removing outdated
restrictions in state law and
allows immigrants with federal
work authorization to be police
officers, sheriff's deputies in
our states.
We're going to talk a lot about
this, uh, and why this is a
critical and important uh piece
of legislation to implement at
the state level, but I need to
tell you how this all started
and why I deeply believe that
this could be a real fix um in
our state. It won't solve all
the issues that we have with
crime and addressing uh the
turnover, um, of recruiting and
retaining police officers, but
I'll tell you that this started,
uh, with my brother, uh, my
brother and I along with my
siblings.
We came to this country as
children in 1996. My brother
always wanted to serve in the
military or as a police officer
and uh Eric, my brother, I went
through ROTC in high school,
ROTC at UNM, but there was no
pathway into being able to
serve, not in the military and
not as a police officer and all
he wanted to do was serve the
community that has given him so
much. And under current law,
only US citizens can be law
enforcement officers in New
Mexico.
Sadly, my brother left to
Chicago and I actually found a
police department that
recognized the value that he
could bring into this vital
public service. My brother was
now admitted into the Blue
Island Police Department located
in Illinois 16 miles away from
Chicago South Loop. He wanted to
be there. Well, he wanted to be
here, uh, really to share his
story, but.
Certainly, as you all may may
know, he was not going to be
allowed to exit now that he is
in the academy, even if his
sister requested it. So
unfortunately, couldn't have him
on the screen with us, uh, but
essentially 364 expands
eligibility for law enforcement
work to individuals who have
received work authorization from
the United States Citizenship
and Immigration Service. That
means legal permanent residents
and also DA recipients like my
brother.
They would still meet, need to
meet all the standards and
qualifications to be an officer,
standards based on their
education, experience, and
character, not their immigration
status. That would open the door
to more than 51,000 more New
Mexicans who would now be
eligible to apply for law
enforcement work. These are
individuals who are desperately
in need by police departments
across the state. And Madam
Chair and committee members,
public safety starts with having
police officers in our
communities available to help.
and respond to the needs of our
residents. The Albuquerque
Police Department said recently
that it has 885 police officers
and has a budget for 1200. Every
police department and sheriff's
office in the state and
nationally has a similar
challenge.
My brother could have filled one
of those roles.
But instead, he's doing it in
the state of Illinois.
I hope that we stay with that we
take steps steps towards fixing
that today.
And with that, Madam Chair, I
would be delighted to pass it
over to my co-sponsors, Senator
Brent.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, you
know, I was uh really uh excited
when.
I almost said, sorry, uh,
Senator Naba, uh, asked me to uh
be a co-sponsor on this bill. I
think it's very important, you
know, I've done a lot of work
trying to to help our law
enforcement community in any way
we can. These are people who are
here legally allowed to work,
um, and so what we're doing is
taking away a barrier to people
who actually want to serve in
our community, and allows them
to go to the law enforcement
academy and to become uh
You know, once they pass, if
they get through everything,
then they can become police
officers on our streets, they
could become state police
officers, and one thing we know
that we need.
more police officers, not enough
people are willing to do that
job anymore. And so this is just
one way again of helping fill
our ranks, uh, in the police
force. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Brant.
And I believe, um, if you'd like
your expert to go ahead and
speak. Uh, Madam Chair, I'd like
to introduce my experts, if you
don't mind, um, joining us at
the table is Jessica Martinez.
She's the director of policy and
coalition building at the New
Mexico Immigrant Law Center.
She's a legal expert with deep
well knowledge on immigration
and work on authorization
process. And also joining us on
Zoom, I believe, hopefully he is
on there now is Chief Jeffrey
Farr, who serves as Blue
Island's chief of police in
Illinois.
She for, uh, has a master's
degree in.
justice and has worked closely
with the US Department of
Justice and has been a powerful
champion allowing DACA
recipients to serve in their
community as police officers.
OK, I believe we do have cheap
bar online.
That's the only person that
seems to be online at the
moment.
Oh, OK. Um, so, uh, you know,
what I would recommend is if we
go to public comment, um, and
then your experts can go ahead
and speak if there are
questions. Uh, so, just by a
show of hands, how many in the
audience are in support of this
legislation?
10. Thank you. And we have
Rosalinda online. How about just
for time's sake, I'm gonna go
ahead and have 5 people. I don't
know if Senator Novi Senator
Brandt, you want to have
particular people or, uh, but
we're gonna do 5 at 1 minute
apiece.
Is there any opposition in this
audience for this bill, just by
a show of hands.
Seeing none. Nobody had
opposition on online. Thank you.
It's all right, that's what
we're gonna have, nobody else.
So if you will, you've got one
minute, you're gonna get a 32nd.
If you can make it 30 seconds,
I'm gonna stand up and do a jig
for you at some other point
I'm doing that on, on behalf of
the committee because, you know,
as you know, we've been here for
a while, so, so if you will,
please go ahead. Madam Chair,
members of the Senate, uh, first
of all, it's an honor to be
here. My name is Luis Hernandez.
I am a retired sergeant from the
Albuquerque Police Department
and detective.
also retired from the United
States Air Force and prior to
the United States Air Force, I
also served in the US Army.
Um, my life here in the United
States began as a resident uh
immigrant, um.
I was a prominent resident of
the United States.
Upon graduating high school, I
joined the United States Army
where I served in multiple
deployments. My first deployment
was to Korea.
I returned to the United States
and served in Fort Hood.
And return back to Korea and
then deployed to Bosnia and
Kosovo.
All those, uh, where is, uh, a
permanent resident and uh during
the the entire deployment, uh, I
served all all my brothers and
sisters with no difference
whatsoever. I was, uh,
Ready to live my life for one of
them just as they were for me.
And later on, uh, when I
finished my active duty service,
I joined the Albuquerque Police
Department where I served for
23.5 years.
So I can tell you that it's uh
very needy that we have more
applicants that are eligible to
apply for police positions. Uh,
it's heartbreaking for me to see
my daughter er in the
Albuquerque Police Department
and sometimes go on shift being
the only officer on ship.
Or one of two.
Uh, yes, there's 800 and
something officers in the
Albuquerque Police department,
but I promise you I do need you
to wrap it up if you will, so
you upstairs, not in uniform,
not patrolling.
So definitely those numbers need
to be um
Boost it up. Thank you for your
time. Appreciate it.
Hello, Madam Chair, members of
the committee. My name is
Marcera Diaz. I'm with
Somosaion. We're a statewide
immigrant-based worker justice
organization, organizing an
eight counties, most rural, uh,
New Mexico has one of the lowest
workforce participation rates in
the country with worker
shortages and many high demand
industries, including emergency
services and public safety
services and law enforcement.
We've been working very hard to
identify what some of the
barriers are, social and
structural to immigrants in our
community.
accessing better jobs, workforce
development opportunities. In
2005, this body allowed young
New Mexicans, also known as
Dreamers, the Opportunity to
continue their education at
public colleges and
universities, providing them
with in-state tuition and
financial aid, and that was an
investment that paid off. Many
of those students were able to
obtain DACA status or other
forms of legal status and are
now working in crucial sectors
such as healthcare, education,
and social work. It
Only makes sense to continue in
this tradition to address the
statutory and unfair exclusions
so that immigrant workers who
are ready and willing to serve
our state and communities in all
these different capacities can,
and they will. So that's why we
urge you to support House Bill
364 and Ar Du Pass. Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. These are doing good
jobs. We have very fine folks
you say your name for the
recordsaneda senior policy
advisor with the Office of the
Americans at the Department of
work for Solutions. These law
enforcement jobs are very fine
jobs. We have very fine
immigrants in our community who
want to do this and want to
serve, addressing the shortage
without allowing these work
authorized individuals to be
part of our law enforcement is
frankly trying to do something
with our one arm tied behind our
back and this is a great way to
recognize the contribution.
And the fact that they are here
and they want to serve, and I
will take my jig off here. Thank
you. Thank you so much.
Oh, you're at 2947
You are determined. Thank you so
much. Go ahead, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, my
name is Jack Tadres. I'm here as
mayor of the town of Bernalillo
and also serve as vice president
of New Mexico Municipal League.
There's a rare community across
our state that's fully staffed
in their police department,
including our own, despite our
best efforts.
this just makes sense to us in
terms of expanding the pool, um,
our standards certainly will not
change. The other challenge we
certainly have is lateral
officers going to bigger
departments that offer more and
more and more money. We need
help, and this would certainly
be a big help to us. Hope you
support it.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Clarence
Romero. I'm the chief of police
at New Mexico Highlands
University.
I've been a police officer for
40 years. My career started in
Questa, New Mexico, Las Vegas
Police Department and now at
Highlands. We have a
Tremendous hard time finding
officers for rural areas and
smaller communities, because the
money's just not there for them
to survive and live, so we need
that type of support. Um, I'm,
I'm in support of this, and
I supported this. Thank you.
Thank you so much. We're gonna
go ahead and go to Rosalinda
Dorado online. Rosalinda, you
have one minute, you'll see a
32nd warning in the chat box, go
ahead.
Thank you. Good afternoon,
President and members of the
committee. My name is
Rosalindarado. I'm with El
Centro Poderi Accion El Centro
de Val derechos where an
immigrant rights, uh,
organization based in
Albuquerque with over 5500
members. Uh, today we are here
in support of SB 364. This
amendment for uh to change the
qualifications for law
enforcement officers to include
individual uh authorized to work
in the US citizenship and
Immigration Services would
strengthen.
our workforce for fostering a
more inclusive, diverse, and uh
opening up the qualification of
pool of candidates addressing a
critical need for diversity in
our police force to better
reflect the service of our
communities, and, uh, it would
also open a pool for our
communities to see their own
communities serving as police
and growing that trust. So we
thank the sponsors for bringing
this bill forward, and we hope
we have everyone's.
support in this committee. Thank
you.
Thank you so much.
So, uh, Senator I was seeing
that there's no opposition in
this room. You have an
opportunity if you'd like to go
ahead and go to uh respond to
public comment or if you want,
just go to the committee.
Happy to yield to the committee.
All right, thank you very much.
Any questions or comments from
the committee
Senator.
Would you pass. We have a
second, but uh if we have
questions first and then we'll
keep that in mind. Senator Sher,
I'm gonna have you go first and
then Senator Ramos. Um.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
So,
Once upon a time, I was an army
recruiter. I was an officer in
charge of a bunch of Army
recruiters actually.
And so I was surprised when you
said your, your brother, sorry.
Good.
And uh so ROTC, so yes,
officers, officers because of
security clearances have to be
US citizens, but not everybody
else, uh, to be a citizen, uh to
be a soldier.
Uh, you have to have, you have
to be here legally.
Um, and you have to speak
English.
You have to have a GED, but
that's everybody, or higher.
That's everybody.
So
So I was confused by that, but
then I got around to listening
to all to all of the police
officers saying, hey, there's
not enough police officers.
And so I don't, you know,
obviously I, I put soldiers in
the army. Uh, I served with an
Iranian who actually was one of
the Shah's bodyguards, so that
was a long time ago. He was
older than me.
totally just dated yourself,
yes, I know.
Um
And he didn't speak English very
well.
Uh, I served with a guy from
Micronesia.
None of us could understand him.
But apparently he's passed the
English test somewhere along the
way. I just couldn't understand
it. No one else in the unit can
understand.
But he was a great soldier.
So
After listening to this, I think
that I'm OK with it. At first, I
was leery.
But I think at this point,
Um, not because of brand, brand,
it would have been absolute no,
but
But now I'm on board. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Sher, Senator
Ross, Madam Chair, similar to
what uh senator was just
stating, you know, when I was in
the military.
I, I was proud to serve and I
served with some great soldiers.
I was an enliste.
I worked for a living other than
Senator Sheriff.
Um
But, uh, I, I had the privilege
to serve with
immigrants that we never even
knew were immigrants.
Because we respected each other
and we worked so hard to
accomplish our mission.
The only thing that I've been
looking through is on this if,
if IR.
Is the federal restrictions on
firearm possession and
employment eligibility.
How is this gonna be taken care
of because I really want to vote
for this bill.
Medicare and Senator, thank you
for your question. Um, this will
not, uh, the, essentially the
answer to your question is it
won't have an impact that the
people who have lawful permanent
status are allowed to carry a
firearm, and there's also
exceptions from other statutes
that say, says that they firearm
is issued by a state or local
law enforcement office, it would
not be illegal for an immigrant
to possess the firearm.
A madam chair, so this is the
gun Control Act of 1968 limits
firearm possession by
non-citizens unless they meet
specific criteria. So this is
the criteria you're talking
about. OK, no further questions,
manager. Thank you, Madam Chair,
if I may also defer to our
expert in Illinois, just on the
same question, if you wouldn't
mind.
Uh, Chief, if you don't mind,
um, going ahead and responding
to that question as well.
You can go ahead and unmute
yourself.
Can you hear me? Yes, we can.
I'm sorry, can you hear me? Yes,
we, great, uh.
Uh, Jeffrey fire, chief of
police of Blue Island, we, um,
also encountered a similar um
hurdle, uh, in the infancy
stages of, of our process, um,
the Illinois Foid Cart Act, uh,
specifically states that the
possession, um, ownership.
Um, uh, firearms or ammunition
does not apply to individuals
who are engaged in their
official capacities as police
officers. So the Blue Island
police department purchased a
firearm, purchased the
ammunition.
Uh, we issue them to the
officers, uh, before shift, um,
they, they get them out of the
uh secured, um, arsenal, uh, and
after shift it is collected and
placed back into the secured
arsenal. So they never leave to
go home with a firearm that is
owned by the police department.
And I think the key is that that
you have to be a citizen to
purchase one.
You need to be a citizen to
purchase one, yes, but
You need to be a citizen to
purchase one, yes,
they can issue them kind of like
we were done in the military,
right? They just showed it to us
when we're on shift, we turned
it back in at the end of our
shift. That's what I did every
day in the military.
Yes sir, that's what we do. All
right. Thank you, Chief.
Yes sir.
All right, so we're gonna have a
fight here on the day of some
who gets a second the motion.
I'm, I'm fine with that. Senator
Bergkman says happy to, to go
ahead and do that. I'm, I'm
sorry?
Right? OK. All right. Is there
any, anybody in opposition of
the DuPass motion?
Senator Wirth, did you want to
say something?
Go ahead. All right, so showing
all in uh in attendance and
support, uh, at 100. Senator
Worth wants to explain his vote.
I know we're going to judiciary,
and I thought that the question
becomes, do we need to have the
same language they have in
Illinois.
Madam Chair, uh, Senator.
We do not have the Foy card Act
in New Mexico.
OK, so I just wanna make sure,
yeah, that.
That's cause I'm sure this, this
issue is gonna come up, so just
suggest you visit with
Laragote, Chief of Staff and
judiciary beforehand and kind of
walk through this, that'll save
us a bunch of Senator Paul, a
bunch of time uh in that
committee. Thanks, Madam. You
mean y'all don't like spending
hours and hours in judiciary. We
love it. I know you do.
Uh, any other explaining the
vote and Senator O'Malley on
Judiciary that's right. All
right, congratulations, 00.
Thank you, Senator Sher, last
but not least
there it, so we do have a
committee sub for this. Am I
correct? Yes. All right. So
Susan's passing out the
committee sub.
Uh.
Um
All right, so Senator Sheriff,
we do have a committee sub if
you want to go ahead, um, I'm
going to go and ask somebody can
move the committee sub for
discussion.
All right, we got language
though to do that.
so let him pass for 168 and I do
pass. Senate Tax, Business and
Transportation Committee
substitute for 60% bill 168. All
right, so you get a committee
sub and you get a committee sub.
Thank you very much for
discussion for discussion. Thank
you. Go ahead, Senator Sheriff.
So the reason that this
committee sub is relatively new
to you, is because the words on
the very top of the page that
say,
Senate Tax, Business and
Transportation Committee
substitute.
Yesterday, said Senate Health
and Public Affairs Committee
substitute. So that's the
difference.
So
What this does is this is a uh
this is a model bill from the
National Association of
Insurance Commissioners, and it
has to do with travel insurance
and travel insurance is
Fairly important when you're
traveling, uh, across multiple
jurisdictions, and so this is
trying to bring everybody into
the same kind of efforts and so
forth.
Um, so this particular model has
already been adopted by 37
states. Of course, this one had
to be converted into New
Mexican, uh, we tried to look at
one from uh Louisiana, but none
of us could read Cajun, so we
couldn't get into the US Army.
Um, anyway, so this, this is
what this one really does. And I
have my expert witness here, uh,
Elizabeth Johnson, and she's
actually from the office of uh
Superintendent of insurance, and
so she can answer all the
technical questions.
Do you want to go ahead and say
anything or do you wanna just go
ahead and go to public comment.
Excuse me, Madam Chair, I'd be
happy to answer questions if
there are any, um, but I will
say that um after we
Organize the committee
substitute the issues raised by
OSI and our agency analysis are
no longer issues.
All right. Thank you so much.
So, uh, by the large crowd
that's in the room, um, just by
show of hands, is there anybody
in support of this bill.
Scotty, are you serious? You're
in support of it? OK.
You, you can only, you can only
speak once. We can't do, yeah.
Uh, anybody in the room in
opposition of this bill.
We have anybody online?
We're all alone.
That's what happens here in
Texas. All right, Scotty, do you
want to go ahead and get up and
speak for a minute?
I promise I'll be brief. Scott
Scan registered lobbyist in the
Mexico government affairs on
behalf of the Travel Insurance
Association and, and really more
than anything, I, I just want to
do a shout out to Elizabeth
here. Uh, this has been a 7 or 8
month process and uh it's really
come together in the last
5 days or so, and it's, it's due
to her and it's because of the
superintendent and so we are
very grateful for the OSI for
all their participation. Thank
you for Senator Sheer to see
too, has been through this for
the last 8 months, but this
bill's been passed in 37 states,
um, it's a consumer protection
bill. We urge your support.
Thank you. Thank you so much.
Uh, senator, you can either
respond to Scott's favorable uh
review of your bill or we can
just go ahead and go to the
committee.
All right, let's go to the
committee. Any questions or
comments from the committee?
Senator Worth, thank you, man.
So can you just explain what, so
it looks like we took out the
premium tax section 5.
In the sub, is that correct?
Madam Chair and Leor. We didn't.
take out the premium tax. We
took out the reference to it
because upon my review, it
applied without that section
being in the bill, so that's
what happened there. Perfect.
And I, and I appreciate.
Again, this bill's not going to
judiciary, and I saw the unfair
trade practices in the original
and the way it was done I was
looking at it, trying to figure
out.
We were adding a new unfair
trade practices section, and so
I see in the sub, you've laid it
all out, and it looks like
there's a whole bunch of
existing language that are
unfair trade practices. I just
want a flag, and I'm gonna
suggest Senator share that you
take a little visit down to
Senator Cervantes, and just
explain, we're just adding two
additional
provisions that are gonna
trigger the unfair trade
practices if I'm reading this
right.
Mountain chair and leader worth,
um, and you're actually raising
an interesting point. The
initial bill referred to unfair
trade practices that actually
wasn't an appropriate reference.
It's actually an unfair claims
practice under the insurance
code, so we felt that the sub
should bring it into that
statute and add a couple of
additional practices and then
there's, I believe it's section
6 are things that the model
language discusses should never
be considered unfair trade
practices and.
we labeled that section
permissible practices.
So after I, I, I didn't even
catch that it was unfair claims,
so that's actually much better,
because again, if we were
messing around with the, there's
been a real push in the
judiciary Committee not to put
language all throughout the
statutes about what constitutes
unfair trade practices. We have
the statute, it should be in
that statute, not in every
statute, but that is helpful to
me. So that's those are the
questions I had. Thank you, man.
Thank you, Senator Wirth. Any
other questions or comments from
the committee.
See there's a benefit to going
last senator, Senator Ramos
do pass. Do we have a second?
Taking from Senator Sanchez. Is
anybody in opposition of the DuP
Pas motion.
Senator O'Malley is just done.
You can see it on her face.
She's gonna be my gauge on how
far we've gone in the committee.
If there is no opposition, if
you will, please show all in
attendance and support.
OK
You have 10 to 0.
Thank you.
Congratulations.
So committee just to uh give you
a heads up to prepare.
Saturday we have quite a bit on
our plate, but we will be
meeting at 9, the floor, I
believe, may start at one, so we
will have 4 hours. Um, we have,
uh, paid family medical leave as
part of that discussion. So we
are gonna have a couple of
several bills beforehand, some
that have been rolled, um, so
we, uh, this committee has
always been ambitious and, and,
uh, stepped up to the challenge
and so I look forward to that on
Saturday. We will have breakfast
provided, um, and I know that
you need.
gluten-free options, so I'll let
them know. And uh thank you all
very much for your cooperation
and collaboration, Senator fat
free and sugar free want fat
free. That's no fun.
Chiron. All right, we are
adjourned. Thank you, everybody.
That's not I throw that in
there. Oh, everybody, it isn't
311 on Saturday morning, 3:11.
OK.
I
Yes.
Yeah, well when I
wanna do.
And they can't have a
Well, that's what I thought and
it said it, it said it there in
the blue I mean in the.
