There Senator Hamblen here
Senator Shendo there we have six
present for a quorum Grace
already will go ahead and the
start of the Senator okay is
Senate bill three forty five.
Good to see how it is.
It was thank you very much Mr
chairman members of the
committee Senate Bill three
forty five would transfer
management of the existing can
consider whether a senior at
dignity fund from the office of
the state treasurer to the state
investment council for long term
investments.
This would you direct that
microphone.
And for your expert you've got
that that hand held my okay
thank you thank you very much I
really appreciate that there are
some of that
so so in essence again Mr chair
members of the committee Senate
bill three forty five I would
transfer management of the
existing Kiki servicing your
dignity fund from the office of
state treasurer to the state
investment council for long term
investment it is so if I may
just and Revenue Mr chair
members of the committee genesis
what we can to do is to seek the
resources for the long term
recurring
support if you will for a very
valid seniors the but I always
refer to him as the young people
at heart as we move forward with
this that in essence is what
this would do but if I can Mr
chair I defer to my expert
witness you identify yourself
and then chill also make a
statement that were available
for questions.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Katrina
how can Lopez in the cabinet
secretary for aging and long
term services back in two
thousand nineteen the case of a
trick dignity trust was
established that then I think we
got around six point two to six
point five million dollars to
invest and really the purpose of
this is to start and recruit
reinvigorate the the aging
system from community based
programs all the way through
long term care we have been
working with
the legislative finance
committee who wants to wanted to
put more money into this fund
but wanted to do so with taking
the money making it investable
and so we can we could
potentially sort of skin sort
some profits off of their make
the money last a little bit
longer and so we're excited
about this we appreciate being
here and and and you know the
speaker today because our
seniors are struggling we've got
the majority of them we only
have about eighteen percent to
qualify for Medicaid and so when
we talk about all these robust
Medicaid services that we want
to leverage with our population
sixty five and older sixty and
older they don't get that
because they qualify for
Medicare which does not provide
a lot of the services that we in
the end that we talk about terms
of case management all day a lot
of these these things is so this
helps to supplement that this
also helps to make sure ensure
up by because by twenty thirty
we're gonna have the fourth
highest population in the
country have seniors in New
Mexico per capita and so we've
got to really be planning and
implementing these things now
and and and make sure that we we
invest for future for senior so
thank you thank you Mr chair.
That Senator.
That's it for now thank you very
much thank you it is time will
go to the audience and but
here's support of Senate bill
three forty five.
Start here if you get up in the
introduce yourself in the.
The hold button when you talk.
Here anyway yeah just because.
Yeah that's right all right hi.
Hi am committee and Mr chair I'm
my name's Lisa read I am the
project manager for primary care
the office of the secretary for
Human Services Department and
I'm Rick very excited to be here
today to support my colleague
the LCS do the great work
they're doing for seniors and I
just want to say that creating
this as an endowment would allow
a L. T. S. T. to expand upon its
existing services for adults
with disabilities and seniors
throughout the state and develop
innovative programs to fulfill
those needs set forth in the
statute so
I request that you please do
pass this bill thank you.
Okay
anybody on them.
One.
But.
We do have wondering okay go
ahead.
One minute.
Mr chair members of the
committee can you hear me yes.
Thank you my name is Cameron
Graham I'm a volunteer advocate
for they are the New Mexico A.
R. P. New Mexico support stands
in support of Senate bill three
forty five and we thank the
sponsors for bringing the bill
for thank you thank you.
Right this time will go out to
the audience anybody in
opposition of Senate bill three
forty five.
I
see none.
Senator Arbil Mr chairman of
questions just a stab in support
of this bill the cabinet
secretary comes to Rio Arriba
county to meet with seniors in
our area to see what the needs
are and so the range from
any from those have mobility
issues who need drugs
transportation and we hear a lot
from grandparents retired
raising grandchildren and I
about to the senior the very but
tell me that I would do what I
can to ensure that there is
funding for any type of
legislation that would benefit
them this is one of those bills
that I want to thank both the
sponsor Senator Campos and
cabinet secretary for bringing
this bill forward thank you for
thinking of our seniors it's
vital that we ensure that we
take care and invest in the
thank you Mr chairman.
You.
But the other question whether
all the too fast there is no
other questions we have a due
pass motion from a Senator
Hermio second second by Senator
Hamblen.
Any opposition to that do pass
motion.
I see none we have a due pass
nine two zero.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
members of the committee thank
you
Senate bill fifty one.
Good afternoon Mr chair members
of the committee we have do you
want to sit here.
we have today a committee so few
for Senate bill fifty one.
And I did to have it delivered
to your secretary and your staff
last week and we appreciate that
Legislative Council was very
timely on this today on the
floor I did pass out the
committee substitute and to
pieces of information that might
help explain though if you some
of the terms that we have in
this bill so do you want me to
explain the committee substitute
or you want to do the do not
pass things first that's that
first okay.
I'll do that okay good because
there's a gentleman I move a do
not pass.
One and a two passed
the committee substitute for
Senate bill fifty four for
discussion purposes.
Thank you all right we all.
All right the opposition to that
motion see none.
Thank you Mr chair members the
bill amendments to changes to
Senate bill fifty one the bill
amendments include the following
language from Senate bill
fourteen which you heard the
other day so we have taken
Senate bill fifty one which is
basically about banning copay
accumulators and cut up Senate
bill fourteen to make it Senate
bill fourteen smaller and to put
some of that into this bill we
now have in this bill a
prohibition on charging higher
cost sharing for drugs obtained
from a non affiliated pharmacy
this is one of the topics that
came up when we discussed
pharmaceutical drugs at small
independent or large independent
pharmacies the other day.
There's a prohibition on
charging higher cost sharing for
drugs at different infusion
sites requires insurers to pass
to the rebate amount to fund an
individual drug at the point of
sale any amount of the rebate
that is more than the cost of
the drug goes back to the
insurer.
Prohibits insurers from
implementing a copay accumulator
or maximize your program this
plan here.
The copay accumulator
prohibition keeps the language
prohibiting insurers from
refusing to credit payments by
third parties for prescription
drugs at the time of sale which
other co pay accumulators and
maximize our state this bill
only applies to state regulated
plans which include fully
insured plans on the commercial
market and public employee
plans.
There was some question about
the risks of preemption after
the hearing on the last bill we
heard industry concerns about a
research and amended the bill to
remove any language impacting
health plan benefit design to
put that language into this
which deals with the
prescription drug drug cost
sharing Senate bill fifty one
only applies to state regulated
plans which include fully
insured plans on the commercial
market and as we were discussing
in the past the commercial
market is a very small piece of
our state when you consider
Medicaid Medicare and the result
today I have several experts
with me I have paged you Hommel
from the office of the
superintendent of insurance on
my right my left immediate left
I have Dr Barbara magnate from
the New Mexico cancer center and
also need to diplomacy from who
is the health policy adviser for
the governor and I'd like Dr
mechanisms to start with a few
comments and then Mr Han.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee hello again
As when we talked last time
about the parts that were there
to protect patients from Mexico
Hey maximizes copay accumulators
and all of the various other
things that pharmacy benefit
managers isn't entirely
unregulated industry have done
for the last five years or so to
really maximize their own
profits at the expense of small
New Mexico business I'd like to
comment today as a business
owner New Mexico cancer center
has two hundred and thirty eight
employees we work in Albuquerque
and Gallup and as all small
business people know my major
expenses purchasing health
insurance for my employee.
And one of the things that has
occurred for every small
business owner is that health
insurance has increased by
double digits many years for the
last five years.
Researching this looking at
published literature studies
from Milliman studies from
Kaiser family friends and other
what we found is that the drug
list prices have not increased
more than a few percent over the
last five years or so but what
has increased a hundred and four
thousand percent is the mark of
that is added to by pharmacy
benefit managers as a middle man
who get hold of the drug after
Lisa manufactured and basically
double the price my original
interest was because I was
watching my patients going broke
and health care is a
contributing factor in.
Representative but as I've been
working with a local employer
group what I found is that it is
also severely impacting the
ability of employers to purchase
insurance for their employees
now we purchased this insurance
because we want our employees to
come to work and be able to work
and in order to do that they not
only have to be able to find a
physician but they have to be
able to afford the prescriptions
that keep them healthy.
So what happens when the market
consolidates the way the
pharmacy benefit manager market
has consolidated where seventy
percent five percent of
prescriptions in this country
are managed by three PBMs and if
you have the top six is ninety
five percent a highly
consolidated market particularly
in health care increases prices
decreases access and decreases
the quality of the care that's
offered and this is what we are
facing I handed out this to all
of you.
This is a diagram that looks at
the major pharmacy benefit
managers who ought to work in
New Mexico and what would happen
would be that they will
consolidate and use the various
things we outlined in both
Senate bill fourteen and this
one to disadvantaged small New
Mexico owned businesses small
independent pharmacies across
our state and every community to
where they can no longer afford
to sell the drugs they manage it
in such a way that that cost you
have to buy the drug for is more
than what they will allow you to
sell it for and then when the
little pharmacy can no longer
stay in business they send them
a nice letter saying would you
like to join our CVS family.
Once that happens we lose part
of our tax base we lose small
employers patients lose access
to someone they've known for a
long time but most importantly
that tax that revenue all of
those fees that are charged
leave New Mexico and our
estimate for from a pharmacist
who is that this would take over
nine hundred million dollars out
of the economy of New Mexico and
send it to the states and if the
states and the other areas get
any of this that they would go
to the profits of large
companies who are not New Mexico
based health care we recognize
is just an infrastructure from
being able to do economic
development no one is going to
put a company in a small town if
they can't get health care so
from a business standpoint.
We need to keep our small
independent pharmacists allied
in New Mexico we need to keep
the tax base of those pharmacy.
The company's in New Mexico and
we need to be able to serve New
Mexico patients because if we
want to employees to be able to
stay healthy and go to work
every day they need access to
drugs they can afford thank you
thank you did you listen to
okay.
The committee.
My.
I think it's on Mr chair members
of the committee gene and a
blessing health policy adviser
in the governor's office would
you have before you is the work
that happen in the interim with
the governor's task force for
prescription drug pricing
transparency we recognized that
we need to do obtain more
information study this and as a
result we've come forward with
house bill fifty one in Senate
bill fourteen which occurred
last week thank you.
And then this page to humble
from the Office of pretending
Care Act.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Paige to
have a line from the office of
the superintendent of insurance
and I have been helping navigate
some of these tricky issues and
bill drafting it and I'm here to
answer technical questions and
I'm gonna.
It
was the last comment I'm an
attorney so she knows all of the
statements.
So the reason the reason we
bring that up Mr chair is
because we were asked to include
some language about the higher
risks in the bill and and I just
want to point out that every
section in the bill has a
section G. which refers to
federal law so unless we can do
something provided by federal
law every section has that in
there which we take care of the
request from the audience about
the iris so we stand open for
support opposition your
questions thank you at this time
we go out to the audience and in
the support of Senate.
No.
I.
Senator.
For.
Okay.
Go ahead you have a.
Afternoon
Mr chairman and members of the
committee my name is Barbara
Webber executive director Health
Action New Mexico a health
advocacy organization statewide
can also we house the New Mexico
consumers for affordable
prescriptions coalition and just
been active for three years has
thirty member organizations
stand strong support of this
bill I think it's going to take
many tools to begin to reduce
the costs for consumers to
really create a portable
medications two years ago we
paid for a statewide poll that
showed that forty four percent
of New Mexicans are not able to
afford their medications
therefore they don't fill their
prescriptions support they skip
their prescriptions for
consumers this is a heavy burden
because they they're going to
medical debt our families going
and hope that or they simply
don't have the help that they
could have had to they've been
able to manage with their
medications so we thank the
sponsors for bringing this bill
and the we urge the committee to
support it and we stand strong
support thank you.
The legislative okay all right
we'll go through all the the
money here in opposition of
Senate bill fifty one.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Jonathan Bloxham of
pharmaceutical care management
association we are the national
association represents PBMs the
very companies that are out
there working every day to
provide lower ways to provide
lower cost ways find that
prescription drug benefit we're
used by you all the state
employers were used by unions
were used by in large employer
small pores and we appreciate
the efforts of this.
It is up to strike the Arissa
but this is still a costly
mandate and now it's just a
costly mandate on the fully
insured the ones that are have
the least buying power are now
stuck with this this costly
mandate that doesn't actually
improve patient outcomes it only
makes it more expensive the more
expensive it is to provide
health care the less cut health
care coverage people will be
able to receive as a result
you'll see higher cost sharing
you'll see higher premiums and
this doesn't actually improve
the health of New Mexicans we
would wish the we requested to
oppose this bill and the take a
look at your own FIR to look at
the impact.
Thank you Mr chairman of the
committee Larry around
registered lobbyists for
Presbyterian health plan I just
want to touch on a couple pieces
of this bill that are
problematic for the insurance
one has to do with different
cost years for non affiliated
pharmacies essentially what that
does is requires health plan to
contract with every pharmacy
throughout the entire state
those contracts away that we
actually used to control costs
for our insureds and our members
because you can enter into rates
that are better with those
pharmacies if your patience can
go there and part of that too to
incentivize a patient to go the
those pharmacies is using cost
shares and the just another
piece to deals a lot with how
you deal with rebates from
manufacturers the way that works
with health plan members you
take those rebates and you
spread them all across all your
insured so everybody gets a
benefit I got timely information
look likely right before I had
to stand up Mr chairman our
estimate on our commercially
insured is if this bill passes
just because of that peace on
rebates it's an increase to
small businesses and their and
their employees of two hundred
dollars per member per month on
their health insurance premiums
we don't think this bill does
exactly what we would hope it
would do is we experts you to
propose legislation thank you Mr
chairman of the committee.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Roy Moore
I'm a registered lobbyist for
America's health insurance plans
and with all due respect to the
sponsor and doctor Machen any we
oppose this bill and first a
couple of landscape things that
I would point out to you the
committee seven not quite sure
which committee sub you're
looking at but on the original
FIR there was a large fiscal
impact associated with the bill
have a note that this bill is
not going to finance so I would
recommend that finance take a
look at the impacts because they
are large when you're talking
about drugs you're talking about
one of the more expensive things
for health plans to provide it's
actually the the most expensive
part of every premium dollar and
so there are some real concerns
there I look to see if I could
find a new FIR on the committee
so I didn't see one I think that
you should wait for a adjusted
FIR before you take action on
this because I think the
embedded costs are quite large
you may have that information I
didn't have it so wanted to
point that out to you in the
first instance the next thing
that I would say is we
appreciate the governor looking
at the cost of drugs the the
cost of drugs is huge and it's
something needs to be done in
that space unfortunately the way
that this bill is composed it
doesn't accomplish that goal and
you'll see it within the FY or
the revised a fire lots of other
points that I could make on
coupons and them being illegal
at the federal level but how
passed along.
Reminder we are trying to keep
you to one minute.
Good afternoon Mister chair
members of the committee I'm Pat
block with a terror consulting
registered lobbyist for prime
therapeutics we rise today and
respectful opposition to SB
fifty one it's important to
point out the copay assistance
programs a manufacturer coupons
are not need based assistance
programs in fact as the sponsor
explained they target only those
with certain kinds of insurance
these assistance programs are a
tool drug manufacturers used to
protect market share when
they're getting ready to or
already face competition whether
it's from generics biosimilars
for other new brand name drugs
several new a policy concepts
came out in the committee sub
these concepts were part of
Senate bill fifty four as you
heard and they directly limit
PBMs and plans ability to use
the time tested cost saving tool
of guiding enrollees to quality
providers have agreed to provide
their services at substantial
cost savings when enrollees
choose to use these preferred
providers insurers share the set
cost savings with enrollees at
the point of service this
legislation would prevent that
and we oppose any legislation
that will increase prescription
drug costs for New Mexicans
which this legislation will
certainly do thank you.
Mr Chairman.
With the wrong way Mr chairman
it's backwards out of office
push the button and so on so
Mister chairman members
commitments Keith Gardner
question this for cigna
healthcare express scripts and I
stand to and and respectful
opposition to the to the
Sanchez bill and and want to
send a state number one trust
your FIR flick which our state
agencies of set this gonna cost
look at the costs on Senate bill
fourteen that's been now rolled
in get significant price
increases we'd like to see if
you're gonna get a discount
don't give it to a select few
through a coupon give it to
everybody who receives that
drugs manufactured using these
coupons to be able to target
individuals to get on to a set
specific medication rather than
lowering the price for every
single individual who takes
medication I'm also in the new
within the retiree health care
associate administration and my
wife is a is a school teachers
you know and so we participate
in the public planning it's
going to cost us more money out
of our pockets every month to
pay for this look at your FIR
that doesn't come from the PBMs
have been demonized today that
is a company insurance companies
have been demonized today that
comes specifically from your
agencies who every day do this
for you administer this for you
the fiscal impact is on the
citizens of state New Mexico
thank you Mr chairman.
Check check.
Mr chairman members of the
committee this is JD Bullington
speaking on behalf of the
greater Albuquerque chamber of
commerce which believes that
this legislation would actually
result in increased health
coverage costs for New Mexicans
for example requiring health
plans to pass on drug rebates at
the point of sale would prevent
them from using the rebates to
instead lower health coverage
premiums across the board
similarly the chamber believes
this bill would ultimately
encourage the use of more
expensive drugs when lower cost
alternatives are available this
two would result in higher
premiums generally speaking and
so it's for those reasons
because of the many prescriptive
costly regulations in this bill
that would raise health coverage
costs the chamber of commerce
respectfully opposes this
legislation.
Madam chair members of the
committee Marla shows registered
lobbyist for Blue Cross blue
shield of New Mexico and we
stand in opposition for the
reasons previously stated but we
would like to also add for your
consideration please to look at
the FIR happy we scored we don't
feel that it is while it is very
expensive the way it is right
now we think it's going to have
a much larger impact and really
should go to finance thank you.
the.
All right.
The questions.
Started out
properties and stands chairman
Senator and and just thinking
about have we don't have an
updated power This Is on
basically Senate bill fifty one.
Typically they don't do NFI.
Under consideration.
A little bit that I wonder would
you be able to respond in some
of the concerns because
obviously if it is going to
increase the cost and then
thinking about our is that we
can strong figure out you know
Medicare Medicaid we know that
sound but all the state plan
census significant number of
people so just wondering if.
So Mr chair Senator on page two
of the FIR that I have as well
as to it indicates that NMPSIA
talked about a recurring cost
retiree Health Care indicates no
cost GST in APS that gave no
estimate.
So.
There is an issue about the
understanding of what this bill
is going to do secondly there is
a bill that went through I don't
believe this committee but it
did go through the floor of the
health care of forty which.
The purpose is to try to
consolidate the purchasing for
all of the large plans that we
talked about down on the floor
so the amounts of money here we
do not believe is accurate.
Thank you Mr chair and and and
and again I think the
recommendations since we do not
know that cost should this bill
Leave this committee certainly
should be considered about
finance because is there reckon
up the budget they're going to
need to know what yeah and what
that cost might be so with that
you know another question just
curious about the coupons and
and how those Houston I'm still
trying to figure that out and
want their fees just one on that
so Mr chair Senator I'm going to
defer to our doctor who has this
experience and I should let you
know that before we incorporated
other pieces some of the medical
professionals that I have of the
one to ask me to carry this bill
about banning copay accumulators
they felt is inhibited their
patients so let's have the
doctor responded that thank you
thank you
Mr chair madam chair.
US senators an excellent
question about eighty five
percent of prescriptions are
already generic drugs in the
country the copay accumulators
and maximise their's are
involved and we had to do out a
walking through the various ways
that that occurs what happens is
if a patient has a very
expensive drugs and those are
usually brand name drugs are
still under patent less than one
percent of them have an option
other than that one drug for
that patient so it's not like
there's a cheaper generic we
could go to and in order for the
patient to be able to afford to
take that medication at all we
as the practice pay somebody to
fill out the forms and apply for
funding from the use of not for
profit entities copay
foundations that then we'll pay
that copay instead of the
patient paying the COVID what a
copay accumulator does is it
refuses to account all of those
monies donated by someone else
towards the patients out of
pocket so that they can never
get to their out of pocket
maximum where the insurance
company would have to carry the
entire cost of care the
maximizer is just spread it out
across the entire year so they
collect two sets of co pays one
from the patient if the patient
is able and one from the
foundation until the foundation
runs out of money the end result
of this is that patients
particularly New Mexico patients
who don't have this sums of
money to pay their copays they
end up not able to get these
medications which are
controlling their cancer there
are multiple sclerosis is cetera
the the so they are not aimed
at.
Everybody they are aimed at the
select few people who need these
extremely expensive drugs and in
our rebate program if any of the
money goes to the copay for
everybody who's paying a copay
and what is left over would go
back to the purchaser of that
insurance which might in these
instances be those agencies
the last time I was here I had
chart showing how much of the
rebates and copays excuse me the
rebates and discounts that are
acquired by the P. at PBMs go to
the patient and it's less than
one percent the rest of all that
money goes to the pharmacy
benefit managers and to the
insurance companies this is
become enough of a this problem
across the nation that
representative called me in this
in the house of representatives
is now investigating pharmacy
benefit managers in front of his
committee because he thinks
these are such unfair business
practices.
Senator David.
By sending it back to the
insurers and PBMs with that not
does not affect crisis in low
over there repeating some of
that I'm confused because you
know.
It seems to me that if they can
repeat that one hi I'm just
confused on some Mr chair
Senator I'll drive making any of
COVID shortly shortly briefly I
mean yes the
miss Mr chairman the Senators
yes if the money goes back
theoretically it could be low
used to lower premiums what many
states have found who have these
in place and what Milliman and
Kaiser family fund health
published is the health
insurance rates do not go up
premiums do not go up when PBM
legislation is enacted to lower
those rates.
Chair again nothing you know
it's gonna be really important
to make sure that overall cost
with the new FIR and awful
you know that's something
certainly going to need to look
at because that does affect
Regarding the purchases through
a state plan as.
Try outstanding so I'll leave it
at that see who else's question.
Does.
The motion forty pass.
The problem.
But the rope.
Senator Brandt no.
Senator Griggs no Senator had a
meal yes Senator Kernan noted
it's going about that.
Senator Lopez excuse Senator
Sanchez.
Senator Tom and.
Yes Senator Wirth yes.
Senator Hamblen is.
Senator Shendo yes.
Four five four.
Yes very much Mr chair and we
had withdrawn or
no I'm sorry.
Thank you very much really I
really feel like it should go
finance if you the F. R. comes
back at a level higher than
what's listed here either that
or we made for.
Four if that if I want to see
that F. R. when it's complete.
Okay thank you.
Thank you and Mister chair we
had withdrawn or I had personal
and withdrawn Committee
substitute for Senate bill two
sixty six yes and to lay it on
the table thank.
Okay the.
All right we'll move on to the.
One thirty.
The other.
Senator.
One thirty thank you Mr chairman
I have with me I think you all
know my hash to my experts this
is actually a pretty simple bill
and
but it is such a does it's it's
in the title relating to health
eliminating were seen as from
smoking permitted areas allowed
in that the Johnson clean air
indoor Act the.
The secondhand smoke kills forty
thousand people a year
and the smoking that probably
the we would reduce that down to
New Mexico there's tens and tens
of millions that we're spending
on that second hand smoke and
people on Medicaid and so forth
and so basically what this act a
request Mr chair and senators is
to take Chrissy nose out of the
the the casinos and racetracks
to take him out of the accepted
to areas and that's essentially
what the bill has a massive
feedback to make a few comments
just it's not going to cost we
have a lot of data to show that
it's not going to cost them
if any money it when you look at
the at native American casinos
when they have smoking and now
when they don't and they're
doing just great when they
don't.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is my seat the
with the American heart
association I think of you know
says the pandemic you know
two hundred casinos you know
nationwide that re opened when
small smoke free and in New
Mexico all tribal casinos are
smoke free and you know and as
as the doctor said here like in
on the Senator like it kills
forty one thousand people each
year these are non smokers
exposed to secondhand smoke.
And seven thousand people die of
stroke non smokers and you know
the the this study was done have
you pass the SAT to just for the
record like you know we don't
commission the study this was
done by independent study by.
You know gambling experts and
Las Vegas and and the study was
evaluation of post pandemic non
smoking trends in US casinos and
if you see you know the page two
most of the people go to the
casinos you know because of
location and the number two
reason is non smoking this is
post pandemic you know people's
attitudes have changed post
bandanna you don't want to
expose to smoking only four
percent.
You know say they go to the
casinos where smoking is allowed
they also look at you know non
smoking and smoking.
Revenues in northeast I mean the
the the chart shows like you
know for non smoking casinos
compared to a plant city and you
can see by the revenues you know
the revenues have not gone down
but they've gone out.
And so we we also passed out the
information to you from.
Indian gaming casinos and as you
can see like you know the
revenues have not gone up I mean
not going down but on up so the
the issue here is you know the
the casinos will not have any
impact on revenues in fact the
revenues you know the studies
and the data shows they are
going up so I think it's is a
public safety issues and
employees don't have to choose
between their health and a
paycheck we don't allow smoking
in restaurants bars.
Grocery stores law offices even
in this building.
And so I think that this time to
you know repeal is exemption and
you know we stand for questions
thank you Mr.
Else will.
Thanks.
Have a look I'd like to make a
comment on that last bill but I
know we're not doing that and
how that was calculated but I
know we're not there it was a
complete miscalculation on the
part of
and and
at this time what that audience
anybody here support that the
Senate bill one thirty.
Those Mr chairman members of the
committee.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee of Charles good
marker speaking today on behalf
of the NM VC action fund and
secondhand smoke is an
occupational hazard for many
casino workers in New Mexico
from dealers to security to food
services job related exposure to
secondhand smoke this is
significant but extremely
preventable.
Cause of premature death among
US workers.
Twenty one states Porter Rico
and US Virgin Islands require
state regulated gaming
facilities to be a hundred
percent smoke free twenty one
states that's what this bill
will do make our state regulated
gaming facilities to be hundred
percent smoke free some
opponents will tell you it's
unfair to single out racinos
reality is it's unfair to that
our state government likes I'm
like so many other state
governments gives receive has a
choice other private sector
businesses do not have.
Workers at the casinos have the
same broad right to healthy
workplace as to the folks
working here in this building at
the Connie's grocery store on
the corner or your bank or other
offices thank you very much
please support this bill.
What.
Hello my name is Andreas
arch Aletta I and
Share representing at the New
Mexico allied health line
tobacco a coalition of more than
sixty local and national
organizations formed to prevent
commercial tobacco the use of
for this for us this bill is a
simple health and safety in the
workplace Bill.
due to the continuous exposure
to secondhand smoke Christina
please have a much higher risk
of heart disease and lung cancer
according to the CDC there is no
safe level of exposure to
secondhand smoke secondhand
smoke significantly increases
more bill morbidity and
mortality increasing health care
costs.
And when it comes to second hand
from second when it comes to non
smoking sections according to
the experts shared and or non
smoking sections and advance the
implications systems do not
eliminate smoke exposure they do
not eliminate smoke exposure.
This bill would wait staff and
gambling employees the same
protections from the harms of
secondhand smoke as bankers
lawyers and office workers we
had an axe recommended do pass
thank you very much.
Okay all right anybody here in
opposition.
You guys gonna get us and.
The opposition.
The chairman Senators market
injure on behalf of someone park
racetrack casino
couple notes one of the notes is
that the study that that has
been presented as a study is not
a study it is a political
opinion piece the opinion piece
itself says that that the
opinion he should not be used in
may not be used for any decision
making process it's just not a
study there has been a study
done two thousand nine federal
reserve of Saint Louis did of
multi very analysis using
control groups using Illinois is
the basis three neighboring
states and were able to show
statistically that the decrease
in revenues will be twenty
percent
on average for for getting rid
of smoking which has a hugely
deleterious impact on the
casinos.
Second is that the bill Sanchez
own numbers they will presented
to you when adjusted for
inflation from twenty nineteen
for the tribal casinos to twenty
twenty two if you use the
government's official inflation
adjuster index the revenues are
down seventeen percent they're
not flat they are not up there
down seventy percent just
numbers pure numbers factual
next is we have a dozen casinos
within probably twenty miles of
our of our casino all of which
allow smoking one of them in in
Texas which is the speaking rock
casino more than three times our
size and they're able to make
that decision for themselves we
believe that the dishes the
decision should be for the
casinos thank you very much
chairman committee members.
Mr chairman members of the
committee Marla shows registered
lobbyists for all American
Ruidoso downs and we stand in
opposition from many of the
reasons stated by St ray park
but also just to emphasize that
it's really unfair to compare
the receipt nose with the tribal
casinos we disagree with the
study as well they're not taking
into factors like sports betting
which happened which was which
the tribal casinos implemented
right before
the pandemic and they also we
were required to shut down for a
year and the tribal casinos some
of which may not have shut down
at all but some did shut down
for six months or so it's just
not a fair comparison we do
spend a lot of money in our
facility trying to set up very
good our filtration systems
designated areas and we also are
curious why we've been singled
out and why the other why the
other games distillate he's are
not being considered Ingle
parlors of FOBTs all of those
I'm not sure why those workers
are not considered as important
as supposedly the ones working
inside the Recinos thank you.
Mr chairman members of the
committee friend Heinrich from
someone alright very striking to
see no the racetrack casinos
already have a number of
constraints on them at the
tribal casinos here in New
Mexico do not have we have a
limit on the number of slot
machines we can have a limit on
the number of hours of operation
no table games are allowed we
have a forty six point two five
percent effective tax rate on
our gross gaming revenue I would
encourage you to let the
racetrack casinos decide this
issue on their own we don't need
another legally required
constraints unfair thank you.
All right what do you.
Okay.
That.
It doesn't matter if.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee my name
is is my operator of the
director of the New Mexico
racing Commission we're
respectfully speaking in a pass
of this bill for the reasons
that is this bill targets are
racinos in the state and as
Mister chair testified that
typically a nonsmoking hit is a
twenty percent decline in the
net that and that was it
hindered the purse money that
awards people that participate
in racing the thousands of
licensees that to participating
in the New Mexico it's a as
they're taking a pay cut if
they're per size are reduced
twenty percent we also feel that
the people have a choice to go
to these facilities they are
don't facilities.
People have a choice in these
facilities as well
at as far as comparison to other
types of businesses that there
are no children in our office
seen as obviously but that
restaurants and amusement parks
and so forth that there are
children about that and that's
one distinguished distinguishing
that difference and the types of
businesses and the nature of the
business that we're talking
about here so I appreciate time
tonight that's all I have thank
you thank you.
All right thank you know go to
audiences Senator Brandt.
The audience I'll be up to the
committee.
I get to perform Mr chair.
Go ahead you Mr chairman centers
do we have an amendment.
Yes we have a I'm sorry yeah
women are you planning to do
this Senator Hickey.
Yes.
Sorry yes.
What we should do that before
start question Mr in the.
This is a movie.
The more I'll have an open
discussion point about eight or
nine when.
Transition to the motion with
human.
Infrastructure needs of the
assessors.
Was senator.
Order your cue yes yes I'm sorry
here for reference trying to get
a state on the amendment to it
removes the
This all that and basically
says.
Gaming facilities nonprofit
gaming facilities.
Ingle parlors.
Our allow.
Mr class question on the
epidemic of the chair good of
we're only women present
Representative thank you Mr
chairman thank you doctor if you
and I know that you're not the
main sponsor on this so I'm not
sure of the gentle
but I guess I'm so so this
section we're dealing with is
where smoking is permitted
Representative clean air act
this is the area that it's
allowed Mr chair and senator
correct so nonprofit bingo
haulers and gaming facilities
what's the difference between a
gaming facility and receive no.
But the receipt as our for
profit gaming facilities.
And so the nonprofit ones would
be what.
Whatever Mr chairman and senator
The like at the F. W. your use
well all right the the the the
VFW is the
FOBTs for general orders those
type of organizations that we're
doing gaming when those Mr
Chairman Senator already covered
under private clubs.
Yes.
Forward is going to be redundant
I guess you can add on and then
I I guess I'm wondering why we
want to leave that in there
instead of just striking all of
section the.
Mr Senator right I think the the
private clubs are cigar clubs
and the clubs they do not have
gaming licenses so that the
nonprofit gaming licenses those
FOBTs and we have good news that
have a limit of fifteen gaming
licenses and a maximum one of
four thousand so those are
members only so they are private
but they have a gaming license
so the bingo parlors mostly on
the church.
Okay
So I I just of not sure why.
Mr chairman and senator.
That we want to leave that in
there and not just strike
section the which would cover
what you're trying to do with
our.
If you want to leave you want to
leave and the nonprofit bingo
callers.
I think we do.
Because just so that they're
clear.
That that that that can have
smoking there Mister chairman
Senator Y..
If this is so dangerous.
If this is so horrible.
Why do we want to leave it
there.
Why are we treating one group
differently than another.
Yeah right.
Consulting my consultant
Senator and Mr chairman the
those are much smaller I mean
the the Racine knows employ a
lot of people there
That.
There may be some type of
irregular basis but for for you
a few hours their seniors are
open several hours so that's why
thank you Mr.
All have on the map.
But thank you and Mister chair I
think just following up on that.
I would say really the people
that thank you.
Those.
Facilities are.
With the new ones they do not
need.
That.
In.
Reasonable to whites okay.
The civic L..
Of the server stops and.
Thank you madam Senator.
Also.
Photo.
Thank you.
Yeah.
One of the.
The.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator for that question the
data that we have is that there
Actually there their
profitability is without the
smoke is is good and so
The I mean that they may feel
that it's unfair that you know
the the evidence from the east
coast and and again as we look
at the native American casinos
in the state they're doing quite
well
and and actually if you look at
it going over time we went in to
comment they dropped and then it
came back up Mr chin so we're
for those are called the golden
Management.
The metal Representative.
We want to for sales.
I like.
All right.
So.
So we're still on the amendment
and.
It affects.
Seven thousand one amendment.
Second was and how much.
Opposition members to work
overall Senator Brandt.
Senator Griggs.
Senator how to meal yeah Senator
Kernan yeah.
Senator Lopez.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator Tom and.
Senator Wirth yes.
Senator Hamblen yes.
Senator Shendo.
Have.
Four yeses.
I.
The idea that.
The lower back from the the.
We do that.
OK a motion about we have
questions.
Thank you chair and senator.
Your study you did.
Not really a study and.
Stated.
I
think something will
need response I'm just share the
love money service are about.
Senate today.
Kelly I do have this question if
we need recognition or.
sending some issues.
We talked.
To single
out there here.
Of course on
this is this something that you
know these are decisions all the
time talk about reserves thank
you.
Coming out of the large number.
More than eighty of in I just
think that it's really hard.
We.
We.
Look at things that there's a.
The physician.
We're gonna have to.
Really concerned.
The card to the loss of revenue.
Receive.
Mexico City.
Well as well as price forces.
Armstrong right.
The ability to to make sure that
the verses are hard to.
That complicates.
Our racing.
C. as in to add on to that
December which actually are I
have not the that.
The differences.
The last thing that.
Yeah.
Not
yet Mr chairman Senator Kernan I
think you know what the the
federal reserve study fifteen
years ago in Saint Louis and
they were looking at Illinois
you know fifteen years ago I
mean things have changed post
pandemic and this study was done
in June twenty twenty two the
the these are the experts in the
gaming industry and it there's
some disagreement between what's
being presented short so I
appreciate that and just.
Have difficulty.
Thank you Mr chair like to on
the on the okay.
Brent.
Thank you Mr chairman.
By the that argument.
Health but
So I do have a few questions
So I I.
I quit smoking over thirty years
ago.
And honestly of self
preservation are probably the
this bill down because of the
budget for smoking in the
casinos I probably go to the.
But like to gamble is a smoke.
Some of those people that would
actually go if they quit having
smoking L. so
but.
I went to I would set up their
supply concert at both under.
It is also right at the
beginning session my wife and I
went.
And that it was you know I was
led to believe that that the
casinos and have smoking.
Well I I conferred with my wife
couple weeks ago this bill is
coming up and I said I would
swear they had smoking on the
receipt for that **** oh yeah
that.
My wife is very susceptible
hates some of and so we walk
through their and so the state
that the casinos are allowing
smoking I think maybe they
weren't but I think some of them
are going back to.
Hello so.
That's a concern for me I don't
want.
These folks to be put it this
advantage over others.
I would love it.
Personally if we just got rid of
cigarettes I got a great.
But I've said many times that
people are allowed to make their
own stupid.
And I think the government
stepping in to save anyone ever
works.
so.
It does concern me at all
continue to listen.
Over the next years as I know
this will come back but it does
concern me with the employees.
Because even though we say well
the employees can choose were
work when you're out of work you
take a job.
You don't really get to choose
where to work right you're gonna
take a job that's available
sometimes you take a job that's
available this not that great
for your health.
As you want to make sure you're
feeding yourself and your family
so that's that's the one area
that I have concern is how do we
make sure that the workers are
protected.
But if we're not gonna have that
an even playing field across
everyone that's why so we should
strike section the and probably
half the others.
From the clean air act because
it's not fair to say they were
seen those have to follow it but
these guys don't.
I like sport that.
But I'm not gonna support for
allow for everyone else thank
you Mr
Thank you Mr chairman and then
Senator all I don't know exactly
how long it's been and probably
fifteen years just reach of the
ticket number when we
eliminated smoking and and
restaurant.
And it didn't hi there I didn't
have the terrible affected
everybody thought it was gonna
have for buddy the arguments
were.
However we did it in every
restaurant.
That we didn't do it in.
I am leave I or.
where they could do that yeah
like you know tribal casinos
with their where there's smoke
free or not you know I think I
think what we need is agreement
of on the restraining orders
that will go full for.
I get the kind of a handy thing
then between the restraint hours
and the and tribal because that
would be a handy thing.
Hi
One of the fortunate people get
as my head was since I was ten
months old.
And smoking is is just damn they
actually and it it is not it is
very handy for me I don't go
places where issues there.
But I'm not.
I don't know that I want to tell
these other gas station because
we're not bringing kids into the
casinos were she knows we're
we're letting you as an adult.
Make your choice.
And that's the part of part of
it that is.
Different to me from when we
made those choices for
Restaurant.
But the gospel is smoking
indoors.
It is dangerous to people who
are there.
That are not sure what.
It just it.
So.
But I don't know I I think that
I've before again to see more of
a an agreement in our.
What we've got right here is we
have a little bit of an argument
we have we have studies that
show one thing even though H.
fifteen years old or so
And I I I think that's kind of
an interesting one to bring up
and I I don't know if I wish
a a rushing I would have done
that.
But
I think I think we need to work
there's a little more before we
Before we.
Passionate and force it all on
the restraining orders but I I
was she knows I'd be wanting to
do something.
I would.
I would see the writing on the
wall.
And
the judge words come to show
for the ages you guys don't see
that.
Our will I think you're you're
not looking show more shares in
the New Senator those comission
of that.
Also for the Pasco Center worth
of second.
A second so that second by
Senator Hamblen.
Any opposition to the motion
tabled.
Motions to table.
Senator Brandt this is beautiful
debatable so we'll go ahead
click call of cultural.
Senator Brandt yes.
Senator great.
Senator had a meal yes and
briefly explain medical.
Senator current yes.
Senator Sanchez yes Senator
Tallman.
Yes.
Senator Wirth no not.
Senator Hamblen yes and explain
my The presentation yes among
the next level.
We'll all be free okay so who's
the first one one six eight four
I got lost track of the meal Mr
chairman I I completely
understand the dangers of
smoking and see where this bill
is going but and hearing the
debate and and hearing about
them being privately run.
That's what would have to be
really question the bill and and
if it comes back we can chat
later but I understand the
dangers of smoking about was the
reason why the way to thank you
Mr chair.
You
Senator was it.
Who's I also wanted to implement
noontime and Fentiman okay all
right so let's say okay good
thank
you for the.
I mean the only.
This is the centerpiece.
This issue.
I don't fault well.
As far as.
This report.
This time.
Thank you.
This issue.
Thank you.
Thank you the.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for bringing this forward and
you know I I also express a lot
of the sentiments from my
colleagues here of understanding
the impacts of smoke especially
secondary smoke
especially for employees because
they're feeling you know they're
they're in a situation where
they need to make a living but
they're having to work
environments I feel that you
know if we're seeing more of a
trend in demand of smoke free
facilities then this is an
opportunity for the those
facilities to address how they
need to rebrand
and to to change their marketing
we saw this during the pandemic
for businesses that survived and
thrived for ones that adapted
and that's really the the
business model is like how do
you adapt to challenging
circumstances so you know I I I
completely commend you for what
the intent is of this but I do
have to vote no because in my
district New Mexico State
University and someone park have
a relationship and that's
something that I really can't
jeopardize at this moment and so
I do appreciate your efforts
thank you Mr chair thank you.
Thank you Mr chair and committee
and will take your comments and
and see if we can.
Some have some thank you very
much.
So at this time of of.
Down to
House bill one thirty one would
have predicted a very patiently
Senator.
I don't want to the.
So
House bill one thirty one of
Representative K..
Thank you chairman and and
senators I'm Representative
Kate's and I'm here to present
one thirty one on house bill one
thirty one is basically a as the
house.
House bill one thirty one.
The.
This is amended its.
For some the floor substitute
I'm so sorry forget the freshman
thank you it is basically a
civil rights bill that is being
presented and sponsored in a
bipartisan manner a
representative Thompson myself
Representative Hernandez and
harp and block of all signed on
this bill as well as Armstrong
and other.
Representative.
and this bill applies the
affordable Care Act budget
classification protection that
prohibits insurers from applying
benefit cost caps it requires
insurers to apply evidence based
standards in their medical
necessary view and coverage
requests for prosthesis and
orthotics I want to stop before
Moores so that individual who is
who's lost a limb or has a limb
difference may need or thought
of or prosthesis so are the bill
is addressing that currently we
want that prosthesis is our rate
of all of the Medicaid right
would there have been in the
past
where it was deemed not
medically necessary to find kind
of a prosthesis on a regular
basis because they have a
lifespan or when a child is
growing the may need multiple
because it has to be fit
correctly or you're causing
permanent damage
on but the Civil Rights part of
this bill is that we want to.
People but especially children
to be able to move and Ron and
John and currently the
prosthesis that is covered under
most insurance plans are basic
very heavy clunky we have rights
then if you if if if you're
unfamiliar with prosthesis city
you can see so that type of
prosthesis is fine if you're
going to stand or walk a few
steps but you can't run you need
a blade and those prosthesis is
can be very expensive in the
we're not being
they were not being covered by
insurance so it two of the
children were both injured and
one required and and is a
surgery to be able to fully
restore them to their full movie
insurance companies are paying
for one but if one lost a limb
we were only paying for the
basic Pasti sis and we want them
to be able to run and jump with
the blade I've brought some
subject experts and who are
adorable and then there's Kyle
he's adorable to this hospital
steps and he's been the engine
and the the advocate for this
and I'd like him to take a
moment to provide some a
statement thank you Mr chair and
representative of time money
from the state is worse than
members of the committee thank
you for hearing that floor
substitute for house bill one
thirty one this afternoon it's a
huge honor to help sponsor to be
the Senate sponsor for this bill
my son was four years old when
he was diagnosed with
osteosarcoma that required him
to have eighteen courses of
chemotherapy similar to Kyle
story he also had to have his
left leg amputated we went about
a year without a prosthetic
without a will.
Chair I carried him everywhere
fortunately he was small enough
that that didn't pose any
significant challenges at the
time when we were finally able
to have him fitted for
prosthetic of the prosthetic
device who weighed just as much
as he did who is not functional
he could stand on it he could
take maybe one stop he was never
going to be able to use that and
to get to the level of the
quality of life that he had when
he had two lakes he.
Was never able to successfully
have a prosthetic device and I
didn't understand why there were
certain people who have these
amazing light weights
prosthetics and that allow them
to run and jump and all of the
things that I desperately wanted
for my toddler to be able to do
that he has never been able to
do it again so he's been and
he's twenty seven now do you
still be twenty eight on the
eleventh of March what is the
date.
We're coming right up he never
was able to walk again he was
never able to run and my goal in
sponsoring this legislation is
for people like Kyle people like
my son people like the other
wonderful advocates for this
bill have the quality of life
that each of us deserve in New
Mexico thank you Mr chairman
thank you.
So.
All to the audiences of the
years port of hospital for
substance for house bill one
thirty one.
Here.
I want to say.
We should note that Callaway
usually lives in a running blade
but she just got out of another
surgery.
So.
This is calorie Lewis how did
you lose your leg I was in our
accent in twenty twenty one what
were you afraid of when you lost
your legs not being able to use
force to get what are your
favorite activities today
running climbing and swimming
how are you able to be so active
because of cherry.
And what do you use to be active
running eight what do you
remember about when you first
put on a running blade it was
super lightweight and fun.
Higher to getting a running
blade what did you do most at
home I would just say maybe
check.
What do you currently do during
school recess play field games
if you are a walking like to
school what would you do at
recess I would probably just sit
at the bench what do you do
during P. E. what everybody else
is doing.
How do you picture your life
without a running blade.
The less active and more boring.
My name is Laura and I'm
Callaway's maam Callaway lost
her lower right leg in a rock
climbing accident in twenty
twenty one five weeks later she
was discharged from the hospital
during that time we were told by
so many what she would do again
the promises would be somewhat
like this just you watch this
time next year Callaway will run
right past all of us we believe
that to we pictured returning to
activity but we didn't know that
insurance would expect her to do
her favorite things on a walking
like that felt heavy stiff and
not like to play at all it was
hard for us to imagine the lack
of quality of life the insurance
offered to the limb loss
community we're here today to
level that playing field to help
insurance programs help
introduce live active and
healthy lives H. B. one thirty
one is about realizing that
movement is medicine and provide
providing that level of care and
opportunity to all thank you Mr
chairman.
We'll
first.
Little.
Years not quite as a door.
Hi hello.
All right can you talk about
your name.
Hi my name is hope Pernik and
I'm six years old and I live in
Albuquerque and can you tell
everybody what happened here
like.
I was born which one right.
And so what do you like about
your process that.
All.
Raul cans are free and I can.
Hold any pain and and never
IAD's Frankreich K. I cannot
hold very many thank you school
lunch and what do you do with
your friends when you have a
like on I play with that
what do you not like about your
leg.
I still can't run fairly fast.
what kind of activities do you
like to do.
Play games with my friends at
school.
And again ballet
what do you think when you see
if friends like Callaway who
have a running blade.
It makes me feel sat on a so
called.
Really one as Zandi thank and it
will take me and take a little
while to get me ready correct
okay thank you.
my name is adjacent Burnett's
from Albuquerque New Hope was
born with one leg which was a
shocking experience for us when
she turned one we found a young
eager process that was willing
to build her process click.
Stop.
Thank you to since it from
behind the all right but
children grow and unpredictable
and fast races the the leg needs
frequent replacement she's now
developing scoliosis that is
requiring additional or thought
devices I'm sure when she was
about three she was sitting on
the floor of her bedroom trying
to get her new poorly fitting
prosthetic on is yes Daddy when
will my other like grow and it
was a heartbreaking conversation
and realization for her that
this is a life long condition
under insurance coverage which
is one of the best school plans
of the state a prosthetic leg
for my daughter was covered only
fifty percent with no coverage
for a secondary device her
prosthetic leg which has to be
replaced every years around
sixteen thousand dollars as she
grows components increasing
complexity and price she's also
needing alternative devices like
scene for being able to run
right if I can adapt to other
physical activities that are
natural and accessible to her
peers and so telling cope that
is not medically necessary to do
those things to run on the
playground with her friends or
to learn to ski with her sister
or even participate in the basic
functions of her other to like
it people around her is such a
challenge.
Thank you madam chairman of the
committee Larry current
registered lobbyists for press
freedom health plan when we
first saw this bill introduced
it was an insurance mandate for
coverage and that's how they
first looked at it but then I
got to meet Kyle and Callaway
and all these great people and
took their stories back to
Presbyterian to the to the
meeting we have with all the
leadership and we looked at this
issue and it is an equity issue
this is not a coverage issue is
not medically necessary it's an
equity issue and tell em to
steal your the best testimony
I've heard in nineteen sessions
that I've been here in the last
committee what she said to the
committee was I just wanted to
run with my friends at recess
and that's what this bill is
about I'm proud to say that
press return health plan is the
first health plan in the country
to stand up and support and we
are actively supporting this
legislation including in any
press releases or any media that
is used on this and so I'm proud
to to representative Christian
Health plan today on this bill
and we urge your support and
passage thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee Marla shows registered
lobbyist Blue Cross blue shield
of New Mexico and we stand in
support of this legislation we
appreciate the time that the
sponsors and advocates spent
with us to make sure that we
could for Phil the quality of
life for our members that we
seek to do every day thank you.
Mr chair members of the
committee Jim Jackson for
disability rights New Mexico
I'll be be the breeze because
their testimony is far more
compelling than anything that I
could say I just want to
reinforce it this is a quality
of life issue for people with
disabilities it's an equal
opportunity bill and the it will
make a huge difference in the
lives of people with
disabilities and we encourage
your support thank you.
Thank you Mr chair Ellen plants
representing the disability
coalition for all the reasons
you've heard more compellingly
than I can stay the disability
coalition supports this bill and
urges your support as well thank
you.
It.
It would have.
Give me two minutes.
Hello my name is the mac
disability and eighteen a
clinician in the field of
orthotics and prosthetics
serving New Mexican community
testing fighting in favor of
house bill one thirty one and
two thousand eleven I had a rock
climbing accident and that's how
I became an amputee I wanted to
become a clinician working in
rural areas to fight for
individuals and need each
activity requires the need
prosthetic design my insurance
wouldn't cover the cost items
were donated I use all the parts
and pieces to build activity
specific prosthetic devices and
without the appropriate
prosthesis my limit can be left
listers skin breakdown the
majority of the population I
serve have comorbidities such as
diabetes delay healing a small
blister can lead to large
balloons and lengthy hospital
stays I also work with children
who long for the ability to keep
up with their friends on the
playground my patients already
find it challenging to get by
and not having access activity
specifically to come at a
greater cost to the individual
and insurance companies there
should be a dollar sign attached
to the pathway of healthy living
and there's no one like for
everything there's no one like
for like please be a part of
making a difference be part of
mobility for all thank you.
Yeah.
My name is Ashley white and the
chief programs officer for the
anti coalition as mentioned the
most common concerns we hear
from individuals living with
limb loss or limb difference
their family members caretakers
and health care providers
certainty that expropriate
prosthetic care to restore
function that has been lost or
is missing the coalition
commends insurance companies in
Oregon that are currently coming
in New Mexico that are currently
providing appropriate prosthetic
or orthotic technology for
individuals living with them
Laughlin difference on the
payment but unfortunately the
experiences of the individuals
that we work with do not show
consistency across all carriers
or even with the state here here
creating a scenario where those
costs are transferred to the
state or federal government like
others have testified here today
this is a civil rights issue
this is an issue in which we
hope that the members of this
committee will support I stated
favor of at the one three one
thank you.
You.
All.
Can you.
Good evening Mister chair
Senators my name is Nicole
Kylie American about impressing
Association and we support the
one your network I had the
access challenges of over twenty
clinics in New Mexico and their
ability to provide appropriate
care to their patients like my
own struggle as a survivor of
this argument and you can see at
age ten they share with me the
pain of want to find a child
access to running prosthesis to
be a kid again the faces and
I'll turn they witnessed
firsthand families the faces of
headed out of pocket costs
patients risking Department
injury trying to be physically
active on an adequate devices
and even patients acquiring
secondary health conditions like
diabetes obesity and heart
disease from our sanitary right
stands we're seeing enormous
amounts of for now New World in
three practitioners who struggle
to uphold the committee healing
within a dysfunctional health
care system today we can help
fix that providing practitioners
in New Mexico the ability to do
their job and provided cations
the mobility of the State please
support issue one three one
thank you.
There.
Hi
Okay so.
My name is grace Walters and I'm
because the funding in favor of
house bill one thirty one I'm a
certified processes or the test
act like by Audubon I'm calling
from my clinic in Albuquerque I
also work in Santa Fe and all
presidents are not X. as we've
seen our number one size fits
all find more officials
specialist devices are often
necessary for full
rehabilitation press eight the
function like this spring
allowing the user to jump and
run they were invented in the
nineteen seventies this
technology has come a long way
in five decades but access has
not last year my company
organized an event for fifteen
introduce were able to trial
running late for a couple hours
I was stunned by how many
participants were running for
you to for the first time since
becoming activities simply
simply by having access to the
right equipment and the
representation letters for
charities to fund these devices
but I believe the burden of
payment should be placed on
nonprofit to seek out as
motivated entities are the
technology their lives will
radically transform and the
future health care costs will
likely be lowered because of
their improved physical and
mental health I'm an able bodied
athlete myself and I participate
in this beautiful state of New
Mexico recreation wise I hear
infirmities able appears to be
able to do the same New Mexico
has a unique opportunity today
and I ask that you please vote
yes to become a cutting edge
leader insurance coverage for
the devices it is the humane
thing to do.
Thank you have a number of other
people having no.
All right thank you.
anybody opposition.
Yeah.
This is going to committee.
Of water.
That motion by Senator Brandt
second body Senator senses.
The opposition.
We're not nine zero.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee not emotional at
all.
They will go to the Senate bill
one fifty five a month.
To our staff at seven because.
For.
and
So our stop at seven so.
Sure that disability real brief
they have some.
Excuse me.
All of our.
Mr
chair of heroes and one.
Thank you Mr chairman this is
the one right if you want to do.
All right.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee.
We're going to really exciting
topic first is the last one that
you just heard so Mr chairman if
you have a substitute in front
of the Senate tax business and
transportation committee so as
to present a bill one fifty five
we did do a little bit of work
on this legislation in its first
committee we have some other
changes we had multiple meetings
every time I agree to carry a
piece of legislation broadband
it just seems like everybody
comes out of the woodwork and
and and on the
telecommunications and stuff and
so it's really great because we
had I'm not kidding when I say
this probably I don't know five
or six meetings within a couple
day period to really try to find
a way to get the entire industry
to be swimming in the in in one
swim lane and we got everybody
in some way and everybody's
gonna kind of threw up in the
swimming pool and we cleaned it
and then we fixed it and there's
a visual for you and and it's a
turns out we wound up finding
some agreement and when asked
the folks that are here as
whatever however you want to act
so we can I can explain the.
The substitutes if you'd like or
you want to have a motion of
some kind or.
I.
The session.
So thank you Mr chairman and
we're all going to be very brief
for you so we can just focus on
questions but essentially what
this substitute does is it it
cleans we did like I said some
some minor surgery in the first
committee and then we decided to
have these meetings I mentioned
a little while ago and the
substitute really does about
four different things
you know what we're trying to do
is continue to move broadband
along with him in a fashion that
works for everyone because we
need all of the above solution
to make sure that we're driving
broadband it is many points in
New Mexico as possible to
substitute essentially points
the PRC to freeze the excess
reduction payments that go to
the rural companies to come in
and you're gonna hear from them
that they are very comfortable
with that it freezes them for a
three year period twenty four
twenty five twenty six based on
the levels where they are today
it's really an inaccurate way to
to measure these these are
access reduction payments but
this keeps them whole for a
three year period what we go to
the next step in what we're
trying to page so that we all
agreed on that and that took
quite awhile to get there it
also retains the requirement
that the real carriers receive
access reduction utilize a sixty
percent or more of that exit
those excess reduction payments
on broadband only so that
accomplishes our big goal we're
trying to accomplish their and
then it requires the PRC
to take the to fund the thirty
million dollar cap that I
carried to reform the fund in
two thousand seventeen we took
it from eighteen million to
thirty million that year and it
also requires that the eight
million it would go to broadband
be bumped up to thirteen million
so now we are very quickly
moving in the direction of
utilizing the dollars we do
collect this way for broadband I
need new technologies and then
something very interesting that
we all agreed on was that it it
that requires the PRC to have
specific items that they will
look at when they review this
legislation and and the
performance of the real
universal service fund over the
next three years and those for
specific item more items are
whether the purpose
with with whether to re purpose
the excess reduction payments in
one way shape or form we have a
professional PRC coming in I
think we're all jazz and excited
that they're gonna be able to do
this very very important work
for us but that the commission
look to re direct those funds in
the direction of broadband
support programs second it's
methodology were requiring
methodology at this analysis to
determine broadband support
levels that are consistent with
the requirements within the
legislation.
And that they be directed and
and spread across all of these
rural areas that that utilizes
Fund also that the appropriate
size of the funds to be shared
with the legislature I kind of
we we all agreed back in two
thousand seventeen after
literally about thirty meetings
that we go from eighteen to
thirty million would be great to
get some professional analysis
for the PRC and have them make a
recommendation to the
legislature and then the impact
of the proposed changes on on a
per connection on for commission
assessments so what are those
going to be percentages we gave
a lot of flexibility two
thousand seventeen seems to be
working for us but as we know
technology changes pretty much
every ten years versus the
previous one hundred years and
so this is that's what the
committee substitute does I'm
gonna ask my experts to say just
a few things about why this is
important and I want to
demonstrate for you Mr chair
members of the committee once
again we got everybody role in
this boat together again it was
really hard to do so we'll start
with the Mr sentence represents
the enemy seeking.
Mr chairman members of the
committee chase Antanas
registered lobbyists for the New
Mexico exchange carrier group of
on behalf of the ten rural
companies of the comprise the
New Mexico city's Care group we
want to thank center video for
for bringing this legislation
forward and and helping us
crafted in the and bring
everybody together the Senate
tax business and transportation
committee substitute for Senate
bill one fifty five per proposes
the modernization of the State
rural universal service fund
given the public regulation
commission time to recommend a
path forward for the phone that
the legislature can then use or
not to modify this or UNICEF
which is section sixty three
nine H. six.
Thank you thank you we also have
the of more most remote wireless
carrier Representative here's
wellness for to see if you were
to as well.
Mr chair members of the
committee and the registered
lobbyists for Smith Bagley most
of you know them as cellular one
we offer mobile us communication
services and McKinley and San
Juan County since the inception
of the broadband point program
for years ago Smith Bagley has
been awarded thirty nine
projects sixty million dollars
from the fund four million Smith
Bagley has put up in matching
funds it includes twenty two
hours and fifty nine tower
upgraded upgrades impacting
ninety four thousand New
Mexicans and twenty five
thousand of road miles have been
covered.
In three years this bill will.
I'll open up the U. S. F.
frontier so A. R. S. dollars are
then put in the broadband grant
program thereby increasing
broadband investment in rural
New Mexico thank you.
Mr Chairman I'm also just Mr but
although we all know say few
words founder and CEO of sacred
wind and he'll tell you what's
going on with their
organizations as as pertains
this legislation thank you thank
you Mr chairman members of the
committee for listening and two
of what we have to say today.
As centerpieces I'm John but
they'll I am the founder and
former CEO Jim I'm now
consultant for cigarette
communications we were the first
company to provide broadband on
that lands anywhere in its three
state area we were the first in
we're still the only company
provide of fiber to the home to
some of the Navajo housing
developments and we were the
first to find it when a gigabit
dot download on microwave to fix
a microwave to the home we're
doing that in fort Wingate and
now we're developing a system to
report provide five hundred
megabit by microwave and will
and to on a much larger scale.
quite frankly our customers
cannot afford the infrastructure
that it takes to get to these
more rural or remote areas of
the state thus the need for the
the PRC of fund to carry some of
the operating costs to to to
reach our a customer segment for
our customers to reach the
outside world do we have fought
over the years to keep that fund
healthy in order to keep our
customers healthy and accessible
to the quality of life that you
may enjoy in other metropolitan
areas here in the state and but
we found ample reasons and in
working with apple because in
working with the center for the
on an agreement here to have a a
from a top to bottom review of
of of the fund program and and
bring that back to to the this
is the legislature thank you Sir
thank you Mr chairman and I I
just want to say that the you
may if you allow for others to
speak in support of where you'll
hear the large where those
companies also are now a neutral
or supportive of what we've done
here they were at the table the
discussions as well so what
you're seeing here is just
continuing to edge the ball
forward on pushing monies we do
collect for these purposes to
broadband.
Right so well to the audience to
use for those of those of.
One fifty five substitution.
Take the time from here to
there.
Good afternoon Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Marco Gonzales and other
registered lobbyists for Verizon
how we want to thank the sponsor
for bringing this forward and
his tireless work for really
making this so much better bill
and bringing it to where it is
right now in this form and with
that Mr chairman and members of
the committee thank you very
much.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Leo Baca
the government affairs director
for lumen also known as
CenturyLink in New Mexico we
stand in full support of the
committee sub for Senate bill
one fifty five it's pretty rare
that you see the industry come
together the way these folks
have and I compliment Senator
Padilla for facilitating all of
that and we do stand in support
of the.
Mr chairman and committee
members thank you for letting me
speak I'm Kelly Slagle that
director of office of broadband
access and expand to I want to
think Senator Padilla for
working with all the different
stakeholders to bring that
different aspects of this bill
together and it will really help
to expand broadband across New
Mexico and especially in the
rural areas so as the office of
by ask you to have a due pass
thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Bob Dick nail most external
affairs director for eighteen T.
for New Mexico in support of
this legislation New Mexico is
doing with this bill what some
other states that have state U.
S. staffs are not doing and
that's take a good hard look at
the future of the fund the fund
had a history of going back to
long distance and local service
the future is broadband I
commend the rest of the industry
for working with us I certainly
commend Senator Padilla for his
leadership a good hard fresh
look at the universal service
fund in New Mexico he's a really
good idea and we appreciate of
the parties working with us in
Senator Padilla thank you Mr
chairman.
The.
One hundred.
Okay.
You have a minute.
Mr chairman members of the
committee on Joan Dickerson was
the
veterans and military families
caucus and it's very important
to our veterans live in rural
areas to have access to reliable
broadband well for telehealth
for education for all of those
things you can do online we
appreciate Senator Padilla for
bringing these creative bills to
establish more broadband in
rural areas and thank you for
your time.
Thank you.
The committee in opposition.
Mr chairman and committee
members my name is Albert can
that come the president and CEO
of the New Mexico surf.
New Mexico serves as the largest
fixed wireless broadband
provider in New Mexico and serve
as the member of the wireless
internet association's national
chapter and is one of the Levin
New Mexico wisps that are part
of with spot.
Additionally there twenty six
other wisps in New Mexico that
provide broadband service in
rural areas throughout New
Mexico their average customer
bases between five hundred and
fifteen hundred subscribers.
I'm also retired chief warrant
officer three with the New
Mexico National Guard and served
as the network security officer
network engineer network manager
personal systems chair and sit
perched chief I have over thirty
years of telecommunications and
computer related fields.
If you'll indulge me for a
minute like to read some staff
at the FCC provided in its two
thousand nineteen order
regarding for Barents of land
lines and TN technologies that's
what we're talking about here.
All right
I'll skip that then in regards
to the bill we propose capping
the fund at twenty twenty three
levels are roughly seventeen
million and allowing I lex to
continue to receive Harris port
at twenty twenty three levels
where they have lost lines are
not as we further believe this
is anti competitive and hurts
consumers and one of our areas
Windstream is the I like and is
a big player Windstream will
receive approximately six
million in support for twenty
twenty three if Windstream loses
five thousand lines they're
still paid for regardless
whether they keep them or not.
Regulations or laws that
subsidize end user customers to
remain a legacy services and
technologies run counter to the
long term benefit of all
consumers.
We believe that allowing the
ilex continue to receive
somebody subsidies for
technology that New Mexicans are
transitioning away from only
hurts consumers I lex do not do
have the opportunity to move
away from the pod systems
install modern IP based voice
systems which could help to
consumers so my legs are
requiring consumers.
Thank you.
Representative Derrick.
Good evening.
Good evening
my name is Terry are you on a
registered lobbyist and I stand
here opposing Senate bill one
fifty five because the past
couple weeks being from northern
New Mexico and doing work with
New Mexico surf and and finding
an understanding about how this
bill affects.
As many of you are aware that
the they section Alice basically
continue funding those incoming
telling telecommunication
carriers until twenty twenty
four twenty twenty five twenty
twenty six three years that's
unfair because right now when
you really look at.
Those incumbent local exchange
carriers are ex.
They begin in twenty eighteen
the question really becomes
where has that money gone to.
And I do know that we get we did
get working Senator Padilla we
did get a break on this million.
That the ilex received
Windstream received close to
five million dollars of that so
the question becomes how is
these monies being distributed
and being unfair is are they
being allocated equally to the
where wireless service
providers.
So these are the questions that
we're asking because you know
the eleven members that are part
of Iraq and the information is
presented.
Okay in twenty twenty two.
When the presented to the Indian
Affairs Committee these
questions were not answered and
that's what was brought up not
today in breaking down those
numbers so I do think that it
needs to be broken down and how
those numbers are going to be
broken down into when you cap
that number four eleven ilex.
To give a response.
I'll be very brief Mr chairman
thank you I
Yes it is one into the hearing
from but but you know that that
being said they did come to the
conversation that I was
discussing with all of the
various providers and parts of
the industry.
And I invited them in I I agree
with them I agree that we need
to find a creative way to
include wisps into what we're
doing with some of the these
dollars we just didn't quite get
to that point and I will as I
told that that in the entity
that you heard from I will
continue to work with them in
the interim and they agreed to
work with me and meet with me in
the interim and for us to find a
way to to support them as well
you know just we're kind of at a
point where we got a cap to
continue modernizing this fund I
I will find a way to incorporate
them into what we're doing so
just there's not enough time
during the session.
Already.
That.
Thank you Mr chairman but one of
the individuals opposes the bill
of this find other co chair of
the house in order to Mexico
have major issues with drugs.
Or so it for the world there.
That is right for this book
about this bill hello.
We have.
We're happy or rural.
This is.
So thank you Mr chairman so and
senator so a couple of things
one is it's going to require the
PRC fund the the the the account
if you were the are you accept
provide up to thirty million
dollars requires them to do that
whether it be a percentage of
flat fee or whatever that they
get to that amount and then also
that we take hi eight four of
eight from what is today eight
million for broadband to
thirteen million dollars so
companies in your area as an
example will have greater access
to be able to apply to larger
individual grants to go into
debt to work on projects in your
area I guess it's best way to
put.
You.
Sure.
All the.
To.
For.
Your.
For years and years yes.
The Senators exited from our
low.
Our approach.
I was called the enforcer the
other day Mr chair.
And how I feel but I'll take it.
Our with.
Hello
The
need to move it out of.
And the yeah yeah.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
yes through the work of the
legislature we have created the
office of broadband access
expansion we have we have ceded
and funded with dollars that
will be leveraged.
In some cases to one in some
cases nineteen to one depending
on what where those funds are
whether they're at the FCC level
or the USDA or what have you the
broadband office in legislation
like this further makes this
eight to thirteen million
dollars and funded to thirty
million dollars it creates more
leveraging capacity for the
state to take some of these
dollars and and make them part
of a package for a broadband
network they can then be
leveraged against federal
dollars so what we've been doing
here you heard from the director
of the office of broadband
access expansion the very
important work that they're
doing links all of our policies
procedures another bill making
its way to the legislature right
now that had a positive hearing
yesterday or the day before kind
of tired Mr chairman but as a
result of all of our terms are
terminology how we look at
broadband will link up to
federal standards which would
make it easier to have federal
dollars flow into the state.
There is.
Sure.
What else this
is a result of your work thank
you Mr.
Help me understand the.
Not withstanding Act with.
That is working.
Twenty three and then World War
limiting a.
Yeah.
So if you if Mr chairman and
senator you basically outlined
at exactly the so these
companies have something called
a access reduction support
payments based on the number of
customers that they provide
services to so that we didn't
have any confusion about of what
sort of investments these
companies could make over the
next three years while the item
on dollars for the item on page
eleven starting on page online
six through really the rest of
the page one money twenty four
while all that work is being
done while it's being studied
this fund is that the best you
support is whatever we thought
what we come forward and freeze
those payments up or down that
would still leave them alone for
that three year period based on
where they are right now and
that that associate with that
paragraph on page seven does one
seventeen through twenty for
expenditure in the.
Chairman.
They would be terminated
because.
Yes Mr chairman so they would be
terminated unless the creative
in crafting Legislative
consorted sister the data that
day that we get from the
professional PRC which you had a
big hand in of of one of the
biggest hands and getting reform
to professionalizing works we're
asking them to come forward with
how's this going for us are we
spending this money right where
we collecting enough are we are
we did are we making an impact
or whatever so ideally those
recommendations will land in
another piece of legislation
that will re read our modernize
that fund as of twenty twenty
six December thirty first or
twenty six.
I was a little bit concerned the
this basic.
Terminates the payments.
May shelter.
They're gonna do a study and
maybe you.
Yeah it's possible or the PRC
could come forward with I'm
again guessing they're gonna
come forward also with with a
piece of legislation or pieces
legislation on what to do with
this funding going forward.
My question with this
legislation basically saying
we're for.
We're terminating the access
reductions related shall be
terminated.
So it doesn't that tell your CD
Act having already.
well they but they would be
doing the study delivering the
results of their study to the
legislature and we would come
forward with a new plan.
Clear that we have to come back
to us that that's right this is
ending and then having them to
study what is ending it
altogether the the vast majority
of the fund actually goes to a
dying technology right now which
is possible and so they're going
to be with all of us are going
to be motivated.
Come forward with a new plan
what we gonna do with this this
but ideally what I'd like to see
happen is we just simply
eliminate the the pots lines
portion of it and just put this
money for broadband in rural
parts of New Mexico.
What is to and I appreciate that
labels here.
I presented this.
Yeah yeah.
Get a little J..
That doesn't cost me a little
bit.
Little bit of hardliners or
eighty something.
All have.
All of.
Seven.
It.
The.
Senator AUMENT.
Thank you members of the
committee.
Thank you
for.
Probably well.
I guess we could sure.
Which is.
Senator.
Sure there's.
Thank you Mr chair and
Members of the.
Committee we have a
The Senate substitute but my
expert witnesses pointed out to
me that the.
It says conservation committee
should say
Tax and business.
Which is your copy showing set
Mr chair.
It is.
Nine nine one.
And access those.
Conservation first that's why we
worked our way.
This corrected on yours.
Okay.
Okay well I guess.
I do not passes and.
For.
Session.
Right.
With.
It will.
Thank you Mr chair the.
So CMMI convicts.
The change could be expanded to
explain in one sentence which is
the
The man that for the the
difference the only difference
in the bill is at the royalty.
payments the natural gas vented
or flared
during a oil or natural gas.
Production.
Will not be
One of the
Collected.
So eliminating.
Hello please and flared and
That is oil and gas.
From the bill.
Is that correct.
That's it.
Not.
I think of the.
Thank you okay because it is a
clarification Mr chairman
members of the committee zoom
way Stewart deputy commissioner.
Public land so basically what
the substitute does is it
removes language that was in
there that clarified that the
Land Office could collect on
wasted vented and flared gas
because of the methane rule
that's currently in place that
is really reduced the venting
and flaring that provision was
in viewed as something that was
critical so now under the bill
the only substantive changes
changing the royalty rate from
twenty to twenty five percent.
So
Before we have questions the new
years support of a.
Senate bill one for.
Senator.
Thank you very much committee
let's get it with the Serra club
you're gonna chapter
representing our thirty five
thousand members we stand in
support of the increase of
twenty five percent real two new
leases oil and gas is a publicly
held resource extracted off
public land for profit and the
state and the land beneficiaries
should be fairly compensated for
this resource
so yeah again we we stand in
support and as well with the
committee substitute thank you.
What else.
Go ahead.
Government at.
Maybe chairman chairman members
the committee my name is Mason
may director for the league of
women voters of New Mexico the
extensions trying to port I've
just be one sixty four thanks to
sponsors to bring this
legislation forward.
SP one sixty four is considered
the positions on environmental
justice and state finances.
Just be one sixty four insurance
just data management has to
support needed to maximize
profits and minimize
administrative costs of
protecting the environment in
preserving value.
We request give you do passed
yes the one sixty thank you.
Right this.
To check want to chat check.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is JD
Bullington speaking on behalf of
the greater Albuquerque chamber
of commerce our state's revenues
are at an all time high a large
portion of those revenues are
coming from the oil and gas
projections show these revenues
should continue at this level
for around another ten years
hopefully but that's if the
conditions remain right if we
want to keep this oil and gas
money flowing in it has to be
profitable for oil and gas
producer's meaning we must
consider with care the kinds of
costs we impose on the industry
and jumping from a royalty rate
of one fifth to one fourth
increases costs for producers so
the greater Albuquerque chamber
of commerce believes this bill
would take us a step in the
wrong direction increasing costs
for the industry that
financially sustains our state
that's why the greater Abakaliki
chamber of commerce is
respectfully opposing Senate
bill one sixty four.
Mr chair members the committee
my name is Jim Winchester
executive director of the
independent petroleum
association of New Mexico we
represent predominately smaller
producers in the state I want to
thank the the sponsor as well as
the State Land Office for
removing the stipulation on
royalties on vented and flaring
methane that being said we still
stand in opposition because we
do have some concerns that do
remain
with operators look to lease and
drill they look at the overall
burden in cost that takes place
in in New Mexico it's been shown
by studies that we have the
highest tax burden when it comes
to drilling a new well in
operating here in New Mexico
in when you add up all those
various taxes that take takes
place it makes a lot more
difficult for smaller producers
to maintain a profit margin
there is a definite
disproportionate impact on
smaller producers with a higher
royalty rate a lot of these
producers are not the kind that
are drilling ten to twelve wells
are here there may be drilling
one or two every few years so
they're operating and thinner
margins and taking way more
money from those particular
small producers makes it a lot
more operationally difficult to
remain feasible so for those
reasons we do stand in
respectful opposition thank you.
They are many.
At thank.
I do appreciate it they set up a
eighty thousand hearing today I
was looking at the beginning
wearing pearls and LCD has been
working for them.
The fact that they do that the
following and your producers
that don't follow the rules and
sometimes twenty five million
dollars today this on thousand
dollar so you know those those
things or places where all of
those cities are you roll and
they have the ability yes ma'am
glad to to remove that part of
the meeting and he organised.
Doing the same thing would
almost be like double jeopardy
so those.
With regard to the to the world
the issue and I know in the many
of the comments of the year that
yeah we're not inclined taxes
tax charges twenty five years
and the thing about state lands
in New Mexico and Texas.
Here.
St Louis.
Our.
Thank you thank you Mr chair
thank you for the question I
don't know the exact number but
I do know what.
Which which you're getting at is
which.
We
Have a higher percentage of oil
and gas for the the produced a
public land in Texas.
Here in Texas private landed in
they have their own time that.
The
overall cost of that.
Learn more at.
The house New Mexico by our
costs or.
All of this edition of the.
Looking back around.
Seven worry about that the
rating and of our topic that.
It is stated.
All.
Large.
Data source data.
well small.
It is five years later.
I.
Service
providers it allows you to.
There is well the the large
counties around.
So this call
is for uses for I need for work
this song is just waiting.
You may also.
Small.
What is the size to.
I go I go to Texas.
So are.
About one.
The.
That serves State Land Office.
The money.
I just don't understand.
We're trying to.
This is a great all.
Yes in.
Thank you for the question Mr
chair of the deferred the
comment to my expert witness Mr
chair Senator.
The reason why we're doing this
is a school kids the school for
the blind the school for the
deaf are beneficiaries of our
trust we were given these lands
with a legal mandate by the
federal government to make money
this is a public resource it is
not a tax this is a royalty as
you know so we are saying we're
willing to give the company.
Currently eighty percent of that
resource if they pay just twenty
percent we're seeing twenty five
is the appropriate amount it's
market rate you mentioned the
the private sector it's twenty
five percent in the Permian
basin is the best oil producing
region that we have in the
United States it's
you know and in New Mexico in
the Delaware basin is you know
it's one of the best basins in
terms of production one of the
cheapest places for oil and gas
to produce so you know what we
understand that that companies
are making billions of dollars
in terms of revenue we get that
we think the school kids should
get a little bit more the market
right this hasn't been raised
since nineteen seventy it's a
cap to artificial.
They've had the twenty five
percent in Texas since nineteen
ninety and we think that the
school kids deserve to get a
market rate that's our mandate
that's a commissioners
petitioner responsibility so so
that's why we're here today if
if the legislature wants to just
taxes on in other areas
absolutely and that's the
progress of the legislature but
we are looking at the lands of
royalties not taxes.
And
one of his
ears.
Where.
Marketing.
I lost.
Texas.
Texas yes.
Legislation.
It from me.
So you know it's about to.
Hi Stacey.
The state.
If you look at the two.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
and thank shelter for
for working to remove the
the burden on banning and flared
I mean I get such a fair thing
Senator current talked talked a
lot about some of the challenges
that she she usually and you're
honestly when you look at
boarding guests all.
You look at.
Two sources of the media revenue
were not immediately Jackley but
one source of the media revenue
to the Land Office of bonus by.
Bonus payments each year which
see if this goes through a sea
of bonus payments shuffle
because the overall cost of the
operation will be higher because
royalty rate will be higher
that surely a a possibility as
you as you look at that but what
what we're doing what we're
doing here is we're if we're
driving up the cost to.
These operators to have the
opportunity.
To be.
Somewhere else.
They have the opportunity to be
in Texas they have the
opportunity to remain in New
Mexico and and beyond on the
federal leases they have they
have the opportunity to continue
to maybe not by moral
leashes oral or leased or.
Because they can sit there and
drill all the properties at the
they have currently
sure there's there's all sorts
of operations or no alternative
options that they may have that
then keeps them from engaging in
New leases and pay and higher
report please those those things
are certainly true for me.
Issues you know surveil calluses
are cash cows issue would would
make just the money.
We have we have opportunities
even today.
To to help them a little bit and
we choose not to.
We had a
we had a tax.
Bill that would help small
producers.
With tax credits but we've
chosen not to include it in the
tax package we have.
Show all wishing to manage to do
you need to drive a cost for
keep them from having
opportunities to do better.
To help them help us.
And we we choose not to do that.
And so while I understand we
Rozzi should been it was the
range of binge by twenty five
percent for
Forty years inflation
it's not like that's
particularly new but it's not
like those places continue to
get leased up as well
Thank you for thanks for
competitive when it comes to to
buy and leashes especially when
they start violations from
private property owners which
Texas is a large part of Texas a
private property owners they
might be twenty five percent
They Might Be eighteen.
Yeah they might be sixteen they
might be a six version eight
verses of faith purchased twenty
five percent.
I used to buy so I know what
they are.
But
We can we can sit there and and
talk about what might happen and
that's that's factoring we might
say Jane changes twenty five
percent it will bother anybody.
But it will.
It will.
And it will keep oil and gas
operators from doing what they
do best and bring in revenue to
to our state and so Mr chair and
senator I can't I can't
supported now we cannot move for
Everton's more.
Because I know there's so much
other stuff that we charge these
guys today.
And it's not you know we were
talking we heard something just
a little bit ago there was an
equity issue which can with
issues just could you say taxes
charges a quarter we should
charge a quarter that's that's
not a very good argument.
The
the state of Texas.
Public school lance may charge a
quarter the
Other Texas lands may charge a
quarter.
If there even Alicia.
Show our so I don't know we all
but I think that it's
We we just don't we don't have a
reason to do this and I I can't
see work budget just to do it
sure thank you Mr chair and and
sanctions thank you Mr chair in
the.
By expert witness would like to.
To comment on his gun Senator a.
The questions from the
committee.
of direct.
So it's just a comment.
The.
Zero.
To.
C..
The city.
The world.
Practice.
Right.
Yes.
No.
Senator Wirth.
In
addition.
For yes is.
That.
Our middle.
Senator Brandt.
The.
Decrease.
Senator how do we are yeah.
Senator Sanchez no.
Thank you Tom and yes Senator
Wirth.
One is.
Yes.
I guess.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee.
Earlier than this are you.
We don't.
Percent of I would.
Okay.
That.
House Bill have fifty ninety
ever.
For.
Right click.
Thank you Mr chairman the before
you today is house bill ninety
and to my ride is my experts Mr
Jack burden with the ready law
firm.
With offices in Albuquerque and
Santa Fe.
House bill ninety is a is an
update to the uniform commercial
code.
That tries to find the updates
necessary to keep up with
technology and tries to bring
the uniform commercial code up
to date with all the advances in
technology with respect to
transactions that involve
different forms of money that
we've seen before.
different forms of transactions
that and then we have to deal
with in the past largely
electronically driven and
technology driven.
And
Mr chair I I don't know if I
need to go into the the process
of how we get these bills
through the very important log
Commission The to I'm happy to
do so if you'd like but other
than that it's a very lengthy
bill.
Provides of basically just
simply updates to the existing
uniform commercial code that has
been in existence in New Mexico
for many decades and is a
workforce of allowing
transactions to occur not only
in New Mexico but nationwide so
that would stand for questions
and less you want to go into
further detail
all right we'll go through the
audience and with your support.
So I house bill ninety.
And we're in opposition.
Committee.
Share this then this post is
Senate Judiciary I think it's
the next often I'm very much
appreciate Representative divert
Devin out taking one for the
team.
Having carried a number of these
bills I think the record with us
and divert you might have been
involved as uniform securities
act that I curate was about six
hundred pages and just about set
everyone off the ledge because
that was a really tough one this
is just the cleanup so I I would
pass the test with this second.
Over the course of.
I guess.
That.
For the best place senator.
The opposition to the new
password.
S. thank you Mr chair of the
committee.
Senator Burt William.
Hello to move to table.
What they would.
One is building.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee today haven't the
Senate bill two thirty two
I think was back in two thousand
sixteen we're if we were able to
tighten up some of the
credentialing with doctors and
physicians to ensure that are
you most we're able to load them
in the system and do it in a way
so that they can get to work
start seeing patients and and
be reimbursed for doing so but
unfortunately there was just a
small loophole that was
discovered and it has to do with
loading them into the system so
they were satisfied the statute
in okay we've done the
credentialing process
everything's good but while it
took waving way longer than it
should to load them in the
system this closes that gap
shortens that period of time and
then we we were able to
negotiate out and in decrease
the number of days from forty
five days to thirty days and
this is important for the
doctors at there's not any red
flags there's nothing from the
D. A. or or anybody that might
have an issue with one of the
providers so those that are the
doctors that we want providing
services immediately we're able
to get them in thirty days and
then if there is a red flag of
brought up then we allow for an
extended period of time for
those positions I think that
amounts for five percent of the
physicians currently with
that'll stand for questions.
The in the support of US Senate
bill thirty two minutes.
Good evening Mr chairman members
the committee Kerry revenue for
North The New Mexico Medical
Society this is a really
important bill to make sure that
when we're able to recruit
physicians we can get them
credential to through insurance
and they can actually start
billing the insurance at the
same time so we fully support
the bill we hope that passes
thanks.
Mr chair members of the
committee Linda Siegel for the
nurse practitioners nurse
midwives of TV's are colleges
gamma we support this bill
because we need to get all these
providers credential in a timely
manner.
Mr chair members of the
committee a page to handle from
the office of the superintendent
insurance and we were one of the
parties that identified at this
issue and we'd be grateful for
the facts thanks.
The.
The roads that we're good enough
Mr.
Not
one part.
Senator Kernan question for
quickly.
So they get credential in the
primary phone.
That's the.
It retroactive.
So they see patients their
production C..
Thank you.
Mr chair Senator they do and
that's that was the issue before
even even when we started this
process is they they end up
having to move that money to the
to the physician but they're
able to save on interest if
they're not having to put that
money out so we're just fixing
that loophole.
Thank you.
The.
In other words pleasure I just
Senator said for.
The opposition to do fast
motion.
Not that in Mister chair if you
wanna hear to anyone or do you
want to roll it it's whatever
pleasure I know you have a hard
stop at seven so if you want to
roll it that's fine with me
that's fine just put me up first
place.
Already so we'll go with the
hello seven eight.
This is Alex.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
committee this is a bill that
allows that provides for the
elimination of cost sharing for
diagnostic and supplemental
press screenings and I'm sure
all of you are aware that early
detection of breast cancer leads
to much more positive outcomes
then delays and what we have
found Mr chair is although
mammograms are covered out
without without cost for many
young women
follow up diagnostic screening
when they're it's medically
necessary in indicated is not
and that the cost of those
screenings can range from from
several hundred dollars to even
a thousand dollars these costs
there by you know
dissuade women from timely
follow up in often cause them to
delay getting the necessary
treatment that they have so this
would eliminate the cost sharing
for those plans that already
provide that coverage Mr chair.
That I stand for questions it.
Audience here to support.
Seventy eight the.
That.
A little bit of fun community
schools
but in this issue.
The.
Although the.
Forty five.
on the second those.
Opposition to pass motion.
Not just thank you very much Mr
chair there one.
Also one.
yes thank you very much this
bill provides for
allows the department of
transportation to waive
administrative fees annual fees
for infrastructure authorized
pursuant to this act used to
provide broadband to unserved
and underserved locations as
defined by the connect New
Mexico act it's Senator Padilla
is my co sponsor he has a mirror
essentially a mayor bill that I
believe you all may have heard
previously he did indicate that
you had on the intent is to
allow the department of
transportation to provide easy
access for providers who are
serving you know frankly rural
New Mexico largely so that makes
it more cost effective for them
and they don't have to pay you
know well market fees Mr chair
and committee.
Years of what also what six.
A couple of people.
What is as of the question
anybody opposition.
Go check okay are going to thank
you Mr chairman members the
committee JD Bullington speaking
on behalf of the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
one of the biggest obstacles to
connective itty in our state is
navigating rights of way
authorizing the state land
office to grant these rights of
way for the necessary
infrastructure across our public
lands will take us a long way in
getting people online in every
corner of the state New Mexicans
need more broadband and this
bill will help bring
connectivity to them much faster
thank you to.
Hi Mr chair committee members my
name is whichever to look pretty
ask a valley telephone we serve
five counties in a very rural
area in southeast New Mexico
just a couple things we we stand
in support of this bill The New
Mexico duty fees are relatively
new to us that that's something
that just kind of started twenty
any waving of those will
certainly benefit us the only
thing we would like to see is
instead of that they may waive
the fees is that they shall
waive the fees just just so
there isn't any kind of any any
kind of confusion because any
any fees are going to slow down
the deployment of broadband in
our rural areas thank you.
Scott Scanlon Richard lobbyist
for the New Mexico cable
association we've been working
with Representative for over
here on this matter and we
appreciate her bringing us into
it remember the table provides
more broadband to citizens of
New Mexico than any other entity
in the state so we very much
appreciate her we appreciate
this bill in order support
thank.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Leo Baca on
the government affairs director
for lumen and also registered
lobbyist we stand in full
support of this bill I know that
Representative Chandler is
worked very hard on this subject
she and I personally have had
many conversations about
concerns from the industry as
far right away costs go and so I
think this bill goes a long way
to help allow for lower right
away faster broadband providers
to provide more broadband
especially in the rural areas so
for that reason we stand support
thank you.
Mr chairman members committee
chase on the US registered
lobbyists for the New Mexico
exchange carrier group our
companies of of rely on right
away to
get broadband out to in these
rural areas and we want to thank
the sponsor for bringing this
forward and we think this will
actually help in in a way
because it is just time
consuming trying to get right
aways and then then costly on
top of that we ordered your
support thank you.
If.
Mr chair members of the
committee quickly tells a can
that with the New Mexico chamber
of commerce I don't repeat what
has already been stated but we
agree and want to thank the
sponsors for bringing this
forward thank you.
Good Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Clint
harden I'm restrict lobbyist for
plateau anymore and for all all
the other reasons we stand in
support of this legislation
thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee.
It.
Where.
Have.
Thank you appreciate that
anybody opposition.
So another cat Act presidency of
New Mexico Sir if I guess all my
colleagues are for this I wasn't
invited to the memos to the the
the party I guess so the reason
that I may not be in opposition
to it but but the way the bill
is right and is it only allows
for underserved and unserved
areas to where NMDOT can waive
the fees what about the other
areas where do you take it has
rules that they're looking at
the charging five thousand
dollars a mile per year for
fiber so I just you know those
other areas why would they want
to do that and so that's one of
the reasons were in opposition
if that's not what the bill says
then we we would be for it but
the way the bills are and is
it's it's not doing that the
other reason is it might be
against federal law because it
says in forty seven USC to fifty
three see that nothing in this
section affects the authority of
a state or local government to
manage the public right of ways
or to require fair and
reasonable compensation from
telecommunication providers on a
competitively neutral and non
discrimination basically for the
public roadways so if you if you
don't allow one provider to have
fees you can't allow the other
one either because it's
competitively neutral it's anti
competitive and that's why we
stand in opposition thank you.
The to read the rest of this I
appreciate that put into this
again we didn't know that
there's some confusion maybe
that somewhat of let us know
here but we propose a bill for a
minute based on section do that
which allows for state transit
commission to waive the and the.
It this is the other part that
when it was amended in the first
and health they took up the fees
so I think that there's some
clarification about that one is
basically looking at it from the
FCC rule W. T. docket number
seventeen dash on the line for
so long must be competitive in
New Mexico and if we just want
to make sure that it violates.
Thirty seven US cities to fifty
three so I think if you just
delete do and allow everyone not
to charge any fees I think that
would make it a little bit
easier.
Thank you.
The.
Can I just have one small thing
Sir thank you apologize Mr
Chairman representative so I
just want to remind everybody
that this is a ninety nine point
nine nine percent more of Senate
bill six Senate tax business
transportation committee so
super Madam ninety seven which I
passed out of here on he was
January thirty first or
something Teno so it's I saw
that you know what what you're
hearing today is almost an exact
more and the
what you just heard Page three
lines it's not that they would
waive them they may waive that
is what I was rates thank you.
Got a good memory.
Yes it is.
Research center.
The opposition.
The motion.
To the best of the General.
I
feel.
Thank you Mr chair to.
Chris.
Okay go ahead Representative
good evening Mr chairman members
of the committee do you prefer
early is this Sir no the one in
front of you is okay okay we
will do that we're here.
All that.
We are here on Senate on house
bill seventy eight which just
two things Mr chairman first it
removes the sunset clause for
the aviation department of the
department transportations one
other funding mechanisms which
is the G. R. T. distribution it
also asks that that here to the
G. R. T. distribution be
increased from two hundred fifty
thousand dollars a month to five
hundred thousand dollars a month
thing next to me is right now
he's the director of the
aviation division at DOT
wonderful resource of all things
aviation information related and
I Dandurand from the department
is also around here and we stand
for questions.
Right up to the audiences but it
is for those of you of the
seventy eight as amended.
All over.
The.
Mr chair members of the
committee a case on the US
registered lobbyists for the
city is a car on school
municipal airport we strongly
stand strong in support of this
and ask your of support thank
you.
But as of oil these lines but it
opposition.
You know.
This is a a motion for the
best place Senator senses.
With the question what is the
question for a.
So Mister chair and
representative of the sunset
currently.
Thirty eight point thirty.
That is correct Mr chairman
floor leader worth we actually
just went through that two years
ago and which we renew the
sunset clause on this bill.
So.
Share or fully removing some.
Mr Chairman leader worth yes
that is the ask
for that.
Mr as.
leader worship and nine
chairman.
The way the aviation department
is funded is kind of unlike any
other type of of of department
to and usually for sunset
clauses you're looking at the
type of tax deduction or another
mechanism that was supposed to
submit its supposed to support
our produce some sort of a
result that is not at all what
we have here and how we fund the
aviation Department Mr Chairman
leader worth I I would submit to
you that actually we should fund
the aviation department which is
in charge of the safety of
aviation for the entire state of
New Mexico in a way in which you
don't have to keep coming back
for re authorization by the
legislature but this is the the
manner in which the legislature
before us chose to grow but
we're we're not asking for a tax
deduction that'll produce more
business or hope that you know
more people moved to New Mexico
we're simply asking for G. R. T.
distribution that keeps our
aviation in the state safe so
that's why we're asking for the
the complete
I thought of this.
It is a very strange way.
Yeah.
Here are five not to those here
or ninety.
On
the day is there any
generalization or.
Mr chairman of the floor leader
there are a couple of different
distributions to come for
special projects maybe three
section nine and house bill two
but that's actually one of the
things that I have dedicated
myself to working on this and
new chairwoman for of
transportation in the house is
we're going to figure out a new
way to fund the aviation
division one that makes a lot
more sense.
Here Representative my best
answer I've heard.
What needs to happen yeah.
This feels to me like.
Band aid approach that we've
done in terms of funding and if
you were to do it I just would
really encourage you to well we
have resources like this
analysis line to line the state
revenues.
Once again once the.
What's the resources go ways
really really tough.
That's all I have to thank you
the.
The the the festival visitors
center Representative.
Rigs.
The opposition to invest motion.
You know fast Senator thank you
thank you members of the.
I think.
Yes.
