But just chair before we begin I
want to make a disclosure which
I did two years ago in my
practice as a hi to get
appointed as a wrongful death
personal representative I've
done those cases involving
medical malpractice cases I want
to fully disclose I don't
believe it's a conflict but I do
want to make sure I let everyone
know that up front and I think
it's.
For folks to understand that I
did that two years ago and I
want to make sure.
Do the dishes thank you so much.
Thank you good thank you Mr
chair Ellen I want to very to a
physician.
For us.
I was wrong or my wife is a
partner in politics opens of New
Mexico which is an anthem gold
falls toward the state so there
you go we're all of that.
What would you get when you have
a phone to legislative order
profit.
These pieces conflicted.
Okay as a lawyer.
All right senator senator
Senator to go ahead and.
You Mr I'm sorry Senator great
I mean the tension patients.
Rural again there where we're
going as a state.
That's the are generally the
bill the bill for you today
Mister chair members of the
committee
we're going to talk a little bit
about a committees but the
original bill two of two ninety
six medical malpractice Mr
Chairman I was when I was
introduced would permanently fix
the Mexico miss classification
of independent own health
patients so these and the
malpractice act it would ensure
that they are permanent place
under independent providers for
medical malpractice for a little
history member with a couple
years ago we did malpractice
reform in November of twenty one
independent physician owned
dependence controlled outpatient
facilities alerted all of us
that they were unable to secure
medical malpractice insurance in
member during that special
session and the price that they
presented to us we granted them
independent operations
facilities two year reprieve and
that was part of that that
though we did during the special
session because they were being
treated as if they were
hospitals under the act so our
bill our bill would actually
extend that after two years that
language that they are
considered independent providers
not hospitals and there's a hole
in the reasons why they're not
under hospitals from
reimbursement rates to.
Many many reasons we can talk to
talk
we have had extensive conference
conversations both myself and
Senator Hickey with the
governor's office on about this
bill and we have a committee so
for you that they have they have
looked at and they've asked us
to introduce and if you wouldn't
mind Mr chair so we can move
this up and then we can talk
about this
The motion.
Representative current
performance that we have.
Do not pass on the the original
to ninety six I do have some of
percent of the two ninety six.
The those second.
Any opposition to the motion.
None.
Thank you Mr chair this up again
as we said we measure would
cause conversation with the
governor's office they they
recommend we do to fix with the
language which is in the
original bill and this bill off
over doing with the independent
providers of the malpractice act
they also asked us to put in a
two year delay on the increase
in the caps for independent
operations facilities until
January one twenty twenty six I
mean that the legislature will
have two more years like we did
last time to actually have an in
depth conversation and after
some back and forth of twin
Center Hickey myself in the
governor's office we had a
creation of a task force of that
medical experts lawyers
administrative to folks includes
leadership off of our house and
Senate both Republican and
Democrat he creates a leader
sixteen members of the task
force actually look at the
holistic approach of malpractice
and come back with ideas in on
that task force included doctors
nurse practitioners
medical malpractice lawyers both
defense and plaintiff and so
they were supposed to come back
within two years for more
solution so that is what our
conversations with the
governor's office with work
right now and we can talk about
the the critical issues that
we're facing a special dog could
patient facilities here being
Not a growing and one case not
building and other cases
potentially closing and have the
impact that's going to have a
New Mexicans and so even though
the task force look at all
Medicaid our members are medical
malpractice the this bill would
only deal with the outpatient
today a patient the so it's not
the wholistic malpractice
situation with that Mr chair I
have for expert witness plus of
course my co sponsor this
bipartisan effort Senator Hickey
Mr chair I am going to ask Dr
Gabriel Adams from Southwest I
gaster ology and I'm New Mexico
I'm sorry.
Kerry I'm sorry I I hi John
Kerry my apologies care first we
all know carry someone have a
Kerry make some statements
first.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee my name
is Kerry robin printer on the
registered lobbyists for the New
Mexico Medical Society and we
thank you all for the
opportunity to be able to
discuss the very real problem
that we are trying to solve the
committee said that Senate bill
two ninety six in New Mexico
there are two ways that
healthcare providers can receive
medical malpractice insurance
the first way is through the
patient compensation fund a
common risk pool that was
created in the nineteen
seventies through the medical
malpractice at the NMAA struck a
unique families to benefit both
physicians and patients as a
benefit to physicians any claims
brought against the position
would have the limit on economic
and non economic damages that
would be awarded against the
physician as a benefit to
patients the NMAA guarantee that
regardless of the limitation on
damages patients could be
awarded unlimited punitive
damages and lifetime medical
costs paid to the PCS to be
clear the PCS guarantees that
all future medical expenses will
be paid for the injured patient
no matter the cost so how does
coverage under the PCF work a
physician obtains a two hundred
and fifty thousand dollar policy
on the open market for
underlying coverage there then
assess a surcharge for
participation in the patient
compensation fund which covers
the physician for all of the
claims from two hundred and
fifty one thousand up to the
seven hundred and fifty thousand
dollar cash then the PCS on top
of the seven hundred fifty
thousand dollars would pay all
lifetime medical expenses and
any punitive damages that are
awarded the surcharge of the
physician pays covers the total
cost of that insurance the
second way to secure insurance
is outside of the PCS through an
industry standard one million
three million dollar policy let
me explain how that works if the
physician is sued due to
malpractice the insurance policy
will pay out one million dollars
for that one point the Polish.
C. will then cover only three
claims in a calendar year
meeting the most the insurance
would pay out would be three
million dollars in the aggregate
but it's really important to
understand that if you were
insured outside of the patient
compensation fund there is no
protection of the and judgments
can be unlimited so here's the
problem the legislature fails
Act of the twenty twenty three
legislative session
independently owned and
controlled outpatient facilities
will move from the independent
provider cap of seven hundred
fifty thousand dollars up to the
hospital cap of five million in
twenty twenty four four six
million in twenty twenty six
this will require an independent
outpatient facility to secure
insurance like a hospital even
though they are not hospitals in
this scenario a facility would
secured the first two hundred
and fifty thousand dollars on
the open market then pay the
surcharge to the PCS to have
coverage from two hundred and
fifty one thousand up to the
seven hundred and fifty thousand
dollars but then they have to go
back out on to the insurance
market to secure coverage for
everything from seven hundred
and fifty one thousand up to the
five point six million dollars
there is no insurance available
through the patient compensation
fund for an independent
outpatient facility to cover
that seven hundred and fifty one
to the five or six million
dollars this fact has been
agreed to by all of the
stakeholders and denial letters
from insurers are included in
the packet we provided for you
today but here's what's
compounding the problem it's
true that independent outpatient
facilities can secure a one
million three million dollar
policy on the open market but
there is no access coverage
available to those outpatient
facilities to cover claims above
the one million dollar limit we
have been asked to confirm that
there's no excess coverage which
we had done this week and those
denials are also in.
Included in your packet this
means that independent
outpatient facilities would be
left woefully under insured and
are therefore unable to practice
medicine forcing independent
outpatient facilities to leave
the PCS due to the
unavailability of Insurance or
forcing them to practice under
insured is bad for physicians
but it's even worse for patients
they will no longer have the
guarantee of lifetime medicals
and have less monetary awards
they are harmed you've been told
that this is a manufacturer
insurance crisis we assure you
it is not and we hope to discuss
that further in the question and
answer period we believe that
the committee sub for Senate
bill two ninety six all the
immediate problem our
independent outpatient facility
space and will allow them to
stay open for an additional two
years well we also hope that the
task force of experts will allow
us to reasonably discuss
solutions to our increasingly
unstable medical malpractice
environment.
The next very thank you Care
think Mr chair New Mexico we
have Dr Gabriel Adams with the
southwest gas round ology.
Well the Mike if you want thank
you independently there you go.
Good afternoon Mister.
Chair of the members my name is
act every R. Adams for you hold
the button on.
Thank you.
Good afternoon Mister chair
committee members folks listen
again here as well thank you my
name is Dr Gabriel Adams thank
you for the opportunity to
testify in favor of the
committee sub of Senate bill two
ninety six.
Southwest gas rural G. of was
established over forty years ago
by Dr Robert land who is here
today in the aisle.
We're an independent practice
that specializes in
gastrointestinal disorders which
include liver and pancreatic
diseases we take care of over
two hundred and fifty thousand
New Mexicans all over the state
including the Navajo Nation The
New Mexico Pablo's we see
approximately fifty thousand
patients a year.
In spite of New Mexico having
the highest rate of liver
disease related deaths New
Mexico does not have a
transplant center however
through our advocacy the
university of Colorado now has
an outreach clinic three to four
times a week at our facility
which is open to any patient
from throughout New Mexico for
liver transplant evaluation here
in state we provide a hundred
percent of the need I care for
you and M. Santa hospital
inpatient hospital we provide
one hundred percent of options
do I care.
Presbyterian health plan which
is an employed physician model
recently contracted with us as
their GI group cannot meet the
needs of their patients.
In nineteen ninety eight we
opened the first outpatient GI
lab in New Mexico to improve
access to care at a lower cost
to New Mexicans southwest
endoscopy is an independently
owned outpatient care facility
which is one of the facilities
listed in house bill seventy
five we perform over thirteen
thousand procedures outpatient
procedures a year primarily up
for endoscopy and colonoscopy
ease we differ from a hospital
in many ways for one we take
care of stable outpatients we
are certified by different
entities most importantly we
provide the equivalent care at a
fraction of the cost to the
patient to the state and to the
federal government because state
or federal and state government
classify us as different
entities that a hospital and
then a hospital owned outpatient
care facility I'm gonna share an
anecdote about how significant
this can be when my son was in
middle school which is a long
time ago because he's a first
year medical student here at UNM
he accidentally swallowed a
quarter when he was at a swim
meet on a weekend drive land
came in to the hospital went to
the hospital and performed an
endoscopy and that foreign body
extraction.
He went straight to the GI lab
no ER visit nothing the bill I
received was over five thousand
dollars a hundred and fifty of
that was for Dr land the rest
with the hospital facility fee
that was over ten years ago if
that had been done at our
facility it would have been less
than a thousand dollars.
So.
That brings me to the matter at
hand.
House bill seventy five which
was passed in two thousand
twenty five one misclassified
our facility as a hospital and
that resulted in the fact that
that type of facility is
uninsurable this unintended
consequence was recognized in
the fall of twenty one as
outlined by Senator more and how
House Bill eleven was passed but
that is set to expire January
first of two thousand twenty
four since then nothing has
changed other than we have
received more denial letters
from insurers and we are unable
to end up obtain insurance
within the patient compensation
fund or outside of the patient
compensation fund at the higher
caps required.
It's substitution for Senate
bill two ninety six is not
passed many practices including
our own are going to be forced
to practice either uninsured or
underinsured.
The Senate bill substitution was
the result of collaboration
between our legislators and the
governor staff and the New
Mexico Medical Society and it
will allow independently owned
outpatient providers to continue
to provide care to New Mexico
and it establishes the task
force to further assist study
this very complex issue of
medical malpractice.
So.
In closing I want to acknowledge
that we share the same
objectives of improving the
lives of New Mexicans are
lawyers are motivated by justice
you are citizen legislators do
so by crafting and repealing
legislation that is flawed.
Being a physician as a calling
it is a calling that I heard
when I was eleven years old
growing up in the old Mexico not
New Mexico in a rural area it's
a calling to promote wellness to
heal and when healing is not
possible to provide comfort and
to be present for our patients
it's a calling I do not want to
give up.
And I won't have to if you pass
Senate bill two ninety six
substitution thank you.
Next.
Next we have Dr mark three with
ex resources New Mexico.
Chairman.
Mr chairman of Senate centers of
the committee thank you for this
folder all folks in the audience
even our committee members as
well.
But.
Mr chairman and committee
members thank you for this
opportunity to speak before you
X. ray so shoots of New Mexico
is a hundred percent position
known private practice operating
for more than seventy years here
in New Mexico we are group of
twenty five radiologists three
breast surgeons in to nurse
practitioners with seven offices
across the state from Farmington
to Alamogordo provide radiology
services to for hospitals three
of which are located in rural
areas and the number of primary
care clinics and the Santo
Domingo pueblo.
Annually we provide care to over
three hundred thousand New
Mexicans each year we drop
patients from all over the state
for breast cancer diagnosis and
treatment and all other imaging
services as well including the
first outpatient interventional
radiology services in the state.
Presently we are constructing a
comprehensive breast health and
imaging center in Albuquerque
with an intent to streamline
care for breast care patients
improve access to care and
reduce the time from diagnosis
of breast cancer from diagnosis
for treatment from dying from
time from diagnosis to treatment
from months to weeks even today
we are have experience just
today another patient with
metastatic breast cancer who
cannot get or surgery here in
Santa Fe for about a month and a
half and literally in
Albuquerque not until July which
is an unacceptable delay.
The imaging center would also
provide all types of imaging for
all types of patients as well
the building has been designed
to include an average our
surgery center the completion of
which has been put on hold
because of the current
malpractice situation in the
state under we would be remiss
classified along with Dr Adams
lab as a hospital in under those
higher caps we have been unable
to find insurance we have
experienced the same refusals of
the insurance companies to.
Right those policies at the a
five or six million dollar caps
are necessary the highest that
we can find outside the act
would be the typical one million
three million dollar cap which
would leave us uninsured and
with the patients in adequately
insured for lifetime medical
care by new on being part of the
patient compensation fund if
forward is not good enough on
the zoom meeting we have an
insurance broker could be happy
to answer your questions about
this who as of national level of
experience with malpractice.
And to a lesser SB less systems
to bill is passed the A. S. C.
will remain empty for the time
being and I believe breast
cancer patients full subsidy
will suffer.
Further complicating the
malpractice issue the HSD is
completely closed within a
single building housing patient
clinics extensive imaging
capabilities including MRI CT
mammography and ultrasound it is
unclear as laws written is with
the entire building and also
medical **** would be considered
like a hospital under the under
the act that were the case would
be unable to operate the
insurance costs would be through
the roof we urge you to pass the
compromise bill that the
substitute as between ninety six
to allow us to continue to build
and expand and take care of
patients in New Mexico thank
you.
Dr for in that we have doctor
Kamar with renal associates and.
Andres the chair person Senator
Shendo and members of the
committee my name the giant
camara and I'm a kidney doctor
kidney specialists to.
I belong to re not messing
associates I'm the president
partner I'm also medical
director of the transplant
program that we share with
Presbyterian in Albuquerque it
is the only second transplant
kidney transplant center in New
Mexico and we is on the only
kidney pancreas transplant in
New Mexico.
my group was established fifty
years ago this is our fifty year
anniversary nineteen seventy
three but my group put stab list
I finished my training at
Stanford and talked at medical
school for eight two years
before we chose New Mexico are
home I work in this group that
thirteen doctors and thirteen
nurse practitioners.
Find care via clinics and
dialysis clinics in Albuquerque
Rio Rancho Bernard Leo Los Lunas
Sapporo Los crucis Clovis Roger
them and Santa Domingo pueblo.
We provide complete a spectrum
of mythology Care we that
includes chronic kidney disease
and blood pressure management
dialysis therapy for life saving
dialysis therapy for patients
with kidney failure we find no
problem need coverage at various
hospitals in the state.
We also do clinical research at
my practice during peak of COVID
we partnered with AstraZeneca
and did try and with.
The COVID vaccine that brought
it to fruition.
we already talked about kidney
and kidney pancreas transplant
program.
Just a little bit about kidney
disease New Mexico the kidney
disease prevalence is extremely
high there is fourteen percent
of prevalence of CKD O. chronic
kidney disease in the general
population but if you look at
Medicaid recipients one third of
them have kidney disease kidney
disease primarily affects poor
and minorities.
In New Mexico there are about
five thousand two hundred sixty
three patients with end stage
renal disease that is patients
needing dialysis or have a
kidney transplant off them at
about five thirty eight hundred
are on dialysis my group
provides care to about one third
of that group in all along all
around the state.
In July twenty nineteen through
presidential declaration
advancing kidney health
initiative it was suggested that
eighty percent of patients on
dialysis should either do
dialysis at home or have kidney
transplant to that effect we
started a home dialysis clinic
in Los crucis I'm currently we
provide home dialysis training
to fifteen patients there from
rural areas surrounding the city
that dialysis unit is covered
through patient compensation
fund if this bill does not pass
we will be closing that unit by
the end of this year and sending
those patients to in center
dialysis unit for three times a
week treatment.
We also run a vascular access
center in my office which is a
small surgical center currently
works as extension of practice
and covered under patient
compensation fund we plan to
expand to ambulatory surgical
center like Dr pepper said to
provide me better care to our
patients we provide care to
about twelve hundred dollars is
patients who need continued
surgical management to keep that
access open I just give you an
example if a patient comes to an
outpatient ambulatory surgical
center the most common procedure
that's performed just from back
to me which is removal of clot
from annexes that's clotted and
cannot be used for dialysis if
that procedure is done in
hospital the chair charge for
that is thirty five thousand
dollars.
If that procedure is done that
outpatient hospital facility the
charges five thousand dollars if
that procedures done in my in in
in our up and let's see surgical
center is fifteen hundred
dollars.
So I just giving an example of
unintended consequences of this
bill that will bring it to all
these outpatient surgical
centers we talked about like Dr
Adams Dr W. it increases the
cost of care my patients will
have to wait in the emergency
room in the hospital to get this
procedure done.
It just does not make sense so I
ate it up in open up through my
group and patients that do
provide care to all on all over
New Mexico I I ask you to
consider this bill so give us a
reprieve till this can be
discussed at a bigger level
thank you.
Thank you doctors are really
over appreciated unfortunate or
to drive Senator Hickey I just
want to from our perspective it
also consults New Mexico Dr
draper said was correct the
imposed COVID world the
pathologist or C. cancer and
tumors that are bigger a much
more aggressive and downright
scary as was at the pathologists
are saying and it is that time
bomb is out there right now
what's going on in New Mexico
and across the country
particularly but what doctor
prefer mentioned I think it's
very important to emphasize what
we're facing special tumors of
out there right now Dr Keith.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
and colleagues good to see you
this afternoon good to see my
column my former colleagues here
in their in their white coats
some of them were my medical
students and residents long ago
and bandits refreshing to see
that they're in active practice
and and helping to take care of
New Mexicans and basically what
I want to close with is kind of
we're at the precipice right now
the fund is almost on life
support
because there's not enough money
and that
the inability to get insurance
for a number of these groups me
they'll have to speak for
themselves but as many have come
to me from from their groups
there it because of the
malpractice situation in New
Mexico and that and the
perception of the difficulty in
getting coverage they're having
a very difficult time recruiting
in New Mexico orthopedics told
me the other day that three
joint surgeons just left the
state because they feel that
it's too dangerous for them and
they cannot recruit to fill
given the situation now I want
to be completely fair about this
and say we have another major
issue in New Mexico and that has
to do with the fact that we're
gonna have to grapple with at
some point we're starting this
year and that's that half of the
work the physicians do has
Medicaid reimbursement that
eighty five percent of Medicare
that's not of of a doable wage
to keep an office open and
With with that again the
Medicaid is going to raise for
primary care two hundred and
twenty percent but we have to
remember New Mexico we compared
to other states the the base
rate of Medicare which all these
indexes are the pricing the
hundred twenty percent comes
from for about thirty to forty
percent behind other states and
if you want some point I can
give you the the formulas that
that create that situation so we
are going to have to address
that issue and and that is one
that's out there but this
malpractice issue is is very
serious particularly in
retaining and keeping physicians
in New Mexico and the other the
other component is that the who
is going to be hurt particularly
those who are now receiving care
through the patient's Fund and
if the fund collapses because so
few people are and it indices
groups close the number of
people this is just a
fundamental law of insurance a
lot of large numbers if you
don't have enough numbers and
it's too small
then you can't really
realistically ensure that small
pool insurance goes away and
that's that's what we're on the
edge of so not only would be
these groups potentially
leaving the others left holding
the funds would have to pay such
astronomical fees to keep it
alive that again it would be
impractical especially for
primary care non procedure based
clinicians to pay into it and
they would relocate other states
around us as I said do paid much
better than we do in New Mexico
based on both Medicare and
Medicaid and to some degree in
commercial so the the other part
really want to make his what's
the danger here is the collapse
of the fund the collapse of
physicians the inability of
people to get.
Care and the.
Representative the many I'm sure
you've heard I get asked all the
time can you get me I'm here
your doctor Senator can you get
me and I can't get me on
anywhere
and I just around let us I did
that to me so I mean it's just
that because they are not there
are there six months or a year
to to getting an appointment and
that's going to only get worse
as time goes on particularly if
this bill does not pass so I'm
asking you to take that into
consideration as well we are not
only affecting these centers we
are affecting access to health
care throughout New Mexico be a
Medicaid commercial or chair and
thank you Mr chair and thank you
colleagues for listening to
these presentations.
Thank you Mr so in closing I
think it's important to say what
this bill is about you know our
doctor to just talk about
Medicaid also additional deal
with Medicaid one of the issues
that he brought up this
equipment capers national
publication just recently right
New Mexico is the worst place to
practice medicine the two issues
that point out what was the
higher prevalence of a
prevalence of Medicaid in the
state and the second was to
malpractice situation so this
bill does not address the of the
macro malpractice issues we have
so I just want to make sure the
committee sub is dealing with
the test only without patients
facilities are we're talking
about
are slow pauses the Capri
creases for two more years and
then quarter at really creates
that task force of the governor
really wanted so we can take a
look at the macro Medicaid
issues thank you Mr chairman
thank you members of the
committee thank you of senators
and at this time of of up to the
audience I know we've got quite
a bit hope to get a long list so
anybody out here in support of
Senate bill two ninety six gonna
have a school.
All right.
Okay I can maybe give ten of you
self select who they are a
minute each or so just to make a
statement I think that will.
Your line up.
Yeah.
That.
The.
I'm not going to take statements
from ten folks so because I know
that there's a lot and and and
we won we've done to see I think
at some point it's going to be
the same so.
All of that but a minute.
Okay so I'm I will be timing
hello also replace.
Then one minute into the fourth
well.
Good afternoon chairman of the
board my name is James us Bob
check I'm a care coordinator for
Christmas Eve instance directly
and emergency department I deal
directly with getting patients.
To after care.
As a committee to the emergency
room the issue that I've come
across is having the access to
patient care for patients.
In.
So directly you know I I believe
we're all involved because it's
going to eventually affect all
of us.
So thank you.
You can say your name and so
forth so as of public let's also
watching.
My name is Alan Firestone I was.
Medical director bill public
health services and Bernalillo
for thirty seven years.
We are nonprofit community based
clinic that has provided primary
health care to Burnley on
surrounding communities for
forty seven years now.
We provide medical safety net in
a recently also assume the
community mental health duties
when the mental health services
in the state began to collapse
because of recent events.
We have been a training site for
medical students residents nurse
practitioner students.
P. A. students and medical
assisting students had a PMR.
Because we're a federally
qualified health center look
alike we have to follow all the
regulations for a few agencies.
We get no grant money we don't
have federal tort claims act
protection.
Our clinic is at risk because we
will be included in the new high
malpractice cap and will be
unable to obtain a higher level
of insurance the doctor.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee on barber
mechanism no colleges and
therefore I cannot own a surgery
center but recently I've been
rescuing surgeons who want to
flee from hospital employment
and from Optum who just fired
their surgeons so I learned
something about surgical billing
and the dirty secret is the
surgeon gets about forty percent
of the bill the rest goes to the
facility when that facility is a
hospital one of my doctors does
a procedure that was charged a
hundred and thirty thousand
dollars he gets five thousand if
we did this of the surgical
center the total bill because
the device cost twenty four
thousand would be about thirty
thousand dollars so we need this
it's also a rural health care
issue because rural hospitals
require senator because that's
the economic engine but surgeons
can't stay if they can't afford
to build their own surgery
centers to do those lower cost
less trout problematic case
basis if they have to do all
those of the hospital it costs
more to patients and they don't
get any of that revenue so if we
want to keep surgeons in this
state and we want to keep rural
hospitals alive we need to pass
this bill so that they can
afford and we can remove that
barrier so they can build
surgery centers have equity in
their communities and be willing
to stay thank you.
Good afternoon chairman Shendo
and members of the committee my
name is Erin Griffin and I'm
here on behalf of my fellow
patients I recently moved to New
Mexico I'm a recent Albuquerque
resident and I want to let you
know from my perspective that
there is an access problem here
I moved here and and the great
for the greater part of a year
eleven months it took me to find
a doctor that could replace a
hip that went out on me as Saleh
to doctors in the course of
those eleven months and two of
them left the state I finally
had to go back and find the
third doctor okay this is not
good access
I you know I just I just say
that you know the please listen
to this room of physicians
that's here they are obviously
committed to providing the
essential care for the quality
of life that New Mexicans
deserve and need so I would just
say here the police loud and
clear obviously a biased because
I am a patient in the in the
interest of full disclosure I'm
also a semi retired insurance
professional executive.
Have a good day.
Me too.
Chairman sendo members of the
committee Nathaniel Roybal all I
am a native New Mexican born and
more to New Mexico and have the
privilege of operating on the
sickest highs in New Mexico with
Ratna consultants it's a small
group we operate primarily at a
ambulatory surgery centers but
we see over ten thousand
patients a year we're really
busy New Mexico is a tough place
without two ninety six to keep
our doors open it is a litigious
state that's just how it goes we
ranked number seven in the
country for a number of suits
filed against our doctors we
ranked number eleven in the
country for settlements to our
doctors and these are normalized
to our small population as we
need to think about not to
belittle what's happening to our
patients these are the worst
things that could ever happen to
a doctor and a patient for
something like this to happen
with in a malpractice situation
but it's incredibly rare less
than one in fifty thousand we
have to be careful that we don't
legislate on behalf of point
zero one percent of patients and
her one hundred percent of New
Mexicans and so I ask you to
listen to these doctors I think
they brought up some incredible
point yes for two ninety six.
Thank you.
Hi Mr chairman community members
I am Dr teddy students came I'm
a general surgeon training
Canada Montana state's fourteen
years ago
I've been practicing in New
Mexico for four years I live in
Las Vegas
Dr Nancy right now I bought a
building in New Mexico hundred
year old historic building
renovating it to be an endoscopy
center I'm currently working in
Clovis New Mexico I have into
this and this Copic specialty
and my plan was to open an
endoscopy center there's a big
need in that corner of the state
there's a hope all people are
getting their screening
colonoscopy ease a lot of people
not finding their their content
is not being found alarming
Clovis I found three
Representative Joe characters in
a week just finally hitting
after year there there calling
cancer screening last there is a
need I can't get the insurance I
can get the one three off the
you know the private sector I
can't I've tried I can get the
five women I can't get the six
limit I've got the denial
letters as well it doesn't exist
I would love to stay in New
Mexico I fell in love with the
people but as it stands I will
have to leave I will be able to
open this the center and and and
it's gonna break my heart and as
and my patients so please vote
yes on this.
My name is Carrie Harmon and I
am not a physician I am a
patient I guess to be a patient
levels with this gentleman right
here my daughter my family have
been patients with New Mexico
cancer center and I'm also a
patient with opted to.
Just recently lost all their
surgeons and I have many permit
you've heard many many personal
instances of the delay in
accessing care and this New
Mexico in New Mexico I can't I
can't add I can add to that with
many examples of my own my own
personal experiences my family's
experiences my friends and
acquaintances experience with
delay in accessing medical care
not only the months it takes to
see a specialist but even your
primary care physicians and you
know I can add to that it's
already been eloquently sent but
what I'm here and I can say is
that I have a growing concern
and it should be your concern as
well that this delay in
accessing care is basically it
concerns me that because there
is the lack of continuity of
care for these patients
especially when you have eight
months between primary care
physicians who leads the state
in your reassigned to another
one so my understanding I think
that this lack of continuity of
care is going to lead to a delay
in diagnosis interventions
treatments and ultimately
negative outcomes which I assure
you have happened so I have one
final say I understand that this
state has a tax credit for
nurses implemented this year for
nurses working in a hospital
setting for full time also a
military tax credit for
military retirees for three for
three more years I'm assuming
the intent of that is to retain
nursing in the state to retain
military retirees in the state
and I am for you please to
thoughtful consideration for
passing or amending legislation
that will decrease this medical
crisis thank you.
Good afternoon chairman and
members the committee have my
name is Jason Perry I'm not a
physician I'm the mayor pro tem
of the city of Roswell and I
come more as a patient and also
to Representative out my
constituents there that are
having problems in Roswell these
kind of facilities are so
necessary expressly in places
like Ralph well because we are
servicing places like Rio does
so Artesia Tatum many areas
around us as well we have a
facility being built right now
they're putting brick and mortar
up right now for five surgeons
that if something does not
happen they will never open the
doors they're not going to be
able to they I just was received
clarification that they cannot
get the
the the insurance it is not
possible we need them to be able
to have these kind of facilities
to do these minor procedures how
the money or something that
happens to other people I just
had a minor procedure on Monday
that one minor to me but
But my podiatrist informed me
after he did the procedure on
making that he's leaving and
Roswell and having to head to
Kentucky he cannot afford to to
continue to to operate I had a
medical instant incident that
happened in two thousand and
seventeen that changed my life
and now my physician seeing a
neurologist I have to travel
four hundred miles round trip to
see a neurologist to see my
pulmonologist I have to travel
four hundred miles round trip to
see dermatologist I just started
with a dermatologist in Roswell
that I hope will be able to stay
if something it changes but all
of my major concerns my
cardiologists everything is a
four hundred mile we need to be
able to have these kind of
places here in Roswell because
if we do have these places in
Roswell then the hospitals my
wife is a proud employee of
loveless side she has been for
number of years they will be
able to do more those major
surgeries that be able to do
more of these emergency
surgeries that they're having to
put people on airplanes and ship
them to love I can tell pass one
of the places force on
employing.
Yes I'm just saying Billy I am
just employ with you to please
do so and do something for the
folks in New Mexico thank you.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is David Roddy
on the health policy director
The New Mexico primary care
association association members
serve three hundred seventy
thousand New Mexicans and a
hundred fifty locations around
the state eighty percent of the
rural
three quarters of my members of
federally qualified receive
federal tort claims act but a
half a dozen members in
communities like child and right
tone and burn a Leo I'm not
covered by by tort claims in the
stock to Firestone said there
will be greatly impacted we
thank the sponsors for bring
this bill and we your tier
support thank you.
Good afternoon Mister chair and
members of the committee my name
is Dr cleo Lopez and I'm a
family physician here in Santa
Fe and I'm representing the New
Mexico Academy of Family
physicians which recommend that
represents over nine hundred
family doctors in New Mexico and
you have heard excellent
testimony so I won't repeat it I
just heard you and all the
members of the academy or need
to pass this thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman my name is
Dan weeks are representative
Mexico hospital association the
association urges your support
of this legislation the medical
malpractice act as many.
Allen's of this is probably the
most immediate one that I can
see at this point in time if you
don't have doctors you don't
have a hospitals and so is very
critical that we maintain
access to health care and we put
our patients first and I think
although this is just a bandaid
taking care one of the many
issues that's a problematic in
the act we really urge you to
support it because it is a
critical issue at this point in
time thank.
We'll take two more we're
already at ten so.
Thank you chairman and members
of the committee and Dr Parker
may I also work at southwest gas
terminology I'm trained at UNM I
want to stay locally I only
joined a at an outpatient based
group because the first woman in
New Mexico Gastroenterol agis to
this was there and how they
recruited me and she has been.
a mentor and since then we now
have recruited and been able to
have six women.
In our group page out of a out
of the the specialty that only
has eighteen percent of women
would like to stay here continue
recruiting I think we've done a
good job and would like to
continue thank you for your
consideration.
What is more.
Good afternoon
good afternoon chairman and the
committee my name is Dr Taylor
and I'm also from southwest
Gastroenterol logy thank you for
letting me speak today
New Mexicans are struggling
taxes health care here you need
to know that people are
underserved.
Bill are suffering and the
doctors who are here today are
the doctors who have
demonstrated a commitment to
patients in the state there are
many more who have left or will
not come here.
we all know there has been a
problem for a long time with
recruiting retaining doctors but
we all know that the problem has
worsened recently and it is now
at a crisis.
We provide critical care to
underserved population with all
types of insurance from all
corners of the state we see
patients from all of your
districts.
And partly because large health
organizations in the state can't
service all the patients and
you've heard about that today as
well the life saving procedures
that we perform in our endoscopy
center that is all physician
owned or cheaper for the
patients and cheaper for the
insurance companies and while
Medicaid and Medicare do not
reimburse us like hospitals H.
P. seventy five Alonso said Mike
hospitals in subjects us to the
five million dollar cap.
We shown you we cannot obtain
insurance.
SB two ninety six removes the
physician owned outpatient care
facilities from the cap that
supplied hospitals and I urge
you to please support the bill.
Thank you.
Mr chair.
It is I know that would just
give one individual okay go it
will go with that one that side
of.
The agency there might have.
I.
Right it's going.
my technology Mr Mike McMillan.
We've got.
A minute if you're hearing us
you can tell me to sell.
Some.
no Terry Cole was on there I
will go ahead and call on Terry
Cole.
Are you on the phone.
You.
Right.
Education.
Terry called.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Terry called find the
president and CEO of the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
the allocation medical
facilities covered by this
legislation are not hospitals so
they shouldn't be treated as
such under our medical
malpractice lawsuits the fact is
that cost in excess of that
would be of help here the
company for more phenomena
Development fatter unity's
without adequate numbers
sections well not graph they
will not track company for crown
this is a guy your problem the
reason LFC secret shopper study
found that Medicaid enrollees
for example are only able to get
a primary care behavioral health
appointment thirteen percent of
the time we're
working primary care doctor
hundred twenty five five and
nearly sixty OPG wides there's a
lot we need to do to contact or
healthcare worker shortage of
this legislation is one key
piece New Mexico so we cannot
become an impossibly expensive
place to practice even the
administration's Human Services
Department centers legislation
have tracked more providers
Mexico thank you take care
was a project there was an error
to apply hospital malpractice
captivity on hospital facility
for the health of our
communities it is time to seven
eight six seven thank you Mr
chair members of the committee.
All right thank you at this time
we will go to anybody that is in
opposition of Senate bill two
ninety six.
I believe there's seven folks
that I've signed up so give you
guys a.
A minute.
Zero Zachary Keelan.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Zachary
Keelan Committee Mexico Attorney
a board member of the New Mexico
that native American disability
law center and I serve on
economic development authority
for my and tribal communities
the Caddo nation I'm here in my
individual capacity today to
talk about the impact on Indian
country in our federations and
poor in rural New Mexicans that
receive health care at
facilities that are covered by
the federal tort claims act
which is brought up here as you
may know the tenth circuit
applies the caps that from the
Mexico medical malpractice act
on those facilities to this
includes the IHS facilities that
are clinics in Crown Point and
to Hachey in Shiprock the one
near Bloomfield that ones in the
Albuquerque area surface area
for IHS which include surface of
the nineteen Pueblo as the Karia
tribe also urban Indian
communities and that receive
care at first choice in First
Nations addition it applies to
all of the veteran clinics that
are that are that are throughout
our state such as the outpatient
clinics and Alamogordo Artesia
Espanola Farmington Gallup Las
Vegas Albuquerque Raton Santa Fe
Silvercity tiles and truth or
consequences this is an
unintended consequence it's
going to hurt people's access to
justice in our state if the if
the caps are lowered and they're
not even participating in the
fund.
Get the love or.
Thank you chairman and committee
members and good afternoon
everyone I'm Cathy love I
represent patients who have been
harmed by medical malpractice
most of what you have heard
today has absolutely nothing to
do with the cap on outpatient
health care facilities that are
intended to be covered by this
larger cap we're talking about
standalone ER's and places where
Anastasia's surgeries happen and
catastrophic injuries can can
happen you have heard for a year
and a half the Southwes gastric
can't to get insurance over the
last week we've now learned that
in fact they can get insurance
on the private market like
everyone else
nonetheless you've also heard
that the provider shortage has
everything to do with medical
malpractice and what we know
from the American medical
association is that the
attribute this to many issues
not laws that hold hospitals
doctors accountable to patients
and patient safety.
Nonetheless we offered to the
medical society to
We are not talking about mom and
pop clinics here we're talking
about big clinics where invasive
procedures are done X. three
associates has a job listing for
radiology right radiologist
position for six hundred
thousand dollars a year with
three months of vacation a year.
I am really disappointed that
the medical society and others
have shut the door in our faces
on negotiations and instead
insist on maintaining a campaign
of divisiveness fear and delay
of justice for patients.
So.
That is reserve.
Good afternoon Mister chair
members of the committee my name
is muddy and I and I and I'm
here on behalf of fairness for
New Mexico patients these are
all patients I've worked with
over the last year and a half
you can't be here to lobby every
single day
one thing that I want to make
very clear is that punishing
patience is not going to help
the doctor shortage.
You know I am working with
patients right now who are
scared to publish their names
they live in tiny towns because
they're fearing that the doctors
in their towns will know them
and they're going to face
retaliation
so it you know that speaking to
a lot of the media and the
divisiveness that's going on
around this campaign
the other thing that we keep
hearing is that the PCF is good
for patients and I will tell you
that my patients that I work
with do not like the PCS what
I've been hearing the word
protection for you all.
Action for you all means
injustice for your patience caps
are limits on justice for
patients we need to make that
really clear
you know the unlimited or
lifetime
at money that this is supposed
to provide for injuries I need
you to know that my patients are
continually denied when they try
to seek that money from the PCS.
what we know is that data shows
is that instituting caps doesn't
reduce premiums data shows us
this y'all's insurance goes up
because the insurance industry
wants it to.
Not because of hostile seventy
five not because patients got a
little bit more justice than
they had before.
You know we should all be on the
same side and I know I said this
is the last committee hearing
but the same insurance companies
that are over working you all
that tell you all you only have
minutes with patients to see
them and we have this industry
now of medical care are the same
people.
Thank you please say no to this
legislation.
Thank you Lisa address the
committee not the audience
please.
Thank you Mr chair members the
committee John Lipschutz with
The New Mexico federation of
labor we represent workers
workers to get all sometimes to
get injured on work sites go to
get help for that injury and
whether it be potentially
through negligence or by
accident that injury could turn
into something much worse
I'm here a need for a
respectfully in opposition to
this bill because we're not just
here on behalf of our members
but the family of our members
the the our members are you know
a lot of times the sole
breadwinners in their your
providers in their household and
when they are unable to work and
contribute to something even
worse happens where the they are
lost to us there needs to be
fair compensation for their
families to ensure that they are
able to move on
a in a just way so for that
reason and others that you've
heard we again respectfully
oppose this legislation.
You.
Mr chair members of the
committee.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is betting
separating Opelka and internet
Mexico Center online poverty we
respectfully oppose SB two
ninety six because we stand with
our families and patients who
were harmed when they were when
they receive health care when
patients go through a tragedy
due to malpractice the
experience enormous financial
and personal loss our laws
should be fair to our families
so they can be made whole and
not undermine the protections
that they finally have in place
our state's provider shortage is
not caused by the malpractice
cap the solution to provider
shortages were identified to the
many recommendations already
given by New Mexico's health
care workforce committee let's
keep our medical malpractice law
as is and instead pursue these
other solutions to tackle our
provider shortage thank you.
You
I have three is there a Brianna
Baker of them.
If we only got a minute.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee thank
you for hearing from you today
my name is Breanna Baker and I'm
a multi generational New
Mexicans who was born and raised
in rural New Mexico my.
The changes resulting from my
prior experience began in two
thousand sits with the heart
attack that my Hyundai knows for
three eight.
Do the misdiagnosis I lost my
unborn child and can no longer
conceive due to my low carb
function any of our transplant.
A jury of my peers and I was one
of my my practice in the Senate
that the damage I would cost
millions over the course of my
lifetime however I never saw a
fraction of that because of cap
some damage.
There has continued to be a
financial impact because of out
of pocket costs for my
medication The New Mexico's
compensation fund delay funds to
my pharmacies that pay up front
and ask for reimbursement with
with a may or may not do since I
am on strict instructions to
never Mr changes does I cannot
avoid these costs I recently
almost last name I in our home
testing machine because the New
Mexico state compensation fund
request a new prescription and
explanation from my provider
asked why I needed the.
It took over here to get it
cleared up I have to constantly
fight with the PCS to get what I
need the PC Act is already back
for patients please don't make
it the the worst will no I can't
be two ninety six thank you.
Thank you eight eight eight a
Schmitt.
After and mute Mr chair.
The.
Please go.
Okay thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee.
I have been a civil litigation
paralegal for thirty three years
during that time and it
suggested in defending manual
many medical professionals in
law malpractice lawsuits.
My job was to do what I could to
assist in the limitation of the
amount of the jury award and now
there's a cap some states have
it sometime States down New
Mexico does.
I'm also with it I lost my
husband.
Twenty two years and my best
friend through a medical
malpractice event that occurred
by a provider and with the
facility I understand that this
legislation is seeking to cap on
smaller facilities not the small
ones that we heard earlier but
still I keep that on facilities
and I think that we need to
protect the system so that it
provides fair compensation to
people I don't think that
they're Medicaid status should
diminish them as a person and
and have them receive less
because they go to a smaller
clinic we're gonna get there
some day if this legislation
passes we have to do what's fair
for everyone involved in it
would appear that negotiations
should continue before passing
this thank you.
All right was there anybody else
there was one more.
Great.
Okay
great do you have about a minute
please.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Greg Coates
I'm a medical doctor and I've
been a litigator representing
patients for over thirty years I
oppose this bill on the grounds
of fairness and its attempt to
shield high risk high profit
outpatient health care
facilities from full
responsibility when they injure
or kill their patients I want to
be specific today about the
consequences of this bill on
patients so I'll tell you about
a man named Daniel Hoberman who
is a healthy man with a history
of heart surgery and four days
before he underwent a surgery in
outpatient health care facility
he had an abnormal EKG it was a
nor Mr Hovor mail was sixty five
he is dead now survived by his
wife and two kids what happened
occurred on a Friday March
twenty twenty two Los crucis
surgery center it is an
outpatient health care
facilities it was for an
elective surgery involving a
deviated septum the surgery
itself was uneventful he went to
recovery unfortunately no
doctors were present he was
managed solely by a nurse hired
by that outpatient facility
postoperatively Mr Homer male
had a chest pain of nine and ten
he also complained of nausea and
Harper no EKG was done no labs
were obtained instead at five PM
on Friday Mr Hovor mail was sent
home he went home with chest
pain in two hours he was dead at
his home and are it since then
his RN's has altered the records
and change to score from a nine
to a two so this bill would have
predetermined the value of Mr
Hovor males live at seven
hundred fifty thousand dollars
notwithstanding all that nickel
Act malfeasance and records
deception this bill takes from
the jury a fair determination of
the value of a life like Mr
dandruff over males Mr chair for
those reasons I oppose this
bill.
Thank you.
Chair Mister Carlos on tag on
the line should get into Texas
she's try to sign it and we're
we're finished with that we're
gonna have the maturity.
So well are there committee
comments questions.
What is it like nobody's.
Really trying to be polite to
the all the years.
Process we.
I'm happy job in that you know
this is a frustrating place to
be.
For a couple reasons.
First you know two years ago and
deal was reached medical society
and the trial lawyers
Got together and resolve this
kind of a.
Train wreck that was about to
happen with two different bills
that were competing.
And it was a deal that every
member of this committee except
for senator Sanchez voted for
the floor maybe he saw something
that we didn't see.
But I I point that out because
we talked about this and this
committee that this puts us in a
really tough place Center Tom at
a bill you know where the deal
was reached on the work and save
and he was coming in trying to
change it and what's of concern
was raised about that it does
make things hard again this
place works on on people being
at the table and I understand we
were in the middle of COVID I
get that
but I think we've got obviously
kind of an insurance issue that
seems to be driving.
The need to have the discussion
about real readjusting
potentially where we are so I
wanted to say that up front I I
also want to disclose I was
passed
by Kathy love to facilitate a
meeting with southwest southwest
which on Monday I did I just
Senator Baca also be there I
thought it was constructive
there was communications back
and forth
and again it's frustrating to me
that we're now in a place where
apparently.
The only solution is what's
what's being proposed here in
the legislation
So I do have a couple questions
that I want to figure out and I
guess my first one is it's been
Representative that the coverage
that can be purchased as a one
million three million policy up
is there an excess policy that
can be purchased on top of that.
Chair members the.
Wirth
Question after the conversation
that happened on Monday there
was a specific request that was
made that we make sure on that
there is no excess coverage
available we went back out to
our brokers and we have received
and I letters which are in your
packet that there is no access
coverage available in the New
Mexico market meaning that the
physicians would continue to be
under insured so they can be
covered for a one million dollar
policy with a three claim limit
so actor get of three million
there's no excess coverage on
top of that we have asked
insurers why and I'm happy to
tell you about that if you would
like me to but I want to answer
your specific question first
there's no excess coverage
offered so I'm and that job I
didn't get that sense from the
meeting on Monday that that was
the case
and again I mean this is one of
the hard pieces and again I
think it's important to figure
out exactly what is available
and I very much present want to
say to everyone that the the
trial lawyers in the letter that
was written asking the.
So what Tate Senator Baca was
there as well the way it was
left if there truly is an
unresolvable problem there was a
commitment to collaborating to
provide a fair solution.
And I appreciated that I think
that's how you that's an
important step to take and I
just.
I guess I'm just frustrated by
the fact that we seem to have.
Can be in a different place.
With respect to that position
from Monday but that's where we
are
I do I do want to follow up with
the the gentleman we talked
about the tribal consequences I
want to understand that I don't
I don't completely understand
that yes if I could Mr Mel madam
chair it that's okay I just I I
want to understand why the cap
how it affects the different
tribal funds because I wasn't
completely aware of that so I
think that would be helpful to
offer the same thing for you if
you don't mind coming to the
microphone.
Thank you.
Federal facility.
Federal is that working hello
alright.
Federal facilities that receive
coverage under the federal tort
claims act under ten circuit law
the they apply the medic The New
Mexico medical malpractice cap
to those claims so limits those
patients compensations even the
those entities aren't paying
into the fund whatsoever it
looks to New Mexico law applies
those caps to it so that's how
it applies to not only I. H. S.
facilities but also the Veterans
Affairs clinics that I mentioned
that are all over the state as
well as
Lows amatory outpatient Veterans
Affairs committees are clinics
as well as places like First
Nations as well that have
coverage under the federal tort
claims act and in and it's also
I think important to if we look
around like if we look next door
Arizona has no caps and no
insurance crisis Kentucky has no
cap which was brought up today
so there are several I think
there's several inch insurance
pieces that need to be dealt
with
and fully considered.
Madam I appreciate that make
sure I understand so.
If this particular substitutes
with pass.
Leave the cap at seven fifty for
the next.
Two years basically that's going
to impact all these tribal.
I think would affect tribal
communities and.
Our veterans and poor and rural
New Mexicans that receive care
at facilities that are federally
federally funded such as
Presbyterian medical services
that facility which is a federal
facility that has federal tort
claims act coverage no one I
think reasonably anticipated
that the tenth circuit would do
that but we don't have control
over that so we you know for if
they're applying it to
outpatient clinics than under
the logic of that case the the
that would probably apply and
that's the that's the concern
and it's a group of constituents
there's not really being
considered in this debate I
appreciate that.
Guess what I mean.
Really there's insurance issue
here and that's what's driving
the dispute that we are.
Is that the issue of excess
coverage I mean can you get
access coverage outside of New
Mexico is that an option.
Mr or madam chair members the
committee and senator Wirth
we've not asked the question
outside of New Mexico but it is
very hard to compare apples to
apples there are many states
that have had very significant
tort reform that has raised the
bar that individual cases have
to me in order to file a claim
and by increasing the bar and by
having that kind of tort reform
it has actually controlled the
insurance market and
accessibility to insurance in
different ways other than caps
that's what's happened in the
state of Arizona we have been
told by the insurers that this
kind of access coverage does not
exist in markets around the
country we have not asked a
specific question for what would
happen in Texas what would
happen in Colorado but we have
been told that the national
standard is a one million three
million dollar policy and that
access coverage does not exist
in the state of New Mexico for a
multitude of reasons I think
it's also really important if I
may madam chair and and senator
just as somewhat of a response.
We were asked by miss love to
consider that the the Indian
health services and the VA
facilities we do not feel that
the medical society is at
liberty to make any kind of
agreements or negotiations on
facilities that are outside of
our control and I think that
that is why the task force that
we are proposing within the
committee substitute would be an
appropriate place for those
conversations to take place I am
not at liberty to make to make
that deal or do you think
negotiation so I think that
that's why the task force
becomes important because there
are questions that need to be
answered but I don't think that
they can be answered
appropriately here in the number
of days that we have left in the
legislative session and I and I
appreciate that and I think
you're right I mean I I visited
with Senator Hickey and had I
mean I get this is something we
need to obviously we need to
work on I think the immediate
question now is how do we figure
out where to go from here and
that's why I'm just it just it
doesn't make sense to me that
you can't get off of relevance
you know from somewhere that
says I'm just having a hard
time.
Let me Senator more money just
just one one final thing and
I'll yield the floor there was
representation about you have
discussions with the governor's
staff you know with the trial
lawyers part of that discussion.
I have personal conversations
with the government staff and I
believe Senator if you have
personal conversation with the
governor I can't speak to if you
want to say what was in the room
on the ship was in that way.
Madam chair and senator Wirth
myself the governor and her
health advisors
for representative Armstrong and
Jeanette diplomacy we're in the
room and it
and there was a meeting a day
prior with Gina and Debbie and
we were trying to find a
solution
and a compromise that the
governor's might be able to
Work with and and move forward
and and we did come up with the
idea if we could get a two year
holding period but also we did
discuss how again this cut is
coming up here and and again
it's it's not an apples to
apples she said Arizona has a
whole lot more physicians they
have to they have tort reform
California has significant tort
reform yeah and and so it's you
but in New Mexico with that with
the track record and so forth
it's as a former insurance
person this is a hive this this
just by what has happened is
already high risk state so
that's why we really want to put
together this task force and to
stop I get that I I just I met
while I was in a meeting with
the governor this morning she's
very unhappy with where this.
FY frankly what I'm worried
about we start moving one bill I
can tell you right now there's
some other bills that should
scare everybody in this room
that that there are a lot of
people what happened with this
deal it was done two years ago a
lot of happy people in this room
on your side of table I want to
assure you there's a lot of
unhappy people on the other side
of the table that would like to
just eliminate the caps
altogether and I'm really
concerned if we start moving
bills here we're gonna have
another bill to go that
direction and we're gonna be
right back into the place we
were two years ago having said
that we got two weeks I mean we
need to figure this out and I
just I hope.
That again rather than thinking
we're gonna pass a bill to solve
the problem here and I
appreciate let me say this I
want to be clear I appreciate
you came in with this up I'm
here you guys are trying to find
a solution and I think in
fairness that's that's important
to recognize this is different
in the bill you started with and
I want to be that that is
exactly the kind of thinking we
need to do is just we've got to
get all the party sitting at the
table to try to figure out the
solution and that hasn't
happened yet and and that's what
that's that's what I that's kind
of where I am on this and I
just.
I just wanna stated if we if we
if we do start passing bills
we're gonna end up with bills on
both sides I don't think we're
gonna get a solution.
Mr chair Senator a this so
that's the idea of the task
force which you are specifically
named to for your does because
wells others are in this room so
I think that is that what you
were referring to that that long
term planning and figuring out
the macro issues that we're
dealing with because this bill
does not address the entire
issue of medical malpractice
claims court doesn't come close
to it this is a very narrow
scope on on their medical
malpractice and in trying to get
all the stakeholders again I was
the governor's desire that list
of made a phone of the sixteen
members comes from her staff and
from the governor herself and an
office and with this Madam I
think the challenge becomes
hello yeah how do we deal in
that we.
Because this bill just keep
status quo that results in.
Another period of time when
we're dealing with the seven
hundred fifty thousand dollars
cap number that that's the part
that hurts the patients I get
the I get I'm I'm here allowing
clear from the doctors as well I
I this is this is something
that's got to get fixed here and
I just want I'm not gonna vote
for this bill but I want you to
know I'm committed to trying to
get everyone to continue at the
table and try and figure this
out as soon as we can because
the longer course just years in
the next two and half weeks
because that's our window here I
provided a solution.
Founded and I'm certain.
We appreciate that senator
senator the yeah Senator is.
Thank you very much and thank
you all for being here and good
to.
You're the comments actually at
in the special social work I
want to go back to the process
brought it up I want to talk a
little bit about what happened
two years ago and that process
was done issue said during
trying circumstances anyway
everything was online our
communication with the people
that needed to be heard very
minimal I know Senator Hickey
center for state taxes I had an
all to a bill that I'm not sure
if it ever had a hearing
certainly not.
Efficient hearing that needed
and I thought it was a good bill
is based a lot of what the US
office of the superintendent of
insurance recommended would you
go back and read that report
was very clear recommendations
PCF how things should move
forward.
Sarah I think that study was
very good looking forward to
another study but I want to tell
you about that go she ation that
occurred two years
from my perspective.
Bottom line is yes on both for
the bills of course those I have
ever taken in twenty years and
I'm gonna.
And I feel responsible for your
vote
I don't know who offered to
cause us at the spoke this bill
because if you do not if we make
any attempt to change this bill
the work was they're gonna go
back upstairs it is going to
have no can that's what we were
told.
And the thing that concerns me
most about that negotiations was
in the room you want to talk
about he was in the rain.
the doctors weren't there.
Hospitals I guess were there but
I don't know that they look
after the doctors very much an
Odyssey I appreciate you being
here Mr waste and I don't see
anyone from Presbyterian
loveless or anybody being that
close attention was flawed from
the beginning and I have those
two for that bill because I was
fearful of what would happen to
these doctors all across the
state of New Mexico and worst of
ever taken in my life
and so we need to circle back
and I appreciate the fact that
we need to do a study the state
fair study needs to be some
where we hear from everyone not
just the trial lawyers the
hospital Representative
It Kerry at
madam chair Mister chair if you
would please talk about.
Rueful don't not much detail but
I I hope that the communication
between of the opposing sides
has occurred differently can you
share what you know about the
attempt she actions.
Looted impact one thing that
that I think that has been a
problem for the doctor shoe fit
by the burden of trying to prove
you can't get insurance I would
like to hear from someone who
would say well this is where you
can get insurance the burden of
proof of the on the other side.
Tell me where I can get
insurance that is number one for
both rocket even four of the
purchases we've got an issue
they're proving about insurance
itself that's what the study of
the COVID and I look forward to
that opportunity for those of
you will be indifferent and I
hope it is a very broad.
Representative group of people
that can really come together to
do this I figured if you'll talk
a little bit about the thank you
to failure in negotiations
Mr chairman and members of the
committee and Senator Kernan
thank you for the opportunity.
On Monday there was a meeting
that was held our general
counsel Dr deference Adams were
present along with us three
representatives that was kind of
mediated by Senator Baca and
senator Wirth.
During that meeting there was
agreements my understanding that
it is true there is no insurance
available within the patient
compensation fund to cover
independent outpatient
facilities at the higher limits
so then the question was asked
is there excess coverage
available for independently
owned outpatient facilities
outside of the patient
compensation fund in in in
addition to the one million
three million dollar policies we
had all of our independent
outpatient facilities contact
their brokers we send all of the
denial letters as they came in
to the New Mexico trial lawyers
association so that they could
see in real time at the largest
insurers in the state were in
fact in line the excess coverage
most most of the reason why is
because the total amount of
medical malpractice premiums
that are collected in the entire
state of New Mexico for
physicians and surgeons it's
twenty million dollars the
largest carrier collects twelve
million dollars of premium in
New Mexico so if they were to
write even access coverage at
higher limits for five or six
million dollars one claim what
take out almost half of the
largest insurers and ties pre
entire premium it is not food
dish yearly responsible for
those insurance companies
actually rate these policies
which is why they will not do it
in our state at that point in
time there was a conversation
where there were other issues
put on the table like the
federally qualified health care
centers IHS the VA we are not at
liberty to make any kind of
negotiations around those in
addition to changes in
definitions which we are also
not at the place to be able to
talk about right now we feel
like it is most appropriate to
do that in a task force all we
are asking for is for
recognition.
That sometimes legislation
passes and it has issues and
those issues are things that we
need to talk about in a very
calm and data driven way which
is what we feel the task force
will give us with another two
year delay on moving the
independent outpatients to the
higher cap that's what the
committee substitute does an
enormous problem for doctor
wanted to.
Mr chair.
Mr chair Senator Kernan I'd like
to expand on one thing at that
meeting that that I attended on
Monday so.
We actually have had denials for
coverage outside of the act
since two thousand twenty two
okay so we did not seek those.
Premium requests since Monday we
have them and they're in your
packet.
What was what was brought to
question on Monday was the they
wanted more precise language the
trial attorneys wanted more
precise language
and so they wanted it to be
broken out that in terms of the
initial policy and supplemental
insurance on top of that so we
have been working on this since
the fall of two thousand twenty
one we didn't just start looking
for coverage outside of the act
on Monday it has been since the
fall of two thousand twenty one
thank you thank you so.
Thank you very.
Verification and this is about.
And it is about the ability to
obtain what's necessary of and I
think we have to recognize that
when there is no insurance
available for positions
for the purpose of malpractice.
What happens to the patients
coming certainly the reason it
means it's to follow you want to
protect not only your practice
but also the patient that you're
treating and you know I I think
it's really important to get
this right and I don't think
it's fair to start comparing
states at this point because you
go to Texas and that's got a
hundred fifty dollars for the
what they do if there is a harm
to an individual and their
potential likelihood from the
point of impact all the way to
the end of their life they're
covered for that we don't we
don't we pay medical expenses we
don't have a loss of income
expenses there are so many
factors when you look at Mexico
everybody says well let's set of
do loan for service and that's
wonderful we could do one for
service let's uh increase
provider fees and that's another
thing that's going to help but I
will tell you this is the number
one issue.
But I came to New Mexico is not
has seventy.
Eight we chose New Mexico for
him to practice because it was
there and they had a fair toward
act that was very to come here
the and we chose New Mexico and
the retired three years ago
you'll never practices.
Circumstances so you know it's
just we we we are going to lose
doctors and I know I've had that
conversation with the some
friends of mine and whether we
will resolve that I think it's
obvious that we are that I have
some other questions I don't
know if you need to go into it I
mentioned OSI steady and I think
that's a really good document to
begin the conversation again and
I think that that was done by
the mayor
in.
Even if we could get the
insurance the affordability it's
all based on actuarial skinny
time you buy insurance that's
what it's based on the new look
at the actuarial to New Mexico
and that probably is what drives
some of the higher costs
I don't know I think that's
that's probably all I have
appreciate the comments really
on both sides because of the
learn something every time and I
hope that we can move this bill
forward because it needs
continue discussion it's it's an
opportunity to do what we did
two years ago hundred very
trying circumstances but we made
a mistake and we have doctors to
rectify this we're going to find
ourselves.
Order that affect me of a lot
of.
Doctors in my area there are
some that we got a lot of socket
going to love the that every
time I go to let you know what I
have to do have to sign a piece
of paper that says that I will
not bring that drive into Mexico
and schism.
The loss if you invest so you
probably do the same thing in
that all goes back to the
lawsuit filed a number of years
ago where we brought to Texas
doctor and stated in this report
finally said you can't do that
that you know people's lives are
in danger here just like that
particular issue that occurred a
number of years ago Senator
Ingle was instrumental in along
with some other Michael Sanchez
was instrumental in fixing them
and we're gonna have to fix this
and I'm depending County on my
colleagues we have to do before
the.
Love I don't know how much
longer we.
Thank you very much and I
appreciate that this can be very
emotional and it typically is I
want to thank Dr methane I want
to thank you for standing up
because this is been a tough
thing both sides for the and I
just should recognize.
And I think.
Thank you so the current of
Senator had a meal thank you Mr
chairman has so I think you for
bringing this bill forward but
was hi ladies and hearing the
expert witness state that you
didn't feel this was the right
to bring the tribal communities
and to have a conversation.
But Mr chairman Senator high to
me of no not at all I I think
that at this point in time it
would be inappropriate for the
New Mexico Medical Society to
make an agreement that affects
IHS and the VA without IHS and
the VA being in the room I
cannot make decisions on their
behalf which is why we're saying
those discussions matter but
they need to be done in the task
force not in the way that we're
dealing with that right now for
that Mr chairman you and I
represent native communities
I represent to pueblos here by
sure that he got in the sand and
I heard from tribal communities
who are concerned with this bill
I heard from tribal leaders and
I also heard from rural New
Mexicans the last part of my
community for my district is
rural New Mexicans and tribal
and in addition to veterans who
are worried about that tenth
circuit hearing that was aired
in the and I wrote it down when
they called me which they have
see so first is the United
States what they were worried
about are those caps will then
her New Mexicans hi
Representative who are looking
at insuring that they recover
from damages if they face
because of being the voice of my
tribal communities and rural New
Mexicans and Veterans I think
that they need to be brought to
the table if by chance this bill
makes it forward by tribal
communities need to be
represented.
Knowing that the tribes were
brought to the table and that
this wasn't the space I won't be
able to support the bill because
of who I represent now I
understand what's happening but
I want to let you know also one
thing tribal leaders told me if
the reduction of caps under
state law these patients will be
heard our tribal leaders and
community leaders understand
that our people will be heard
even though the federal
government doesn't pay into the
fund federal facilities the
clinics receiving the benefit
are of malpractice caps and that
is we can just the impact of our
Indian country of your veteran
communities in rural New
Mexicans but I serve is not
being talked about are
considered and that becomes an
issue for my sentencing but I
want to thank you for breaking
the bill forward and hope that
if the bill moves on we will
have a conversation with tribal
leaders.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Senator Tallman.
So thank you Mr thank you the
centers of.
Over.
Actor ritual.
effective on the date did you
say the New Mexico ranks seventh
of of the
The amount of of.
Hey I was.
Your place.
Do you recall your comments.
The philosopher and drive.
All yes so the thanks for the
opportunity the truth is the
data is is really lacking and
being a researcher I had to go
in and look up the data and
provide the data because you
have to normalize this stuff to
a state where small state
smallest population numbers mean
different things compared to New
York but there's a next national
practitioner data base and
that's part of the United States
department health Human Services
and all of our malpractice
claims and the amounts that
there for our file there we can
normalize that then to twenty
twenty census data that database
is very searchable so we're able
to gather all the data from
twenty eleven to twenty twenty
for every single state.
And then see how many suits were
filed.
What those suits settled for and
then rank the state's and so
then again this is back in
twenty twenty with our six
hundred thousand dollar cap we
were number seven in the nation
for number of suits claims
against our doctors we're number
eleven in the nation.
For the value of those suits and
so the point is we're not
undervaluing any of these cases
these cases were for being and
one of the poorest states in the
country we feel like we've
traditionally we've really
placed a high value on these
cases with a six hundred
thousand dollar cat this isn't
taking into account the highest
cap in the nation that is we're
going to face now.
Click here just one of thank you
for that.
That's true so why are we so
were you always.
Mexico on the loss of
well because what it does is it
creates a litigious Environment
these this money that's coming
out and in these settlements is
not there's no pool of free
money this is money that's paid
in terms of from practitioners
in terms of their
Insurance rates it's a it's a
tax on providers and when you
have a competitive national
environment for a shortage of
specialists it's you're asking
specialist to work an extra
month for free or so it be it
very but work a month for free
just to stay in New Mexico it's
a lot it's a heavy ask and and a
lot of providers are saying no
thank you and so you can go back
and forth all you want whether
insurance is available and and
and you can get it and okay sure
am I willing to pay the excess
premium or will I just rather
practice from el Paso breaks my
heart to say but I don't feel
like working another month for
free.
I'd rather.
Acticin of Paso.
Thank you.
You have the floor go ahead as
so.
This from us medical side.
I'm sorry seven Mr senators from
medical system medical society.
So.
The.
I raise.
Mexico.
Find.
I.
State.
This.
M. A. Carroll medicine.
or general surgery the high
energy.
Five thousand.
Please hold for the so our rates
so I.
Mr chairman members of the
committee and senator Tom in so
this is data that we've actually
gotten from insurance carriers
to write policies in New Mexico
and then write policies across
the country you can see the
rates not only on the page that
you're on but there's also
another graph that we provided
earlier to compare if the
patient compensation fund rates
with rates on a one million
three million dollar policy.
Most often what we hear from
insurers about why rates are so
high in New Mexico is one there
is not been significant tort
reform that is happened to raise
the bar for that you have to
meet in order to actually file
K. venue is a very big issue for
the insurers that they identify
as a reason why rates are very
high and the caps are reason why
they actually say that the rates
are very high and this is why
when you are a physician
malpractice carrier company and
the total amount of premium as
the largest insurance carrier in
the state you're collecting is
twelve million dollars if you
then have the exposure of the
six million dollar claim three
times a year from one physician
your entire twelve million
dollar premium that you've
collected in total in the entire
state will not cover that kind
of risk and so as a fiduciary
those insurance companies are
saying we have to charge much
higher rates here and often the
insurance carriers are now
saying we will not right outside
of the PCS at all because food
is yearly we can't make the math
work.
Thank you
Thank you for that Sir Philip Mr
chair thank you moved to the
Senator Hamblen thank you Mr
chairman thank everybody I think
I think all of us are kind of
bound by the circus that is the
insurance companies and I'm my
apologies because I know that
you used to do this but you know
I I I think of that the concern
is that you can't get
malpractice insurance we've got
a a patient fund that is up in
excess table to people who need
that money
and we're all trying to come to
a solution on it you know when I
think of just recently I tore my
meniscus and I had to go and get
an MRI but because the insurance
company would believe what my
doctor said I had to get an X.
ray first which was a waste of
money.
A waste of a procedure.
And so it's to me I I I I see
it's the insurance that we're
having to complain about.
Because you all want to do good
work with patients who need what
you do and yet we you know when
you mention of malpractice claim
three times against one doctor
here that's a flag for me.
And so but also you know the
thing is is that I do had to pay
for my MRI out of pocket four
hundred dollars so I could get
it is an emergency basis because
I was serving in the legislature
and so there are problems here
with this and.
You know I I see this we talk
about you know and and thank you
for sharing that study with me
from the office of the
the OSI
but you know the thing is is
that with that we had the the
the superintendent ignored all
of that in that that report.
And it went went against the
committee recommendations in the
opposite of that and and so I'm
wondering.
We we need okay we need to have
continue conversations on this
because I think we are all tied
by the circus that is the
insurance company our patients
are tied by a fund that is not
providing them the resources
that they deserve and then we've
got folks who are who are
hurting we have patients who are
hurting and so it's difficult
for me when we still haven't had
conversations and I understand
the deadline I understand that
the clock is ticking all of us
are hearing that at the back of
our heads as we look at the
calendar I was disappointed
because I thought we were ending
on Friday the seventeenth and
found out no it's Saturday the
eighteenth and so I was a little
crap yesterday so I understand
that that that urgency but I
also feel that all of us our
hands are tied because of having
to meet these needs in order for
us to do the work that we're
doing regardless if it's it's a
practitioners or people who are
hurt you need to have their
services and their ailments and
and the the injuries that they
have received for the rest of
their lives and so I feel that
these conversations need to
continue because I think what
we're not looking at is the
problem of that we don't have
insurance and that we don't have
a fund that is serving patients
that's you know I don't think
either one is the bad guy in
this room I think we have a we
have a system.
That is failing and that we need
to take care of it and because
otherwise people are going to be
hurting all across the board and
so that's my comment Mr thank
you Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman and.
Senator person to bring this
bill
this is a real problem Kerry
could you address the.
side issue real quickly
superintendent Mr chairman
members the committee and
Senator Brandt there's a couple
of different studies that have
been completed to date so back
in twenty twenty the
superintendent insurance was
actually directed to put all of
the stakeholders together to
discuss how we could amend and
modernize them medical
malpractice act and he spent the
entire year doing a lot of
shuttle diplomacy between all of
the interested parties many of
who you see here today and he
issued a report on December
thirty first of twenty twenty
that made recommendations for
how we should modernize the act
that report is what was
introduced and Senator Kernan
spill in the twenty twenty one
session with competing
legislation house bill seventy
five which is the bill that will
ultimately passed since that
time there is a mandate and
house bill seventy five that an
actuarial analysis be completed
every year on the patient
compensation fund and that's for
two reasons number one part of
the debate on house bill seventy
five was to differentiate
whether was positions that were
responsible for the deficit or
it was hospitals that were
responsible for the deficit and
we actually in that study found
there was a third party who is
responsible for the deficit
which was a former
superintendent of insurance
superintendent Franchini who
allowed a slew of batch claims
out of the PCF when when he when
he shouldn't have on so based on
the deficit numbers on the
superintendent insurance is
supposed to make sure that he is
establishing the surcharges at a
rate that will start to drive
down the deficit within the next
five years that is the
recommendation that has to come
from the PCF advisory committee
around where to set rates but in
the law the superintendent
insurance is still the fiduciary
of the fund and he is
responsible for setting the
final surcharges to create a
balance.
It's between making sure that
they're appropriate surcharges
coming in to pay off the deficit
while also making sure the
surcharges are set at a rate
where physicians can still
afford to participate in the
funds because if it becomes an
affordable everybody leaves
there's no more surcharges and
the pool collapses so this year
the superintendent insurance
that the charges at a lower rate
than the actuarial
recommendation but he did so and
he explains in his report that's
also in your packet that he did
that out of the interests of
really long term solvency of the
fund of being able to keep more
physicians participating in the
fund in the long run.
Thank you Mr chairman Mr our
yes.
Mr chairman Senator secretary of
appreciate that could you also I
guess I I still have a question
on the
the tribal the VA is to be a
patient.
Interesting.
but this this bill change
anything.
Dealing with the calf.
That the tenth circuit is put in
place.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee and Senator Brandt so
it's our understanding that
right now the tenth circuit
decision has said there's some
ambiguity but that these federal
facilities would be under the
lower cap seven hundred and
fifty thousand dollars the
request that we received at nine
fifty three last night is that
there be language included in
the bill to direct that
hospitals that are federal
facilities would actually be
under the six million dollar cap
rather than the seven hundred
and fifty thousand dollar cap so
again we are not the ones who I
feel as the medical society an
independent physician and
outpatient facilities you can
make those decisions we think
that that is something that very
much should be discussed in the
task force because if there is
an appropriate division there
the task force will identify it
and if there amendments made to
the act in twenty twenty five
legislative session it would be
we feel appropriate for that
discussion happen there we just
are not ones who can make that
determination on behalf of the
I. H. S. sport or the courts.
Thank you Mr chairman and Care
appreciate that I I think I
understand most of that but
does that if the if I was
provided my doctor really
screwed up.
and I want to file a lawsuit
against the VA.
What I follow state court.
The federal court but Mr
Chairman I am not an attorney
Center worth probably can it's
been neat but the federal tort
claims act defaults to your
states malpractice laws when it
comes to the establishing of the
cap so when you're discussing
the establishment of the cap the
federal facilities to fall to
what's happening within your
state and that's where now
there's this
The result in the task force.
Thank you Mr chairman
Search characteristic that I
think that helps a little bit
and you know I was always told
to getting sued the VA because
it's really hard to federal
court so allies are probably
done that a long time.
The.
The yeah.
I understand trying to protect
patients but.
Share the story couple years ago
on a shared again because.
My oldest son was born in
England.
This for at a military hospital
on our if you look at the.
My son and my wife almost died.
Your no fault of the doctors
actually
just a yep well things that
happens in birth.
But I was contacted even being
in the military.
I was contacted by several
lawyers wanting me to see.
Honestly in my opinion would
have been for those doctors.
By my wife were both.
So I think sometimes we get a
little sue happy.
And it concerns me that our
state is one of the most
litigious states in the country.
I'm not saying that doctors
don't make mistakes what it
called the practice of medicine
not the perfection of us.
We're all human sometimes you
don't see something sometimes
rest work sixteen hours a day
instead of the normal eight hour
shift.
In conditions that I couldn't
do.
You're asked to do it.
and I think sometimes we expect
a little much.
I'll tell you another thing you
know we keep we passed a bill
last year to.
Not charge taxes on social
security income why we do that.
So we could draw more retired
people to New Mexico.
The number one thing most
retired people are looking for.
Health care.
Are they gonna come to New
Mexico when we don't have any
doctors take care of their needs
no they're going to go to
Florida.
Where they have really good
medical care for seniors.
Well when I get older I'm
probably going to Florida.
Don't make sure my medical care
taking care of.
will reverse things here I stay
here.
All you doctors.
Can't practice independently I
know the VA's hiring I can get
get the.
And I would be glad to have you
take care of me as a be a
patient thank you for.
Thank you Senator X..
Thank you Mr chair Senators
thanks for for Danish physician
this issue bigger.
Than what we're talking about.
Is the hospital in Alamogordo
you know the faces challenges
every day trying to recruit
doctors to Alamogordo and more
than likely they're not going to
be able to get all.
And this is part of that.
I can't say how much part of
this reporter that the issues
but this is a part of that.
we're gonna lose some of the out
patient clinics or whatever the
right term he is
Those guys are gonna leave.
And it really because of what we
patch.
There's a little over two
million people in New Mexico.
We're sitting here talking about
a population base.
That is not very big.
And when you look at some of the
comments that have been made the
amount of money that the insurer
can generate.
Cannot cover.
One point two claims we can't do
it.
Show.
Hello we how do we fix that.
The the task force the review of
that is certainly a way.
And I think we're going to I
think we need to questions that
I think we need to pass this
bill because if we don't pass.
Senator Shendo Mr chair Senator
words.
You know I guess I understand
some of that other stuff that
might be out there.
But if this thing should cheer
the chances to fix it with the
ash.
B. goes away.
And.
I don't know quite how we have a
lot of the dealt with other than
move move the bill forward you
know I'm probably one of the few
me and then Senator tall and.
You can probably remember back
in the day when doctors made
house calls.
You know whole this change
should change their whole lives
changed the litigious nature of
the society of the stated we've
I would for.
Is is a challenge to you guys to
the to the doctors and nurses
the people that that take care
of H..
And if the if the choices for
them because they can't afford
the insurance regardless what
your call is insurance costs to
go up.
If they can't afford it and
they're not here.
There's nobody.
To help take care of us and then
on the other side of things
nobody dishes
And.
That to me.
Is something that I certainly
hope that the lawyers in the
room understand I mean although
they can certainly move to but
it's
And sometimes it might not be a
bad thing.
you know not charge and worth a
portion.
The year because I may need your
help I don't know.
And then agency chaired in
senators I mean I'm not the land
of the that we can sit here and
we can have some of this give
and take but I think we also
recognize.
We recognized we look at many
people around here.
We didn't all come from Santa Fe
of.
The need is great to find a
solution be it temporary for
what
Then I'll recommend something Mr
chair Senator
You know next year we're going
to have a budget surpluses like
we have the issue.
The fund that we're talking
about.
They certainly ought to be
supplemented potentially by that
van van that help.
Make.
You make settlements with people
are hospitals pulled out of the
phone.
Hospital can't afford to stay in
the fall I mean these are these
are real things happening right
now.
That are impacted not only the
doctors but they're impacting
the care that patients receive.
I think we need to move this one
forward and I I think.
That's the only thing I see that
we can do and then if the
argument needs to be well it's
not the right one.
What is.
And.
This one change to me.
Mr chair and and in senators of
fish is a fair and reasonable
approach until we can make those
other determination.
Sure thank you Mr chair thank
you senators on we we we just
have to.
Do shop.
Thank you.
You.
It also the committee but I
appreciate it I did have the
questions around in the health
service by appreciate the
Senator army for the question
and
You know this is the issue that
we got address.
And we were both sides you know
we we've heard accretion all of
you that are able to testify
sorry within get to everybody
but I know this is a serious
issue both on the drive side and
the patient's side.
Number is thinking about you
know all the issues that we have
to look at you know we have a
shortage of doctors we started
the you know and I used to work
at the university Mexico we
started the undergraduate for
your purpose as we complete more
doctors but we're creation of
iron and we're they can't
practice you know then we're
educating you know doctors for
our surrounding states so I
could look at that because it
it's an issue the same time I've
heard horror stories from our
own tribal communities in New in
on individual you know of from
the northwest corner that
dropped his wife off and went to
lunch.
I got a call.
And the wife got no anesthesia
or something no not not
responsive he just went to lunch
to go to call and that was the
last conversation.
So these are real issues that
we've got to address.
And I appreciate the fact that
there's the groceries is going
on.
Because I no only we will make
it work.
A. N..
The
army want to hold this.
Right here so that you guys can
have a few more days to
negotiate something.
But I'm not sure what the will
of the committee is going to be.
You know as as to no.
Majority Leader said you know we
have to two weeks in a few days
left.
And but we've got to do
something I think we'll
agreement.
But also appreciate on the
sharing the knowledge that this
was a substitute that that was
negotiated with the folks
upstairs.
And so we also have to
acknowledge that as well.
So with that
I'm Senator resurrect.
Motion for of no REC.
Share substance motion.
Steps to motion to table.
So that will rights to
substitute motion to table so
for cultural.
Senator Brandt no.
Senator Griggs no Senator had a
meal yes Senator Kernan no.
Senator Lopez.
Senator Sanchez no.
Senator Tallman.
Yes.
Senator Wirth yes.
Senator Hamblen.
Yes Senator Shendo.
Yes.
We have I yes and for the.
So for a table to table.
But I want to say also you know.
And I hope that we can you know
figure out something to do.
Next to this.
In the.
Has.
Senator Kernan thank you.
I'm trying to.
May not be able.
Senator o'neill if you could
present the.
Your.
Senate bill two forty great
thank you Mr chairman members of
the Senate bill two forty
proposes to amend fifty seven
dash twenty two dash six to
require charitable organizations
that have total expenses of
seven hundred fifty thousand
instead of the current five
hundred thousand dollars
threshold to be audited by an
independent certified public
accountant it also this bill
also adds that if the Attorney
General has reason to believe
that it's in the public's best
interest the Attorney General
may require the charitable
organization to submit an audit
if their annual budget center
seven hundred fifty thousand.
Mr chairman.
Members
You see this bill before two
years ago
it's it's a you know as someone
that worked in the terrible
secretary for a long time you
know small charities don't have
the means to to do it required
audit.
I mean it just saps their
limited funds so
You know the difference this
time around is.
We actually have the support of
the accounts last time we had
they were neutral but Larry
heard and with the accountants
society supports this bill he's
presenting another bill in the
house and
You with that I stand for
questions I do have a you know
an expert is available for
question to answer questions
John Chavis the exam.
Okay thank you so at this time
will go up to the audience soon
anybody here in support of
Senate bill two forty.
This week.
Thank you
Anybody here in opposition.
That.
Okay all right we'll go to
committee for Senate Bill to
questions of Senate bill two
forty.
Many members.
But.
So move we have a motion to.
okay what Wilson for the second.
Second by Senator Hamblen any
opposition to the motion.
The.
It
the most important.
So what is that drool over okay.
Thank you thank you.
We're done folks is also
important.
