So much I'm here on behalf of.
Representative Lara this is
house bill two twenty six it
exempt purchases of school
instruction materials and other
educational media from
requirements of the people
procurement code and removes the
requirement of procuring
instructional materials through
the state purchasing agent
the the the reason why this is
brought forward isn't in twenty
twenty school closures in New
Mexico forced most districts and
charters to transition to remote
learning increasing purchases of
online material and digital
services and Congress
appropriated over one point five
billion dollars in federal
emergency relief funds to New
Mexico districts to acquire
devices to make purchases for
remote learning functions and so
what we're doing with this bill
is really exempting those so
that the school districts don't
have a hardship as we continue
to recover from the pandemic and
incorporating remote learning
and and school practices thank
you Senator anybody in
opposition.
None.
Anybody okay all right no
opposition.
Would you pass for the person
that we're second was in the
army open any opposition to do
pass motion.
I see none.
Just forty five seconds.
Justin the voted yes to the
internet okay you announce the
names of the voted yes to okay
so those voting yes Senator
Lopez and Senator call then
Senator huh meals into words and
Hamblen Senator Shendo.
This for the public that's
listening.
Representative Harper you go
ahead and of two sixty nine is
amended.
I think chairman committee
members to sixty nine as amended
is a department bill the fed's
last year passed a law that
requires all the states to use a
new.
Drug clearing house federal
clearing house before the issue
commercial driver's licenses we
have to reference that clearing
house if we don't do it we lose
about forty million dollars a
year in federal funding
and so all this bill does is
safe when someone is applying
for commercial driver's license
or renewal people check this
clearing house
and and if there is a reason not
to issue that license because of
that information they want
without us ever questions great
thank you anybody out here in
opposition to this bill.
Anybody else.
Okay.
Committee members.
With that best motion was
senator Wirth second by Senator
how to meal.
The opposition to the best
motion.
See none Senator Lopez voting
yes Senator Tallman Senator meal
senator Wirth Senator Hamblen
Senator Shendo ability yes able
to pass will jump to Senate bill
two eighty six.
Possible to do something else
bills are just thank you.
Germany member's house bill two
eighty six aligns New Mexico law
with federal law with regards to
tenting of front windshields
remember this.
Yeah so right now it's state law
we can only to the first two
were three or four inches from
the from those the roofline this
would allow us to tense the
entire windshield up to thirty
percent.
It's awful.
See that that difference here
this is a this is a clear this
is actually this is a film on it
when you put a film on it you
lose about ten percent of the
light transmission.
This is a thirty percent chance
to see it's very light.
And just to compare that to this
is what you content you're a
side windows at.
Your we're windows at.
So just just we have an idea
now and I'll just briefly say
the room the main reason why I'm
doing this is there is a company
that is spun out of technology
understanding actional labs and
they're going right now through
their a round races looking gold
seven million dollars it's a
company here in New Mexico.
When it is warm outside this
bill will keep the heat out.
When it is cool outside it will
lead to heat in so this is going
to be transaction for missional
for like building windows like
first energy saving costs but we
also really cool to do that in
your car.
So that is never questions
great.
At eight.
Thank you new questions for the
committee.
opposition sorry opposition.
The position.
In addition to the committee
motion for the past thank you
for the best Sierra mail with
your one question so remind us
again what happened in this bill
because I think I cared for you
on this carry it for me chairman
and the like in your it was a it
was pocket vetoed what year was
that was four years ago four
years members and and I and I
believe we resolved any concerns
behind that talk of you hoping
for a successful run this time.
Thank you for already we have
the best motion.
Second.
so it's critics Kernan Shendo
Hamblen were pardon me Tallman
Lopez ability in the affirmative
a two zero.
Westerman so you can use.
Know if you can pitch it for me
on finance appreciate that all
right thank you.
All righty so no we
Two seventy.
House bill two seventy do we
have.
Garcia everybody is hearing this
is bill.
Burgess's expansion of trucking
Los.
Two seventy one census.
Otherwise you could present the
judges will.
Well it's a different it's a
sentence into this.
Okay all right the president of.
Representative.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee.
Morning good morning house bill
two ninety nine what else will
to ninety nine does is this bill
sets a framework to begin
inspection elevators in the
state of New Mexico it will be a
two year process before we
actually get it started but this
bill lays the groundwork and
policy behind it we have worked
extensively with RLD and
appreciate the help and support
a superintendent Trujillo and
CID director Clavain you Mr
chairman members of the
committee.
Thank anybody in opposition of
two ninety nine as amended House
Bill.
Okay.
Already.
Questions from the committee.
But
you had a question is it thank
you Mr chair but I feel we had a
good visit and talked to
Director Trujillo and I think
everything is is good out of it
the thing I worried about we
have a lot of historical
buildings and I didn't want I
guess are of the come in and
make it so difficult I'm we want
safe elevators but didn't want
to go so far that we would have
to shut down some of those
buildings so I'm I'm very
comfortable with the thank you
you thank you Senator.
Okay what is a very.
For the purpose what do passed
Senator Kernan that occurred and
have the first of the second
Senator Kernan for the past
motion second by Senator Hamblen
any opposition to the defense
motion.
I see none.
Senator Griggs Kernan Shendo
Hamblen work our meal Tallman
and Lopez voting affirmative you
have to pass I think it was a
committee Mr chair I can do to
seventy foot Representative
Garcia editor.
Okay that's okay yes.
Thank you Mr house bill two
seventy would authorize the
secretary of transportation to
suspend or modify modify vehicle
size weight and load
requirements during a declared
state or federal emergency those
orders be required to be posted
on the department's website
that's what the build us.
Okay anybody in opposition.
Of house bill two seventy.
Okay any questions from the
committee members.
This pleasure.
It is that food for the best
senator Neville second by
Senator Kernan any opposition to
the do fast motion.
I see none critics Kernan Shendo
Hamblen work our mill Thoman
Lopez of voting informative.
Q.
Senator two seventy one twenty
one to seventy one can.
But the.
Okay.
I can do it okay good so
property financial in.
Thank you Mr chair this is
another
Department transportation bill
house bill two seventy one
simply raises the threshold for
required reporting to the D. O.
T. for a motor vehicle accident
from five hundred and property
damage to one thousand dollars
in property damage that's all
build us.
Anybody in opposition of health
bill two seventy one.
But as soon.
Okay any questions from the
committee motion for the
panelists would do percent of
milk a second by senator part
any opposition to do pass
motion.
I see none Senator Griggs Kernan
Shendo Hamblen work.
Our meal till then and Lopez all
voting affirmative.
Yes.
Okay no jump back up to for
seventy six my Estes Senator
myiasis.
Thank you for the time Mr
chairman members of the take a
look at this map.
The top half is the beautiful
state of Mexico devided by the
transportation districts and I
have you to look at district
three it not only encompasses
the county Bernalillo which is a
third of the population but also
the growing Valencia and Santa
Fe counties.
So money is distributed roughly
equally amongst the districts
and then the bottom map you have
the outlines of Albuquerque
below that you Mr chairman the
be you in the queue is the
beautiful south valley of
Albuquerque which is
unincorporated when you think
about incorporated for no County
maybe think of these mounds or
whatnot but the south valley
essentially because of these two
maps and it's nobody's fault
does not get the adequate
resources to build local roads
and so this would appropriate
ten million dollars to
commission district two which
incorporates the southwest
quadrant of Bernalillo county
with that I'll turn over to the
representative whose district is
in that area Representative
delacruz.
Thank you are.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
members just very briefly if
you'll indulge me I'd like to
describe the area a little bit
it's approximately thirty nine
square miles it has a population
of a poem about almost the same
number of thirty nine thousand
unincorporated residents that
means they don't have any of the
governor and so governance
outside of Bernalillo county.
the median income in the United
States is about seventy family
median income is about seventy
thousand dollars in a self
eligible forty.
A little history.
The US all values
Is an area that was first
settled by the pueblo people
later in the sixty nineties by
the Spanish it was the early
villages about three school
party told us by the US and by
the way the members Mr chairman
and members this was settled
before there was a City of
Albuquerque.
The royal road or the community
on still traverses the area I
was originally route sixty six
later became highway eighty five
and now is this level of art.
Despite this long history the
cell valley is largely known for
ground water pollution a lack of
street lighting and poor roads
Ryan and chairman and members
were obligated to try to change
our community a little bit I'm
I'm new to the house and one of
the number one items that I
heard as I as I traverse the
community canvassing was a the
problem with our roads we are
largely a bedroom community and
that being said you have to
travel to work and if your roads
are in poor condition it makes
it that much more difficult and
if your income is such that you
can't afford to have your car
repaired all the time that is
another issue and so this
request Mr chairman and members
is is long overdue and just so
that everybody knows of the two
point five million dollars that
that each member received in the
house I dedicated one million
jobs to roads in the area thank
you Mr thank you.
And then also just last last
measurements of the population
of the south valley is roughly
equal to
Ross Russell Farmington Hobbs
Clovis that have wonderful tax
bases mayors
and and and the clout to to
provide resources to those
committees so we at the money
that does going to district
three much terms you know
usually goes to major projects I
twenty five Paseo
I twenty five Rio Bravo the I.
twenty five I. forty interchange
major projects not local
projects and so just once again
for nobody's fault the selfies
has been deprived of resources
for decades were trying to
offset that with the a modest
appropriation of ten million
dollars great thank you of this
time we go out to the audience
anybody here in support of phone
Senate bill four seventy six.
Anybody in opposition.
Questions of the committee.
Senator current thank you and
and I certainly will vote for
your bill and support and we
know roads are important
everywhere across the state and
when you look at the map of
course you know we all fight for
areas and we certainly have done
that down in southeast New
Mexico and and I know that the
than the number of miles per
district is pretty significant
to when you look at number that
our district into the number of
miles and that large area
flooded roads to take care of
this well maybe not population
you have that certainly the
roads and and I will tell you
the the amount of traffic on the
roads down in the southern part
of district two is significant
and I've shared that video I
have with others on on the the
traffic related to the oil and
gas industry and and what that
does to the roads so we all have
our needs we all have our wishes
and certainly with county roads
what are counties responsible
for when they constantly have to
go back you prepare those routes
that that are.
We're seeing an awful lot of
heavy truck traffic in that area
that that I agree we all have to
fight for areas we all need that
money we were very fortunate in
district two couple years ago
when we had a little bit extra
money that was sent our way and
I appreciate that very much so I
understand the need and
certainly hope that we can help
you get what you need in your
area as well thank you.
Senator bricks.
Thank you for sharing his eyes
walking in this morning I was
walking in with senator my
issues I was talking about.
What's called a special
assessment district and in in
Alamogordo years ago with an
area out by the the airport.
And special assessment district
is where you you put a tax on
the property and you go ahead
and then you you build out and
when somebody buys it the or
they paid that back as time goes
along and that's way to finance.
Rogge sidewalks whatever it is
you by the you might be
considering and I think for for
this area whether or not you can
get all the money this way or
hal it's something maybe the
county needs to consider because
you're still in a pretty
organized you know part of the
world we are not out in the in
the hinterland of jail Terrel
County
and give you an opportunity
maybe that you can you can do
that but of those or other other
options needed we back in in
that day in time
You know when we didn't we
didn't actively lobby the state
for you know for additional
funds to do shift could probably
wasn't a really show the
headquarters as part of it may
be but but never the less such
another it's another option I
think it's something that you
guys may need to be aware of any
and consider sure thank you Mr
I think chairman Matt Matt
something go ahead
Representative one of the things
that I I think I failed to
mention is that there's about
two hundred and fifty five miles
of of road in the area of those
roads.
All but nine miles or actually
paid so there's largely in the
center of that area both
pavement as well as water insure
in the main part not to rural of
their summit rural.
But here's what I would here
Mister chairman I was canvassing
through the district.
Earlier came out here in
nineteen seventy eight they pay
my road and then never came back
and that's where the real
problem ladies is not that it
doesn't have asphalt but that
should terrible condition Mr
thank you if thank you.
Sierra.
Thank you Mr chair and thank
you.
For bring is first so did you.
Request any capital outlay
money.
The Senator.
Thank you Mr chairman as Sierra
but now we're gonna be working
with the administration within
the department transportation
the the local county officials
on how to how to solve some of
these problems as mentioned our
personal capital out of it when
two roads
which normally we don't give you
know small increments of capital
to rose would make such a
tremendous impact in our
neighborhood but we we've been
Begin with the the chief
executive and will continue with
the conversation.
That answers your question thank
you for the answer is and thank
you Mr chairman is there.
February I wasn't paying
attention to this what the
verdict is a money in the
budget.
The upcoming twenty four.
For fiscal year budget.
Mr chairman Sierra as you know
we haven't raised the gas tax
since nineteen ninety two so I
try to pass a lot but what we've
been doing is yes and I'm with
you on that what we've been
doing is putting essentially
cash putting general fund monies
into the road funds so I believe
there's some more in a way to
fifty million dollars per local
road funds and will be
advocating for some of that
money into this but we would ask
this committee to.
To pass this bill to give us
some momentum toward that
endeavor.
Thank you for the answer and the
county.
The is thank you Mr chair in the
G. pro two county for money.
And what was their answer.
Thank you Mr thank you Mr
chairman.
Member Senator Tallman yes
absolutely so I'm in now in
constant conversation with
Baylor county of a vast that
they dedicate more of their
bonding capacity every bi annual
cycle that they dedicate more to
the south valley and I have been
highly critical Mr chairman and
senator of the fact that in the
about two thousand and four
Bernalillo county paved a large
section of this level of art or
high we eighty five sixty six.
Through that run specifically
for my district so from two
thousand and four to today they
have done zero maintenance work
zero so I'm highly critical and
I'm constantly asking I have not
gotten a a commitment outside of
that the commissioner from that
specific area with takes I just
like it takes a quorum here so
I'm I'm working on it Mr the
project and the permit and we
appreciate the time Mr and just
like donating said Mr Chairman
that two eighty five was the
priority there's other massive
party statewide so we would you
know we went to the Great
Recession just like everybody
else but now that we're sitting
on.
You know three point five
billion this definitely would
would be the dollar spent thank
you Senator Griggs seventy
second time thank you for
sharing one quick thing Center
representative that exist out
there for class eight counties
only there's a two cent a gallon
gasoline tax available to be
imposed at retail.
That's only in classe counties
it's never been imposed
and H. it's one of those things
it if you know you don't wind up
with what you need or something
like that it might be something
to explore because it is it's
available it's just not ever
been done shows thank you Mr
chairman thank you senator
Representative so one quick.
Thank you Mr chair and American
vote for this gonna vote against
my good and the Lopez but if the
county had had attended the
million dollar cost to run on
their new building they go to
use at ten million for the
roads.
Thank you Mr chair it's all I
have okay thank you senator
Clemente.
Already K. so what is the of I
don't have anybody else on the
list of Senator Lopez I moved to
pass the best motion Senator
Lopez.
The second second by Senator
Hamblen.
Any opposition to the do best
motion.
See none do have Senator Griggs
Kernan Shendo Hamblen worth
Tolman and Lopez voting to from
the seven two zero.
Thanks for the fast thank you.
Of house bill sixty two.
Senator Senator Griggs.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee this is a bill
that senator Rehm is carried for
Representative Rehm is carried
for years trying to address I
guess the issue that they have
an Albuquerque primarily of
curbstone ain't of shelling
selling automobiles that you
don't own.
In different areas of the
community bill has worked with
everyone apparently he's got the
agreements of the the auto
dealers in Albuquerque New with
that.
I mean I'll do my best to stand
for questions for the deal but
it just requires a seller unless
you to a licensed dealer they're
gonna position title to the car
the vehicle point got to be
registered in the seller's name
it's going to prohibit the sale
of the vehicle by a person who's
not the vehicle owner or
registered the.
So with that I'll I'll do my
best thank thank you a Senator
anybody in the support of Senate
passed bill sixty two.
Anybody in opposition of house
bill sixty two.
I
see none.
Questions from the committee.
Total all in.
Thank you Mr.
Mr chairman and and etcetera I
don't I don't know he's he's run
it for several years and she's
trying to get consensus with
with everyone and I guess she's
finally he's finally done that
this bill currently is sailed
through you know all committees
in the house and the four but
he's he's worked really hard I
know for several years getting
the right answer.
Well you know I think since you
just asked me last night.
Chair of the one that's
delivered for.
Okay thank you senator call when
anybody else.
Would.
Over the past Senator Kernan.
But.
Senator Griggs any opposition to
the to pass motion.
I
see none we have Senator Griggs
Kernan Shendo Hamblen work
Coleman Lopez of voting for me
seven zero thank you Mr.
Okay great thank you Senator for
doing that for our friend over
on the other side.
house bill seventy three as
amended Dixon and Garrett or you
can say that we are going to
solve six nectar.
Good.
Thank you Mr chair musical
chairs.
house bill seventy three is the
health consumer and public
affairs committee some of four
seventy three as amended.
it's biomarker testing well
marker testing is used to help
determine the best treatment for
a patient it can and clued
analysis of tissue blood but
specimens and it's important to
step in accessing precision
medicine which helps us find the
right treatment the cancer
survivor of the keep the chemo
almost killed me today a
biomarker would be used to find
out what's the best treatment
for any given disease it's safe
insurance companies money it's
just patience money you can find
out that for eggs so I'm I
support this bill because I so
much personal experience with
not having biomarkers you might
go to infertility treatments and
discovers I did through tissue
analysis that nothing was going
to work so it's.
Future of medicine but it's
always already here with us it
helps oncology patients now the
Senate for Elsa Mars and
diseases across the board and
with that I'll have my expert
witness in a single ad remarks.
Thank you Mr chair fried it
always comes up about the cost
issue and these kinds of
treatments balance our we have
several terror
cost analysis pari Milliman and
CVS that that show in the long
run if you're getting a precise
type of drugs for your precise
disease that that is going to
save money in the long run when
otherwise you would just be
trying different kinds of
chemotherapy.
Thank you and with that we stand
for questions I think this time
will go out to the audience
anybody here support of house
bill seventy three as amended.
Give you a about a minute.
Representative Derrick you
might.
Thank you.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Kim looking
at today I come to you as a
patient advocate.
Facing cancer diagnosis is
terrifying I know this because
I'm currently undergoing
treatment for breast cancer I
have not been fortunate
fortunate enough to receive the
biomarker test but what if your
doctor could do a simple test to
make sure you got the best
treatment for your cancer with
biomarker testing doctors can
find out which treatments will
or won't work for many patients
based on their markers in their
cancer cells this information
often allows us to avoid more
generalized treatments like
radiation and chemotherapy
chemotherapy which I've
undertaken.
Instead it used the most
targeted therapies allowing
doctors to identify the most
effective therapy which can
result result in fewer side
effects better quality of life
and most important they
increased chance of survival
thank you for your consideration
today.
Thank you.
Good morning.
Good morning now chairman
members my name's Matt Thompson
Richard lobbyist for the
biotechnology industry
association bio is the world's
leading biotechnology advocacy
group and we're made consisted
of member companies research
institutions in state
biotechnology organizations we
stand in strong support of house
bill seventy three thank you
thank you.
The body of the one okay go
ahead got a minute.
Mr chairman members of the
committee this is Dr barber mac
in any I'm a medical oncologist
and the CEO of New Mexico cancer
center biomarkers are the
standard of care in fact United
health group all up for April
first is now going to
automatically cover bio markers
it's not the future it is here
and making us delay for three
weeks arguing with the insurance
companies to get permission to
run a test that can direct the
right therapy the first time
we'll save money we just had a
patient who sat in the hospital
bleeding from her stomach for
six weeks while we argued with
the insurance company to allow
us to use the bio marker which
when we got it and use the
correct drug her bleeding
stopped in about three days and
we were able to send her home
this will save money it is the
standard of care and making us
jump through hoops and beg and
plead to do standard of care
therapy is just inappropriate
thank you for your support of
this bill.
Thank you.
That it.
Okay all right.
Anybody in opposition.
Of house bill seventy three as
amended.
I see none questions from
committee Senator Kernan thank
you Mr chairman you know as I
was reading through this trying
to understand exactly what that
meant hi I I do agree I think
this is not just the future I
think it's what needs to be used
right now and all of this many
of us who've experienced family
members who have struggled with
this years ago before we had
this opportunity put it what a
nice thing that would have been
had we had this years ago that
help me understand currently if
there is a request or in order
for this particular kind of yes
Do the insurance companies in
some circumstances already a
proven allow this to be done.
The Mr chair Senator Kernan yes
I mean they are doing biomarker
tests now and and even treatment
of this is to really in sure
that that continues and
following the the protocols that
the different entities have have
set up so it's not that some of
the insurance companies aren't
doing this they are but this
will make sure that everybody is
even Medicaid is authorized
borrow markers so Mr chair said
currently Medicaid already has
is included in what they'll
cover correct yes to some extent
yes okay and so Mister chairman
and I certainly support the bill
I IBM I know that typically this
would probably be an oncology
oncologist that would order the
test but are there other areas
that would also be included in
in making this request on behalf
of their patients.
Mr chairman and senator yes I've
been doing that Alzheimer's bill
and I learned that now they're
doing it also recessed for
dementia and Alzheimer's justice
would simple okay thank you Mr
chair that's alright you a
Senator Lopez.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
thank you for bringing this bill
forward it is very much needed I
moved to pass Mr chair.
Okay any other questions we
could never gonna do passed
motion by Senator Lopez second
by Senator Kernan.
Any opposition to the do passed
motion.
See none we have Senator
Sanchez's Griggs Kernan Shendo
Hamblen or the meal Tallman and
Lopez forty two from two six two
eight two zero.
Of the past thank you Mr chair
thank you senators.
House Bill to twenty.
Serrato small.
Thank they texted me I think he
was on his way so.
Of.
Dixon.
You want to do a three oh nine.
Hernandez index and there we go.
These chairs always forward
said.
Never used.
The good afternoon afternoon.
Go ahead.
Mr chair and members of the
committee it house bill three oh
nine
seeks to amend an increase the
maximum jackpot for nonprofit
gaming like you have to abuse
and Oakes lodges right now the
maximum jackpot per day is four
thousand dollars we're trying to
change that to ten thousand
dollars this has been changed
since the nineties and
technology has left it has left
them behind our gaming machines
now require a five digit maximum
jackpot instead of a four digit
and they're running out of parts
for the machines they currently
have on the floors
and so we're trying to do this
as a may not if they have to so
that if they feel like they can
that their establishment can
handle it then they can raise it
to ten thousand dollars but
again they can have it anywhere
from zero dollars to ten
thousand dollars it's not a it's
not a requirement with that
merited dignity to Senate
Representative thank you look at
the sure if you words.
And this is our expert rich day.
Mr chair members can hear me
okay this weekend the only thing
I I'm registered this for our C.
gaming ministry leaders that
provide the nonprofit's these
machines the only thing I'll add
to that introduction is what
well that the NMAA alright this
is fantastic
the other part is.
We went before we took this on
we want to make sure we weren't
violating any gaming compacts
expanding gaming and we're not
doing that as such.
Thank you and one last thing
before we go for questions this
is a this is a duplicate bill to
Senate bill one forty three
cared by senator Munoz that you
guys passed a couple weeks ago
so right with that we stand for
questions Hey anybody here in
support of this bill.
But as soon.
Anybody in opposition.
Okay.
Questions when committee.
Like us motion by Senator Kernan
second by Senator how to meal.
Any opposition to the the best
motion.
I see none with Senator Sanchez
Griggs Kernan Shendo Hamblen
ordeal Tolman and Lopez of
voting yes zero eight two zero.
Thank you.
Small small Representative
small.
I don't want to pass this bill
I'm still bruised up.
The noted from the
Representative small.
Good afternoon how you doing
doing great Mr Chairman thanks
so much for putting us on today
Mr chair Committee we have
Michael yaki and Genevieve
Sherman who are on as experts
there on online as I understand
Mr chair committee house bill
two to eight is a powerful
financing tool this is a
completely voluntary tools that
will come at no cost to
taxpayers or to our local
governments Mr chair community
Committee we work closely with
the counties to make sure that
this optional financing tool is
again will be can be implemented
if the county commission so
choose with no cost to their
to their taxpayers it's not a
man say
it's for
commercial property Mr chair
multifamily residential or
agricultural again on a very
voluntary basis to do
improvements at the property
owners team are helpful for
their bottom line item for our
environment and with that Mr
chair again I just want to say a
big thank you to Representative
Serrato who's the lead sponsor
senator Wirth and others who are
have helped make this a really
good bill this year thank you Mr
chair I thank you Representative
Go to the audience anybody
support of this bill.
Go ahead you can the.
You guys about a minute each.
Thank you Mr is it just hold
down
the control to them.
With that hold on I think that
perfect thank you Mr chair
Catherine Christiana and the
registered lobbyists for New
Mexico counties and we stand in
support of this legislation I
just want to echo what the
Sanchez said thank thank all of
the sponsors first of all they
worked really closely with the
counties to make significant
changes in the bill moving are
treasurers affiliate into a
place of support of this
legislation as well as the
assessors so we thank them for
making changes and working with
us and bringing this bill.
Thank you.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is Jim
day sure to Representative the
renewable energy industry
association of New Mexico this
bill provides an excellent
finance financing option for
developers to implement water
conservation energy efficiency
renewable energy and resilience
in their projects the long term
financing makes it makes these
projects to be cash flow.
Positive and as result lot of
benefits to revitalizing older
buildings local communities lots
of opportunities for jobs and
economic development we are to
pass thank you very much thank
you.
Mr chairman members of the
committee Marla shows registered
lobbyists for Naot New Mexico
commercial real estate
development association the
Development industry worked on
this legislation during the
interim we want to thank the
sponsors we would like to see
its passage we believe the
legislation will help us by
filling equity gaps in
development to adapted
reasonably convert existing
buildings this will be another
tool in our toolbox to both
improve our environment and
better respond to advancements
in energy efficiency thank you.
Mr chairman Mr chair members the
committee Jason Weaks register
lobbyist for the New Mexico
hospitality association we stand
in support of this legislation
we really think this will be
great in terms of creating
energy efficiency at the state's
hotels you can go up and get
charging stations you know
charger electric vehicle it's
going to lead to some
significant and important
upgrades and we stand support
thank you if you.
But it wasn't.
Anybody in opposition.
I see none questions from
committee.
Senator meal thank you Mr
chairman as a former county
commissioner I really appreciate
that this bill when I read it
and so no question I just wanted
to thank you for bringing this
bill forward it's gonna help at
counties throughout the state of
New Mexico and if there's no
questions I'd ask for it to
pass.
Senator Griggs question.
Thank you Mr Mr Chairman
representative small how do you
how do you envision this in the
in in active what do you what do
you what do you see it
accomplish thank you very much
Mr chair
I'll go to my experts would miss
it because this is a tool in
existence in Colorado Utah Texas
Oklahoma a number of other
states all across the country
Mr chair
if county commissions the
locally driven choose to enacted
I see the tool being there and
then property owners and
developers being able to utilize
this tool for improvements that
they'd either new or
read the yes and.
improvements to their properties
using this financing tool so
whether that's more water
efficiency whether that's better
cooling or heating and some of
those ways if there's anything
to add on line
We have an expert as thank you
Mr chair we have Genevieve
Sherman Senator Sherman.
Can you all hear me yes were you
able to hear the question from a
Senator Griggs.
Thank you chair I was able to
hear the question okay go ahead.
Thank you chair thank you
Senator creates I as
Representative small said first
at four counties that choose to
adopt this program it is
voluntary it is a tool in their
policy tool kit to make
additional sources of private
funds available to existing
building owners as well as
developers who are looking to
on by older buildings perhaps
speaking buildings to bring them
back into use of commercial use
and this source of funds helps
them to access a lower cost of
capital at much longer terms to
fund really critical
improvements to these properties
that can include anything from
water efficiency in reclamation
to energy efficiency more
efficient air conditioning or
heating units as well as on site
at clean energy and resilience
improvements these are all very
expensive capital improvements
to make in these buildings and
this is a voluntary program for
those commercial property owners
or developers but we've seen in
the other thirty plus states
that have this program that this
is a very important source of
lower interest financing for
them to actually build and and
renovate these buildings to a
much higher standard of energy
and water performance on that
has the benefit of ensuring the
properties have higher value for
a longer period of time as well.
Thank you.
Thank you for.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
experts thank you Representative
small which I guess is the way
it Shannon is just this is kind
of like a a property by by
property our project not a.
We had a discussion just moments
ago about roads in in Bernalillo
county were potentially a
special assessment district
could be created to finance the
rose and this is issues similar
but it's not exact but it looks
it looks like it's more designed
Mr chair representative and an
expert for an individual project
is at is that correct or
organize for chairman Senator
yes okay thank you Mr Mr
chairman and and Representative
and van the the county I guess
passionate provided the
What they'll get from the
administrator certification of
the proposed improvements and
that the property owner
qualifies for the sure the
county the county will be
assured but the county.
The county has.
But there's no reason for the
county to have a lean ideas out
there but but it's all it's all
interesting I I hope it is you
know it's something that could
work because Mr chair and and
Representative right I can see
it actually even on these these
road projects potentially we're
you wanted to do an assessment
in an area and you and you
worked with a.
Private company to to do that
and then the takes the county
city or so out of the picture
shows thank you Mr Mr chair
thank you Representative thank
you senator current thank you
very much and thank you just
thinking about it County needing
to adopt an ordinance is that
correct in in and so if the I'm
thinking of an older building
particularly in in my
communities in the municipality
and you know you hate to lose
those old buildings and yet I
think to try and bring it up I
can envision that perhaps the
bank would rate to to to do that
in so this is a a secondary or
an alternative method for them
to be able to improve like you
mention
perhaps infrastructure water
heating cooling elevators things
like that is that what this will
get you Mr chairman
Representative Senator yes and
so Mister chair would if if the
city would they have to also
pass the ordinance since it's in
the city limits or could the
county do it as a county and in
that particular building would
be eligible from accounting
perspective Mr chairman Lee at
the county level go to the
experts Mister chair if there's
any any additional information
for Senator Kernan.
Go ahead.
Chair thank you I thank you
Senator and thank you
Representative for the question
Representative small is correct
this is at the county level
however it may be utilized
within cities and local
governments as well with their
consent and agreement thank you
very much I think that's all
right Senator Tallman.
Thank you thank you Mr thank you
for being here is what what's
the difference between the
special assessment district in a
tax increment.
Development district thank you
Mr chair thank you Sir Tom I
think it's much more this is at
the property level
for for individual a property
owners for individual buildings
for this exact yes yes Mister
chairman Senator thank you for
the answer it's all ahead of us.
Mr chair thank you we do have a
due pass motion by Senator our
meal.
Second by Senator Kernan.
Any opposition to the defense
motion.
I see none with Senator Sanchez
great Kernan Shendo.
And then heard a male tellement
and the Lopez voting affirmative
do pass a very Representative
thank you thank you committee
would to house bill.
Three fifty three what I saw the
future of.
The Senators.
Thank you right here thank you
for.
For.
He.
Hi Mr chair representative
whoever wants to go first well
that you guys I'm Russell will
tag team and and rock paper
scissors if we need to
thank you Mr chairman committee
house bill three fifty three
request the legislature to
approve the issuance of two
hundred sixty seven million
dollars in tax increments
Development districts Sierra had
just asked about that revenue
bonds to provide public
infrastructure in the three
hundred thirty seven acre south
campus district in Albuquerque
this bill does have an emergency
clause and I'll just go through
some notable aspects of the
south campus Ted and extended
expanded opportunities to
support joint economic
development efforts with Sandia
national labs Kirtland Air Force
base and the Air Force research
laboratory participates in
interstate twenty five
improvements especially to get
involved Arden Avenue to assess
our Travis interchanges improves
public safety public safety
through police substations
gunshot detection technology and
other safety facilities
increases pedestrian convenience
and safety with improve lighting
and walkways and improved access
to commercial services for an
underserved population so
although this may appear like
it's it's benefiting you and I'm
that part of the of the UNM
campus it really has trickle
effects to the rest of the
community and so what I would
like to do is let Representative
they happen the hill if you'd
like to make any other comments
and then we can have our experts
make very short comments thank
you very much Senator and thank
you Mr chairman and members of
the committee to see you again
but just a couple more.
Right about on this bill it was
created by the City of
Albuquerque in October twenty
twenty one as a partnership
between the City of
Albuquerque's universe
University of New Mexico and the
city is dedicating seventy five
percent of its G.R.T.  to this
to it because it feels so
strongly that this is would be a
good development for the area
this would be a good thing to
happen the Bernalillo county
commission unanimously approved
education of seventy five
percent of the counties gross
receipts tax and property taxes
district because they felt so
strongly this would be a good
improvement for the area and it
is in December the state board
of finance unanimously approved
the dedication of fifty six
point two three percent of state
gross receipts tax to the area
so the project has been
thoroughly vetted a lot of us
are very excited to see this
blighted areas Albuquerque
realize its full potential and
with that we will introduce our
experts of which there are
several with me this is Leri
haraam.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I think the
Representative and senator good
job describing the Ted the only
thing I would add is the state
board of finance for this ticket
is as required that we re appear
on an annual basis to show them
the progress which is a new
requirement that there is an
annual reporting piece for every
other kid but what we'll go back
in front of the so they can make
sure that it's progressing as
promised and then also when the
state that is most similar I
would say because the
involvement of U. N. M. which is
why I'm excited Center Hamlin
involved just downtown Los
crucis did which I also worked
on several years ago and is a
great example of a successful to
I'll just stand for questions
and also three seconds
tendonitis thank you very much
of the executive vice president
for finance and administration
and help me to get there.
for the university New Mexico
and we thank you
for your interest in this ticket
and we believe it is really
strong positive public impacts
are very excited about and I
also stand for questions thank
you.
Thank you for the will the
committee will to the audience
anybody here support of this
bill.
Yes Mr chairman of the committee
David automobile registered
lobbyists for the City of
Albuquerque I believe
Representative Hochman Vigil Bob
laid out the multiple layers of
vetting and approval that is
very important to it has gone
through the City of Albuquerque
strongly supports this did as a
means of getting a community
across the finish line that has
been waiting to do so this is an
area of Albuquerque that is
familiar to most folks at so it
is the UNM self campus but it
also involves the of the
baseball park basketball parked
the football park as well as
developing science park so this
is an area of town that has been
underserved for decades and is
ready the community is ready for
it in the city is certainly
urging you all to passes to
thank you.
Thank you for.
Just like you Mr chairman thank
you members of the committee my
name is Kim Sanchez trial I'm
vice chair of the U. N. M. board
of regents I'll keep my comments
very brief I am more excited
about this project as a member
of the U. N. M. board of regents
but I'm actually more excited
about it as a member of the
community and someone who lives
in Bernalillo county we will
turn what is frankly an ugly
piece of dirt into a beautiful
center for our citizens this is
the but underserved area of the
community as well as the members
of the UNM community so I would
ask for your support we've been
working on this project for four
years since I joined the regents
I'm very excited to make this a
reality thank you.
Thank you madam but we have to
go ahead and give you a minute
each.
Madam chairman Mr chairman
members of the committee my name
is Chelsea Kevin I'm the
director of public policy for
the New Mexico chamber of
commerce we support HB three
fifty three and thank the
sponsors for bringing it forward
we appreciate all the work from
the local level including the
intensive community involvement
all the way to the NM as a
approving this project for many
years to bring forward a full
economic development project
tickets are an excellent tool to
spur economic development and
provide the public
infrastructure to support these
efforts like roads water and
sewer lines the need has been
identified there has not been
new construction in this area
since two thousand eight we're
excited by this investment and
the job creation that will
follow thank you.
A good local.
Mr chair this is Marcus Gonzales
economic development director
from Bernalillo county the
counties in strong support of
this bill and the county voted.
Immensely to support it's a
share of the G. R. T. in
property tax for the south
campus tented areas located in
commissioner for both district
and she is in support of the
transformational change is that
the structural provided to the
area which is in Senator years
located for university therefore
space Sandia labs and the big
guy this did provides a
mechanism for the city county
and state to leverage each
other's I'm resources and put in
place I basic infrastructure
which often times is is the
critical element that is missing
when we need to complete at
economic development projects so
we look forward for your support
thank you so much.
Thank you.
Any opposition to this project.
The committee.
Question Senator AUMENT.
Thank you thank you Mr chair
thank you
Senator Representative ring is
for table largely support to
some very familiar with this
financing Scott scheme.
Having a use it in one city in
Illinois and the city and
That's of any item that is known
only we redeveloped portion of
downtown which eventually became
the largest tourist attraction
western Illinois so
wholeheartedly support this
thank you Mr chair.
Senator Senator Griggs.
Thank you Mr chairman is that
Senator Representative experts
all all of you
As a practical matter has it has
begun work is it the is the
enrollment district going to
impose the tax is the is the
City of Albuquerque going to
impose a tax.
And then as it as it comes out
after that who who is the
bonding entity.
Mister chairman Senator Griggs
there is no tax to be imposed is
already the gross receipts tax
rate for the City of Albuquerque
where it is the income is
actually the growth in new gross
receipts tax revenue that comes
as a result of the project so it
will be collected through tax
and Rev to a normal tax code in
that increment is eligible for
reimbursement for that for the
public infrastructure so the
bonds will be issued through the
tiered board itself has already
been created and then the bond
holders of course of on the
private bond market.
Sure Mr chair and then chair
representative and that and
experts the the tax that's
available at their we believe is
sufficient to pay two hundred
and sixty seven million dollars
for the ball Mr Chairman Senator
Griggs yes over the life of of
twenty five years the growth
will be sufficient to repay
those bonds and that's the this
the vetting process we went
through the board of finance and
NMFA.
Okay mission Mr chair and
Senator Representative I've I've
I've struggle with section and I
struggle with this because of to
the city of Albuquerque's
lobbyist it.
But.
And if.
It may be the first time in my
life I have to vote with.
What is the measure of our meals
but anyway I just need neither
here or there but there you go
thank you Mrs you you know and
I'll talk about it there you go.
anybody else the.
The area of the last time I
actually ran was the high school
state championships in nineteen
eighty two this started mill the
stadium and we went south and
read through all that they're
not going to develop that how
dare you.
Like this fund.
So the I don't have any
questions I think it's a great
probability of hernia Mr
chairman so I lived in this area
in graduate school and would ask
for it to pass us okay so we
have to pass motion but.
This Senator Tallman.
Close to forty pass.
Senator Hermio for a second.
A second okay all right our meal
motion.
Toman.
Second.
Any opposition to this motion.
I see none.
We have Senator census Griggs
Kernan Shendo.
For the meal torment and Lopez
all will be here for a minute
that Hamblen I'm sorry thank you
all right sorry.
Thank you Mr chairman committee
thank you look to minors I'm
gonna get back because of
civility and.
We have the very top I was in
rules.
Representative you
already will go back up to the
Senate bill four or five.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee before you have
the food excess of the act this
is a bill that you all passed
out
two years ago in the.
Missed of COVID what happens
grocery stores shows basically
became empty and meanwhile
farmers such as myself at as
much food as could possibly be
available to help with people
and what I realized is that
within our state regulations
there's a real disconnect
between farmer in in consumer
and so this would open up
alleviate some of those barriers
that really in the end consumer
should be able to go to a farmer
and say oh you're selling T.
bones I'm gonna buy a T. bone
from you and and make that
purchase and and realize what
they're doing now in this
community believe it was Senator
Hamblen who stepped out of the
room had a issue and so we put
in language the last time that
would require a size of the
signed as we set aside issues of
what could be the size of a a
post it note or whatever so we
put in that if somebody is
selling is not through the
license Kishen is from a private
kitchen that has to have a
twenty and twenty by twenty sign
that will inform the consumer
that they are purchasing
something from a private citizen
it also removes the the gross
receipts tax on processed food
from a farmer so there's a
little bit we can't really get a
straight answer from
the tax division as to if
grandma makes and grows grapes
and then she makes the jam or
jelly and then sells it and
she's at the farmers market You
aggressor gross receipts tax on
that with your grow store by
smokers great jelly from who
knows where made a great from
who knows where there's no gross
receipts tax on it so we take
care of that issue and then this
year with the whole eggs going
the what twelve dollars a dozen
and just ridiculous numbers we I
decided to put in a little
language I know preemption is a
fund term we use up here but
even cities like Ross will have
just recently passed the ability
for citizens to have six hands
with within their.
Mr inTaos so this would ensure
that every New Mexico resident
can have up to six hands or
ducks as long as they're not
mail they would have to be Act
laying poultry so that they can
grow their own food which I I
think is a of a pretty neat part
of the bill and it also does the
meat inspection program and I
know that I have that going to
you NDA I know that's a
contentious issue and so if we
need to switch that over if
there's any snowball's chance
that this bill is getting out I
would be amenable to putting
that to where it seems the house
would like that to go and that's
a livestock board I'm not set on
in India I just me personally I
think that's what should be but
one chambers already acted and
said that they think it should
be at life support.
Without a stand for questions
great.
All right anybody here in
support of Senate bill four oh
five.
Opposition.
M..
Chairman committee members.
yeah that we the public can also
hear you can introduce.
The state your name we
represent.
I know you know.
Mr chairman committee members my
name is Pam Roy I'm here
representing New Mexico food and
agriculture Policy Council and
farm to table and respectfully
actually work closely with
Senator Pirtle really appreciate
this bill coming back forward
and we want to just bring a few
things forward that that we
think help to twenty percent is
not the right word that there is
already a cottage industry law
in place that really does and I
think it was two years ago more
flexibility was brought forward
for that so that people who want
to do certified home cooking in
their kitchen for the purpose of
selling to the consumer like a
roadside stand or farmer's
market they could do so with
some training and I I do
appreciate the idea of signage
is really important we know that
not everybody gets that signed
up so that people understand
what's.
Food and so one part of this
would be for instance someone
might know how to do jams and
jellies and sugar which is non
hazardous they might not know if
you put onions or garlic in your
salsa that creates a potentially
hazardous situation if you're
selling it or giving it away for
New.
So end as Pirtle said we're
really excited to see that there
is House Bill two oh five which
is the meat processing act which
would reinstate our state meat
inspection program we feel like
that is a clear approach to
again from farmer or rancher to
consumer a with those it's food
safety standards in place so we
wholeheartedly support the idea
food access and these ideas that
we make it really practical at
the local level and really
apologize for having to.
Where's
price really only one.
Houston rodeo.
Okay question the committee is
Senator automobile so I would
more of comments just today Mr
chairman but as rural New
Mexicans we know that this is
something that happens right
Senator Shendo and I purchased
or no bread from the public from
women who who can bake bread and
sell it to any of us were
willing to purchase happens to
the chilli growers in my
district and happens to anyone
from tomorrow is to I've been
bred Senator Pirtle my district
was happy with this bill came
forward and I'm still going to
support this bill thank you Mr
chairman Mr chair Senator Q.
Senator Kernan thank you in Mr
chair and ask for the bill to
and and though I appreciate the
concerns I I think about all of
these people like those to
provide your bread in of the
things that Senator Pirtle
stalking about you know I I
would imagine you their experts
I mean I would think that that
would
trying to figure out who would
do the training because I
imagine that many of those
individuals very knowledgeable
about how to how to do what they
did a step thank you that's all
I have a sports film.
You.
I I know that for of folks with
our tribal communities they work
with the Indian health service
to do the kind of a quick
whatever food service training
so that they're saying you know
we have north of amis a video
travel to highway four rocks
area you know there December.
Indian tacos of bread tamales
pies cookies the so but but they
all have to go to the I think
the some type of of food
handling type of program and so
forth so in in Mister chair
members of the committee I mean
I would I would be happy to put
in we have the extension agents
across the state that do this
already for the public so I
think we could put in some
language between here and and
and the next committee and and
get that put in I don't see an
issue there's an extension agent
in all thirty three county so I
don't think that would be
something that would necessarily
make the the bill not work I
think it would improve the bill
ensuring safety but also
ensuring the the consent of the
consumer and if they want to buy
a burrito out of a van on the
side of the road and you know
that's their prerogative.
Those are the best ones they
are.
All righty I don't have anybody
else on the list Senator
expenses.
Like us motion by Senator census
second by Senator how to meal.
Any opposition to the do passed
motion.
See none we have Senator
Sanchez's Griggs Brett Herman
Shendo handling of meal till
meant and Lopez of woody's in
the affirmative that's nine two
zero four the public that's
listening.
Thank you members of the
committee already.
A
chicken in every pot chicken in
every pot.
Okay you are right
Is Harper back I think he's
presenting your okay yeah he
always presenting my bill so
will come back to that
Representative Kate's house bill
one fifteen is amended.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senators today and I'm
presenting house bill one
fifteen it's just a
clarification several years ago
the legislator I have had passed
a bill requiring that home
inspectors for residential homes
go through a certification
program this bill clarifies that
the standard of the home
inspector licensing exam is a
third party accredited in is
complying with the prevailing
standards of the standard of
education.
And I rests for questions by
today I have a range of
parameters my expert witness the
chairman members of the
committee just two quick items
want to just want to make sure
that everyone understands the
distinction between the building
inspector and a home inspector a
building inspector essentially
inspects new construction home
inspectors existing structures
this is a good way to think
about that and the only other
item I would add that by doing
this led by adding this language
it helps with the reciprocity
leg which is part of the of the
application for licensure by
credentials in our rules for
home inspectors so clarifies
that so somebody from another
state or for somebody from this
state to go to another state and
do the same line of work.
already anybody here in support
of this bill.
Will be in a position of this
bill.
Questions from the committee.
The budget just to pass motion
by Senator Kernan second by
Senator Brandt.
Any opposition to do best
motion.
I see none we have Senator
Griggs Brent Kernan Shendo
Hamblen armilla Tolman in Lopez
overloading in the affirmative
you have a do pass thank you
Senators the eight two zero.
Which is the X..
I'm here.
Okay there you are how to how do
we do that the other side about
halfway through okay.
The real you know how it is.
We were able to get our bill or
no so one forty six percent to
Representative ours about
halfway they were gonna finish
this afternoon okay all right
okay thank you SO three sixty
eight as amended yes chairman
members of the committee if you
remember last year we passed a
bill.
that was basically an IRS
blessed way around a change at
the federal level during the the
tax cuts and jobs act the
limited the amount of state and
local taxes you can deduct from
your your tax return to ten
thousand dollars.
And what we did last year we
joined the majority of the other
states to allow for a pass
through entity of Business and
I'll see you know a partnership.
Instead of deducting their state
local taxes at the personal
level to do it at the entity
level what this means is you
know when you're calculating
there's a definition can
calculate all your income your
expenses of your business and
then you deduct you know your
expenses and you get how much
you made that year in the neck
it's passed through to your
personal income tax and that's
what you pay.
We change the definitions we
conclude the local taxes in this
calculation right.
And this is this is great it has
actually help our small
businesses they
they received actually more back
from the feds.
That way and and also the state
benefit we actually got a little
bit of extra revenue to so it's
kind of one of these unicorn
bills.
Well what happened was last year
restructured as an exemption
like the majority of other
states did.
we work with all the tax experts
in once on this all across the
nation and we all did this but
with what we found is in
practice it didn't work the way
we all planned in all the states
are now changing it from an
exemption to a credit to get to
work right Colorado adjusted
this I reached out to the
department a few months ago was
like Hey I hear this is going on
and so we work together with all
the tax policy wonks to bring
this legislation in front of you
this really just making what we
did last year actually work and
I'm happy to answer questions
because the very quick
description of this bill Mr
chair this is more changing has
the tax policy director at the
tax revenue department anything
but at the end of the work Mr
Chairman representative of a
members of the committee good
afternoon good afternoon no I
don't have anything to add to
what Representative Harper said
but if you have any questions
all so would be here to try to
help answer okay great thank you
anybody here in support of the
this bill.
Station.
And your members of.
It is part of the.
The legislation to make sure
that we can take advantage thank
you.
Anybody on zoom.
Okay nobody in opposition of
this bill.
Questions the committee.
We would be passed by Senator
Kernan secretary second by
Senator Hermio.
Any opposition to do pass
motion.
See none we have senator Sanchez
Griggs Brett Kernan Shendo.
Amylin part of meal till then
and Linda M. Lopez all ability
to from if you have to pass
nine two zero.
Okay.
House bill one eighteen as
amended though they are Dixon.
Late.
Afternoon Mister chair hello are
you good Sir thank you.
So Mister chairman of the
committee house bill one
eighteen this would create the
office of entrepreneurship
within the economic development
department its main function in
life will actually to help folks
that are new in business have
the resources across state
government they need so it
started for folks that are in
business your of five years
have a central point within
state government that can help
folks navigate all the different
barriers that exist and help
them overcome those and and find
that central repository to
encourage entrepreneurship
development within our state and
I'll hand it over to
Representative Dixon ships and
comments then if thank you
senator and members I just would
add that you know this is a bill
that I think our business
community supports we've had
good conversations with economic
development department and have
funding in the budget.
Okay.
Of up to the audience anybody
here support of the house bill
one eighteen as amended.
But.
Mr chair members of the
committee I know your time is
short so my name's Nathan bush I
work at the university of New
Mexico with staff we're here to
strongly support legislation
this also tracks nicely with
some real investments that we
thank you for in the state
budget this year for us research
and commercialization projects
so this would allow us to
translate that to market and
also Mr Clinton Abbey from an
MSU asked me to put a good word
for this bill also think right
thank you.
The US.
Okay go ahead.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Chelsea
Canada and and I'm here on
behalf of the New Mexico chamber
of commerce we support HB one
eighteen New Mexico must take
better advantage of the state's
innovation assets including
supporting entrepreneurship
according to the chamber's
recent economic competitive
analysis driving New Mexico's
future it highlights the need to
nurture the entrepreneurs that
will transform ideas into jobs
entrepreneurship plays an
important role in building
wealth in families communities
and economies thank you
Representative Lane antics and
for bringing for this piece of
legislation.
Thank you.
Right okay anybody in
opposition.
I see none questions the
committee.
Senator Hamblen thank you Mr
chairman question will be brief
I really love this idea and
obviously from New Mexico state
university's perspective I think
it's great the the question I
have is you know we've seen an
enormous amount of growth in
solopreneurs
at the you know even prior to
the pandemic when people were
starting to realize that they
wanted to start their own kind
of business they have these
ideas and with the conversations
about mentor capitalists and all
sorts of stuff and I'm I'm
wondering and the reason why I
ask this question is is there an
age limit on who can participate
in this entrepreneur instead
this this department the reason
why and I don't know if
Representative lane you know
about this but in Los crucis we
have the kids can youth
entrepreneurship program and
these are young people from the
ages of eight to sixteen who are
learning about their own
businesses and I think of like
your kids Representative Dixon
and how they're learning about
budgeting and customer service
and product placement and
development social media and
it's an incredible program and
I'm wondering do you know if
there's an age limit on this Mr
chair I I love the question I
love this on what you're
describing there is no minimum
or maximum age I think the only
sort is asters to be you I don't
think you could former
corporation maybe until your age
eighteen but you can run as a as
a as a also proprietor and
certainly get the resources
right thank you very much that's
all I have a love this idea so
thank you Mr chair Senator
Coleman.
Thank you
Representative brings forward.
Isn't this what they're already
doing I would hope there are
these departments are you doing
is is in this part of their
mission one of my missing.
Mr chair so there are some
similarities how this differs is
this is a central office that
you as a business owner someone
interested in starting a
business go and actually get
help across the other state
agencies that's the main
difference that we're not doing
right now
and then also we have local
hopes that help with business
development and this would give
them a central place as well.
Okay thank you for that answer
and the that's all I have Mister
chair right.
It's a great idea I don't have
any questions so much much
needed to do best motion by
Senator Kernan second by Senator
Hamblen.
Anybody in opposition of the do
pass motion.
I see none we have a two passed
ninety zero Sanchez greats Brett
Kernan Shendo Hamblen ordeal
Tallman and Lopez loading for
the past thank you.
By the way Representative lane
thank you for your outfit in the
basketball game the other day.
Seventies.
It did.
For those of those two socks.
Already of house bill one of
five is amended.
Some amendments.
This.
Yes again what will consider.
Right.
Okay
So.
Mr Chairman are you this morning
Florida senator good afternoon
Senator the afternoon and then
we have to move the clock
forward no that was a tough jump
this morning if we have
questions purpose built we we
feel of the state of the good
good
to.
Well senator our we've
just just a second we.
And then some do you want to go
through the bill said it is
going to the split first going
to mess up her.
The.
We did this in the time frame
maybe call this a
Which team do what to do what.
That is.
Directly that's where you
brought to me yes to the.
And then this is this the one.
This morning.
Is the.
I got a job.
Okay go ahead
would with that house bill.
I know I in front of you today.
To put this in a nut chair this
is to maintain two people.
On a train in New Mexico.
To me this is simply a
unemployment bill.
We're looking for higher high
paying jobs in state in New
Mexico.
Why would we want to maintain a
two person train crew.
I've got cousins that are
revenue streams.
And when you have trouble owner
train.
The engineer when he locks that
train down he cannot leave the
cabin that current.
So if there's something down
that track that needs to be
looked at any of those centers
go off as they do when those hot
wheels come by or something like
that.
The need to people with that I
would ask my compadres here to
say a couple words real shortly
they need real fast.
That would explain this bill
you have a proposed amendment
but I want to if you're still
stuck in the past that would.
Chairman members of the
committee hi my name's Clint
Harris are Representative
brother locomotive engineers and
trainmen simply put the
railroads keep pushing this back
collective bargaining if they
wanted to collectively bargain
this they would have done so
over forty years ago by their
own testimony and in a previous
committee today
We do worry about
The system that the role reserve
suggested to be used in this
case is positive train control
it's not a replacement for a
human being in no capacity
positive train control only
looks forward and does not look
back into the into the train the
real ridges additional layers of
technology that has failed as
seen recently in eastern Ohio.
Okay with that Mr chair would
stand for questions okay of.
Yes.
with that.
Thanks this legislation
to
view this in this class.
I have the.
Well.
There is the amendment.
Thank you Mr chairman and I can
the the amendment is a is a
contingent repealed.
And it talks about the section
three of the act is repealed
effective on the date that
federal law or regulation takes
effect that prescribes minimum
crew members required to operate
a railroad train or locomotive
that is moved in the movement of
freight in New Mexico provided
that the secretary
transportation certifies to the
director of the Legislative
Council Service and the New
Mexico compilation commission
that such a federal law or
regulation is taking effect and
Mr chair there should be clear.
As this moves forward we're
talking about in the that in
this image issue that we're
gonna require two people.
But federal law and federal
regulation current eight being
discussed and debated whether or
not to needs to be in federal
law or regulation and if indeed
it is then we want to repeal
this law all get it out of the
way because of federal rule in
the federal law will take
precedent over the fact that the
at the state law which initiated
in and agree to show Mr chair
and and members with with that
you know will will stand for
questions on it because we just
want to will be clear what we're
what we're up to what we're
we're attempting to do is it
we're putting we're putting this
in law we're we're codifying the
fact that it's going to be to.
But a federal rule in federal
law.
Goes into effect that is going
to be two there's no real reason
for the Fishel and so that's the
I mean I think there were some
attempts and it may be to to try
to do that issues makes it more
more specific more clear Mr
chair members.
Mr chair with Landis on
friendly.
The amendment.
James thank you Mr chairman.
We learned yesterday on the
floor.
That it's it's okay to have
redundant laws.
This is a that's the lesson I
learned yesterday on the floor
from Senator Vontaze so whether
it's covered by federal are not
doesn't mean it shouldn't be
covered by state law
so I don't.
Understand.
We're putting it in first I
don't think we need to repeal it
is because federal law comes in
and changes their standard
because then if what if they
change their standard back
especially if they just put it
into rural then you get a new
department transportation
secretary and they can change
that back so
During according to serve on to
is it's fine to to duplicate
laws so I'll start doing that
next year thank you.
So the.
We're.
Both we will consider the
members.
Senator Representative this is
voted on the amendment.
Senator had me about.
This is.
Those.
Have a question sure so this
leads me to the question Mister
chairman Senator if if you
already have a contract with the
right.
That is currently in place
saying that you have to on the
train.
I don't help me understand I
mean would that not be
sufficient at this point to when
is your contract up at me which
is it expiring if the federal
government's going to
potentially come in and is it
time for them to do what they
need to do and then that would
take precedent it's my
understanding is the federal
government says either through
legislation or through
rulemaking that that's going to
be the rule I don't understand
what the urgency is with regard
to to to doing this in statute
right now will report before
Senator what I like to do is
that we're not on the bill yet
for questions I don't like to do
is go out this amendment has
failed I'd like to go out if you
don't have anything else to that
we like to go out to the
audience those are that are in
support of the bill and I know
there's a lot of contention so
what I've decided to do was to
give each group fifteen minutes
depending on who you are we
gonna start time in and so that
will each group will give you a
fifty that touch task of quicker
maybe ten minutes ten minutes.
From the mall.
Good afternoon Mister chair and
committee members my name is
Kathy Elliott and I am here
today and I'm not representing
officially anybody with the
railroads I am representing
myself as a mother of a rail
road engineer.
as mother of a railroad
engineer.
The one thing I haven't heard in
this committee today is the word
safety.
And it's safety that we're
talking about here we're talking
about to people to run a train
that is almost three miles long
at this point because they keep
getting longer.
That if an engineer something
goes wrong with the train and
there is one person currently in
that locomotive and something
goes wrong there is no one else
to back them up I can tell you
as a mother of an engineer my
son has anaphylactic shock if
he's bitten by a wasp I would
certainly like to have somebody
there to help him in that
situation let alone another
person who may have any other
medical need.
I think that there are a lot of
times where these trains go by
us.
We see them we want our Amazon
packages to be delivered
quickly.
We're happy to have them.
But what we don't understand is
that each of these people who
are on these trains are putting
their families and now you're
asking them to put their safety
at risk.
Last week I stepped onto an
airplane.
Smaller planes a glance left and
you know what I saw.
I saw co pilot and a pilot.
Can that plane actually probably
run with one person.
It could probably run with no
you're right Senator.
But.
They have to.
And that's what we're asking
today is that whether or not and
Senator Griggs brought this up
if the federal government does
these things that's wonderful
but if it's a small world word
but it means a lot that's I'm
sure and today we're asking New
Mexico to make sure that the
security of not only of our
railroad people be secure but
also the people in our state
thank you and I would appreciate
your passing the bill.
But yes so I am timing so I do
want to let you know that you've
got about seven minutes I want
to be fair to both sides and so
please those of you that are
speaking remember there are
other people speaking as part of
your are your perspective you've
got seven and a half minutes
all right thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee I am
the state legislative director
for smart TV I'm not a
registered lobbyist I'm not a
lawyer I'm a locomotive engineer
and last week I worked as a
conductor on the streets coming
from Winslow Arizona.
Now in the past eight years that
we've been working this bill I
have resolutions from the city
of Gallup all all of the.
Members of that committee gave
me a separate resolution the
county of Valencia I have Los
Lunas the city Bernalillo
grants in Cibola county of also
admitted resolutions in support
of this bill they see the safety
that this is a safety bill it's
it's not about our contract
because our last contract was
settled by Congress we didn't
get a choice and.
Thank you very much thank you
yes ma'am yeah.
Mr chair members the committee
my name's government health and
residents the county.
Twenty five years of the NSF.
I trust you guys are all here
for constituency Communities and
the safety of all New Mexico.
Mr chair committee my life is
not negotiable I neither does
the.
The committee and the public.
We don't need to talk about past
times.
I'm gonna that serve we live in
the now we look towards the
future I'm gonna keep this short
I have a lot of stuff.
just want to mention vinyl
chloride in Ohio.
We carry fear chloride ferric
chloride from Albuquerque all
the way up to close to Santa Fe.
That's a no brainer thank you.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is really
difficult I've been a locomotive
engineer for twenty six years
and I am the legislative
representative for the delete
key eleven in Clovis New Mexico
we need to keep two people in
the cap for the safety of the
crew and for the safety of the
public.
Most of my territory I operate
on his very or very remote.
If I were to fall ill in the
cab.
fall ill the cap my conductor
who would be able to administer
first date.
And direct first responders to
my exact location there is no
way the railroad would no I was
incapacitated until another
train happy to stop and check
me.
Many of our trains are three
miles long I need that second
crewmember to cut and clear road
crosses in the event of an
emergency.
I can't cut crossings along.
Let's not bargain for safety New
Mexico has a chance to lead the
nation in real safety for the
cruise and for the public thank
you.
Morning Peter shepherd from.
Sen well Dona Ana I'm gonna take
credit for that chairman I had a
great speech right until I
talked to Senator Griggs
yesterday and ended up in the
trash can after some frustration
my son seeing me we had little
power while so Mr excuse me
Senator Griggs to give me a
different perspective I do want
to bring that up by the way not
to trust you but everybody.
We talk a little bit about
mandating safety we all know
it's safe enough to I don't
think anybody that at this point
can argue that
and I want to say after a spent
a couple minutes with my son we
do mandate safety you mandated
shot for him to go to public
school be mandated the masks
someone did mandated the vaccine
that's what we do you didn't but
somebody did it got canceled the
last minute I took the shot.
You willingly as a group as a
safety for group for a city for
state for the federal government
we do mandate safety and I
appreciate you talking to me it
was great anyway thank you all
very much and I would've done
better if I got to use my speech
but Mr Greg's Aid alive anyway
thank you all thank you for your
time to fix it and working on
Sunday which we do all the time
thank you the school is.
Sorry.
Hello.
With them what long run
permitting eleven Dalhart Texas
on here of your own home for
your court I'm not getting paid
I'm not a rate provided or
Representative I've been at it
for twenty eight years I've seen
the Orioles in that town Sir
February much sooner can we pull
up half of Three Rivers of the
recall at that Santa can we've
had three derailments and if
offices where we have the room a
daily the materials we help
through Mexico still it brings
of your local community lawsuits
well sentiment of all all point
is no stranger trying to get
himself we hold nuclear
biological and chemical waste
would you like to computer do
that Mr Brent.
Would you like mean Graham yes
the computer can do things but a
man on the ground think we help
through our community your
community and I'm a property
owner from New Mexico's well I'm
very patient thank you so just
let you know about two minutes
and fifteen seconds.
Hello chair members of the
committee my name familiar brown
I'm a conductor out of bill in
New Mexico I'm a member of the
smart transportation department
I'm here in support of this bill
and this bill would protect my
job I've been a conductor about
almost five years now I'm just
starting my career and I would
like to take my job and all the
new hires that they have hired
this year and the past year and
our last contract wasn't
negotiated was decided by the
government and here they're not
willing to sit down and
negotiate creating Khan says
with the C. there and I'm here
for to protect the safety and
well being of my coworkers while
we're out there alone by
ourselves and the community with
the dangerous hazardous
particles that we call thank you
thank you Senator and go to find
another for twenty nine years
positive train control it tells
with New Mexico is going to be
it doesn't see the petition on
the side of the reservoir the
cartons and the real.
But that second set of eyes
does.
Be nice to people with the.
Thank you.
Senator is a my name is a does
the number would have been
working for the railroad for
twenty five years we're gonna
blow in New Mexico as an
engineer.
last year nearly had a stroke
while I was on the train the
only guy had to count on was the
guy next to me.
Upon arrival to but when I drug
Albuquerque for cleft in the
hospital.
the doctor said that you know I
nearly missed having a stroke I
ended up having to have heart
surgery so you have to think
about this from a safety
standpoint with one person on
the train if he becomes
incapacitated there's no one
there to give life saving CPR or
for a.
Just a few questions you know
there's no one there to call for
help when it comes to first
responders there's no one there
to drive the train to the first
responders.
This bill will help to save
lives your decision today will
save lives tomorrow thank you.
I want to set eight seconds
locomotive on locomotive in the
middle of nowhere they told me
take for our CMF current budget
have a combat veteran on the
train with noted that true story
verifiable using to people here.
Need to be able to correct.
Thank you.
Already will have a.
For the thirty the time is up
and so we just know that okay
all right thank you and anybody
here in opposition of this bill.
Let.
You also have for the.
Ten minutes combine.
Mr chairman of the.
Mr chairman members of this
committee we've heard some very
valid points the good news is
that we have two people
operating freight trains today
and we will have to people
operating trains indefinitely
can you state your name and and
where you work.
I.
But hello Espinoza I work for
union Pacific in every I
represent their public affairs
group so the good news is that
we have two people in the
captain definitely and that's
because of a collective
bargaining agreement that we
have with our labor partners to
say that the number of people
operated tree is not part of the
collective bargaining process is
simply not true it's a process
it's been used for over a
hundred years and it's something
that when you look at this and
you realize that this is a
situation this is not a vote
against labour this would be a
vote to protect the sanctity of
the collective bargaining
process so safety is our top
priority and we want we are
working to improve our safety
all the time they mention
hazardous materials what we do
manage those and we are
obligated by the federal
government to move those hatter
desserts materials because it's
the safest way to move them much
safer than trucks ninety nine
point nine percent of these
products arrive to their
destinations without an issue
caused by a train accident but
you know what that is not good
enough and we're not gonna stop
until a hundred percent of these
products arrive safely so again
please think about the fact that
this is a collective bargaining
matter there is no need for the
state of New Mexico to become an
agent in the collective
bargaining process for this
matter thank you.
Good.
There's also somebody.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is TJ trio and
I'm a registered lobbyist for
BNSF railway.
With all due respect to the good
sponsor sponsors of we
respectfully oppose house bill
one of five in order to save
time I want to hit a couple
legal issues because and I let
my colleagues with you P. talk
about some of the other safety
issues
but before I begin I want to
think of the opposite the
advocates of the bill the pin up
a pleasure to work with them
enjoyed getting to norm
unfortunately we just
fundamentally disagree on this
bill I want to commend them for
their passion in which they
approach this subject and I I
truly agree with them that CD
should be first and foremost as
as we proceed with what the road
system.
Here's what the issue is Mr
chairman members of the
committee you've heard me come
up your previous bills and say
this bill has a legal issue and
unfortunately this bill did not
get referred to Senate
Judiciary.
A fundamental problem with this
bill Mr chairman members of the
committee is the fact that the
federal government has
preempted.
This particular bill this bill
is a legal effectively let me
tell you in August of two
thousand nineteen Illinois
enacted a two person crew Law.
On September thirtieth of twenty
twenty the federal court for the
Northern District of Illinois
declared the law preempted.
What the court said the federal
railroad safety act authorizes
the FRA to regulate real safety.
Therefore a also permits a state
to regulate rose real safety so
long as the at FRA prescribed a
regular regulate the issue or
issue order covering the subject
matter.
A federal regulation order
covers the C. so the matter of
the federal regulations
substantially subsume the
subject matter of the role of
the law.
But the court did the court
reserves decision and answered
in the affirmative that you
cannot regulate to person you
cannot issue a state law
requiring two people or three
people or one person that is a
topic for the federal government
that's the space that the
federal government has entered
into and that's where it
belongs.
Mr chair members of the
committee obviously been a sub
supports safety were one of the
largest employers in the state
at fifteen hundred employees
Roughly around there and again I
appreciate that I think it's
positive but fortunately federal
law preempts this particular
bill and ask you do the right
thing I know it's a tough vote
but we don't need to invite
additional lawsuits New Mexico
doesn't need to ignore the the
following law the deal with the
subject matter thank you members
of the committee you.
Thank you members of the
committee my name is JD
Bullington lobbyist for Union
Pacific Railroad I want to talk
about safety right up front.
Locomotive safety is a complex
matter it is way more complex
than just quote two person crew
and quote you can't talk about
locomotive safety unless you're
talking about a well trained
crew that's alert it's
responsive and it is backed up
supported and guarded.
By safety innovation and
technologies that prevent human
donor and auto correct and when
they happen.
Before we had positive train
control in the state in this
country before trains were on a
GPS guided computerized network
we had some horrific crashes we
have one of two thousand and
eight a California metrolink ran
right head on into a union
Pacific car railroad you know
the cause of the crash was.
It was human error the conductor
and engineer missed a solid
yellow light the name Mr red
light in an area right before
they came on to a single track I
had had on.
There's no question that was
human donor but now we have
these trains protected and
backed up by by this network in
place.
one of my one of my favorite
quotes and soundbites that I
hear my friend Clemente other
state about this is that you
know we can't negotiate safety
we should negotiate safety but
if your definition of safety is
person crew then nobody can
negotiate safety because here's
the contract in place the to
contest this is been a place for
thirty years it's binding it's
nonnegotiable less labor says it
is and the railroads can't
change.
This mandates two person crew
and this is not a government
negotiate a contract this is
binding right now and it can't
be changed.
Labor has already won this
issue.
We have two person crew and the
railroads can't change until
they're ready to say it's time
to change so what is the agenda
here well the agenda is to get
this contract codified into
state law.
For the federal government moves
on this published rural.
That they're going to adopt.
This is the published rules from
the federal railroad
administration that says there
shall be anymore.
Two people on a locomotive as a
career.
That's what it says labour's
already one that.
But they want to immortalize
this contract.
And to put into state statute
before its pre empted that's why
the timing so critical on this
my last comment Mr chairman
members the committee I'm gonna
make is a former member of the
international association of
machinists and aerospace workers
and I can see climb space right
now going Ono jadis a brother
yup I'm a brother.
There is no more powerful tool
for labor than the collective
bargaining agreement it is the
hammer that forges out the
compensation the salaries the
budget that hours that are
manageable and also safety in
the workplace.
There's nothing more powerful I
am really surprised that labor
is trying to take a piece off of
the table in this case an entire
contract and to put it in state
law.
When they've already won again
got about a minute and a half
and I believe you also have one
more person online so what's the
ramifications of this bill what
does it do labour's already one
we already know we've got two
people in the crew in the
locomotive the danger this bill.
Is that fifteen to twenty years
from now if we ever into a
regulatory framework.
That allows for a patchwork of
state laws you're creating a
logistical nightmare for
railroads that have to cross
across other states and deal
with a patchwork of laws this
law is unnecessary it
compromises the collective
bargaining process and it's
absolutely a need thank you can.
There's a project that there's
one minute okay we have a one
minute.
Senator you want to speak
this brief except for Mr
chairman madam vice chair
members of the committee my name
is Chelsea Canada and I'm the
director of public policy at the
New Mexico chamber of commerce
we respectfully oppose H. B. one
oh five we believe that this
bill is premature and it's
currently being dealt with on
the federal level railroads do
not exist in a vacuum only
operating within state lines we
believe setting personal
requirements on the state level
can affect interstate commerce
additionally a study last year
looking at railroad safety
records found one person crews
are comparable to to person
appropriations over the last
fifteen years the federal
railroad association and other
safety regulators have evaluate
the crew size issue extensively
and I've never found any data
that two man crews are safer as
you heard for shopping has
always been establishing
collective bargaining a long
standing process used by
railroads and rail labor
organizations to negotiate wages
benefits and work rules
railroads believe creating
staffing should continue to be a
teacher dressed in the
collective bargaining process
thank you
with over time okay that's all
we have in terms of times who
just know the name of we'll go
to committee for question
Senator understood Mr chair of
this co sponsor would like to
say just three words okay three
what Mr thank you Mr chair
members of the committee yeah I
I did carry this bill two years
in a row several years back I'm
fully committed to helping get
this done so Representative
every syrup gone came to me
yesterday and handed me his bill
file and said by the way there's
hearing market you do this and
so I was thrilled to see happy
to see Senator Woods here he and
I have actually not work on the
bill together but I I think that
actually respectfully have a
great deal of respect for Mr
Billington and Mr Trujillo and
others that spoke today in the
professional from the government
affairs office and what I have
to say is they actually made the
case very well for why this is
important actually why this
needs to be done these things as
they said are already in.
The agreements that they have
with labor and the simply caught
codifies and I I don't think
there's anything that could have
set backs even said better this
is already happening today let's
just put it in rural Erin law
and let's just move on down to
the tracks that's number one
number two yes there is a
patchwork of of of issues across
states but that's on me that's
on many fronts Mr and this would
simply ask or require those the
companies to operate at the
highest standard the highest
level possible for safety of
their employees you just sign
individual who'd been severely
wounded as a result of the work
that he was doing so I'll wrap
up my comments there I did come
up very fast because Mr
Representative Alcon asked me to
and I knew Senator which was on
this and I'm actually desperate
to go down to the floor but that
because we're gonna go down here
shortly and thank you very much
want to say a few words thank
you thank you Senator so go to
committee Senator Kernan thank
you very much and so you know
just hearing everything this is
finally part from both sides
because before today it was
basically just one side that I
heard from it sounds like the
contract that is in place cannot
be changed or broken and less.
The union agrees to open that up
and renegotiate.
And for me it I don't understand
how are you doing this because
we change statute all the time
so you've got a contract that's
our client you're gonna have to
of conductors to in the trip on
the trying and then we're going
to put it in statute.
Five years from now six years
from now will come back here I
will be here but somebody will
be and in that may decide we
don't need to because of
whatever has been develop
between now and then and then
all of a sudden.
Your contract which was a great
contract that is not going
anywhere we can change statute
any day and and so that's what's
confusing the may one the world
would you even do this you've
got an ironclad contract can't
be changed unless you agree to
now you want to put it in
statute and trust us.
My goodness that's a little
risky and so that's my concern I
think the amendment was a good
amendment and I could vote for
the bill with the amendment
because that just says exactly
what Mr chair he'll said when
the federal government comes in
and they make their whether to
rule or legislation whatever
they do it's in place and they
have preemption asan.
And so you know this just says
if that occurs then district is
repealed and I could vote for
the bill with that on there but
I can't vote for the bill I'm
worried about I think you should
have to I have no problem with
that it is not here Mister chair
and senator from one of your
conductors that we are already
transporting nuclear material
across the state did I hear that
yet.
I love you state that yes Sir
please.
If you're I want everyone online
to hear what you have to say
about this.
This.
Roger gathered up front opened
up but Canadian Mr with get a
closer to I with okay I have
gone to two different classes on
handle nuclear biological.
They don't in was also.
Receive the.
Shipments you make the product
and then love comes to us and
we'll vote for the refund at the
door.
It does happen if you sit on the
highway which could be drug
robot computer you'll also see
people from the environmental
protection agency in other
entities surrounding that
vehicle going down the road
we've all seen those vehicles
are blacked out also you.
Now that's one three not break.
Sir the necessity this is the
thank you but yes no stand once
and it is expected that would
halt ugly stuff in my last
comment is on the Ohio the
rounds just three in the last
two weeks they evacuated one
mile but to.
Okay so director figured on the
interstate I twenty five forty
fifty four hundred of and I work
in New Mexico top model but to
move with kids everybody if we
have one problem and I just
received a text all should came
from Texas there's a major
element just now to happen make
sure it's seven minutes ago
McPherson Kansas.
all more discussion number
thirty six hours I don't know
look communities are involved it
be on the news and connect this
thank you Mr chairman I really
appreciate it because we've had
this discussion on another bill
with regard to the safety and
but I think I heard you say you
were well trained to be able to
haul whatever you need to call
and I appreciate that gosh maybe
both bill now thank you thank
you very much that was very good
Senator Tallman.
This is all over the.
Right.
What what I I can understand why
this is why they're coming here
what it does to be in the.
But that's done at the
negotiating table.
Maybe we could setting a
precedent here that PPE unions
that are going to come here to
codify
things that they want.
What what line outlined today.
Mister chairman Senator Mr
Chairman Sierra like to address
that money I'm sorry Martin
I just finished but twenty fifth
year with the NSF I'm a
locomotive engineer there are
some things that were brought
up.
By those that are opposed to
this bill that thank.
What is actually going on here.
The keep talking about the
contract and how we've got the
to people and its in our
contract look.
That is not true.
This contract that the
government.
Gave us did not address how many
people are on that track.
You have to realize the real
road refused to come to the
negotiating table.
To work with the unions over
this new contract.
That is why collective
bargaining when they bring it up
means nothing to us this is
safety if you want to know where
is protected on the two person.
Groups that are closest
agreement not a contract his
degree with thank you Mr
chairman so the rules are
interested in safety.
All we do is work on state Mr
chair for so.
All we care about the safety
that is what this bill is about
enough what I'm telling you is
that where the confusion I can
see is because of what they said
what they said wasn't true we
only negotiate the contract and
are safe working conditions this
is about.
Two people on that train is
about our safety the safety of
the community and the safety of
the state.
So so you.
To telling me the railroads
don't care about safety.
Obviously they do do you think
they want to train city rail.
I will tell you that go to the
go to the chair please.
Mr Chairman.
Sierra I will tell you the I
believe the rope used to care
about safety.
I know when I hired out all we
heard was safety was number one
the very highest regard we had
was for state.
It would take twenty five years
later it is not it is now about.
So the at three all three more
Mr chair the at three.
Mile long trains the two must be
caring.
Multiple millions of dollars.
Of goods maybe a half a billion
who knows so this is they're
making a lot of money.
So they feel they can't afford
to people on a train in the in
the set with their.
It that's what they are what
what out whether of reason would
they have they can't afford it.
Senator Tallman of.
With with what they're doing
here of I guess they can't.
This is crazy.
So Mr chair.
So the correct me there are
other states running with one.
With one engineer.
We.
The.
Mr chair Senator Tallman not
that I know of.
So I guess I didn't I guess I
misunderstood somebody.
So.
How can it be.
Is so choose the the federal
government is going to come out
with a
Of the statement a US.
With the ruling that there's
going to be this one.
The person in the locomotive is
that correct.
Mr chairman Senator toman as of
right now they are running a
pilot program with an engineer
only on the train.
But if we if we Enactus.
Bill today.
And the federal government comes
out with the ruling.
What happens.
Would we be what what what would
take precedent the federal
government or is our state bill.
Mr chairman Sir Tom and federal
government.
So then why are we here.
Mr Chairman Sierra the.
Here is.
Are to improve protected under
free consistent remote.
Bills the way that plays out is
in Santa Fe eighteen just above
and B. and murders.
The crew constant stream it
protected the last Santa Fe
employee so as long as we have a
Santa Fe employee under the old
agreement we are perfect.
When that person retires.
I would bet you the very next
day BNSF comes out with the deal
and says now we're going to work
run one crew member on that
train and here's the scary part
every one of those guys
collector of protected under
that can retire today.
So this would be the.
Protect the current employees
but not future employees.
Mister chairman Senator Tallman
this.
The employees you have right now
plus any employees that they
hire in the future.
Hi I'm gonna vote this's crazy.
Maybe I'll get lucky and the to
be decided by the time it gets
to me.
Sure.
Yep that's a vote last right.
Senator a we have Senator
Griggs.
Those dominate up you I'm sorry
I didn't to tell you that I was
and I'm done thank you okay
thank you Senator Griggs.
Thank you for sharing thank you
senator thank you gentlemen I'm
I'm somewhat disappointed in the
fact that we couldn't agree on
the amendment because what the
amendment says what is that if
we pass this law all in the
losses are going to be two and
the federal government comes and
says that there's going to be
two then the law goes away.
What we just heard Mr chair and
and gentleman is at the federal
rule in law will preempt.
The state law regarding.
But we wanted to be clear in
this long show that we supported
you with the two man until that
happens.
I'm disappointed that somebody's
not telling the truth.
In H. either you all for it
should the railroad.
And the Mr chair and senator.
that's why we don't get involved
in union negotiations.
Because that's a private.
Argument.
Between the two shocked image
we're supposed to be Mr chair
and and senator it's supposed to
be between.
The workers.
And.
The company ever so often the
federal government.
Get involved in some of the
usually get involved because
there can't become an agree.
Between the two shot.
So the federal government gets
involved to for.
The continuance of a short.
In this instance it would be Mr
chair Senator the the railroad
because you guys are important
to the country to Bruce product
from here to here is extremely
important to the country.
And I don't think there's any of
us up here that don't support.
Having to people.
The challenge that we're having
a Senator tall man talks about
is why are we getting in the
fight.
Why are we doing.
And I don't think.
I don't think I know why the.
And I've Schecter and I've
listened to you guys from both
sides have been lobbied probably
harder on this than than
anything.
And I like all of the.
Even though you don't know where
the first quite Joni New Mexico
one right regardless of the
fact.
The card was that you guys it's.
This is.
What we're talking about two man
crews right here in some of the
some of the arguments over
safety and some of which over
jobs but what if it was another
issue with the rail.
Something I did you can't have
you can't have trains longer
then I called.
You want to in the middle of
that.
I mean I don't know that that
toward to be you guys.
Have forever.
Have for ever wanted to.
That Tana me with your best.
You don't want us being in the
middle of your based each and
every issue because once we get
in it once you get in bed with
us.
That may not be a good place to
be and I don't I don't.
I don't know how else to kind of
can you say.
I'm.
You know I was watching
something on on something the
other day and here's here's
president Reagan he's talking
about you know.
Governments the problem.
Governments to problems and you
guys are wanting government to
get in and try to deal with this
and.
If we're the problem.
We're only going to make you
worse forty at some point so I'm
not I'm not still certain I
would sure I didn't hear people
say in that that's not true.
The case something means
somebody's lying.
And I don't know that you guys
are line eighteen I don't know
that we don't have a couple of
different things we're talking
about and we're not clear on
what that is.
Because I don't know what you're
you're you contract is Mr chair
Senator the gentleman I don't I
don't know I don't know what
else to reserves.
But this thing troubles me
because we don't need to be in
the mix we don't.
I don't know that I will support
the bill still.
I would have.
Really like to have supported
the bill with the amendment
because I think the amendment
addressed everybody's overall
concern it should we could
support to until they changed
when they change it H. change
anyway.
So I don't know what the
argument will.
But that was the amendment we
didn't approve the amount.
I'm just I'm just disappointed
it's come to this I guess guys
and and honestly it doesn't it
didn't matter
whether it's a Mr chair and you
guys are the unions or whomever
I'm just disappointed that it's
come to this because railroads
are important in New Mexico.
You guys are important to New
Mexico.
And I don't I don't know what
the answer to this this deal is
but I I kind of thought we had
it with the amendment but I
yes we did so thank you Mr
chairman and thank all of you
again and now that we know we're
the first quiet Joni's in New
Mexico we will never forget it.
No Sir we won't.
K. Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman the
Senators no this this one's not
an easy one.
I really had my mind made up
when I came in here but I would
say some of the public testimony
made accusations.
Even use my name in those
accusations the kind of pissed
me off.
So
I don't know.
Kathy I I appreciate what you
said
But we haven't actually got to
talk about it yet so to say that
we're you had talked about
safety we do have a chance.
you know so I just I still
understand the adversarial
attitude from some of the public
testimony towards us.
So.
So I do have some questions.
and I I did
I I got a copy of the contract
at least the the page that has
the the how many people have to
be in there
I think neither one was lying.
because it does say that
basically consist for all crews
operating units specific Eastern
District will be one conductor
foreman and one brakeman helper
except as provided herein so
there's an exception to that
and so
without getting into all the
details of the exception because
I wouldn't understand them
anyway there is an exception to
the turf to personal can we all
agree on that set.
Okay thank you
As far as the federal government
goes and having this patchwork
we do that with the.
Semi truck transportation all
the time.
I mean California made it almost
impossible for a while the even
drive a semi truck in California
of by the way all the real guy
should be really happy about
that because now you get a whole
lot more freight from California
because none of the truck
drivers want to drive California
anymore they also offer the
Nevada border and there's a few
truck drivers will drive in
California this page that loads
of California Nevada border
yeah I'm a native of California
so I know all about that my
family still lives there because
they're too dumb to get out
sorry that's not what the dump
market back to my family K.
Finney.
but you know.
It happens all the time which
transportation.
Now president trump when he was
in office and that took place he
could have been acted the tenth
amendment kept California from
doing that we didn't.
Commerce Clause would take care
of that issue right away use
that affected commerce directly
and effect this president good
do it any day and you know free
up the point by just saying that
California's rules is on
constitutional under the tenth
amendment.
Louis take care some of the
stuff.
do I trust the federal
government to make the right
decisions for New Mexico I don't
trust the federal government to
make the right decisions for my
feet.
The loan for the state.
So no I don't trust their
government all I don't really
hardly trust the state
government.
And I'm part of it so in some
ways I I think Senator eggs
right do you really want us
involved in your contract
negotiations.
But at same time we involved
object goes use in almost every
session we set the salaries for
the teachers so they don't have
to negotiate that we set the
hours for the teachers so they
don't have to negotiate that we
get involved all the time in
contract negotiations between
the union and their employer
especially in education.
but we also do in
transportation.
With the rules that we set for
transportation so I I don't know
what I'm I'm really torn on this
one at this point.
I I. E. L. one of the questions
I I think that is questionable
as to whether everything's
covered the contract.
and I really appreciate you
coming and we had a great
conversation and I'm probably
going to keep my word to you but
I think you talked some here
folks.
Thank you.
Thank you senator Sanchez.
Mr Chairman question common for
ready on with to pass.
If you don't have any questions
Mr chair okay anybody else on
the questions Linda Lopez are
you question just a second sure
go ahead of them the new office.
I thought you meant you so you
met a second many like that
couple of seconds not second the
motion of start of it.
So that one of our club to do it
the good okay so.
No this is a tough one and I
think of I appreciate comments
and come into the office and
everybody that we've had talked
to thank you very cordial and so
forth and I think I made it
clear and I want no no I ask
about the federal exemption and
on you know and all that stuff
and you know I think you know
now hearing more of it you know
I think the question is why
we're doing his understanding
one point what you're trying to
do you know as technology
improves but having a contract
and I told you about you know
Peter you know the Senate of
transportation secretary blue
joke on ASEAN in two weeks ago
after the incident in Ohio and
and I think I saw the
introduction of the bill in the
Senate for the two man crew and
so there's a lot happening I
think the question is why we're
doing this and so
but with the yeah it's a tough
one I think all of us are for
safety equipment it's amazing
you know what goes on a rail and
the all the chemicals and
everything that that is to you
know traversing or are states in
our communities and I think all
of us for for safety and I think
the question is you know.
You know I think I listened to
some extent I also agree with
the Senator Griggs what we doing
what we get involved in the
federal you know of a bargain
with the feds and and and and
the company and and and and your
bargaining unit so for so.
But the I don't have anybody
else on the question of section
so we do have a due pass motion
but Senator senses we have a
second by Senator Lopez clerk
please call the roll Senator
Brandt yes.
Senator Griggs.
Senator had a meal yes.
Senator Kernan though and he'll
explain both.
Senator Lopez yes.
Senator Sanchez yes.
Senator Tallman.
A week yes.
Which is a yes that's a yes okay
Senator Hamblen no explain my
vote Senator Shendo no great to
explain over the.
We have five yeses and
foreigners I to forty of the
best motion.
Budget okay we will.
Thank you Mr chairman thank all
of you honestly and I think you
know I told you what I thought
would change which is the best
deal and I I hope that you
understand that it's not the
that I am against actually
either side I just feel like
there's a you know there's a
place for us there's a place for
the other and we're out of our
place right now and I
again you guys have been have
been great to talk to great to
visit with but yeah we had an
issue that I've I hope that will
and yeah we're gonna get into
the floor and we'll see it will
have the opportunity for
everybody to talk about it and
maybe that's where it's more
fair to decide in for a ten
member committee show thank you
Mr chair and thank all of you.
And thank you I would like to
explain my vote because we've
had a wonderful conversations
and and that and I was
conflicted about this this bill
in particular because we in this
body have in the past created
legislation because we don't
have any confidence that the
federal government's going to do
what they're supposed to be
doing
and then we say that we need to
do stuff to protect people in
New Mexico as well but you know
I and I think my my colleagues
all of us to have have stated
that we want safety for our
communities and the cargo that
you transport much more
effectively and environmentally
sound David do trucks because of
the length of the trains and I
appreciate that but in my
district we have the border
industrial association and we
are at the border of New Mexico
and Texas and and and what I am
concerned about is what's going
to happen at the border for this
milk multi million dollar
complex that we have that brings
in a lot of economic development
into the region and so
it so please note that that's
that's why of of my vote just
very conflicted in understanding
the value of both and I
appreciate the conversations
that came from this committee
because I think you all
understand we are very
supportive of employee safety
but we also recognize the impact
that the rail system has in our
state and it's really these are
conversations that need to
continue because I think there
is a solution there I I just
don't know if we know what what
it is yet so I I do appreciate
that and thank you for the
committee for for having
thoughtful really practical
conversations on this thank you
members the committee exposures
on the floor by Senator Woods
sure owner thank you personally
for taking this matter at.
This took up a lot of your
valuable time in committee.
And I think it's an important
subject can internet grateful to
you for doing that now what's
that worth in real dollars I
don't know.
I may find out the.
