To have a meal.
Senator Kernan.
Senator Lopez here.
Senator Sanchez this senator
Tom.
Senator Wirth here Senator
Hamblen dear Senator Shendo here
we have six present for excuse
for and we have a quorum okay
great all right we'll go ahead
and get started does for folks
up in the audience of we have a
for license plates bills we're
gonna go ahead and take care of
those right off the bat in a.
The Senate bill two ninety six
is being rolled to a Thursday so
we're not gonna be here that and
the sponsor of three oh three
has asked to pull that for a
moment so so so that you guys
went over
And then on to Senate bill two
fifty nine we will hear that but
we would not taking action since
that's a affects the the budget
and then as well as Senate bill
three sixty those two were here
but not taking action so with
that of.
Turn it over to you gentle lady
who also first.
Thank you Mr chairman.
I am here in front of you is
with my colleagues on different.
A roof require being that the.
Motor vehicle division of tax
Representative to issue a
special New Mexico license plate
and my particularly when Mr
president I Mr chairman I'm
sorry Mr chair
members of the committee is with
regards to Special Olympics.
some Mr president Mr chairman
this is something very simple
but again I think I will pass
this on to my colleague as we
each make a pitch.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
members of the committee I also
have one of the license plate
bills that has been introduced
by chairman one knows and in
essence what that does is it
creates a new specialty license
plate with a logo designed as a
specified in section sixty six
dash three dash four two for New
Mexico statutes annotated
nineteen seventy eight
commemorating New Mexico miners
and if I may with that in the
rat Toneri of course we continue
with the minors hospital we have
individuals who
truly would really like a
license plate like this and then
also I have a Senate bill three
oh five another license plate
bill and this one here would
transfer distribution of
revenues from the issuance of a
special route sixty six
commemorative vehicle
registration plate from the
department of transportation to
the tourism department so that
in essence is what these two are
license plate bills are doing on
a pass it on to my distinguished
colleague Senator Gallegos.
Thank you senator Senator Mr
chair Senators I've have had in
the past might bring to you
again this is the make a wish
license plate
the vast continuously to be
looked at for a plate for and
it's not just one or two
statewide there's a lot of
people that have it's sort of
like with the these other
license plates are groups of
people that would be interesting
getting these I have a quota
says want to wish comes true it
creates strength hope and
transformation and child and in
the community and then with that
all we'll send for questions.
That all that's alright this
okay this.
What.
All right let's go one by one
anybody of the audience's
support of Senate bill one forty
two.
Mexico minus license plate.
Williams.
Okay anybody in a.
What.
Okay there's no opposition so
have a motion set any opposition
to the motion.
Do not have a deeper forty two.
All of the.
This seven two zero eight I'm
sorry Linda.
I'm it.
Okay so we have a due pass on
Senate bill one forty two.
Anybody in support of Senate
bill two seventy six.
The question leak which license
plate.
What does.
we do have one individual to the
next.
We donated.
All right buddy in opposition.
Senate bill two seventy six see
none motion for a new path thank
you for the past listening to
him.
we will.
The second and then we go to
with the second by Senator
current senator Coleman for a.
Question on two seventy six.
and
Mr chair Senator there is a
little bit of fiscal impact on
mine but it really depends on
the organization so on this one
that I have it's an add on fees
that they pay it over the plate
that they currently by but in
the first target of getting the
bill ready there is some fees
that department transportation
will have to incur but hopefully
with sales of the plates allowed
please come to hopefully a
balance.
This is.
It
is a good point.
All right thank you so we do
have a motion any opposition to
to do passed motion.
yeah would you pass on to
seventy six nine two zero.
Senate bill two eighty four
Special Olympics license plates
anybody support of the special.
Where we give you one minute if
you want to testify or use okay
we're all good all right.
But we also do.
Okay all right.
In opposition of Senate bill to
the for special pick license
plate.
motion were to pass what senator
Wirth second by Senator current.
Any opposition to the past
motion.
See none.
To pass nine two zero.
Senate bill three oh five route
sixty six license plate.
Anybody in support of.
I.
What is its purpose K. anybody.
Opposition to go I.
I see none.
That's most of what do passed by
is sentiment.
Second by Senator army of any
opposition to do pass motion no.
The know on all the way here
okay all right so the third call
the roll Senator Brandt though.
Senator Griggs.
Senator had a meal yes Senator
Kernan yes Senator Lopez yes
senator Sanchez.
Senator Tallman.
Senator Wirth yes.
Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Shendo yes.
We have a yeses and two males
were to pass.
All right yeah would you pass.
What was it eight two two two Mr
chairman thank you very much
thank you members of the
committee years ago when I was
on Senate rules and Senator Mike
Weiner was there also we used to
deal with these type of bills
and I really appreciate your
indulgence thank you thank you
Mr chairman all right thank you
thank you Mr all right Mr.
Interesting we have we have four
license plate bills not over
drafters.
All dollars there for the other
word is one of the things you
madam or plans or all right I
know which one one one.
We talked with the discussion.
No I think Senator sapien that
have introduced a bill you know
where we meet maybe we come up
with a license plate and have a
space so that any sticker that
we want to close so won't cost
deals you any money but
basically because of the sticker
you put on there so anybody that
wants so at least a licenses
uniform but you have a space for
stickers and maybe something
that we need to suitable for.
Okay all right gonna use up to
a.
Thank you thank you.
So we'll now move up to the
Senate bill seventy six Senator
Coleman.
Mr chair I move it do not pass
the Senate bill seventy six the
Senate.
Activism verification.
Senator to have a listen to
work.
Sierra.
View we have a move on this
bill.
Okay for discussion so go ahead
present.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee
This is a Senate Bill substitute
for Senate bill seventy six is a
LFC endorse bill that makes
three changes to the procurement
code is recommended by
procurement best practices.
Mr chair and members since two
thousand sixteen LFC staff
completed to evaluations and one
progress report on the state's
retirement systems highlighting
deficiencies in the state's
purchasing practices some
important recommendations of
those evaluations main under
dressed including repeat.
Who's purchasing exemptions that
circumvent competition and
adding guardrails to statewide
price agreements this bill
addresses some of the valuations
statutory recommendations.
This year is our hands state
savings through increased
competitive sourcing as I said
earlier this bill makes three
changes number one.
this bill requires state
agencies and local public about
out for local public bodies
purchasing off the price
agreement to enter into a
contract with a scope of work
with the vendor if the price.
If the price of the purchases
over five thousand dollars for
professional services for over
sixty thousand for general
services for construction.
The second change it makes Mr
chair is also requires state
agencies and local public bodies
to obtain three quotes before
purchasing goods General
Services for construction
services between twenty thousand
and sixty thousand off a
priceless that number is and the
third change Mr chair is section
two of the bill repeals the
hospitals and health care
exemption in the procurement
code.
I have with me today Mr chair
The at the head of the
valuations for.
LFC Kayla Fisher.
And I think she would like to
maybe expound on what I just
said thank you Mr.
Thank you senator thank you Mr
chair again a Micaela Fischer I
believe the manager of the
program evaluation unit the
middle classes right here but
it's nice to be here so Senator
Tallman said this is a area of
the LFC has worked on.
Pretty significantly over the
last five years this substitute
deals with some of the most
significant recommendations that
are evaluations.
The first more on.
You can see at the bottom of
page two of us substitutes it
says that if you had an agency
purchasing up a price agreement
over certain thresholds that
they really need to be doing a
separate contract with a
separate scope of work really
defining what work is going to
be done for services under price
agreement this was a
recommendations that the General
Services Department had further
state agencies up until twenty
nineteen when they rescinded
that guidance but it's a good
best practice and the reason is
otherwise I I pull the pricing
of the purchase order from HSD
just this morning
they had a one point eight
million purchased a delight to
do some I. T. system upgrades
there was no contractors no
scope of work that said what was
going to come in that's just
simply a purchase order when
you're doing purchases at that
level it really puts the state
at risk of you know not being
able to recoup on its purchases
if you know what's asked for is
not delivered.
the second item on the price
list that's our solution very
bottom of the page to goes on to
the next page of the sub it
simply says the agencies that
are buying off a price list for
construction workers are
services over twenty thousand
they just need to do an extra
step of due diligence of making
sure the price on the price list
is really the best one there are
several reasons that we
recommended this change the
first is that it's a requirement
to the federal government of
their own procurement laws so we
have state agencies spending
federal money they already have
to do this
the second reason is usually the
prices list on the price list or
just feeling you know but not a
four so visitors might quote
choose one prices by one pickup
truck of a prices but maybe a
different price if you're buying
ten
a good example in our twenty
nineteen procurement evaluation
Ation price of four different
agencies were all getting in
purchasing the very same
ammunition for example
having this requirement you know
to get quotes will push agencies
to check and see if they're
getting the best deal for the
taxpayer dollars at any given
time.
And the last reason for this
just because sometimes price
agreement sometimes gets stale
you know they're often to go she
added for five years at a time
and prices change your
businesses come online it's just
worth it in those interim years
for agencies to do this extra
step of due diligence again to
make sure they aren't
overspending.
Finally you know the last item
in this bill is a repeal of an
exemption in the procurement
code that mainly applies to our
state Medicaid managed care
contracts we noted in our twenty
sixteen evaluation that
technically because of this
provision HSD could order
Medicaid managed care contracts
which is the biggest contracts
the state to does something like
you know over a billion dollars
a year in aggregate of spending
hundreds exemption HSD could
technically award those
contracts with no and R. F. P.
no competition at all I'm not
saying HSD is never taken
advantage of this exception
so.
So it's not an exception that's
needed to the procurement code
summer appeals that and with
that Senator and and Mr chair I
will.
Leave it there and I'm happy to
answer any questions you might
have the the no Senator.
Alright anything else before I
go though but thanks for giving
me opportunity thank you Mr
chair thank you anybody here in
support of Senate bill seventy
six.
Mr chair of my name is John
Merrow and if you our operations
director of we appreciate
senator Clemente and if you live
with
with us that some of our.
that was the the resulting.
So with that we are.
Else.
What does.
The body in opposition of Senate
bill seventy six.
All right Senator Kernan.
Mr chair and.
Thank you Senator that I have is
like hear from the other TV
presenter.
Question.
There working and.
Alright so I think what I heard
was here okay.
Global.
So I question the this is that
my.
The state.
So with regard to local I.
What's the change there for the.
Thank you for the question
Senator the for ten million
expert witness so Mister
chairman Senator it's a good
question local public bodies
generally have to follow the
procurement code just the same
as state agencies to
and we had when we were working
on the original version of this
bill which is these parts plus a
lot more we work really closely
with the need they've got
healthcare Byrd on staff is a
former attorney at state
purchasing to help make sure
that the provisions were
developing this bill we're going
to put undue pressure on those
local public bodies that might
not have the purchasing staff at
our state agencies to.
Mr chair Senator they're not
here in support or opposition.
So
the fact
is that.
You're not that far from there.
So Mr chair I don't do it.
I want to speak for them of
course but I I feel pretty
comfortable saying that we we
worked on this really closely
developing bill and that they
would not be in opposition to
that Mr chair and senator one
question you mentioned
HSD and CEO contracts so
again like those in.
So how will this.
As a single back out on.
I.
Process and select.
Thank you for the question of
the for expert witness.
So it's it's a good question
Mister chairman Senator Kernan
so the effective date of this
bill would be June sixteenth
just like all of most other
bills my expectation is that HSD
will have figured out whatever
they're going to do with the RFP
process by that point in time if
they haven't the repeal would
take place and they've as long
as they went out for their
regular competitive RFP process
again you know that's that's
fine this would just take away
the exemptions that date you
know technically could award
those contracts without doing
that.
Here.
Your state if they.
Issue those are after.
What we see.
So Mister chair and sorry for
not being clear so this bill
repeals the exemption.
So right now HSD has gone
through a competitive RFP
process they're not taking
advantage of the exemption and
so you know we this would just
you know get rid of that
exemption that's all.
The US the.
Wirth I think you're just a
couple questions.
You know I know.
This section of this is current
language drafted as.
Notwithstanding the requirements
always.
Loss as a one.
The loss that.
For the lawsuit following I know
that
is adding.
That was one of the row.
That out there second question
what's being.
Transaction.
Three.
Thank you for the question
center of defer to that with.
So Mister chairman Senator the
repeal is
Section thirteen one ninety
eight point one of NMSA it's
called the hospital and health
care exemptions it
It's a little over eighty but it
says the provisions of the
procurement code shall not apply
to procurement of an agreement
with any entity is essentially
for the purpose of creating a
network of health care providers
jointly operating a common
health care services to state
purchasing agent or central
purchasing office makes a
determination that their
arrangement will or is likely to
reduce health care costs improve
quality of care or improve
access to care that's the piece
of statute that this appeal.
one wire.
Thank you for the question
center of for my expert witness
so to Mr chair.
Recommendation to repeal this is
been one of the come up over and
over again in our reports
because Medicaid managed care
contracts are I think the
biggest contract the state does
not one of the biggest and it's
high risk to do a large contract
like that and not fair and
competitive processes we want to
you know that's not being
utilized and we don't want to
see relies to the future and I
appreciate that when I.
General Services on the other.
The representative anyone here
General Services of a on the
work this.
Yeah.
The Mr chairman thank so thank
you for the question I did speak
with the
The spokesman for the former
interim director of general
services
this morning and she indicated
that.
she yeah I had some problems
with this bill but the she
indicated that she would be
willing to
Work with me in the future to
come up.
What she.
Described as a really good bill
but shouldn't have time to do
that in this session.
We was Anna and a silver screen.
Well I guess I guess
Thank you and was there a
discuss with our I just want to
make sure that you're on your
phone and rolled over.
There are other ways of.
The only way out here.
I was here for I didn't us to
speak to her but the Sanchez did
tell me that the that she was
willing to work with the.
Sponsor anyone for
better it's not about.
Right is that correct
this is sure that that is
correct.
I guess is here.
What what losses your bill is
morning.
Level it over to work with her
what's your.
Well I'm willing to work with
her.
Actually with the school to.
The committee yeah.
This is one of the things that
that was a.
It does sound like there's not
in this state they get there and
they're not here with us
question one make sure the data.
Negative you were on hold this
for.
I want to pass four fifty really
getting got that yeah city now.
The is is there's a whole.
Here well try and the Mr chair
and senator will try and the.
Like to get something through
this year so they don't have a
problem with the.
There if any negative comments
about the Medicaid section they
were changing from anybody so
maybe we can that work and
The
The first and second change.
hopefully.
How to get something done this
year because as you know we may
not be make a generic.
Next year eight three two years.
I guess so
that the changes were this bill
okay we're here.
Distortion you do sure.
They
certainly between here is here.
yeah I just want one another you
mention this on opposition I
just want to make sure.
The following year.
So I just.
The effective make myself clear.
Do you want us to hold it is the
questions posed yes solar okay
so okay we want to take any
action on this bill you can go
back and talk to folks and see
that come up to some agreement
and and let me know I will pull
back on
Sir thank thank you Mr chairman
I'm looking at the entire or I
don't think it's updated to
match the that are really think
that's important if you could do
that along with the.
So Mister chair and senator I
have a a draft for FY are for
the separated going happy to
share that with you and would
you once more yes we bring you
back okay appreciate that thank
you okay thank you thank you Mr
chairman thank you members of
the of the committee.
Down to Senate bill two fifty
nine.
This is the lotus.
So you don't if you don't want
to see if that's what to.
The thing that you do with okay.
If we were to disappear I think
you sit on the rules committee.
It's that they can give you some
time.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my involvement
with this bill got started as a
member of the Legislative Health
and Human Services Committee I
was yes at the very first the
interim meeting with drafting a
white paper senator searching
for resources to deal with the
problems of alcohol you could
use in our state.
And what of what I found in
doing that research is only half
of the money that is collected
on the tech the current tax
is is given to programs and the
other thing I've found is it's
the first tax that gets cut when
we have a downturn in resources
and then the other things I
found out we're just.
Over the course of the summer
we're was the damage that
alcohol does to our state
It is just stunning to look at
what we see what we experience
in our state in fact in twenty
twenty there were one thousand
eight hundred and seventy eight
deaths due to alcohol.
Again to put that in context an
average of five people died
every day due to alcohol related
causes it's associated with
cancer heart disease heart
disease alcohol use disorder
anxiety and depression learning
and memory problems liver
disease digestive problems
violence motor vehicle crashes
and other injuries and of course
death.
So what I learned also was it
Senator I mean Representative
Ferrary had been working on this
for quite awhile and then we
also saw since two thousand
twelve for a long long time of
even before she was a member of
the house and then.
we saw of series written by Ted
Alcon that really highlighted
the history of the tax in the
state and really chronicled the
damage in fact after the
publication came out by ten
Alcon I was very gratified
because Senator Pinto came up to
me and said I want in on this
bill because she also wants to
see the problem solved.
What we have done with this bill
is make a dramatic change when
you hear how great the increases
it's only because the tax is so
low right now and then you will
hear that our tax is in on the
high side nationally or at least
in the region but what you won't
hear from the opponents is that
may be true about the call the
the tax but it's not true about
the cost.
When you look at the cost of
alcohol in states around the
region we're on the low side in
fact it actually looks like they
may understand that we are low
income population and that they
charge accordingly because the
cost of alcohol in our state is
lower than then around the
region so we have here
the experts and one is online
professor David Jernigan or
associate injured again I guess
he's a professor in the
department of health policy and
management and he's the
assistant dean of practice at
Boston University school of
public health who is been a
researcher and does incredible
modeling with the connection of
price and and what that does to
consumption and then we have
Shelly Man late levy who is a
former director of the Santa I
Santa Fe prevention alliance in
a public health advocate I would
like to turn it over to my co
sponsors to speak a little bit
about why they think this bill
is so important at this time in
the history of the state of New
Mexico like I said I don't think
we're going to address the root
causes of many of our social
problems unless we take on this
this serious serious problem
with that I'll turn it over to
Senator Pinto.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Mr chairman members of the
committee.
This bill this tax woods hasn't
been raised even before my time
before I was even allowed to
consume alcohol.
And I think there's a couple of
us here that dollars about that
so that speaks to how long that
this has not been increased and
in that sense to.
Within my area the health care
providers are deploying that we
need to do something because
they're tired they're worn down
by constantly seeing this
particular substance and.
Actually it's not just a
substance because we can collect
tax on alcohol but we can't
collect tax on math on all these
other substances that are out
there and even with the mayor
wanted to we're not even
dedicating that to behavioral
health we have suicide rates we
have shortages in staff for
behavioral counselors in that
sense and where are we supposed
to get this funding when all
this time we have never increase
our dedicated any money to all
the social issues that plague
our state in that sense and I
think everyone of us here I
actually have someone in our
districts that have suffered in
some way from.
From suicide from alcohol
consumption even for my young
kids that are consuming alcohol
to the point where it leads to a
Patel AT.
How long will we wait I'm going
to wait another day I hope it
happens in my lifetime that we
actually dedicate and prioritize
our funding and our ability to
address these issues in that
manner to tackle something that
is to me just a tip of the
iceberg Inc which we're going to
see even more and in that sense
to during the COVID I do not
think we actually saw a decrease
in alcohol consumption we
actually saw increase increase
nationally so thank you madam
chair and thank you
Representative Ferrary and
Senator Sedillo Lopez and
Senator top.
Thank you L. now as for some
brief comments from Center for
ari I mean Representative
Ferrary.
Thank you I'd have to bump
Senator souls.
thank you Mr chair and committee
members as you see in your
notebook there's a lot of stance
stats that we as a group working
on this issue the alcohol policy
reduction group that's in Gallup
and also others in at U. N. M.
have been really helpful to
getting the information that we
need.
But I think what's really
important is how much it costs
our state and each of us as
individuals it's over two point
two billion dollars now and over
a thousand dollars each person
and that's just the act excuse
me the economic part of it the
twenty twenty status of for
people who have lost their lives
has grown to over to any two
hundred seventy four people and
we've seen spikes of seventeen
and thirteen percent in the past
couple years so this is
something that is urgent that we
do now and by raising the
alcoholic size taxes we can see
a drop in consumption it's
scientific research based
information we have to how
effective this could be but then
also we heard in interim how
important it is that this
funding generated will go into
programs that will
Help a ratty Kate this problem
forty nine percent of New
Mexicans don't drink at all and
so we're sharing those costs by
all of us to do
you know don't drink or don't
drink excessively or heavy
drinkers
we have
Also lose in of.
Our young people one in three
deaths of ages twenty to forty
nine New Mexicans are attributed
to alcohol and with raising the
tax and making it so that we see
that drop in consumption and
then also have the programs we
will be able to also work on
issues such as domestic violence
sexual assaults homicides
suicides all of the different
things besides a chronic health
issues that we see.
And I think we should have Dr
Jernigan space.
Mr chair dot Dr David Jernigan
is one of our experts and I
believe he's online.
Yes yes I am can you hear me
yes.
That's great Mr chair members of
the committee thanks for letting
me speak.
Western part of health policy
and management at Boston
University school of public
health the number down I'll call
policy issues for thirty five
years and serves as an adviser
to both the World Bank and World
Health Organization my comments
today are my own use and don't
represent the official position
mining for city point of focus
in my testimony today on the
expert consensus from around the
globe about the single most
effective thing we can do to
reduce alcohol problems which is
to raise the price of alcohol
according to the World Health
Organization I'll call taxes are
one of the most effective and
cost effective ways to reduce or
prevent alcohol
alcohol tax increases have also
been endorsed by the task force
on community preventive services
which is the independent body
that conducts reviews of the
science and advices CDC on
effective prevention measures
let's take a real world example
in twenty eleven Merioles raised
its sales tax on alcohol by
three percent I co authored to
evaluations of the health and
consumption effects of that tax
increase in the wake of the tax
average monthly basis of
gonorrhea declined by twenty
four percent or almost sixteen
hundred cases per year alcohol
sales were three point eight
percent percent less than what
they would have been expected to
be eighteen minutes out eighteen
months after the tax increase
underage drinking public twenty
six percent range been tracking
by twenty eight percent binge
drinking among adults by
seventeen percent well the
number of alcohol positive
drivers of all ages on Maryland
roadways fell by six percent.
How does this happen basically
can across the plaza if the
price of alcohol because of
people drink less even young
people and have the drinkers the
price goes down they take more
literally hundreds of studies
have quantified just how much
less people will drink and how
much alcohol problems will
decline in response to tax
increases one systematic review
looked at three hundred forty
estimates of the effects of
alcohol taxes and prices on
alcohol related morbidity and
mortality estimated doubling the
federal alcohol tax would reduce
alcohol related mortality by
thirty five percent traffic
crash deaths by eleven percent
sexually transmitted diseases by
six percent and violence by two
percent the bottom line is
alcohol taxes state lines all
taxes also have the greatest
impact on exactly the group
causing the problems excessive
drinkers according to a tool
developed by experts CDC by
researchers at Boston University
and Johns Hopkins seventy five
percent of any increase in New
Mexico's tax on alcohol would be
paid by the nineteen percent of
the state's population or
excessive drinkers well the
forty nine percent of New Mexico
adults who don't drink would not
take any.
increasing the tax would also
lead to a net increase of as
many as twenty two hundred jobs
for the state's economy
depending on how the state
decides to spend the new
revenue.
Why because alcohol taxes
Shipman's funds from a
relatively capital intensive
sectors which is alcohol
production and sale to one of
the most labor intensive sectors
in the industry in the cockpit
Kanemi which is government and
health and treatment services
among not excessive drinkers the
taxes are also clearly not
regressive.
Even among excessive drinkers
the group that will pay the
largest amount of the tax will
be New Mexico's highest income
segment the twenty nine percent
of the population earning more
than seventy five thousand
dollars a year and the benefits
of the tax increase would
clearly be progress that we're
going to services that lower
income persons are far more
likely to make use of that
highincome.
So the message of the sciences.
Alcohol taxes save lives alcohol
tax increases like the one under
consideration in this bill good
for public health and for the
economy based on this evidence I
encourage you to support SB two
five nine to preserve protect
and promote the health and well
being of the people of New
Mexico thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chair net now we
have a Shelly Man Lev a.
Thank you so much Mr chair
members of the committee thank
you Dr David Jernigan truly a
mentor and an international
expert now called tax policy in
addressing alcohol harms.
I spent twenty years as the
prevention coordinator the Santa
Fe public schools I see senator
Wirth I had the pleasure of
working with your your amazing
son and many other young people
in our community.
I was also the former director
The Santa Fe provincial lines
and I came before this body the
Senate in two thousand and
seventeen begging.
That we do something seriously
about alcohol.
At that time one thousand one
hundred people in New Mexico had
died the previous year from
alcohol related harms the math
is simple right now it's two
thousand two hundred and seventy
four people in twenty twenty one
I just did a workshop in
November I told people to
memorize one thousand eight
hundred seventy eight individual
lives you all know some of them
all of us here of experience
that so that's what we're here.
New Mexico needs to implement
the most effective strategies
and alcohol tax policy raising
the alcohol tax and dedicating
those stable funds we hope they
go down over time for those
stable tends to addressing the
harms related to alcohol is
singly the most effective thing
we can do it's a to a win right
a win win strategy.
I'm gonna focus on what the
revenues can do.
We're talking about raising with
a two hour by raising the tax
twenty five cents per standard
drink our standards in taxes
currently very anywhere from
less than a penny two seven
point one cents.
It would bring in an additional
one hundred and fifty five
million dollars into the state.
Currently we raise about forty
five million.
Yeah those together that means
two hundred million dollars
which could be fully directed to
prevention treatment harm
related to alcohol compensation
for alcohol related crimes
serving the needs of our tribes
pueblos nations that have been
so severely impacted by alcohol
and other harmful substances.
So this fund would be fully
directed I have to say if we
were to take the current funds
of which about twenty five
million dollars.
Almost half for dedicated to
address harms successful program
like the county D. W. I.
programs we only have twenty
million that is currently not
being used for those purposes
twenty million additional
dollars is not adequate to the
task hundred and fifty five
million begins again if you
heard estimated.
About three billion dollars and
harms of which taxpayers pay for
forty percent.
Again tax committee three
billion dollars estimated of
which forty percent is taxpayer
cost and that affects all of us
so what with the fund do.
It would take care prevention
from early childhood home
visiting programs through higher
education greatly increase
resources for screening and
treatment of particularly we
have many situations in which
due to an insurance lack of full
insurance or because people are
incarcerated in justice systems
we don't have funding for
treatment I will compensate
victims of alcohol related
crimes like domestic violence
and again in the dressing unique
need to publish tribes and
nations thank you so much.
Thank you Mr chair has you can
see it's a two brought two prong
strategy.
we this is not a governor's bill
and the governor is not but we
did work with the governor's
office
in developing the plan for how
these funds could be used and
with that Mr chair we stand for
questions thank you of.
What we go to the committee of
to the audience anybody here in
support of ten we're not going
to take any action on this bill
but those go out to the audience
in support of Senate bill two
fifty nine.
In just one minute if you guys
can get up introduce yourselves
in the.
Figure testimony appreciate that
thank you.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee a millisecond guy
are with a masters in public
health and a former state
legislator on a in Oregon on
many health and Human Services
policy and budget committees I
strongly support this bill New
Mexico is the worst state in the
nation for alcohol related
deaths and for costs related to
alcohol New Mexicans died of
alcohol related causes at nearly
three times the national average
and alcohol is involved in more
deaths than Sentinel heroin and
met the meth amphetamines
combined Representative Ferrary
talked about the cost as well
this is the costliest the two
point two billion I think you
said is the costliest per drink
consumed of any state the
department of finance
administration says in its
impact report on the companion
bill house bill two hundred and
twenty two hundred thirty
raising taxes on alcohol as an
evidence based strategy the
public health policy analysts
have studied and much of the
research states that raising
alcohol taxes will reduce
consumption the professor from
Boston University brought up the
example of Maryland when Alaska
resets alcohol taxes by a few
cents a drink in nineteen eighty
three and again in two thousand
and two it found in the study
found a cut a call related
mortality by a total of forty
percent when Illinois raise
taxes in two thousand and nine
it with some it cut fatal
alcohol related crashes by
twenty six percent with an even
larger reduction among drivers
under thirty I don't want to
take anymore time I did send you
an email with lots of these kind
of statistics and also some
points about countering some of
what the opposition may say
thank you to.
You guys were going to make a
statement can you come up here
please.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name's Linda
Atkinson I'm the executive
director of the D. W. I.
resource center and the New
Mexico victim's Rights Project.
I have been working in this in
the center since nineteen ninety
two I think I started sooner but
I won't confess to that.
we had took a big focus on D. W.
I. prevention and raising I'll
call excise taxes in nineteen
ninety three after the Christmas
Eve crash I don't know if you
remember that the cravings
crashed and that today with
inflation those dollars have a
rotated but fifty percent
they're not worth the the amount
of dollars that we need as
you're hearing today in the
victim's rights project working
with all the teams of crime
that's expansive look we have to
look at it isn't just D. W. I.
we've brought that to the for
consumption of D. W. I. crashes
are up again so I would urge
this committee to support Senate
bill two fifty nine and
appreciate listening to all the
research and science I want to
say since nineteen ninety three
it becomes deja vu hearing what
liquor industry says we're going
to go out of business well raise
a tax in ninety three I didn't
hear of any businesses going out
we close the drive up windows we
heard the businesses would go
out of business we didn't see
that either so I would rather
pay attention to what we do it's
a data driven research based
solutions to reduce death and
injury thank you thank you.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee my name
is Anil Emerson I am a former
employee of the New Mexico state
legislature I served as house
tax analyst for years I was also
executive director of the
legislative finance committee
I am currently on the victims
excuse me victims rights project
D. W. I. resource board and I am
here in support of this
legislation I urge you to
consider this legislation as a
very important policy piece were
taxes can be used to achieve
social outcomes there is
extensive research as was
discussed earlier by the
witnesses that undeniably shows
that raising the price of this
commodity will in fact reduce
consumption.
The benefit also is the
additional revenue raised which
can address some of the real
problems that our state faces
Richard C. earlier to support
thank you.
With one.
give me one minute.
But.
I.
Hi Mr chair and committee
members my name is Jenny way and
I'm an addiction medicine
physician working in Gallup New
Mexico since two thousand twelve
and I share our McKinley County
apple task force and I
enthusiastically support Senate
bill two fifty nine there is no
way to exaggerate the extent of
alcohol related harms in our
hospitals and emergency
departments there are more
prevalent in far more secure
than any of us have seen in any
other setting and we have
providers that are practice from
all over the country from
Atlanta to Seattle from LA to
New York City we're facing a
public health emergency here in
New Mexico and I'm not talking
about COVID a one that's one
we've been fighting for decades
now I'm only getting worse I
never get used to seeing twenty
eight year old mother of three
and fulminant liver failure
yellow from head to toe because
river can't clear her taxes
leading from every orifice of
providing because she can't make
a protein needed to clot blood
swollen legs with ten leaders of
extra fluid in her abdomen cause
for liver failure a shutdown of
hippies I never get used to
telling her children and her
mother that she has died from
aids preventable illness yes a
preventable illness but only if
sound evidence based public
health practices are enacted
like just the two fifty nine we
healthcare providers do our best
to provide compassionate care
with the resources available
thanking them and medicines and
addiction treatment but all that
is not nearly enough and were
burning out and was losing
important health care staff too
long we've been in disaster
mitigation we need to ship this
apple accident towards
prevention for funding for
medical courses but our
communities need us to be
stronger and Senate bill two
fifty nine shows that we can
meet thank you for your time Mr
chair and committee members.
You.
All.
Go ahead yeah one minute.
Good afternoon chair members of
the committee my name is Cindy
Sokoman many evaluated also the
director and founder of the New
Mexico traveled here health
providers association
association membership includes
behavioral health providers from
Apache Navajo and levels many
tribal community members are
negatively impacted by alcohol
related harms even the most
don't sell alcohol on private
land increasing alcohol taxes is
the most cost effective method
to reduce excessive consumption
and prevent alcohol related
harms people with lower income
are most impacted by alcohol but
also most says price increases
and would benefit the most from
interventions like the one being
proposed heavy drinkers are also
benefit because they have the
highest levels of harm and
therefore shift in their
consumption can have a positive
impact on their health currently
every New Mexican pays to
address the negative impact of
all help whether they drink or
not and many would rather pay
order a drink knowing that the
funds generated will create
hundreds of jobs in behavioural
health prevention across our
state in increasing much needed
services and rural communities
we have a responsibility to
address and remedy the impact
that alcohol has had on our
state.
Extension centers are only
seconds please over staffed and
not the solution to address
substance use disorder thank
you.
You.
The.
Okay of okay we'll go to the
audience anybody here in
opposition of to Senate bill two
fifty nine.
As we go ahead and start here
give me just one minute G. H..
Mr chair members of the
committee Jason Weaks registered
lobbyists for the distillers
guild of New Mexico we very much
appreciate the intention of this
bill we fully understand that
alcohol is a major issue that
our communities face one of the
things that we like to point out
though is that
particular craft meant a craft
manufacturing in the state it
creates manufacturing jobs we
export this good out of the
state these are good jobs these
are stable jobs the other thing
is we're not currently
maximizing the value of our
current liquor excise tax really
using about half of it to treat
alcohol issues into cessation we
think that there are some
alternatives
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Amanda
Aragon and I'm the special
projects manager for troubled
mind distilling we are a small
business with four locations in
the state and we respectfully
oppose this legislation thank
you.
Mr chair and committee members
my name is Abby Edmundson I'm
the executive director of the
New Mexico tippers kids and we
stand in respectful opposition
of this bill thank you.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee my name is side of or
on the corner of tractor brewing
company and in the last twelve
months our self prices have
increased by twenty percent due
to increasing labor costs and
the cost of goods sold and our
volume of sales have gone down
ten percent since the
legalization of cannabis I feel
like we're already doing some of
these measures thank you.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Randi
Valverde and I'm a registered
lobbyist for Anheuser Busch we
stand in opposition to this bill
while we advocate for
responsible consumption and we
support measures to divert the
liquor excise tax to the
intended purpose of substance
and alcohol abuse and treatment
programs we cannot support this
level of an increase to the
excise tax we already have the
fifteenth highest excise tax for
beer in the nation and this
would represent a five hundred
and fifty to six hundred and
fifty percent increase depending
on which analysis you're looking
at and this will affect New
Mexicans who are already being
impacted by inflation when the
state has record revenues to try
to address our alcohol problem
so for these reasons and others
we have to stand in opposition
thank you.
Good afternoon Mister chair
members of the committee I merry
came group registered lobbyists
for The New Mexico restaurant
association we respectfully
oppose this bill.
Well we absolutely agree that
one hundred percent of liquor
excise taxes should go for the
purposes intended instead of
having fifty percent diverted
and going into the general fund
as it currently is.
We disagree that this is the
time for a tax increase as we
have record revenues for the
state thank you.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Chelsea
Canada and I'm the director of
public policy at the New Mexico
chamber of commerce we
respectfully oppose SB two fifty
nine we agree about the public
policy issue at hand aren't
supposed and are sympathetic but
we had to disagree with the
approach we have an amazing
opportunity in the state to
invest in New Mexico with our
historic budget surpluses the
chamber prefers an approach to
use already generated revenue
from the current liquor and
alcohol taxes to be re
distributed to fund prevention
treatment and recovery services
instead of increasing taxes as
discussed with the industry over
many years this policy decision
of creating a flat tax would
represent a sharp jump in
taxation on liquor beer and wine
especially for craft distillers
and brewers like you heard today
the price will be imposed on
imposed on all consumers in all
settings impacting small
businesses who are still
recovering from coming out of
the pandemic the FIR highlights
of the proposed tax increase a
beer will place New Mexico the
highest in the nation for these
reasons and more the chamber
respectfully opposes this
legislation thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee good afternoon
John Thompson registered
lobbyist Representative a host
of beverage distributors Mr
chairman one thing I have not
heard this committees already
passed out of Senate bill two
twenty which proposes to re
distributed liquor excise tax
and there's a Medicaid leverage
component I believe in that bill
that will generate substantial
funds the same bill more or less
is moving on the house side
house bill three twenty one we
would ask that that we support
measures like that that that
begin to provide education
treatment and prevention thank
you for the time to speak Mr
chairman and respect.
Have a good night Michael.
Scott Scanlon registered
lobbyists for the San Juan
county and for the city of
Farmington and we also
respectfully
oppose this legislation it would
reduce our percentage of the
local D. W. Y. funds from forty
five percent to twelve percent
and both San Juan county and the
city of Farmington use those
funds extensively and existing
D. W. I. programs and so we for
that reason we oppose this bill
thank you.
Thank you
Yeah.
So I think it's.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee my
committee my name is changed for
a the vice chairman of the
public tax alliance coalition
and we
took a look at this bill there
are some concerns and also we
will Committee of the the tribes
of concerns have a tax agreement
with the state and we don't know
how this could have an impact on
our tax agreements and thank you
Mr chairman.
Thank okay if you can give I
don't know they got one at age.
Good afternoon Mister chair
members of the committee I'm
cert sterile senior vice
president of the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
we won't dispute that our state
has a drinking problem according
to the Albuquerque journal
alcohol was a factor in nearly a
quarter of New Mexicos four
hundred sixty seven road deaths
last year.
However simply ratcheting up
attacks isn't the answer to
combatting alcohol abuse it
needlessly punishes very
responsible adults and it would
harm local economies what's less
clear is this taxes proceeds
will support evidence based
programming to address the whole
related harms this bill will
harm New Mexico's distinctive
local breweries wineries and
distilleries the FIR puts it
mildly describing this rate
increase as substantial sources
of what the five hundred fifty
percent increase per year.
And given the historic revenues
or state is in the midst of
collecting we don't need to
consider tax increases
especially in next tax increases
that would continue to rise
without legislative action I
thought the whole harms are
truly a priority and if we
believe that the programs this
proposed tax funded we should
find means to support them right
here and right now without a
bill would hurt business.
It's.
That.
well.
Good evening Mr chairman and
members of the committee.
Yes I'm up into many come up
with my name is Li little that I
represent New Mexico petroleum
marketers and our members are
small business owners in every
city in New Mexico.
Orient our customers are lower
income New Mexicans and it
challenges our customers of the
base over the past few years
have been very difficult the
dealing with the pandemic
inflation at a four year high
interest rate to the twenty year
high and and how we want to
increase taxes on again
including a yearly increase.
We absolutely believe all taxes
collected on alcohol should be
dedicated to social behavior
health Mexico this legislation
targets in penalizes those New
Mexicans we believe that in the
second quarter for those reasons
we host Senate bill two fifty
nine thank you.
Thank you.
Good no no we'll go to the
committee for questions.
army of.
Thank you
I think we can all agree that
it's all called the the phone
I did everything the way.
The and although I see the
effects of the.
The.
Both of those that I represent
have reached out.
Which is that this
time.
Thank you Mr chair Senator my
understanding is no that's just
that's a separate thing this
bill would not touch the.
Mr chair is this is about eight
noting areas of.
We'll be back on the.
Do you want to the.
Back up for.
Mr chair Senator.
That has always been said every
time that there is a tax
increase and we haven't seen it
what I do believe that they
could do and I I was joking with
somebody but I was have serious
that not only should they pass
it on maybe they should Jack it
up a little bit more so that we
could have more of an impact
unfortunately people will come
back and buy alcohol and I don't
think it's going to affect their
businesses especially if they
feel if they could add something
to make up for the decrease that
we're hoping for
and way co sponsor want to say
something.
Chair and senator.
it's on Mr chair and senator for
small businesses they should see
a growth in the economy be as we
add more jobs into state
government and also
health care health care issues
so we will see ugh ugh no more
jobs as David Dr Jernigan
pointed out.
And a growth of thousands
throughout the state.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
seven.
Senator Griggs.
Thank you Mr chair you know we
talked about the some of the
animals
and.
The one of the things came out
of the shared mission refracted
not all the the correct version.
Should be.
So that's something that needs
to occur whether the fish bill
pro.
are one of the things that
there's you know I've I've kind
of worked on a similar bills in
the past and there are often
times difficult to.
But.
In this particular.
the approach that you've taken
on the twenty five percent for
fo I thank you we really need to
reevaluate that I think it's the
industry in the work insurers.
About health insurance options.
Are you don't you don't do it
that way today
actually leaders we tax on some
other things we yeah we're not
very construction they have how
we do it we need to make hello
that that.
Of the chair years ago.
Years ago we had a drive up
window.
We saw all the problems with the
to be advised of by getting rid
of the drive up with the.
The work at.
here people continue to figure
out you know how do we need to.
Get alcohol with the drinking
driver who are really doing the
Mr chair and shutters and what
we're Senators.
And for world there's a lot of
ditions.
We were pre file call we were
the wind up of the what if
should conditions.
In the drive information with
David R. for some of the
challenges we face courses
across the state and I'm.
I'm not kidding vans.
Chair Senators at the.
Increase the seventy rigs
actually would you hold although
I appreciate the fact that
you've got the stated in the
cage.
But the
New Mexico New Mexico still just
different.
Distances challenges we face.
are not light legislation.
I think that they should be
able.
Thank you the need for more
thank you Mr.
The rules which some some idea
will have.
Session.
tax on.
That's our goal.
How we.
Basically the.
Two years ago.
Better way there are.
The shooter.
Sharks.
The Russian.
Your our.
Thank you should I think.
I think you guys should waiting
around.
You're at the stage of a lot of
folks.
Years or.
And now we need to move forward
or aft.
Usually.
And also to.
For
our.
Sure.
It is.
Thank you.
Late route were ready to go.
They are.
Your.
Thank you Mr chair we have
reached out and there are
conversations about potential
compromise I just don't know we
really would prefer a big and
bold approach that would.
Generate the money that we need
and would also reduce
consumption but we have reached
out to see if we could come to
some agreement we have not yet.
Thank you all right Senator
Griggs Senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senators and representative I
appreciate you bringing this
bill and a couple thoughts first
I think the.
Bill it's an RTC Pinos got
Again dedicating all the
revenue.
Needs to happen and it makes
sense I've talked about that a
bunch it's it's being used and
and and a because I've talked
about it some people say well
center worth talking about this
these may not support the actual
bill this in front of us I
support both I think the reality
is we need to dedicate all the
current money that comes in from
the excise tax.
To all the funds into treatment
it should not be used for the
general fund I found out that it
was my predecessor in the house
Mexico all in one of our fiscal
crisis who managed to go and
divert this money and I
distinctly remember a big debate
on the Senate floor when I thank
senator Sanchez was Michael
Sanchez was trying to use some
more of this money for the
lottery scholarship and
Representative Harper was
fighting that and so again the
minute we run out of money we
start going and dipping into
money that needs to go for
treatment but I I really think
we need to do both and I guess
what what I want to understand
is if if we were to pass this
bill I want to understand the
correlation between this
increase because obviously raise
a bunch of money which can be
used for treatment but I'm also
interested in you know changing
behavior to sing.
Assumption I'm curious if you
could just give us a sense of if
if we were to do this you have
studies that show what the
reduction in alcohol consumption
might be the yes Dr Jernigan
predicted a seven percent
reduction with this month but
much of an increase.
Is he I don't know if he's still
on because I know we had a hard
stop.
That that I our time so I don't
know if he's still on but we and
I should mention that I so he
is.
I'm still here yes thank you
yeah we actually ran projections
using the list of cities that
the centers for disease control
recommend that we use the really
interesting thing about alcohol
is that it is a relatively
inelastic good so you can raise
the price on it through tax it
will decrease consumption and it
would still increased revenues
because people were reduced
their consumption some but not
so much that you don't get the
increased revenues that's one of
the reasons that it's such
widely recommended and endorsed
public policy around produce
calculated on.
Not I appreciate that Mr chair I
think about obviously we.
Learn from cigarettes.
Where.
Have increased taxes and changes
model and I.
Public health discussed in the
wall Gen five percent right and.
Six of the bill this is no
ordinary having public health.
Incredibly important.
Or Aleisha.
This is the scene is just a
revenue bill waxing shaving.
Your I think all of us live I
just love the real clear I
think.
Get all the dollars that we for
you going into treatment
programs but we also need to
this.
Thank you Senator Brandt.
Gentleman.
F. I. R. K. five.
That.
I raise prices for.
To reduce workers.
For the.
Relation to various other
factors.
Are used for self serve alcohol
as it relates to build up.
Your.
Yeah that's what I wanted
different studies.
Is that what what's the in the
study here in.
so by Senator Singh of the the
FIR is says the.
The different studies.
To two different places that you
mentioned.
What we're mentioned was
Maryland.
Race three sets.
Alaska's races.
Why are we trying to raise
twenty five cents they had such
a big impacts of recent.
Thank you Mr chair I would like
to refer that to our expert in
modeling these of Dr Jernigan
for washers Maryland actually
did a three percent not a three
cent so what's larger than that
we model that it came out to
about a nickel a drink we got
considerable benefits from the
Maryland was not racing and
facing anywhere near the level
of alcohol problems that New
Mexico faces I'm sorry if I love
your state I think you're
fantastic state I cannot believe
the level of alcohol related
harm in your state.
This is the most effective thing
we know to actually reduce that
harm.
And Alaska.
Sure I mean Alaska you know one
of the former center and one of
the former speakers one of the
senators who spoke previously
talked about New Mexico being so
different in terms of large
distances well it's hard to get
a state with much more large
distances the Alaska and yet
they're too high quality
evaluation for the Dawn of the
LFC Alaska's tax increases in
nineteen eighty three and two
thousand two and both of them
found both significant drops and
harms and significant drops and
consumption.
And
Mr chair one of the interesting
things about reviewing the study
is there many factors that go
into price mark up
rent there's so many factors and
our alcohol is cheaper even
though our taxes.
Is not
Is is not on the low side and I
think that that's really
important because the only tool
we have is tax to raise the to
raise the price and and that's
what we hope to do we hope to do
it in a bold way that will have
a large impact and that will
know that raising the price.
Is related to the outcome.
Chairman the.
Last year we did a right away
with a little miniature and that
was supposed to that's all of
our problems.
Go down.
Prohibition has been tried for.
Try again but it didn't work.
I I don't believe in using our
tax system.
Prosocial behavior I've ever
had.
but.
They did a three percent in
Maryland and the lowest one on
here three hundred fifty two
percent at twenty five cents
for.
I think you know first first of
all I'm with serve work.
On yeah we actually talked about
this also work there in the
error one of the tax.
Related to the work that we have
to do is take the money.
That was not being used properly
and put it into.
Not not put in the general use
of for what it's it's a.
I will say as well that that you
know some of the the W. I. funds
and some of the counties we
probably need to do a better job
of of the town's bility comes to
how that money is being spent I
heard from several counties
that.
Several those counties are not
spending that money correct
some.
Some do not so we need to hold
your produce better job of how
the building without a twenty.
But it's how we've done that I
think it's premature to come to
try to put special twenty five
cents.
And I know it rose twenty five
cents appears that while you're
talking about.
Six hundred fifty percent of
their.
you know I don't drink very much
because I really need.
And
Yeah and you know alcohol sorry
what to expect.
So I don't do the trick that is
all but not much because I've
just.
but.
Yeah you've already got the
lowest income state.
That's probably why I'll calls
will need repair this caller
that percentage wise to
someone's in from it's a lot
more
Other income okay.
Well like I said like I said in
the introduction Mr chair when
you look at it it's almost like
they realize that they have to
price a little lower in order to
keep the keep the consumption
high when you look at the at the
map and
I think it's important that I
understand the position of not
liking to use taxes social
policy but it is something that
we do every day and it is the
only tool we have to raise the
price and reduce consumption and
again I started this not has
that I started this for
Legislative Health and Human
Services by looking for a stable
source of income to not only do
treatment but to do prevention
and recovery and if you look at
the end and then Rikki Lee B.
eight so many of the harms that
our family's experience so I
started the this has a search
for state funds that would not
be swept away hopefully but that
would be something that can be
used in the future Mr chair and
I believe that it's such a high
percentage because the price is
so low now when you're charging
less than a penny a drink that's
that's really shameful.
And also if I can just test
drive during again if you could
mentioned about the incomes.
Well let me just say first
somebody asked what thank you to
to the Alaska tax increase was
in the second tax increase the
trouble that we're taxed with
the full increase the amount of
wind tax and they more than
doubled the spirits Tax but if
you use percentages to describe
how large these tax increases
are it will be quite deceptive
because of somebody's once said
if you're tax is a penny and
drink if you raise to three
cents occurring drink your
already tripling it it just
depends on how low the taxes
Representative Ferrary what else
do you want me to speak to.
About the income levels and how
it affects you know different
people.
Sure the the benefit of this tax
will accrue in terms of the drop
in consumption the most to the
people with the lowest income
and they're frankly the people
who need the most help in terms
of reducing alcohol consumption
they are the most price
sensitive the other people who
will benefit from this more will
be young people because again
there are price sensitive more
price sensitive segment of the
population.
The biggest chunk of this tax
bill will be paid by people
making the most money and New
Mexico the twenty first nine
percent of our population that
makes seventy five thousand
dollars a year or more.
And Mr chair members of the
committee.
I don't think it's really in
that sense fair to do their
compared to to other states and
how much they raised it when we
talk about such a period of time
in which we didn't raise it.
And then that since we talk
about behavior no when you go
down south into the Los crucis
area yep people from Texas
coming into New Mexico to buy
liquor because they don't sell
it in that sense over there and
then when you have people
travelling from out leaving New
Mexico going into Oklahoma.
Bill bill couldn't tell by
liquor here because they know
the alcohol content of what sold
there is less and when even go
up into Utah into the four
corners area the same thing
happens to they know all that to
New Mexico is cheap and they
know in some sense we're kind of
the alcohol state not really the
chili state for some of these
people whose behavior is very
loyal to that consumption of
this particular product so you
know I understand about the
comparison but I think there are
some discrepancies in in every
in every way thank you.
Mr chairman of the.
We'll be coming the marijuana a
place for all those places to.
but you know.
I'm not sure the taxes are
pro war worry fifth highest in
the nation one yet.
To see us sitting high explosive
Oregon health Oregon C. W. I
loss of way tougher than ours
the actually crafted EW I will
couple years ago that was taken
from the Oregon law.
So you gotta get a fourth
that should before we even
consider making it a felony in
the state.
Another case in order right I
mean at the end of.
I couldn't even get.
Judiciary Committee to think
about.
Right because you know I was
gonna make the third defense
just like it is in Oregon vality
but I was also gonna require
treatment.
like orthodox it first T. W. I.
in Oregon you're going for
three.
Second you're going for
mandatory inpatient treatment.
I was paid for by not getting
this tax the general fund.
Didn't get that support.
So that would come back and say
well let's just raise the tax
we're not ever willing to use
the money we're already racing
to deal with the alcohol issues
that we have in the state I
think it's a little ridiculous I
think yeah we come back in two
or three years after we've
actually started putting that
money we're supposed to be we
haven't seen a reduction.
Then they.
But we also are dealing with the
D. W. I. laws of the state work
hard prosecuting attorneys are
district attorney's
loans out as a seven the W. I..
They can still charge of this
author.
Keep it from being a felon.
That's ridiculous that's our
laws of our state that's what we
do in our state so the to say
we're just going to raise the
prices and deal with the issues
we have in our state we need to
deal with the loss that we have
in our state before we're going
to get a handle on this not just
the prices we we've got a bigger
issue here than the price of
alcohol do we have an issue here
with our laws not taking the W.
I seriously.
Thank you Mr thank you Senator
Tallman of Senator office.
Thank you.
Here I have a question to Sen.
That is.
Representative highs.
What is also alive yes I the.
I have provided the.
That is the the right.
Dollar.
Right.
Thank.
for the.
Those were and
Percent.
A time this.
The issue.
This.
The.
Mr.
Good idea for.
David Wallace and answering all.
The one.
The.
I.
More.
The.
This is.
Or is.
this is.
A lot of this is that as we
progress.
It raises the.
Senate budget is.
Whether you have
The.
Overtown bases.
It is.
Or.
All the taxes and we were here.
Hi.
Yeah.
You have to check in the amount
of.
At
it and that shows.
The one
with.
Today is well everybody is
always going to we have such a
higher.
Of all related that what we want
to do a lot.
Well.
Well we are the face of this.
They.
And that is it for.
All of that is.
And that.
Five hundred
is there any opposition.
The.
So.
A.
J..
The racing.
A little.
Our.
Related Representative Natalie.
the state.
Sharks sharks.
The
rules.
Right because it have the.
There is.
Thank you senator opus.
Thank you Mr chairman yeah you
know I also.
Service.
Years.
On the same issues in.
Hello.
And yet we try to make a change.
Changes.
It says.
Those.
Cash okay.
You know I I'm always tired in
their preseason regressive tax.
Your support will.
I don't mind that I'm sorry the
station.
Tobacco.
Highlights.
Eight thirty years.
That's a lifetime for a lot of.
We're number one.
Getting on over the.
And all the other issues and
what all.
This long.
It's also long to look back to
me.
Our sorrows.
Yes back to other social
services that are on there
Russian.
Try to self medicate all is one
way there's a whole list of
other drugs the people you so
many pages writing of the
letter.
Yes every family has an awful.
I have.
I have on the frequency.
Tracy's.
You're making a choice to go
purchase right you must have
six.
At your point that cash and some
other necessary you have on your
list of.
that's right.
There's proven information data.
Right.
After tax.
It has reduced.
Houston section especially for
the younger generation.
That's what we're trying to
effect service those of us who
receives.
Yeah we're already there.
Looking to see how we can effect
changes always.
Our young people under statutory
show we're not just all of the
information that they're.
Is there for you and I have said
on there and tobacco settlement
research whatever and yes this
thing on.
Data.
We can.
Sure just raising twenty five
cents he's not.
hello.
Mr chair as as we all know and
senator Wirth mention to and as
what the intent of this bill is
to make sure is going to have.
One two programs like this is
also issues about mental health
Mr chair.
No we're what we Mr chair yeah
this is not a health.
This is where the money is out
of this.
The size.
This is where we make those
decisions.
I support this measure one more
comment that was made Mr chair
two guards to drive with the
windows I remember the vote Mr
chair I was here.
I remember when we take that
hard about.
There are the issues that came
up in the south valley that both
Senator Padilla I represent
market short of.
Existed in our communities yes
because why we have gas stations
and they'll sell liquor so go
purchase your food at the gas
station popping open what you
put in gas I on still.
Share it's just another way of
how the industry still violate.
Talk about the little ones is
there is racism right here.
It was not to the curving it's
just a kind of stuff the
littering that happens and
everything else that.
Piles up to seven communities
Sam.
See that letters.
Many of.
I just want to make the comment
Mr chair I want to say thank
you.
Just getting of a conversation
that you know.
it up and make the hard choices.
Thank you senator.
I didn't get discussed and what
I've heard.
Talk about Mexico and families
on.
H..
The that go through.
Thank you one of the things that
we talked about.
At
this year's.
In.
Last year I.
Fathers.
Thank you.
This legislation doesn't say
that the state is.
What that's doing for.
Hi excise tax on this on.
Still getting.
Thanks.
City.
That what we're trying to do.
Treatment issues where you go
for treatment.
Regards to.
Yes Sir.
It's not budget the number you
have.
With the newspaper.
So you have all this money which
is going to be on.
Sure.
That is very.
I.
So I I think it's a.
I understand.
Every family members.
Lost my very.
Get around.
So that's the on the other hand
we this.
All that money.
We've never had.
Better it not.
What we did last.
The young people to minutes.
No I still.
Search.
I have six and.
So.
What was the for this.
Mr Chairman ask a question if
everybody's done.
no not yet.
I have a not necessarily
questions but I appreciate the
debate and the discussion I
think of.
We know that this is a huge
issue.
Listen tribal communities.
And I'm very curious.
The this.
I know we're.
Looking at other states.
But as mentioned all the tribal
reservations are dry.
For every young person or
anybody that wants to get
something passed to drive.
Off reservation.
When we're just increasing it's
not like a local thing.
And so I know that we've debated
in our own tribal community.
Is it better for us to legalize
it our kids or whoever wants to
purchase.
Don't have to drive so far in
three coming home or whatever.
I think what I'd like to have
maybe as part of this
conversation interim is bring
the tribes together.
If we're going to really educate
young people.
And we're gonna change behavior.
It's got to start somewhere.
But if you just say no and it's
illegal.
But yet we know people do it.
I don't know that's going to
change it.
You know I I know we all
experience in our families
personal stories.
You know when I made the comment
to Senator till then about his
bill about savings and I told.
That I asked him if he knew what
the average life expectancy of
the Indian male is in this
country.
Forty eight years.
A lot of it has to do with this
and a lot of it has and so
that's the.
I think.
The research I like to see.
How does it affect.
I've lost a no.
The suit tell my buddies.
Going to school with thank you.
While we're on the road.
I was an athlete too high school
college.
You know I enjoyed your your
tier one here there but I always
always always a so to figure.
And I wish.
Some of.
My friends were also that.
But they're not.
So to me this whole create
create in increasing taxes is a
side conversation.
Because the real conversation
needs to happen.
At that level.
The one your exciting research
in Maryland.
This any community that they're
citing is it dry four people
have to drive.
Ten miles five miles fifty miles
a hundred miles.
I want to see those.
To see if.
They make a difference.
Because if we just keep telling
people no it doesn't work.
Somehow we have to convince our
young people to understand what
the consequences of those
decisions are going to be and
how do we help them.
Because as you know Senator
Lopez mentioned there's a lot of
socio that we're dealing with.
In our tribal communities.
And I think this is one X. gate.
But how do we help them.
With other issues that they're
dealing with.
So I I just make this comment
because it's affected in all our
communities our families.
This is a much deeper deeper
conversation that we need to
have that I don't think it's
going to be solved just by
raising taxes and we can all
feel good because we raise this
much money of course it is.
But I rather figure out.
Process where we can really
build you know all treatment
facilities there is no treatment
facility that are any kids go to
we ship them to California we
ship into Colorado we shipped
them to Arizona we have nothing
to New Mexico here we talk about
trying to solve this problem.
They're away from their families
and so forth so I mean it's it's
it's a much bigger issue that I
don't know if we're going to you
know.
But it's a good conversation I
think as others have mentioned
you started that conversation.
And I think we all interested in
moving down this road and we can
come up with some solution and
so forth so I just want to make
that statement I appreciate what
you guys are doing but it's a
much conversation and the stuff.
Thank thank you Mr chair and I'm
very very sorry for your loss is
all of us have had so many
losses but I I did want to
mention that it's a two pronged
bill and you'll notice on page
nine by nineteen of the bill
prevention and reduction of
alcohol harms on lands of Indian
nations tribes and pueblos is
one of the uses that we think
that that's why it's important
that the the tax be high enough
to create the programs and the
treatment centers and the
prevention centers that we need
in the state
incremental change isn't going
to do that moving toward the
twenty five million to the
general fund is going to do that
we transformational change and
that's what we see with this
bill Mr Mr president Mr chair
I think.
I don't know if anybody else
wants to close or if you're done
I I apologize we're not gonna
take action to.
May I ask a question about that
Senator served or Mr chair so I
understand that some alcohol
bills are are being moved
forward to finance and some are
not and I guess I wanted to
understand the difference we're
my understanding is senator
Tallman Bill move forward.
Is that correct is that correct.
Over.
Bill is that Senator Ortiz and.
And senator Ortiz and that did
that move forward.
Senator Thomas not raising any
taxes that that was the Ortiz is
basically fifteen the what those
two general fund over to the
treatment programs behavior
health and whatever so there was
nothing having to do with any
taxes Senator Tallman Bill
races of incrementally in his in
his bill and it move for with
the no Representative.
The.
The.
Really.
Mr chair to fight with at all I
just I for my own personal
learning want to understand the
difference.
This is.
There was a there was a motion
to do pass and there was there
was a tie vote.
The state here.
And then there was no I think
there was a then.
Another way.
No REC.
What for no REC and so did the
did move forward we're and
sitting in finance.
Right so with that over no
Right.
And so the decision was made not
to move ours and I respect it
because I understand and I guess
is what I want to clarify.
That this committee will
consider this bill has part of
the omnibus tax package work
okay that that's that's what I
just really wanted to clearly
understand I appreciate it Mr
chair thank you thank you.
Thank you for for your
presentation the put the
sanitation Mr.
Okay we're moving on to Senate
bill of three twenty seven thank
you.
We
are going thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee Senate
bill three twenty seven is the
approval for economic
development projects out of the
reach economic to overlook
revolving fund this bill is a
New Mexico finance authority
bill that I carry house with the
third time we here essentially
extending the ability for the
finance authority to on their
own a program I have there the
rules that they utilized to
approve these economic
development projects for four
years were extending a sunset
essentially
from
Two thousand sixty two thousand
eleven there were three loans
that were approved it took it
took an awful lot of of of back
and forth effort and we know
that these things have to happen
little quicker than us coming up
here to Santa Fe to approve the
so essentially since then we've
seen forty loans for a thirteen
fold improvement these are
things that have gone into state
you know downtown question Las
Vegas New Mexico for the massive
renovation of the downtown area
which is brought movie
productions and you name it to
New Mexico
it does not reduce the oversight
but in the of finance authority
at oversight act and it just
helps us to keep our eyes on it
and also a way for us to stop
this if we don't think it's
working for since then we've had
zero issues with what just
transpired this takes the sunset
to July first of two thousand
twenty seven I have the
president CEO of of the New
Mexico finance authority with me
we both agreed to be very short
because we know you still have a
lot to do.
Thank you.
Already the ones in the
In opposition.
You know the committee.
The questions Senator a friend
thank you Mr chairman.
The.
But if the.
The last page of the bill to get
credit.
The.
Yes it's expected that I.
Have I that settlement but Mr
chair and senator the the date
for the extension actually
appears on page two in section
C. starting on line six which
takes it from there to ensure
the provision thank you twenty
seven I had to provide that with
myself thank god so that doctors
I is the end of the bill that is
the end of this all right I can
agree I was trying to find the
date and thank you Sir are.
I had to look myself centers
already.
And what else.
The nondisclosure Committee.
What do pastor Lopez Senator
Griggs second.
Any opposition to do pass
motion.
We'll see none you have a new
path.
The two four six eight nine two
zero.
For the public that's what and.
Okay is Senate bill three sixty.
Dyed diesel fuel gross receipts
Senator Baca.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee for
your current consideration I
present Senate bill three sixty
which is it has to do with the
dyed diesel fuel gross receipts
tax the issue at hand currently
is di Dusun di diesel is a
special fuel that is tied to
core interests with the federal
regulation it's used primarily
an agricultural purposes and so
that's things like tractors
generators things like that what
what what the the situation now
is is that or rather than being
no tax like a regular fuel type
diesel is taxed using G. R. T.
which is a percentage basis
basis Mr chair and so
essentially what has happened
over the past few years is that
as fuel prices have wind up so
have this so has this tax yeah
it has went up to a point such
that it exceeds Q. of the clean
fuel taxes it is so so what's
happening is it initially this
die diesel was that was a
instituted by the federal
government to really
differentiate this kind of
diesel to give kind of a tax
break actually but what's
happening is the way we
structured it in this state the
tax actually has increased we're
actually paying more now for
this die diesel than you were
then you're paying for regular
over the road diesel the reason
that's important is because we
charge over the road diesel
clean diesel in such a way as to
provide for public Conway since
that's what the use this die
diesel doesn't use public
highways and therefore the need
for the tax is simply not there
for public highway use and so
what's what's happening is the
intended purpose of this tax on
this particular fuel.
it is not really achieving the
end goal that we had which was
to alleviate some exemption and
give some relief to act act
businesses farmers things like
that and with that Mr chair I
would stand for questions thank
you senator of we go out to the
audience anybody here in support
of Senate bill three sixty.
What else.
One.
What.
Affirmative.
That right.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I'm Beverly it's
again with very moody's as of
New Mexico we stand in strong
support of Senate bill three
sixty as you all know those
involved in agriculture cannot
pass on additional costs they
incur so this is a common sense
bill that would help our
producers would like to thank
the sponsors for bringing it
forward and urge you to support
it thank you.
That is.
Is anybody in opposition of
Senate bill three sixty.
Yeah I will committee for
questions.
Senator.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator for bringing this
forward we had a brief
conversation about and I was
able to talk to some farmers
that are in my district
who are very interested in this
and grateful for it one of the
questions they had and and you'd
mentioned tractors you know some
of the non road equipment which
is commonly used especially in
our small farmers who have like
ATVs and forklifts and Vacco's
that use diesel engines is is
that something that should be
included like that definition of
non road equipment in this bill
I think and and the thank you Mr
chairman center for the question
I think that's where we we
isolated that to mean an act
purpose so as long as you're
using it for an agricultural
purpose that that use for that
diesel would be exempted and I
might add that it is actually a
federal crime if uses diesel for
any other purpose okay so that's
a protection that we have in
place now but we try to isolated
to agricultural purposes okay so
it.
So I'm and pardon me for not
knowing Mr chair and and
senators like if they use that
would they be covered I mean
would that be something that
they would be violating anything
I mean I'm just thinking of my
small farmers and if they've got
any TV that they drive out and
they use this fuel I mean is it
automatically covered or does it
need to be stated in the in that
regard just with the content of
the surrounding section and how
agriculture is is treated there
is a a companion needing actual
sections seventy six dash twenty
six dash to that talks about Ag
businesses and and actually
gives a definition in their and
so under in that regard I
believe it would be covered that
is the intent of this bill I
guess it could be argued but
that it would be covered under
under this bill that's the
intent of it great Mr chair
Senator great eight eight before
we move if we can I don't know
if you have the opportunity to
to be able to find out just to
make sure so I can report back
to them because I'm I'm in
support of this bill I just want
to make sure that they're
covered the answer Mister
chairman Senator would be just
fantastic thank you one other
question Mr chair
Budget is that was that what was
the reason to remove the
alternative fuel tax out of this
to strike it that when you're
talking about seven dash sixteen
dash three is that it correct
okay that that was repealed in
nineteen eighty two so it's it's
essentially an obsolete law I
see and so it's just cleaning up
the statute that was from the
existing statute that was there
okay great thank you that's all
I have Mister chair
representative Senator mail.
Mr Chairman so I don't have any
questions I just want to thank
you for this I had a number of
farmers from northern Rio Arriba
County.
College right me in support of
the.
So small farmers get a lot of
hits when it comes to what
they're doing and trying to grow
and sell produce and so this is
just one of those costs that
would help you with what while
farmers are facing and I want to
thank you on behalf of small
farmers and we we've accounted
for bringing this bill forward.
Thank you thank you Mr chair Mr
chair Senator Sanchez.
Mr chair and thank you secretary
for bringing this.
What's that stated earlier as
you know we have Derry's we're
losing in New Mexico and farms
and ranches and this was would
have they would have to have to
have that actually cost and to
answer Mr chair Senator Woods
the other way you refer to this
that I do some of the off road
diesel so you are covered with
it all Ag small tractors
forklifts all that stuff is
covered when you buy this ready
some because it is only
purchased for off road use so
just Senator Baca said it is
covered on all that stuff but
this is a good field you know
you reducing this and cleaning
up the the and
former
law we had it it's going to
really help all the dairy
industry that we're using here
will hopefully we'll to keep on
the farmers and ranchers special
smaller farmers in the senator
how do we always areas of this
will really help them out so
thank you Senator walk on the.
The.
What else.
Questions from the committee.
Senator for an offense under
current tax exempt diesel right.
For Russian projects yes there
are there are several sections
chairman Senator within our
statue that cover different
types of tea so polite
biodiesel's heck even space feel
Mister chairman Senator that are
exempted out of out of taxes
that and I think the intent here
Mr chair Senator initially was
to provide a tax break for for
this type of diesel but back
then we never intended fuel
prices to react with our G. R.
T. in such a way that would
actually make it more expensive
than what clean fuels are
running now and I hope that
answers your question Mister
chairman Senator.
Are on the refuse on that.
You were.
That it was Russian taxable.
Currently they are not so.
These little better also.
Representative di.
The.
What
is the.
Usually used in agriculture one
thousand nine
thousand yeah.
One yeah what what what do you
think about.
Mr chair Senator the one and I'm
not sure the exam at the schools
and act the only tax for you.
Most of farmers can't have would
have to have like a taxes to.
Tax exempt.
And farmers dollars.
Not sure.
Need to just see.
We just the lady here on the
floor.
Disappointed out of the.
There is a lack.
Yeah.
Mr chair Senator the the actual
content and make up of the clean
diesel versus die diesel is it
is really Neil they're almost
identical so students except for
the fact that clean diesel has a
site slightly lower sulfur
content for some reason I'm not
sure exactly what that is but
that's the only real chemical
differences dies actually added
to it to differentiated visually
I believe for enforcement is is
what and regulation and so on.
Thank you Mr chair and it.
Thank you I would be awesome I
think the.
was able to explain you know the
questions I had the use of
farmer and so I don't have any
questions so thank you Senator I
know we're not gonna take action
on this that's okay but it will
be considered for the expected
so thank you thank you Mr chair
thank you for thank you members
of the committee and I hope
you'll consider this tax back.
The Senators the products that
they are.
Before we before we since we all
of us are here this is a good
time of I have worked clerk in
our analyst putting together a
chart a matrix of all the bills
that we've helped and so my plan
is to have that ready by.
Thursday so you'll get to review
everything and and.
This feedback as to which ones
you do if you like for us to
consider and then we will take a
look at that it is so important
so that way you know it's it's
everybody has these include
which one of the before we close
the like and so forth so that's
that's kind of the plan going
forward their session sure so we
haven't heard off of bills
there's a have an impact on your
toes of how many more do we have
a I have a bill one is five
fourteen.
Is that the was it.
Is that the combination of.
Is that going to be part of and
maybe even considered for part
of the the tax package that are
first doing and I believe
Senator Shendo speaker is seven
different the I'm I'm we're what
we need to well I would just
want to get a sense of where
we're going I mean I think you
know all of.
Trying to also with here to try
to figure out what's coming over
from the house with regard to
the big.
Bills that we're going to
consider are the same secure
gonna draw the matrix on part of
that big bill or seven that
would be filled
the ticket fees because I.
Happen is
they're laughing together
Here
readings that you need to know
we have a bill
sitting over by.
Does that ring a bill on the
omnibus bill you have the
opportunity.
There's a lot of things together
landed on that.
One this is the.
Is that I think.
your Lente.
Act with the result they're
doing exactly the same thing
that they've done the same thing
that is where Shendo is they put
together a matrix got input from
their members what are the.
The committee members not able.
And so and then there and then
they're they're wrapping their
work on that right.
Okay so thank you Mr chairman
what I'm asking is there an
opportunity are there other
bills that could potentially be
incorporated that we've not
heard yet that we will here
before when state are before
that bill comes of.
Right.
I I will will consider what
Florida like to talk about that
okay and I think there might be
I'm trying to think I thought
I've got everything but I think
that Mr five fourteen this model
is the so but but no we'll we'll
try to get.
Senator etcetera etcetera
etcetera were for their tax
bills come over this committee.
Well we're gonna have to pull it
up or down.
For.
I also.
Well I mean again it is that
we've done this before gonna
help it's going to get rivers
is.
The you know this for the
legislative process maybe we
will budget.
County I think he's out of it.
And they get that's that's how
we.
The total before that's over the
last year and so the same
process.
Welcome and thank you well the
the bill that the bank tabled
bill.
it was not support for one of
the bills that seem to be the
one that everything's going to
be kind of falls into so I'm not
sure how far along they are in I
think we're gonna have a lot of
work to do because I don't think
that there's consensus on that
committee
supposedly the bills that
everything's going to be either
in and out of my correct.
Chair and senator I think
they're going to the legislative
process just like workers who
and they've got to try to wrap
something up in the idea that
you you know the idea that you
put together a tax bill that
everyone's.
You know warm and fuzzy about
it's hard to do no but again all
the bills over there were table
the same way that the average of
those done in here we're we're
just holding a board up table
from.
Temporarily for the table.
Okay all right thank you all
right well I just want to make
sure since everybody is here I
just want to make note of that
one we're all clear what's going
to happen before okay so what
we're on Senate bill one for.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee US Senate bill
fourteen has to do with the
pharmacy and regulating the
pharmacy benefits managers of
this past interim the governor
had a task force on drug pricing
that was charged with
identifying practical solutions
to the high cost of drugs which
contribute to the cost to
employers to purchase health
insurance and contribute to the
cost that we as individuals
might have to pay as employees
as we manage chronic illnesses
and also how it affects our
families the task force
identified the evolution of a of
pharmacy benefit manager
companies from administrators
providing the insurer with the
market around pharmaceuticals
and so I have a few more remarks
but I would like to introduce to
my experts who are with me today
Dr mac in any the from the New
Mexico cancer center actually
cared the drug Task Force the
governor's drug task force this
past interim and excuse me page
two Hommel is with the office of
the superintendent of insurance
and this here's both supporting
and offering technical
assistance on the bill.
the task force identified of
that.
Quite a high profit and we were
just this in other committees
yesterday regarding a small
portion of this bill we have
another pharmacy bill that's not
the governor's bill this is a
governor's piece of legislation
and if we look at the
increasing profits of the drug
companies and trying to
understand whether it was the
pharmaceutical companies whether
it was the insurance companies
whether it was the pharmacy
benefit managers or we're we're
the price increases coming from
and how were the profits of
being raised the of.
Pharmacy benefit managers
profits have increased a hundred
four percent or higher.
Over five years and Dr Macon and
you can speak to this later
Senate bill fourteen seeks to
return of the pharmacy benefit
managers to their original
purpose of negotiating drug
prices for the benefit of the
employers to purchase insurance
and patient who need the drugs
the bill is carefully crafted to
allow the is superintendent of
insurance the ability and the
resources to hold these
companies accountable by
requiring that they adhere to
certain constraints Senate bill
fourteen also supports the
continued existence of
independent pharmacies as part
of the tax base we do not want
our small pharmacies in our
independent pharmacies of being
torn asunder because we all have
to go through a mail order
company and I myself get my
drugs to a mail order company
because I've part of retiree
health care
health insurance and I'm on
Medicaid Medicare so I don't
really have much choice but if I
needed I would like to have the
option to go over to Walgreens
to get emergency supply and
sometimes that is in question.
So of some parts of this bill
have to do with the pharmacy
benefits managers doing more
reporting to the office of the
superintendent of insurance some
of it has to do with the PBMs
being paid a fixed rate rather
than a percentage of the drug
costs we also have in this bill
banning a copay accumulator
which of.
Persons who are not in the the
insurance industry find a little
hard to describe because it's
not a black and white piece of
paper that tells you the process
of how these coupons come about.
Now the banning of the copay
accumulators only affects ten
percent of our.
Population here in the state of
New Mexico who are insured it's
only those under commercial
insurance that would be
affected.
So with that I'm going to stop
because I know it's late hours
and I would like my two experts
to be able to make come comments
Dr Meghan any.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my pleasure to be
here I Environment Canada and
then cancer doctor by trade but
more importantly this committee
I am the CEO of New Mexico
oncology which is a
physician owned business that
operates in Albuquerque and
Gallup.
And we purchased chemotherapy
about fifty five million dollars
a year twelve million of that is
for the Gallup patients and I
thought that gave me some
insight into drug purchasing I
on manta that by my work with
the American medical association
where the resources of that
organization to help me
understand this and as we that I
was appointed to chair the
governor's task force I learned
even more from the small
independent pharmacies who are
part of the health care
infrastructure across this
entire state I have some data
from Texas that I handed out to
you and that I made those
posters that I think show the
problem.
And this is the slide that shows
that in twenty sixteen in the
state of Texas the rebates which
were negotiated by the pharmacy
benefit managers total of five
hundred fifty eight million
dollars which is quite a lot but
five years later it was five
point seven billion dollars I
wanted to show this graph.
Because this shows where the
money goes and if you look at
the Orange Line is the pharmacy
benefit managers if you look at
the blue that's the money that
goes to the insurance companies
and if you look really hard you
can see a tiny green light at
the top and that's the amount
that actually benefits the
patients.
The insurance industry will tell
you that if they limit pharmacy
benefit managers they will have
to raise rates this data is from
Kaiser family fun it shows that
when the pharmacy benefit
managers really started
switching from a flat fee to a
percent of the drugs that the
rate of change of the premiums
did not even budget just
continues to increase so what
we're trying to do list Senate
bill fourteen.
Is to put some constraints
around this otherwise
unregulated business which is
been allowed to get exorbitant
profits out of employers
purchasing health insurance and
out of patience paying copays
two thirds of bankruptcies are
triggered by health care of it
and two thirds of those people
have insurance so this looks
this bill looks at all of the
various ways that the pharmacy
benefit managers can create
profit for themselves out of
every transaction every
prescription that is written.
And this would allow all New
Mexicans if we just push those
rebates to New Mexico patients
the average that has been found
when CVS Caremark did this for
its own employees was six
hundred and thirty dollars we're
return to the patient who needed
specialty pharmacy drugs and a
hundred and thirty dollars were
returned to the patients who
just need ordinary medications
specialty pharmacies are not
pharmacy drugs are not actually
a defined entity it just
basically means any drugs that
cost more than six hundred
dollars so imagine the effect on
people in New Mexico if we could
return that much money to them
and allow them to be able to
afford their medications as an
employer I purchase health
insurance.
Because I want my employees to
be well and to come to work.
And we can give them the ability
to be able to afford their
insurance employers will be able
to afford their insurance
instead of seeing the double
digit rise that we all see each
year so that we can continue to
help New Mexicans thank you.
That may madam chair members of
the committee of my name is
Paige to handle I don't know if
you're picking me up all night
I maybe if you could if you
could get the hand held Mike
just so folks could hear you on
the webcast.
madam chair members of the
committee on page two Hamel I am
with the office of the
superintendent of insurance and
I wear a lot of hats there one
of them includes overseeing the
staff person who has been
implementing the pharmacy
benefit manager legislation that
was enacted a few years ago so
I'm here to provide technical
assistance and to give you
information about what OSI is
doing to currently regulate
these entities and any insight I
can give on the components of
the legislation that we assisted
in drafting.
Okay thank you so much well at
this point we're going to go to
the audience is there anybody
here in the audience that is in
support of SB fourteen.
Two three all right let's get
the three of you feel line up
please in the center go ahead
make sure you state your name
and if you will keep your
comments to about a minute.
Amount yes yes we are thank you
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Jason
Thompson I'm a registered
lobbyist for the New Mexico
pharmacy business council other
an advocacy group of advocating
for independent pharmacies of
which was talked about in the
committee and which participated
in this task force.
we strongly support this
legislation really appreciate
the sponsor Dr mac in any and I
was size help in this matter.
Eckley as it's a pertains to the
patient choice issue especially
in regards to rural New Mexico
were a lot of the independent
pharmacists that I represent
operate particularly section for
in the bill the patient choice
provisions in their field our
really good start secondly the
frustrations in the barriers
that they
have to encounter on a daily
basis we believe is a really
good P. sets addressed in this
bill for independent pharmacies
that we think will bring some of
these practices and and find the
most quality type of service for
that thank you.
It just to let you know I am I
am timing because I do want to
be sensitive to time thank you
for
good evening members the
committee chairman my name Mr
Senator registered lobbyists for
pharma and with proposed
amendments we are supporting the
legislation to add on to some of
the points that Dr MacNamee
brought up too many patients
face out of pocket costs for
brand medicines even if they
have insurance that is why
pharma and its members member
companies offer over nine
hundred fifty patient assistance
programs to help patients with
that they've set up they've
created the medical assistance
tool or map which provides a
search engine to connect
patients with these programs
savings for patients using these
programs can be substantial for
example in two thousand nineteen
patients systems helped patients
taking brand HIV or oncology
medicines save sixteen hundred
dollars on average in patients
taking multiple sclerosis
medicines at save two hundred
twenty.
Hundred dollars on average with
those with those points we
support legislation to.
Hello Mr chairman Madam chairman
members the committee my name is
Kerry robin printer and the
registered lobbyists for the New
Mexico Medical Society we fully
support Senate bill fourteen and
think it's a really important
way to make sure that patients
can have their prescription drug
costs managed throughout this
process and we very much thing
to to make any for her work on
the task force during the inter
agency while she's been a really
great point four is for the
physicians when it comes to
these issues.
Madam chair members the
committee I'm Dale Tinker I
represent New Mexico pharmacists
Association I do we do stand in
support of this bill
you we had and several of our
independent community pharmacies
who participated in the task
force over the last year
contributed I I believe to it
pretty substantially
one of the big issues for us it
has been the spread pricing
issue and this bill addresses
that the transparency that we've
tried to address over the years
this bill addresses that there
are some great things in this
bill we are very supportive of
of the legislation and hope that
you will pass it thank you.
Great thank you is there anybody
online in support.
All right we'll those
individuals if you will please
state your name let you go one
at a time please know that you
have one minute to make your
testimony.
What you pick to start.
Get.
Any crossing on a community
pharmacist in Carlsbad New
Mexico battles every day trying
to get patients the medications
they need we have seen
increasing difficulties because
the PBMs is like three PBMs
control eighty five percent of
the patients that they that we
serve and it's a I see it every
day that the the spread pricing
in the state.
The four years of students to
huge battle and this bill really
helps to put the power back into
the office of the state
insurance to see as very capable
of understanding of these issues
we ask that I ask that you
support this bill
it will really help the patients
in rural New Mexico who are
under certain having difficulty
and it will also help community
pharmacies like minded they need
to be able to survive and
support our patients thank you
thank you.
Right one more online go ahead.
Madam chair and members of the
committee my name is laurel
McCloskey I'm executive director
the chronic disease prevention
council and as a member of the
prescription prescription drug
task force and we are in support
of this bill for everything that
was needed previously protects
patients out of pocket costs it
looks at spreading pricing
addresses that that occurs when
to health plans and payers are
charged more for prescription
drugs than what is reimbursed to
the pharmacy this bill was
created with substantial
research examining other states
what works what doesn't works
and as a result is a
comprehensive change for
prescription drug policy New
Mexico so thank you and we
support this bill all right
thank you so much that's all
we're going to have for the
testimony in support is there
anybody in the audience here who
is in opposition of this bill.
Okay so we're gonna have four
folks come up all it you all
rock rock paper scissors it.
And then if you can check to see
if there's anybody online well
we're queuing that up I'm gonna
give you all the equipment thank
you madam chairman's Committee
Larry Herman registered
lobbyists for position health
plan.
Prescription drugs are one of
the single highest cost drivers
for Health Care today in this
bill actually going to increase
costs to insurers which is
passed on premiums all point to
just two quick items for you
page thirteen line six it talks
about professional dispensing
fee of less than ten dollars and
forty nine cents that becomes
the floor are dispensing fees
that we're paying out to our
contracts are significantly less
than that so for Presbyterian
commercial plan members we're
still calculating that but that
alone is going to cost millions
to tens of millions of dollars
to our patients and it also
point you to the significant
issues on the fiscal impact
report for talks about the
provisions of the bill will have
significant operational and cost
impacts on insurers and PBMs
insurance companies are are
required to meet in eighty five
fifteen ratio for a cost verses
administrative of cost and those
costs are passed on directly to
patients so this is going to
drive up costs for our patients
and our members thank you Madam
thank you.
Miss.
Mr chair and committee members
my name is Chelsea can and I am
the director of public policy at
the New Mexico chamber of
commerce the chamber respect
respectfully opposes SB fourteen
the chamber supports efforts to
expand the sample access to
affordable health care coverage
for all New Mexicans and
businesses this includes
ensuring the appropriate cost
manage it then of limited health
career health care resources and
prescription medications we
appreciate the attention of the
legislature and the executive to
look into cost drivers of health
care in New Mexico our members
support transparency initiatives
that address the entire
prescription drug supply chain
to ensure accountability but
this proposal does not provide
for that and only focuses on
specific elements there for the
chamber opposes the bill in its
current form thank you to.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Roy Moore
and I'm a registered lobbyist
for America's health insurance
plans we stand in opposition to
the bill and I would point you
to your FIR more specifically
the just the statement in the
significant issues part of the
FIR the bill does not address
the fundamental problem of
pharmacy program costs namely
the cost of drugs the cost of
drugs imposed by manufacturers
drug manufacture set the price
and everyone tries to deal with
the problems that and that
follow from there the task force
in the executive order that
created the task force was there
to look at the cost of drugs
fortune this bill does not
accomplish that goal as you look
to the FIR you will see
significant costs from the two
agencies the submitted
information thirty million
dollars that is significant but
I would also note that the New
Mexico public schools insurance
authority did not present
information the numbers are
significant the one last thing I
would mention madam chair is
there's an embedded issue within
this bill and that is the
control of the PBMs in terms of
their providing services to
employers there's an original
preemption issue there which
should get addressed in Senate
Judiciary Committee thank you
for the extra time.
At last.
Good evening my name is Dr Lee
Gina Mendez Harper I'm a
pharmacist and a registered
lobbyist for prime therapeutics
we are of pharmacy benefit
manager that's owned by eighteen
Blue Cross blue shield of not
for profit plans across the
United States including the
question show the New Mexico.
I stand in a respectful
opposition to this bill
certainly the task force was
created to look at practical
solutions to address rising drug
costs are concerns with this
bill is that it doesn't it
doesn't achieve that goal there
are cost saving tools that we
currently use to manage drug
costs that are prohibited from
us the prohibit.
That we are prohibited from
using their cost drivers such as
the ten dollar forty nine cent
dispensing fee that was
mentioned previously and then
there's some other concepts in
the bill that we just don't
quite understand and and with.
Want some additional engagement
there some pricing metrics that
they want to use which are
generally used in hospitals and
clinics but aren't used in
retailer community pharmacies so
we're trying to figure that out
to help I stand with in respect
labs Isshin and look forward to
working with the front.
All right let them know that
that they've got a minute and
that will be the last of our
committee today.
You're you're that.
Thank you Mr chair members the
committee my job on Boston
national association
Representative Marci managers
must stand in respect well
position of this bill I would
note that a number of in that
state into the main New Mexico
table to limits on minute I'll
do my best because but here's
the trick this bill does not
lower costs for drugs in the
state of New Mexico the
governor's task force as opposed
money saving solutions but that
process was eight and
recommended ideas that actually.
The task force met a few times
share information share our
disease and adopted the
recommendations of mine closed
doors these bad ideas will more
New Mexico families and patients
your own FIR says an increase in
the cost at least nineteen
million dollars in the first
year alone.
And sponsor for state employees
if you pass this bill and you
have to have a choice you really
need to take in your own budgets
to pay for the increased lower
cost aspect posturing zero eight
even worse this bill forces that
same decision you ten seconds
servers who are self insured.
That because of the inclusion of
self funded a recipient and
heartlands our estimate is that
that would increase cost over a
hundred and seventy eight
million dollars in the first
year alone through Mexicans I'm
not mentor once told me you
can't pay more and pay less this
bill mandates anymore
prescription drugs it's going to
cost you thirty nine million
dollars please wrap it up Sir.
Yes thank you thank you it's
going to cost your plan thirty
nine million dollars which is
going to.
The timeliness for reason.
Of thank you now I can go to the
committee.
There are.
I just want to thank the senator
the Sanchez my brothers a
hemophiliac that is part of some
of the auto which provides
financial assistance to
individuals with the bleeding
disorder of the cost for the
plaza where the factor that he
needs to do that my nephew are
also hemophiliacs this will be a
huge cost savings for our family
and I want to thank the senator
for bringing this bill forward
thank you madam chair.
Then everybody else.
The only vote for a
Senator Kernan Senator.
You know this is difficult.
Your.
Local pharmacist stated their
support act questions.
Questions about.
Years
and years.
Yeah.
That is.
Questions that.
Or.
Commercial.
Well.
Reach out.
Market.
This is a.
So Mr chair Senator thank you
madam chair up for that question
and I'm gonna let them drive
mechanism into the first part of
the question.
You Mr chairman and chair and
members of the committee and
senator yes this would affect
commercial insurance as well.
Couple of comments that we did
have on the task force it was
open and there were a lot of
comments from members of the all
of the organizations you heard
from.
And we were expecting that the
insurance industry would be
saying that costs will have to
rise however data does not back
that statement up in several
states where this has been
enacted the costs have not shown
up as as threatened so I think
that's an important
consideration.
Hey there
And
are only sign
there I see is this.
Yeah very often.
Yeah.
For many years and that was on
the other side is this morning
over I.
The
So listening to New.
All this time.
Down.
Remember to visit our website is
a.
Be clear yes in order.
Right.
The additional.
Oversight.
And.
Madam chair Senator the
superintendent of insurance is
appointed by nominating
committee.
Okay.
Okay
and so the the additional
authority that we would have
under this bill as it clarify
some of the licensing
requirements that have come into
play and have rate raise
questions in the past
the licensing requirements
basically it would be clarified
to say that these companies
don't need to be duly licensed
as a third party administrator
if they also provide services
claims handling services so they
clarify that those provisions of
the clarify provisions on of
requests for data in issues of
transparency one of the things
that conversations that came up
quite a bit in the commission
that happens the summer was you
know what are of Pete what are
PBMs and what are pharmaceutical
companies charging for drugs
that was information that the
committee decided that they
needed more transparency on so
it shifted some of the
responsibility to aside to
collect that data the we would
be certainly responsible for
reports of enforcing the other
parts of the legislation which
includes
hearing.
Complaints from pharmacists
which we already do about the
pricing of drugs and if there
the pharmacists are being paid
what they believe is the
appropriate cost of drugs but we
already sure those complaints
and disputes about the
transparency in the cost of
drugs and the price of drugs but
this is something that creates a
little bit more
there there's more of a process
and referral to a sigh for
peels.
There is
additional information.
That we would have to enforce in
plans regarding ensuring that
the copay accumulator
provisions are put into the
health insurance plans and
policies
and there are.
I don't want to go through every
single thing in the bill but we
would be in charge of enforcing
the spell.
Instructions that.
Experiencing with regard to the
manufacture.
Just because
That sort of where the problem.
Awesome.
France.
The cost.
Dances.
That was signed by.
There there are provisions in
the square I will be getting
transparency information on the
cost of drugs and we are
currently negotiating
information on confidentiality
of some of those costs but in
aggregate we could probably
class and categorize those that
information and release it
publicly and have it be a
a component of the transparency
that gets reported out to the
legislature.
Mr Chairman.
The main facts are in.
Get that at the office of the
superintendent of insurance.
I'm sorry Madam chair of Senator
that is something that the
office of the superintendent of
insurance could find out through
the manufacture but also through
the PBMs who are purchasing the
drugs from the manufacturers
understand.
I think that next more than
that.
So Mr chair and Senator and
committee members venture is we
did have a an amendment I think
your committee has we just got
it you just got to I'm sorry
because it was this this morning
by the staff for two your staff
for because I got the same email
but it does relate to
confidentiality that have around
individual drug pricing that
might be considered proprietary
and confidential and this is
something that was deemed to be
important to add to the bill if
the bill goes forward.
So get given that and given that
we just received that
we haven't had been able to go
over that and we didn't debate
the bill with the amendment so
if this moves this is something
that we would recommend that you
bring to the next committee
which is Judiciary fine okay
thank you madam chair
Yes all aware crown next time.
New heights there are so there
yes.
Some information about taxes and
first one thing we've learned is
that we can look at
that.
Thank you for not and certainly
found that out.
Rectus insurance.
Many years ago.
Service here not always the.
On the
right
so also Garcia.
This is.
Yes I have this and your.
Yes
madam chair and listed in the
Senator chair Senator members of
the committee
this would make it so that we
would be able to in our office
where we do have a small
pharmacy that purchases
chemotherapy in support drugs
nothing else that it would make
it so that the of pharmacists
are oncology pharmacists would
be able to provide those drugs
directly at the time the patient
comes to their appointment this
would allow us to know when they
get the drug when do I need to
follow up with them to see how
other tolerating and as it
stands now a significant
percentage of the drugs that we
would like to be able to find
right there is a one stop shop
are forced to be sent to
pharmacy benefit managers mail
order pharmacies or sometimes
they will ship a lot more drugs
than we wanted to sipped and we
never know when the patient gets
it we don't know whether they
tolerated we pay to nurses just
call people up every other day
and find out if they got their
drug test.
And it is really a hardship on
those patients to that figure
out how to do it we also
currently have to pay
significant numbers of staff to
fill out the forms to get the
cost sharing
benefits that are provided
through the foundation so that
patients can even afford the
stress is without are doing that
is the practice no one would be
able to afford that
chemotherapy.
We would be able to streamline
our processes what this would do
in this bill would be to deliver
those rebates first to the
patient and secondly to the
person who's purchasing the
insurer so I was somewhat
surprised at the FIR comment
because the retiree benefit plan
I think would be the purchaser
of those drugs and any rebate
that was over and above what
would to the patient would then
go back to that entity to to
fill in some of what they're
describing as a shortfall it
would be a significant boon to
our patients thank you.
Your organization as well
service.
I did Representative.
This is a little.
Our.
Yes.
On the eve of the state address
online that that is not it is a
hard decision.
I.
Studies.
Issues regarding
The.
On
the rostrum.
So.
Less than listen.
Madam chair.
I could make one comment that's
the might be related to your put
some of your questions the I am
also carrying a bill
I think it's Senate bill seven
which is the Health Care Thorgy
and the this is also governor's
bill which would create a health
care of forty that in the first
year would pull together pieces
of nine different state agencies
to focus including all the I.
back members retiree health care
state employees the APS in the.
Never see if the school
insurance in terms of purchasing
pharmaceuticals hand purchasing
health care so the idea of in
that other bill is that the
first year would look that bill
and that agency would look at
how to reduce costs by pulling
and collaborating on the
purchasing so that's separate
from this bill.
Thank you madam chair and.
The staff as well and and I have
a.
Part of the.
Yeah average.
Thank you senator current
Senator.
This you wanted to what else
severance.
That is our hearing is the
total.
Leave the floor or.
Thank you madam chair.
And senator I.
I guess you know.
A little the use of some of the
testimony.
The.
Look at with this were supposed
to look at have lower cost to
look at why.
By the same patients and the
rest go for much much lower than
I.
Madam chair senator I'm going to
defer drive back in the for
that.
Yes madam chair and senator yes
we very much did look at all of
those impact of there is a.
They.
Agency in the state government
that has been looking for some
time at the idea of it is re
reimportation of drugs a viable
way to do this in the conclusion
was basically that there's no
way that Canada or other
entities will be able to supply
the needs of the United
About as the shipping process
occurs that whether or not we
would be able to verify the
pedigree of those drugs there
have been a counterfeit
chemotherapy brought into the
country there have been deluded
chemotherapy and support drugs
brought into the country so add
significant concerns about that
we also looked at other parts of
the supply chain for example the
manufacturers themselves New
Mexico with its two point one
million people does not have a
sufficient market share that it
will make any sort of fiscal
impact on these large
multinational corporations but
we felt that by focusing on the
part of the cost of the drug
that occurs after it leaves the
manufacturer which is now up to
about fifty percent that we
would be able to affect that
that does not imply that we
would look further into
subsequent area but it's it's
very difficult to boil this
entire ocean so we wanted to
take a small part of it to start
with
the.
Manufactures are also in in
processes of developing some
transparency we reviewed several
of reports I for example Jansen
where they have published for
many years in a row a lot of the
statistics about how their costs
are what they spend for research
and development what they spend
on advertising what they spend
on paying for rebates to the
pharmacy benefit managers and we
think that transparency needs to
apply to this entire industry
because until we really know
where the money is going we will
not be able to get a handle on
drug pricing but the idea of
Senate bill fourteen to put
significant
transparency and reporting
requirements and given the
superintendent of insurance
agency some ability to really
force that transparency and
evaluated we think is a good
first step in addressing this
problem which affects everyone
in the country and everyone in
New Mexico.
On the.
So.
It is a larger chain them normal
with normal.
Thanks for.
For.
The pharmacy a lot larger chain
then that that we're dealing
with because every every step of
the chain has a market this
business were.
Of madam chair Senator you
you're correct it's far more
convoluted than that when I
worked with the AMA we
identified seven different steps
in the supply chain where
additional cost to add it up
mostly by the pharmacy benefit
managers what happens if I may
is that as they go to
manufacture they say if you wish
your drugs placed on our for
military or not adversely
affected on our for military and
a high tier with a high copay we
would like to have a significant
reaping because they are paid as
a percentage of the cost of the
drug it is in the pharmacy has
met benefit managers best
interest to have that costs go
higher for the cost because then
their payment is higher than
with the spread pricing they
will tell the insurance company
and the employer who purchases
that insurance that that drug
cost a thousand dollars when in
reality they're paying the
pharmacy four hundred dollars
for that same drug and pocketing
the rest the rebate chart I
showed you is a significant
amount they put fees at every
step of the way the pharmacies
have to pay a fee for the
privilege of being in the
network they have to pay another
fee to for the privilege of
filling the prescription they
get a clawback if they do not
have
meet criteria that are unknown
to them and not negotiated are
often are relevant to the type
of practice that that pharmacy
has and we look very seriously
carefully all of these.
To figure out how we could level
the playing field between small
independent pharmacies who are
taxpaying members of the
infrastructure of every
community and the very large
that pharmacy benefit managers
three of home control seventy
five percent of every
prescription written in this
country just six of home control
ninety five percent of those
prescriptions.
Your.
Hello.
Years of offices House.
And
also.
Nations wells
Your doctor.
Representative.
dollars alone.
Thank you
how do I know you wanted to say
something Sierra are you good
with us moving forward on this.
Okay I'm gonna timely service
ready to go.
Sure you do it.
But I don't we're also we're
also getting late into the
night.
Question is once a year to go to
a.
Services and transaction.
There the.
So that the new insurance.
The.
Sure the.
So
there's
four
the lotus the number that.
The state is.
Do.
Sierra thank you very much
Senator had a meal madam chair
motion but do pass that second
there's no sense.
Senator Lopez.
But we've got to grow we have a
a motion by Senator how to me
second by Senator Lopez.
Yes.
Senator back so.
Yes.
Yes.
Senator Sanchez.
Sierra yeah.
Senator Wirth.
Yes.
Sanitation yes.
Senator Griggs yes.
All right on us six three you
have a do pass thank you.
madam chair all right we will
return on Thursday as soon as we
can right after the floor.
