553, the timber grading Act from
the consent calendar so that
there can be discussion and
public testimony, that is going
to go first because
representative uh Vincent is
here, kind of
Stealthily, since there is a
call of the house.
So we're gonna, we're gonna use
them and abuse them while we can
and then send them back into
wondering if you're gonna be
escorting while you go to the
restroom.
Yes, and then what we will do
after that, we'll do 553 1st and
then we will go to the two items
on the consent calendar and then
we will go to new business just
so everybody knows what we're
doing in here. All right, so
first and foremost, you have to
take the attendance.
Senator Figueroa here.
That's not.
Senator O'Malley
present.
We have a full house. All right.
Representative Vincent, so thank
you for being flexible on this
and for coming. Um, and, uh, we
will be allowing public
testimony on this, but if you
want to go ahead and present
House Bill 553, uh, the timber
grading Act, uh, you're welcome
to do so.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you members of the
committee, and I appreciate you
hiding me out and let me present
this bill, this bill, uh the
goals of House Bill 553 is to
allow residential construction,
the option of using locally
produced lumber, vegas and
beams.
New Mexico has 18 sawmills and 3
facilities producing beans,
vegas, and latias. They are
located all across the state,
such as Chama, Taos, Raton, Las
Vegas, Jamos Pueblo, Milan,
Tularosa and reserve. Many of
the facilities are
multi-generational run, uh,
sawmills and some tribally owned
and operated. They are small,
independent operations that
operate on the edge of profit
profitability.
553 provides the provides New
Mexico with the opportunity to
solve 3 problems at once by
allowing residential and
commercial construction to use
locally produced lumbers, vegas
beams, and will improve the
market for timber removed in
tree thinning and post fire
hazard removal.
Offset price increases as
tariffs on imports from Canada
to drive up lumber prices and
generate a local timber supply
to rebuild after wildfires and
address the statewide shortage
of housing.
And without that, Madam Chair, I
stand for questions.
All right. Thank you very much,
Representative. I appreciate
that. So, um, now what we're
going to do is go to the
audience and just a reminder
representative that um you will
have 5 minutes to respond to
public testimony afterwards, or
you can just choose to go ahead
and go to the committee.
All right, so, um, just by show
of hands, how many in the
audience are in support of this
legislation?
OK, we have 1234. how many in
the audience are in opposition
of this legislation.
None? OK. Can you tell me if
there are people online
in opposition.
OK. Um, so if I can get two of
you up here, if you don't mind,
and then we'll go to the folks
online.
Uh, and you'll get one minute,
and Carrie, you know the
routines of the committee,
Carrie Ramba Bruder representing
Lincoln County. Uh, I want to
say a couple of things. One is
the technicality of the bill. We
consulted with CID to make sure
they wouldn't have to renew any
building codes or anything once
we had local certifications in
place to grade our wood that was
produced locally and they have
said that the bill complies with
all of the certificates that
they already take.
in order to have wood grating,
the difference is we would have
local certification versus
paying out of staters to come
into New Mexico.
Our wood for us. So this is a
local grown program. We also
know that this bill is very
important because we have
created a Sierra Blanca Regional
task force for economic
diversification in our
communities after the forest
fires last year. This is an
integral part of it because it
will allow us to have a vibrant
timber industry with the sawmill
that we're trying to get up and
running at Mescalero. We'll have
our local certifiers for the
wood, and then we can hopefully
make sure that wood stays
local for our own um
construction of structures. OK.
Thank you, Carrie. All right,
Kim.
Thank you, Madam Chair, on
behalf of Mescalerapache tribe,
um, they are in support of HB
553, the timber grading Act,
which establishes consistent
grading standards for timber
products in New Mexico. This
legislation will enhance market
transparency, improve product
quality and support sustainable
practices in the timber
industry.
This is an important step
forward in strengthening New
Mexico's forestry economy and
ensuring responsible management
of our natural resources.
Mescalera owns two sawmills with
plans to open them, um, within
the end of the year. Thank you.
Thank you, Kim.
All right, so we have two folks
online, Jackson Phillips and
David Cretcham, Cretam, uh, who
have voiced in opposition, so
Jackson, uh, you are up for
speaking first. We have you
registered as an opposition. You
will get a 32nd warning in your
chat box. If you go over a
minute, we will cut your mic,
uh, so if you will, Jackson, go
ahead and unbeat yourself and go
ahead and give your testimony.
Hello there. We, um, on behalf
of the American Wood Council,
uh, we actually had another one
of our team members, Shane, um,
who I believe is the one that
raised his hand in the chat to
speak in opposition.
Do you see a shade online?
OK, his hand is, his
Right. So if you will.
All right, go ahead and, and uh
we'll get to Shane in just a
minute. I do have David.
Who is also expressed
opposition.
So, David, and then we'll go to
Shane.
David, if you will, please
unmute yourself. You'll have a
32nd warning in your chat box if
you go over one minute, we will
cut your mic. Go ahead.
Uh, this is David Kretzman. I'm
the president of the American
Lumber Standards Committee, and
I thank you for giving me the
opportunity to.
Um, we have a concern with
equivalence and the process, the
bills that you're proposing cuts
the very heart out of the LSC
system, which is consensus-based
structural system of continuous
checks and balances and
qualifications that are
essential to
Create the proper labeling of
material and tying it to design
values.
There's no liability link
between the producers and the
pieces of lumber that a consumer
can fall back on in the bill
that's proposed. Basically, the
bill would codify buyers beware,
and you don't provide any tools
or recourse for future owners to
understand who to hold
accountable if there's a
problem.
With no system outlined for
traceability on each individual
piece.
Uh, we have a very big concern
about this.
Um, and he therefore opposes
adopting the legislation as
drafted.
All right, thank you. And so now
we go to Shane.
Shane, if you will, please
unmute yourself and you have one
minute, you'll get a 30-second
warning in your chat box if you
go over one minute, we will cut
your mic. Go ahead, Shane.
Thank you. Good afternoon. My
name is Shane Ellis, and I'm a
regional manager for codes and
standards. The American Wood
Council. And so I wanna make a
strong point on is that the PS20
standards was referenced in the
New Mexico residential building
code in the New Mexico
commercial building code, and
those codes utilize the lumber
grades or that standard for all
their structural provisions. Any
program that doesn't meet that
standard will make all those
provisions and the codes
unusable. For instance, span
tables that um are used for
floor joy.
headers over openings and
rafters, uh, all rely on those
lumber grades, and additionally,
anything that's an engineer
design relies on the national
design specification wood
construction and also use that
lump grid as a prior home
builder and building official,
great stamps on individual
pieces of lumber where the only
way to determine in the field of
the correct type of lumber is
being used in the right
location.
Uh, it's common for building
designs that specify different
lumber grades for different
locations, um, and
If you establish any type of uh
separate path for a lumber
grading, we believe it will lead
us substantial challenges to
contractors design professionals
and building officials to ensure
a building is structurally
sound. And we think the best way
to serve New Mexico's builders
and homeowners and lumber mills
is a part of long-standing
process for lumber grading that
is already readily available.
Uh, thanks for taking the.
All right, thank you so much.
That was 1 minute and 12
seconds. So, um, just for the
record, um, so representative,
would you like to go ahead and
respond to any of those
comments? Yes, madam Chair,
members uh committee.
We went through this and all the
committees that this bill went
through and we are going to
provide the best standards, and
they will be standards, they
will meet the PS20 standards. We
have, we did talk with CID and
we're not gonna have to change
any building codes and Madam
Chair and members of the
committee, if they would come in
and grade our lumber for free,
we wouldn't be having this
conversation and I don't blame
them for wanting to oppose this
cause it's gonna take money out
of their pocket, and we're
trying
to grow our own, and with that,
Madam Chair asked him for
question.
All right. Thank you so much.
Um, now we go to the committee,
by the way, the American lumber
standard is located in
Frederick, Maryland out of
state.
Take that how you.
Anybody from the committee,
Representative Senator O'Malley,
my apologies. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Someone who spoke up
earlier said that this was going
to be uh that the timber, um,
was going to be for New Mexico
sold in New Mexico. And so, um,
I'm looking at page 4 and it
says that um it may be used in
all residential and so this
could be sold out of state.
Madam chair and, and uh
Senator, yes, ma'am, I don't
want a box this in, you know, if
we could make some money off of
it, that'd be great cause what
we're trying to do is start
thinning the forest. We're
trying to get things going to
where we don't continue to burn
people's houses down, and with
all this timber that's out
there, we need to start removing
a lot of it and it has, it has a
monetary value to it. And if we
can start running that through
our local sawmills and growing
our own and grading our own
timber.
Madam Chair and center, I think
that New Mexicans are smart
enough to grade timber. I really
do. I think we're gonna be fine.
That's really nice that you have
all that confidence. Um, I'm
joking, of course. So, um, the,
uh, OK, so I mean making
statements like this just for
New Mexico, that's not true. So,
and I don't, I'm not saying that
so you should have the right to
something tumor if you can't.
That's not an issue. Um,
Let's see what else. This whole
idea of traceable, uh, what
could you talk a little bit
about that?
The standard yeah yes ma'am,
madam chair and senator. So if
you look on page 4.
What we're gonna do with these
wood graters is when we run that
wood we we grade the wood, the
timber, it's gonna be the name
of the grader.
The name and location of the
sawmill and when and where the
timber was processed.
The name of the timber species.
The quality and type of
structural timber that was
graded and labeled.
The location where the timber is
to be used.
The date that the timber was cut
and processed, the date on which
the timber was graded and the
moisture content of the timber
at the time of gray.
PS20 standards almost like it,
you know, if you go to a law, if
you go to law school or if you
become a doctor, and you do it
back east and you come over
here, it's about the same
standard. There might be some
reciprocity. OK. Madam Chair,
senator, so, um,
To see if I understood this. So
it's really up to the builder,
construction, whether or not
they accept.
This trim or not, I mean, they
can choose not to, you know,
buy, buy any timber, that's up
to them.
Madam Chair and send her, yes,
ma'am. OK.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator O'Malley.
Senator Ramos, Madam Chair,
Representative, what a concept.
Right, utilizing our own.
A madam chair
I mean, what's the difference
between our trees and others,
Madam Chair. Why can't we
utilize what we have, um, Madam
Chair Representative, what's
gonna happen with this wood if
we don't utilize it and we leave
it out there.
Madam Chair center, it'll it'll
just rot.
And it'll, so right now if you
look in Lincoln County,
everything is freestanding right
now, and with these wins that
we've had, everything is going
to start blowing down and it's
gonna look like pickup sticks in
there and, you know, if we have
another incident, we're gonna go
through it all over again, maybe
not the intensity of it, but we
are going to go through it
again.
Madam Chair Representative just
south of you. There's an old
burnt scar there in weed.
And we hunt there all the time.
We've had people have very near
encounters with falling trees
while we're out there honey.
You know, this is also a matter
of safety, especially around the
homes of uh of that new burnt
scar. So, Madam Chair, I, I, I
saw that the vote in the House
is 48 to 0. I think we just need
to continue using common sense
and and pass this bill manager.
Thank you, Senator Ramos.
Any other comments from the
committee?
OK, before we go to the Dupas
from Senator Scher and a second
from Senator Sanchez, um,
representative, uh, you know,
right during the pandemic,
certainly recognizing that the
cost of wood went up quite a bit
and um I built a house for my 50
pound tortoise named Beaver, and
And
that I thought typically was
gonna be about 250 bucks, turned
out to be about a $500 worth of
wood, um, and my tortoise's
house has trusses and
everything, and it's a really
good, that thing's not moving.
Um, but I'm wondering when, when
we look at this, and this may be
a magnificent grasp of the
obvious, but when we buy New
Mexico wood, can we, uh, hope
that the prices for that wood
will be significantly cheaper
than from what we're having to
import.
From other places.
Madam Chair, so if you take the
concept of it, we're right there
locally and I, I don't want this
just in Lincoln County, I want
all of our mountainous places,
so this, this works out and not
only as a monetary and an
economic driver and building
jobs, you know, it's going to
help us with, it's going to help
Senator Werth and I with our
insurance stuff and Senator
Ramos, and we want to get our
insurance right and we start
pulling all this good monetary
timber out and we start putting
this stuff together and we're
not trucking it all over.
the place and that's where, and
we're not gonna have expensive
timber graders coming in here
and having to grade our timber,
we can create our own timber, so
I would say yes, ma'am, it's
gonna come way down.
Thank you so much,
Representative, and I certainly
appreciate that the Mescalero
Apache will be able to have some
other opportunities for economic
development. So, uh, on that we
have the Du Past from Senator
Sheer, and a second from Senator
Sanchez. Is there anybody here
in opposition of the DuP Paz
motion?
See none, if you will, please
record all in attendance as in
favor of the DuP pass. Thank
you, Representative. Have a good
time down at the call. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you. We,
uh, we, we, we know that
feeling, so now it's your turn
to jail. OK, have a good time.
Make sure you go to the restroom
beforehand. Just to let you
know, we have to be escorted
everywhere when there is a call.
So, even to the restroom. So,
um, all right. So now what we're
gonna do is we're gonna go ahead
and go to the consent calendar.
Um, we are, we have two items.
that the committee has agreed to
the consent calendar, so what
I'm going to do with that, and
these are, these are bills that
have had either unanimous or
near unanimous votes. um, and so
because we have had over 200
bills assigned to this
committee. Uh, we have had 45
House bills assigned. We have
addressed 42 of those house
bills. Uh, so we're gonna do 43
and 44, um, today, uh, and not
in, in, uh, not excluding those
on new business. So what I'm
gonna do is I'm gonna read the
bill number.
The title and the um uh sponsor,
and then if there is any
opposition, then that bill will
go on to the next, next agenda
so that we can warn the bill
sponsor that that is the case.
However, there, if there is no
opposition, then we will, we
will move that bill and show
that it has been voted
unanimously. Uh, and then we
will get to, uh, HB 67 after
that with um Senator Jaramillo
Representative Garrett can't
make it. So, uh, the consent
calendar. So,
For House Bill committee
substitute, 2 committee
substitutes of House Bill 444,
the transfer Athletic Commission
Authority, um, from
representative de la Cruz and
Senator Maestas, um.
Is there any opposition to this
bill?
see none. House Bill 444 with
two committee substitutes
transfer athletic Commission
Authority from Representative de
la Cruz and Senator Maestas
receives a due pass with a vote
of 10 to 09 to 0, and now heads
to the floor.
You're welcome.
Now, moving on to House Bill 22,
prohibit credit card fee tip
deductions from Representative
de la Cruz, um, and I believe
representative Hernandez.
Is there any opposition to this
bill?
See no opposition. House Bill 22
prohibit credit card fee tip
deductions from representatives
de la Cruz and Hernandez
received a due pass with a vote
of 9 to 0.
Uh, and now heads to the floor.
All right, we are done with
consent calendar. And just to
let you know, we are, we are
having one more meeting
scheduled for Thursday, and so I
will compile any other house
bills, uh, we will go through
this one more time.
And then, um, in our last
meeting will be on Thursday.
All right, now we're moving on
to House Bill 67, Senator
Jaamillo, I think you are going
to
Go ahead and do that.
too.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, House Bill 67 seeks
to change state statute, to
better clarify access to
unemployment benefits for
adjunct instructors at New
Mexico Higher Education
institutions under certain
circumstances, but this bill
does is it aligns the concepts
of reasonable assurance to the
federal definition, which is a
determining factor for
unemployment coverage for
adjunct instructors. This bill
creates a five-part eligibility
test to determine reasonable
assurance of re-employment.
Joining me this afternoon is
James Motelano, who will serve
as my expert witness to answer
any questions if we need them.
All right, thank you. You're
welcome to say a few words if
you'd like, or we can go ahead
and go to public comment. Uh,
Madam Chair, please. All right.
So, is there anybody in the
audience by a show of hands who
are in support of this
legislation. You can be the lone
wolf, that's all right.
Anybody in this audience in
opposition of this legislation.
seen none. Anybody online? No.
Do you wanna get up and talk for
a minute?
We'll give you one minute.
And you'll see the timer from
the vice chair, but go ahead and
if you will, uh, where did that
microphone go?
Dan, did you take that
microphone?
Uh, Representative Vincent took
him,
of course, because he's trying
to start a karaoke bar. This is
what's happening. Go ahead, you,
you might need to speak up a
little bit. There, oh, Mel's got
the mic.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
John Durch, I'm with the
American Federation of Teachers
in New Mexico. This bill is
really important for adjunct and
contingent faculty in our
institutions of higher education
because it removes a vague area
of statute, um, with a long used
concept of reasonable assurance,
aligns New Mexico statute to the
federal definition of reasonable
insurance, and this is a win,
win, win. It's a win for
institutions, it's a win for the
employee and it's a win for
Department of Workforce
Solutions because we're now
going to be all working off the
same set of criteria.
and removing that subjectivity
from this area of law, so we
urge your support today. Thank
you.
Thank you so much.
since there is no opposition, do
you wanna go ahead and go
straight to the committee? All
right. Do we have any questions
or comments from the committee?
known as the what is the will of
the committee?
I'm hearing it's uh, so again,
Sharon Sanchez.
Is there anybody in opposition
of the DuPass motion?
See none if you will, please
record 10 in uh support 10 to 0
to pass. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Madam. I'm gonna head into your
office if you don't mind to lay
down for a while, I just don't
feel too well. Thank you. Have
you come back later.
All right. Now we are on um
House Bill 15.
Senator Doig, I think you're
presenting that since
Representative Anaya stuck in.
I was jail.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I want
to know how Representative
Vincent in this game.
All right, Senator, you're
welcome to go ahead and start.
And you know the routine after
you present, then we'll go to
the audience and you can either
address the audience or go back
to the committee. Thank you,
Madam Chair. I have here with
me, uh, our secretary of work
for Solutions, Serena Nayer and
uh House Bill 15 is the
healthcare strategic recruitment
Program. We have a shortage of
medical providers here in New
Mexico, and we want to make it
as easy as possible for folks
who have been trained who are
from New
Mexico to come back and work in
these positions here. So this
essentially creates a concierge
service where, uh, Department of
Workforce Solutions will be
reaching out to folks who have
graduated from institutions
within the last 10 years here
and who aren't already working
in in, in the medical field
here and tell them all about all
the great incentives we have,
help them uh with their
transferring their licensing,
finding housing, basically
making it as easy as possible.
For folks to come home to New
Mexico and work in healthcare.
Mount chair, unless, uh, this
actually has something to add,
that's it.
All right, thank you. So, now by
a uh I don't know if you want
Secretary Nyer to make any
comments? No.
All right, now by show of hands,
uh, how many in the audience are
in support of this bill.
OK, keep your hands up, please.
12.
Before 5. OK, 567, OK, 7.
Roughly 7 or 8. All right.
Anybody in the audience in
opposition of this bill.
OK, see, then we also have 2
online, uh, who are in support.
So let's just go ahead and do,
we'll do 4 people in support.
Um, if you will, please come on
up. You have one minute.
We will time you
Uh,
members of the committee, my
name's Nate Bush. I'm staff at
the University of New Mexico. We
strongly support this bill. We
greatly appreciate the work of
the bill sponsors and working
with the executive to uh recruit
our best and brightest and make
sure that they have an.
Serve the state back here when
it comes to health professions,
so thank you. Thank you so much.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, Jason Weeks,
registered lobbyist for the
Hospital Association, Hospital
Association stands in support of
this bill. I want to thank the
sponsor for bringing it forward.
We do have a healthcare crisis
in New Mexico in terms of
recruitment and retention of
physicians, but also a lot of
other medical staff. We need to
do what we can to train them
here, but then keep them here
and also attract others from out
of state, this bill does a lot
of good things, um, towards
those ends.
And so we'd urge the committee
to move it forward. Thank you.
Thank you so much. Uh, we're
going to go ahead and go to the
2 online.
So we have uh Dick Mason, I
believe, uh, you've registered
in support and then Dana Gray,
uh, Dick, we will give you one
minute. You will see a 32nd
warning in your chat box if you
do go over a minute, we will cut
your mic. So, Dick, go ahead and
start and unmute yourself,
please.
OK, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Dick
Mason, and I'm a board member of
the League of Women Voters in
Mexico. The league has
prioritized support for HB 15
because the League of Women
voters supports a healthcare
system that provides a
comprehensive level of health
care for all New Mexican
residents in order to provide
that comprehensive level of
health care, we need to assure
that we have adequate providers
and to provide those to to
provide those services and right
now we do not have those uh
provider.
HB 15 puts forward a plan to
recruit and retain those
healthcare professionals. The
league wants to thank the
sponsors for bringing HP
forward, HB 15 forward and urges
the committee to give it a due
pass. Thank you.
Thank you so much, uh, Dana Gray
will give you one minute if you
will, please unmute yourself and
uh pay attention to the
thirty-second warning in your
chat box. Did you go over a
minute, we will cut your mic. Go
ahead, Dana.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, my name is Dana Gray,
Executive director of Desert
states Physical Therapy Network,
representing 30 independent
private practices throughout the
state. We'd like to thank the
bill sponsors for introducing
this piece of legislation.
Network clinics continue to find
recruitment a challenge. We
appreciate any efforts made to
bring qualified providers back
to our state. This is a great
way to compile information about
tax credits, incentives, and job
openings for potential
candidates. We stand in support
of House Bill 5
and urge your support as well.
Thank you.
Thank you so much. All right,
uh, Senator, you're welcome to,
if you'd want to respond, even
though they were all favorable,
or we can go ahead and go to the
committee. right, committee, do
we have any questions or
comments or concerns?
share.
No, if you need a Claritin, I'm
giving those out too. Obviously,
I need a healthcare provider,
but I do have a question, uh,
just about why.
It's not this workforce
solutions job already, Madam
Chair, senator, um, I don't
think this is, or I'll, I'll
have the secretary address that.
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator Sheer,
it is certainly in alignment
with our goals and our real
estate plan, but uh, but this
gives us the opportunity to do
is coordinate with the higher ed
institutions and sort of
requires them to to cooperate on
those alumni lists. And also
there is funding in in the house
budget in both sides' budget for
this, and we frankly just
aren't funded to do this type of
proactive outreach.
And Madam Chair. So this is
really about getting some money
to make the
The schools of the higher ed
schools talk to you.
Uh, Madam Chair and Senator
Sherry, yes, I think the data
collection piece is also going
to be really useful, um, asking
things like what are the
obstacles that folks face and
what are the reasons they may
not want to come back to New
Mexico. I think there's been a
lot of speculation on those, um,
topics, and this will help us
get some hard data.
OK, thank you, ma'am.
Thank you, Senator Sheriff.
Other comments or questions from
the committee.
Figueroa.
Madam Chair and sponsor, thank
you, thank you for the bill.
What in your mind would
constitute success if we look 2
years from now, 3 years from
now, what is your hope? Is there
a number of providers you're
hoping we can keep a percentage.
How, how do we know we're
successful.
Uh, Madam chair and Senator
Figueroa. I think there are a
couple of sort of lead measures
and then lag measures. So one of
the top priorities will be
gathering all the incentives in
one place so that we have that
central repository and also um
as we mentioned, getting that
comprehensive list of all of the
grads who were no longer either
in the state or in the state and
not practicing in the medical
field and then the lag measures
will be related to whether we're
recruiting people, not just in
general, but especially in the
rural areas, and that's where
the, the
watchmaking really comes in. I
think we'd want to identify a
percentage of those matches that
we were able to successfully,
uh, complete.
OK, Madam Tara, thank you. I
think that's exactly what I
wanted to know, and I think
that's um that detail isn't in
the reporting, but it probably
needs to be the matching and the
percent going to rural, and I'm
sure you'll figure it out in
your excellent rules. Thanks,
Madam Chair. Thank you, Senator
Figueroa. Other questions or
comments from the committee.
No, what is the will of the
committee? Move a do pass. We
have a due pass from Senator
Figueroa and a second from
Senator Bergman's.
Is there anybody in opposition
of the DuPass motion? OK, so if
you will, please go ahead and
take the vote.
Senator Figueroa.
Yes.
Senator had a meal is excused
Senator O'Malley.
Senator Paul.
Senator Ramos.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator Sharon.
Senator Wirth.
Senator Bergman's, yes.
Senator Hamblin. Yes.
We have 5 yeses and 4 no 5 to 4,
that is a pass.
Um, Senator, do think we're
gonna go ahead and wait on the
last one, to make sure that that
one goes just, um, what we are
going to do just since, uh,
Chair Linda is here. We're going
to hear HB 7 next and then
share, you and I will do that
afterwards, but I just wanted to
give you a kind of a heads up,
you wanna do.
1447.
You wanna do this?
As
I said because he's yeah,
because you are here. All right,
so let's go ahead and do that.
Sure, uh, Vice Chair Bergmans is
gonna go ahead and chair the
committee because I'm gonna go
and sit down, um, and play the
newlywed game with, um, Senator
Lin with Representative Linda
I'll be.
Oh
Thank you
So.
Hello.
Whenever you're ready.
Good afternoon, ma'am I'm chair.
Good afternoon committee
members. Uh, I'm here to present
the House Taxation and
Revenueitte substitute for House
Bill 14, which the House's
version of the tax omnibus bill.
I may mention earlier, uh, this
past week and that while not so
omnibus, we have two bills that
are part of the House taxation
and revenue committees omnibus
package. Those are house Bill
548, which is an oil and gas
equalization tax, as well as
House Bill 14, which is the
Earned Income Tax Credit.
The expansion thereof.
Um, if you would like, Madam
Chair and committee members, I
can proceed with giving further
detail or how do you wanna do
this in terms of amending the
bill. I think that makes sense
that you go ahead first. You got
it, so.
Related to part one of the tax
package itself is currently
under the oil and gas emergency
school tax. Oil is taxed at
3.15%. Well, natural gas is
taxed at 4%. This part of the
bill brings oil and gas closer
to the same rate and improves
equity between those similar
industries. To do so, what it
does is oil tax.
It regrass, excuse me, oil tax
to 3.43% and lowers natural, the
natural gas rate to 3.9%. It
does so by adding a new surtax
on oil of 28 100% and reduces
existing rates for natural gas.
I will make note, Madam Chair
and committee members, that
initially presented in our
committee, House Bill 548 was
supposed to raise upwards of
about $450 million but after
consideration from committee
members on both sides of the
aisle.
as well as industry um.
Members from the oil and gas
industry, uh, the original
sponsor chairman, uh, Nathan
Small, did make considerations
for that and greatly reduced
that to where now this will
raise about $130 million for the
initiatives that are presented
in this package.
Furthermore, um,
Madam Chairwoman, I will go into
the expansion of the earned
income tax credit, and what this
does, it, it creates the New
Mexico earned income tax credit
that builds off of the successes
of the Reagan administration's,
uh, federal income tax.
Uh, program, uh, of working
families tax credit. The bill
increases the tax and extends
the benefit to over an
additional 101,000 more uh New
Mexican workers uh currently in
2023, uh, there was about a
little over 200,000 workers that
claim this credit in New Mexico
itself, uh, the working families
tax credit has been shown to
reduce poverty, improve New
Mexico labor force participation
rate, but some problems exist
with the current credit, for
example, a person without
children working a minimum
wage job does not qualify for
the working families' test
credit and is often taxed
further into poverty, uh, for
every year that they work. So
similarly with a family of 3
with a median household income
that receives a working family's
tax credit refund.
I only refund of less than $50
pays over $900 in state taxes,
so at this point in time with
this expansion, what it does is
that it essentially eliminates
or extinguishes the tax, the
state tax liability of
individuals making minimum wage
to families that in this case,
families of 3 with 3 children,
excuse me, making upwards of
$70,000 extinguishes their tax
liability, and so we're talking
about, we're talking, we're
talking about those teachers
that level 1, level 2.
3 we're talking about police
officers are talking about
firefighters we're talking about
the individuals that cleaned
this very building in some
cases, so with that, Madam
Chairwoman and committee
members, I would stand for any
questions.
Thank you, that I'm sure there
are 2 amendments, and Mr. Chair.
I'm not sure how we want to do
the amendments.
So we'll go to public comment
first. So are there, who in the
room is in support of this bill?
Please raise your hand.
say no one.
And how many are in the room are
in opposition.
5.
Online we have
4 yeses and 1 no.
So we'll do the room first.
Would you like to speak in
support?
You have one minute and I'll
give you a 32nd timer before we
start.
I'm, I'm being asked by my wife
why this bill is not online.
Like every other building.
It should be.
OK, it should be.
I see it online, so just, just
for the record, it is available
there.
I think you need a new computer
at home there, so I'm sure.
Go ahead.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Madam
Chair, Mr. Chairman and members
of the committee, I'm Camila
Feibelman with the Sierra Club's
Rio Grande chapter and our
interest in this bill is its
origins in the oil and gas
equalization uh bill and what
we'd like to clarify in our
support is that New Mexico's
natural resources are extracted
off of our public lands for the
benefit of our people, and that
is what this
Bill does through an earned
income tax credit, and that's
something.
Very supportive of making sure
that our families can get by in
the day to day. That's what our
resources are for. They're ours
and they should be taxed fairly
and equally. Thank you.
Thank you.
And we'll do.
in the room in opposition.
If you'd like to line up.
You'll have one minute each as
well.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. I'm
Ashley Wagner, the vice
president of government
government affairs in New Mexico
Oil and Gas Association. We
represent over 200 member
companies. Oil and gas is proud
to support working families
throughout the state through
providing affordable, reliable,
and sustainable energy options.
The industry provides over
100,000 direct and indirect
jobs, investment in our
environment and has created
record surpluses for the state's
budget in recent years. Those
surpluses have benefited every
single.
Mexican in multiple ways in the
short and long terms.
However, Nimoga must oppose the
committee's substitute for House
Bill 4 House Bill 14. It demands
millions more during a time when
the market is extremely
volatile, companies are laying
people off.
And the price per barrel of oil
continues to drop. This
combination not only creates
upheaval for the companies but
will risk New Mexicans jobs and
drive up the cost of energy.
Thank you.
Good afternoon, chair, members
of the committee, Mike Miller
with Permian Basin Petroleum
Association, uh, the imposition
of an additional surtax on oil
and gas production or oil
production when prices exceed a
set threshold introduce.
And introduces unnecessary
volatility and uncertainty in an
already cyclical industry. New
Mexico's economy relies heavily
on oil and gas revenues and
unpredictable tax burdens could
discourage investment, impact
production levels, and
ultimately reduce the overall
tax revenue. Additionally, the
surtax would disproportionately
affect small producers, reducing
competitiveness and economic
growth in rural areas. We
certainly support helping
working families in New Mexico
doing so in this fashion sets a
significant precedent.
these and the other reasons we
stand in opposition. Thank you.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Jim Winchester with the
Independent Petroleum
Association of New Mexico. Um,
we heard extensively on the
House side that this bill is
quote tax justice against all
the billion dollar profits from
oil companies. Well, the smaller
companies that I've spoken to
this past week that I represent,
say this tax doesn't cut into
their profits. It cuts into
their ability to operate moving
forward.
And anyone says that this is
fear mongering or that the sky
is falling. You only look at the
bottom half of oil production in
New Mexico the past 7 years
alone. We already are losing our
independent producers from 2017
to 2023, the number of producing
entities has decreased from 518
to 414, 20% decrease.
And while some of the programs
in this bill are not without
merit, this punitive tax
increase does not consider the
full impacts of what it will do
to smaller members. Please
oppose. Thank you.
Thank you. And now we'll go
online to those in support.
I have Richard Mason, Page,
Sepora, and Charles.
And then we have one in
opposition, so we'll start with
those in support.
Richard, you'll have one minute
and you'll get a 32nd warning in
your chat box. Go ahead.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Dick
Mason. I'm a board member of the
League of Women Voters of New
Mexico. The league stands in
strong support of the
committee's substitute for HB
14. He wants to thank the
sponsors for bringing it
forward. The league believes
that the state's obligation to
collect revenues to fund
services that are generally the
state's responsibility in our
adequate to finance the
essentials of government.
They further believes that our
tax system should generate
revenue from those most able to
pay. In other words, our tax
system should be progressive.
Further by decoupling our earned
income tax credit from the
federal earned income tax
credit. It protects the Mexicans
from changes in federal
policies. For all the above
reason, the league stands in
strong support of the committee
substitute for HB 14 and urges
the committee to give it a due
pass. Thank you.
Thank you, Paige, you'll be
next. You'll have one minute.
Go ahead
Hi. Good afternoon, Madam Chair
and members of the committee. My
name is Paige Knight with New
Mexico Voices for Children, and
we stand in strong support of HB
14. It continues the
transformative work you all have
done these past few years in
enacting targeted and
family-focused tax policies that
help New Mexicans make ends
meet.
The EITC is designed in this
bill will extend the credit and
therefore its many studied
benefits to more hardworking New
Mexicans, allowing them to be
better able to put food on the
table, pay their bills, and to
secure greater economic
stability. HB 14 is also
fiscally responsible, providing
a fair and equitable way to pay
for the EITC expansion with a
modest tax on oil. The revenue
generated will allow the state
to maintain healthy reserves,
which is critical given the
uncertainty around the federal
budget and its.
impact on New Mexico. We want to
thank Chaente and members of
this body for their work on this
piece of legislation. And for
all the incredible work over the
past several years in improving
tax equity in New Mexico. Thank
you.
Thank you.
support
Your next you have one minute.
Hello, Madam Chair and members
of the committee. My name is
Tippora Nefesh, and I am a
registered lobbyist for New
Mexico Thrives, the state
nonprofit association, and we
stand in support of HB 14 as
amended. It helps, uh, working
families and people who need it
most, and we thank you for
bringing this.
Forward and ask that you pass it
along.
Thank you. And then we have
Charles.
Go ahead.
Oh, thank you, madam.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Charles Goodmacher
speaking on behalf of NMVC
Action Fund, uh, and I want to
thank the sponsors for bringing
this bill. It's very important.
This is a pro-economic
development, pro jobs bill is
Henry Ford uh realized more than
100 years ago when you
Provide uh
Or allow lower income people to
earn more and keep more of their
earnings, they will spend more
locally, and it will be support
the businesses and so this will
support New Mexico businesses.
Thank you very much.
Thank you. And we have one in
opposition, Enrique.
You'll have a minute.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair,
members of the committee,
Enrique and Nell here on behalf
of the Greater Albuquerque
Chamber of Commerce. Uh, we are
here in opposition of House Bill
14. Um, I wanna say first, the
chamber is proud to support
working families, but with $3
billion in new revenue, there is
plenty of money to fund priority
programs and initiatives without
a tax increase. We also support
the oil and gas industry, and we
are opposed to further taxing
the industry.
That contributes so much to our
economy. Please vote no on House
Bill 14. Thank you.
Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, would you like to
respond to any of the public
testimony that was given?
Uh, Madam Chair and committee
members, I respect, uh, all the
comments that were made this
afternoon, you know, I, I wanna
just address a couple of things
when we talk about energy, uh,
heights and and prices at the
pump and a, and a cause for
concern in regards to New Mexico
and, and uh with this $130
million tax increase might mean,
uh, remind the folks that we're
looking at the price of the pump
or energy costs. These are
These are global issues that
we're talking about here, ladies
and gentlemen. These are not
just matters of this bill coming
forward to this committee today
and saying that the sky is going
to fall. Rather, I would say
again, remind everybody these
are global issues. These are
matters of the tariffs that this
federal government is currently
waging on individuals and and
and governmental agencies and
and the price structures that
are going to be affected by
those are going to be great. And
so we have zero control over
that at this point in time,
however, um,
I would also make mention in
regards to the employment and
job loss concerns that were
mentioned by some of the
individuals, uh, in the comments
in 2024, New Mexico itself saw a
1% increase in oil and gas
employment, uh, just in the
state on its own. And so I'd,
I'd, I'd ask the question of
whether or not are these
individuals or the potential of
the job losses those in the oil
fields or are these individuals
that are, that are part of the
workforce that are maybe
attorneys or accountants or
other staff member.
members that are, that are of
the smaller organizations and
and the smaller producers being
bought out by a much larger
conglomerates that already have
these individuals in-house that
then maybe they don't need that
support, uh, in the local
communities, um.
I would also make mention that
The time in New Mexico related
to oil and gas has been a good
time, you know, we, we, we've
seen oil and gas production
skyrocket, and, and we are
enjoying those, those benefits
of those fruits at this point in
time, even to the point of in
2019, it's, it's commented here
and I have record here that oil
and gas net profits were about
$2 billion in this state alone.
Fast forward to 2024 where we
saw a jump of that of upwards of
400%, meaning that the net
profits, not gross profits, not.
taxes paid to the state, but the
net profits of oil and gas in
this state alone were $10
billion. So when we talk about
$130 million increase to cut
from the profits of $10 billion
it seems, um, that this industry
is one that
Maybe we'll maybe be able to
absorb that, uh, and I make
mention that there is a reason
why people come to the state to
venture for oil and gas, and I
make the analogy that oil and
that oil and gas in the premium
based oil and gas is what the
San Juan River is, uh, to trout
fishermen and fisherwomen. We
have the best of the best in the
state. There's a reason why
people come from around the
world to come fish in the San
Juan River. There's a reason why
people come from around the
world to want to dip their straw
in the Permian Basin because of
the
Of, of, of our natural resources
which belongs again, and I
remind this committee and Madam
Chair and this committee
members, uh, that, that natural
resource belongs to the citizens
of New Mexico. So when we talk
about wanting to make sure that
we are pursuing good tax policy
to export tax liability, uh, to
those that at this point in time
are about 99% of the largest
2020 large multinational gas
producers in the world, uh, to
pay for the ins.
benefit for our citizens in this
case, making sure that those
individuals that are making
minimum wage upwards to families
that have about a 70.
$1000 income. That's good tax
policy where we can provide that
benefit to our, to our members
of our state, Madam Chairwoman
and committee members, I would,
I would ask you in your
respective districts, how many
of those people are in your
districts. I would venture to
say a lot. So when we're talking
about good tax policy, and we
can again export that tax
liability to those large
multinational conglomerates.
Pay for a benefit, that's good
tax policy. With that, Madam
Chair and committee members, I
would, uh, again stand for
questions.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, Madam
Chair, I believe you have an
amendment.
Yes, Madam Chair and committee,
um, I do have an amendment in uh
prior to introducing the
amendment, I would like to just
give uh a little brief
statement, um, on why we're here
today, um, you know, in our
committee, we heard dozens of
bills that provided us with
multitudes of opportunities to
pick and choose, should we get a
tax package? And if it weren't
for the house, we didn't even
know if we were gonna have a tax
package and have the capacity
for that. So I'm very grateful
for Chair Linda in the house,
uh.
bringing this here. Um, I know
that in our minority group that
uh there are concerns about the
about really the source of this.
However, I would feel that
Uh
At the end of it all, that we
are able to provide things for
our communities, um, throughout,
in order to help them. And it
was with much conversation and
collaboration with the ranking
member and um uh and the members
of this committee to discuss
different ways that we could go
ahead and impact our community
complimentary to the earned
income tax credit, and because
of the bills that were presented
in this community, that gave us
a lot of flexibility to be able
to do that. So I feel that the
amendment.
doing, um, and be able to allow
us to all bring back to our
communities something that will
positively impact the residents
in our districts. And so, uh,
Madam Chair, I do have an
amendment. Uh, would you like me
to summarize the amendment or
should we go ahead and move the
amendment for discussion.
Summarize, go ahead and
summarize. Oh well, we can take
a motion, but can you give us
the 202 number at the
bottom.31954.
4.
and is there a committee member.
Thank you. Go ahead, Moving
chair. All right, thank you very
much, Madam Chair and committee.
Um, I'm going to summarize that,
but also if there are really
technical questions in terms of
the numbers, we have Ismael
Torres, who's been working with
both chambers on trying to
maximize the uh the amount uh as
Chair Linda had said, uh,
originally we thought this was
going to be uh 200 million each,
and I'm grateful that the House
is willing to split that evenly
between us, um, and now we're,
we're addressing 73 million per
each chamber. And so just
is a summary, we're going
through a couple of things and
looking through some of the
bills that have been presented
into this community. Um, so for
example, the volunteer EMT EMT
and firefighter income tax
credit, um, the search and
rescue tax credit, local
journalism employment tax
credit, uh, local news printer
tax credit, foster parent and
guardian tax credit. Um, we're
doing a little bit of the
quantum facility infrastructure
tax credit. Also to address the
issue regarding the shortage
when we're talking about, um,
uh, having more
doctors in this community, uh,
we're, uh, including Senator
Brant's health practitioner
co-insurance, uh, and, and Izzy
will be able to explain those,
those a little bit more in
detail. Um, but also what we're
doing is talking about growing
our own Representative Vincent
was talking about growing our
own earlier with the lumber tax,
with the lumber, lumber grading
bill that he brought forward and
if we do not provide a
foundation to grow our own
doctors, then we're not moving
anywhere forward in terms of
trying to
Recruit and retained medical
practitioners. Um, we also have,
uh, uh, an opportunity to help
um Ruidoso, which experienced
extreme catastrophe, almost
wiping out the village of Ruido.
So, um, and so we have that as
well and we do have a little bit
of a, of a generator of revenue
generator, which is Senator
Sheer's liquor excise tax, and
so that is Madam Chair's summary
of the amendment, um, and then
we'll be more than happy to take
questions.
you me a chair.
Are the
Lindy, would you like to add
anything as well or
representative one
no, madam chair, I, I believe
that this time is for you all to
figure out your amendment. Thank
you. Is there discussion from
the committee.
Don't everyone jump in once.
There's a DuPress motion senator
figure. Do you have some
questions? No, second.
OK, we will vote on, well,
I will ask a quick question
before we, I know we're, we'll
continue discussion once we
take this motion as well. Um,
but I did just wanna ask.
If maybe Izzy could weigh in a
little bit on the
The piece of the text, the piece
of the amendment that we will be
raising revenue.
Uh sure,
Madam Chair, um, thank you for
the question. I believe that's
on page.
35 starts on page 35 of the
amendment, and uh this
represents a 20% increase on
non-craft.
Alcohol.
That's it.
OK, thank you.
We have a motion to adopt the
amendments.
Is there any opposition to
adopting the amendment?
Seeing none.
OK, Rebecca, will you take the
role, please.
Senator Figueroa.
Yes.
Senator had a meal.
Senator O'Malley.
Senator Paul.
Senator Ramos? No. Senator
Sanchez.
Senator Sher.
So
Yes.
Yes.
Senator Bergmans? Yes,
Senator Hamlin.
Uh, back to Senator Paul.
We have
So that amendment has been
adopted unanimously. We're back
on the discussion,
sorry, 9 to 1, I apologize. Uh,
we're back in discussion of the
bill as amended.
Committee members of this, is
there any discussion?
Senator, uh, thank you, Ma. I
do, I do have a question. Um,
one of the things that I think
you addressed in this bill,
which I'd just like to emphasize
is I believe there's a trigger
in there, one of the concerns
was price volatility. Just walk
us through what you did and how
that's gonna work.
Appreciate the question, Madam
Chair and senator. So in the
discussions with industry and
also with discussions with our
economist, uh, Chairman Small
and I and others talked about
triggers to make sure that uh if
in the price of oil per barrel
dropped below $55 that uh the
the amount of money collected
will then cease, so that um
it'll allow for the industry to
gather its legs and and and
resume process as normal.
Man, I, I appreciate that and
think that that makes up a whole
bunch of sense and so during the
time that, let's say the price
is at $50 a barrel for 6 months,
uh, am I correct that
essentially this, the inflow
will stop during the 6 months
and then once the price goes
back up to above 55, it just
starts over again. The the tax
doesn't go away, it's just a
pause, is that correct? Madam
Chair and Senator, yes, sir.
Uh, thank you, ma'am. There's
one other question, um,
I think I saw something in there
about impact on tribal. Is there
any differentiation in how this
tax is applied on tribal lands.
Madam Chair and Senator Worth,
no, uh, uh, oil produced on
tribal lands would continue to
enjoy a credit against the state
liability for any taxes paid to
them.
Great, thank you, uh, Madam Char
again, appreciate the work
you've done on this, Mr. Chair.
Are there any other questions,
Senator Fierroa?
Thank you, Madam Chair. On that
note, inspired another question,
would you say if the price drops
below $55 a barrel, Madam Chair
is the incremental difference
the change we're making in this
tax bill.
What is what that what stops or
is it the entire text that
stops.
Madam Chair and, and, and
Senator, the, the, the tax
itself, the raising of revenue
for the tax itself would cease
until that that price per
barrel, maybe, maybe just rises
back up to above that $55 per
barrel price.
Thank you, Madam Chair, that's
all.
Thank you, Senator. Are there
any other questions?
before
we take that motion.
I do have a, uh, an amendment
here. Go ahead. So, uh, Madam
Chair, uh, this, this amendment
is just to move $100,000 is all
it moves, uh, permitting the
generation and distribution of
self-sourced power creating a
qualified microgrid, this would
also happen down in in Donana
County, so it should be friendly
to everybody.
Madam Chairs is a friendly
amendment, um, as much as I
would like that to help my
community. Um, I, uh, have to
say that this is an unfriendly
amendment.
And because of capacity of what
we've got here at this moment.
This would really far exceed the
capacity.
Thank you, Senator Hermiel. move
to table.
Thank you, Senator. That is a
non-debatable motion, so
Rebecca, will you please call
the roll?
Senator Figueroa.
Yes, your table.
Senator had a meal.
Senator O'Malley.
Senator Paul.
Senator Ramos. No to table.
Senator Sanchez.
Yes.
Send to share.
No.
Senator
Senator Bergman, yes. Senator
Hamblin.
We have 7 yeses and 3 nos.
Thank you, Senator, you're
amendment has been tabled.
Is there
I'm sure.
Senator O'Malley, yeah, I, I do
pass.
as amended.
Thank you. No question.
Rebecca, go ahead and call the
roll.
Senator Figueroa.
Yes, Senator Jara meal. Yes.
Senator O'Malley, Senator Paul.
Senator Ramos.
Sanchez.
Sen it to share.
Senator work.
Senator Bergmann's? Yes, Senator
Hamlin.
We have 6 yeses and 4 no's.
Senator Paul to explain your
vote. Thanks, Madam Chair. Thank
you all for bringing this bill.
There's, you know, I think
there's some good things in
there, but the fundamental core
of it, there was just too many
things that
Wouldn't allow me to vote in
favor of it. I appreciate all
that you guys have done to to
put this together and for all
your hard work, but
unfortunately, just couldn't
side with you this time.
Senator Sanchez I'm Madam Chair
and Representative Senator,
thank you for bringing this bill
and not, um,
everything that Senator Paul
said. It was great, we worked
together on some things that I
support and there's a few things
that we couldn't support, but
we're very thankful that you
incorporate us in this and let
us work together and we do work
great as a team and we'll work
closer supporting one next time.
So thank you very much, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Senator Sanders with
the
You have a pass.
Thank you.
Uh, just for
One second.
Just for everyone who's
following along, we're going to
roll House Bill 7.
And we'll go ahead with a motion
now from Senator Ramos.
Madam Chair, having voted in the
majority, I moved to reconsider
HB 20 and have it, uh.
be the next order of business.
Thank you, Senator, for that
motion. We do have to vote on
that motion.
Unless he, unless, is there any
opposition to that motion?
To a motion to reconsider House
Bill 20.
Seeing no opposition.
We are back on House Bill 2.
Hello representative. Would you
like to go ahead?
Uh
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
I think we were on questions,
uh, from the. Would you like to
just give us a reintroduction of
the bill briefly.
House Bill 20 establishes the
technology and innovation
division, uh, at the Economic
Development department, it is
meant to assist with our
economic diversification
efforts, primarily into our
high-tech areas of aerospace and
space, biosciences, advanced
computing as well as clean
energy and water. Those are some
of the um sectors that are
identified in the strategic plan
from 2021.
In addition, the fund, um, the,
sorry, hospital 2 creates the
research and development and
deployment Fund, which is a
vehicle for our
Um, consortiums to find a a
statement.
Madam Cha, I moved to pass.
Thank you. There's a motion for
a due pass in a second.
Since we are back in the bill, I
will give a chance for there to
be public testimony and
discussion before we take that
motion.
Very briefly.
Is there anyone in the room in
support of this bill?
Is there anyone in the room in
in opposition to this bill?
OK, do we want to have one of
you in support. Go ahead if
you'd like to speak.
Can I, can you turn on one of
those mics?
Or there's a microphone back
there actually right behind you.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Mark
Fedorth in New Mexico Coun of
University presidents. I
represent the 7 universities in
New Mexico, including New Mexico
State, New Mexico Tech, and the
University of New Mexico, our
offices of research and we stas
part of this, this legislation
that creates the research
development department, working
and also with the University of
Mexi with the university
research offices and on behalf
of the state of New Mexico.
Thank you, ma'am, chair members
of the committee.
Thank you. And then we had one
razor hand in opposition, so
we'll go ahead and give you a
minute as well.
Yes. My name is Mary Lanesi, and
I'm a lawyer and I'm with New
Energy Economy. I do have to
question how this bill is up
again after there is a due pass,
uh, a denial of a due past. I
didn't hear a motion to
reconsider, which I think has to
be unanimous.
Um
So, but now I'll go back and I,
so I think that's just out of
order, um, but now the issues
that I have and I haven't seen
the amendment because it's not
online, um, there's 3 major
things. One is clean energy,
quote unquote, is not at all
defined, and I think the bill
should instead state renewable
energy consistent with law,
which is NMSA 62163 F and H.
The other two amendments that
are needed is number one, this
should prohibit grants for
carbon capture and sequestration
and hydrogen. CCS and hydrogen
are both fossil fuel driven
proposals that are subsidy
dependent. They require
permanent government subsidies
in order to pencil out and also
include financial risk with
limited revenue potential. These
fiscally unviable ventures
should be prohibited in the wrap
it up until there is proof that
they
effectively reduce carbon
emissions and our.
Thank you. Thank you.
Um, we also have
2 and support online and one in
opposition, and we'll go ahead
and register those.
And now, is there any discussion
from the committee?
Seeing done, we already have it.
On the bill, yes.
Adventure.
Uh, yeah, I do. Oh, I, I am
concerned about um
that
You know, we have these big
categories, and there's no
definition and it's not really
clear what we mean. And so, uh,
I feel, uh, I'm very concerned
about that.
Um, in particular water, uh,
that was actually brought up.
And that is, what do we mean by
that? It's like, you know, if
you have a, um, you know,
innovation around water, but,
you know, what innovation? What
are we trying to accomplish?
It's, it's just not real clear
to me. So I have some real
concerns about that. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator.
I do have some questions, Madam
Chair. Go ahead. All right, my
apologies for missing, um, you
know, is, is the committee knows
it's like the committee shuffle
right now. Um, can you tell me
about the, the
produced water reuse is there,
is there something in here about
this or is that the amendment?
Can you clarify that for us,
please, cause I think there are
others who also have that
question. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Um, thank you members of
the committee. There is nothing
about produced water in the
spill, and there's no amendment.
OK. Can you tell me, uh, Madam
Chair, if there's anything
about, um, hydrogen in this
belt.
Madam's, uh, chair and members,
no, there's nothing about
hydrogen in this pill.
OK.
That's all I have, ma'am I'm
sure.
Thank you. Any other discussion?
done, we'll go ahead and vote on
the do pass motion. Rebecca,
will you please call the roll?
Senator Figueroa is excused
Senator Hao,
excused Senator O'Malley.
Senator Paul. Yes.
Senator Ramos, yes.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator Sheer.
Senator word. Yes.
Senator Bergmann's. Yes, Senator
Hamblin.
Yes.
We have 7 yeses and 1 no.
You have a pass. Thank you.
And I'll hand it back over to
the chairwoman. Yes.
We're gonna stand in recess for
10 minutes because we're still
trying to play, um, committee
shuffle. We have rep uh Senator
Figueroa, who was out, uh, she
will be back. We have Senator
Jaramillo, who uh is
and um
And we need to build sponsors.
So we're gonna take a 10-minute
break.
We will be back here at 4:35.
