are some bills that will be held
because those are bills that
could be included in a potential
tax package. So what will happen
is, is that I will inform the
committee when we are on those
bills, uh, and we will just, we
will go ahead and hear public
comment or have commentary from
the committee, but we will not
vote on those bills because we
will, if there is capacity for a
tax package, we will vote on the
tax package as a whole.
Right, secretary.
In the back. So, yes.
Madam Chair, if possible, can I
reverse the order and here
Senate Bill 351 1st, because
Senate Bill 350 will make more
sense after you hear that.
Absolutely. We'll go ahead and
we'll go in that order 370?
Well, no, no, no, no, you,
you're in the seat, you're stuck
there,
Senator Cervantes you said
right?
We'll go 370, 351 with an
amendment and 350 and then go
for the rest of the order, uh,
here today. So before we do
that, we do need to take roll.
You will, Rebecca. Senator.
ro a
Here,
Senator had a meal.
Senator O'Malley.
Senator Paul.
Senator Ramos.
And Sanchez is excused Senator
share. Senator Wirth is excused.
Senator Bergmann's.
Senator Hamblin.
Here. We have 7 present. All
right, we do have a quorum
Senator Cervantes, you're
filling in for Senator Doig. Uh,
we are talking about Senate Bill
370, the OBGYN Medicaid
reimbursement rates. You're
ready to go. We have 10 minutes.
Thank you very much, uh, and,
uh, and then if, uh, we'll go to
public commentary, if it seems
overwhelming, then we'll just go
right to the committee. It
shouldn't be thank you, Madam
Chair. I'm joined by Lisa
Curtis, who many of you all may
remember was one of our Senate
colleagues not too long ago and
she's joined today along with an
expert who's on Zoom, Lisa
Koffler.
Lisa A. Our, our purpose before
you today and with uh Senator
Dewey asked me to step in for
her is to try and address the
shortage of obstetricians,
gynecologists statewide. Uh, we
all know, we've all heard, we
see the reports and statistics
and we know from our own
experience, the uh lack of
available services in remote
rural parts of the state. This
bill intends to address that by
providing for a higher rate of
Medicaid reimbursement and also
to assure that that in turn has
been paid in compensation to the
providers and try to attract
them to the state.
rural parts of the of New Mexico
and to keep them with us and so
if I could turn to Ms. Curtis
and we'll stay within your 10
minutes. OK, thank you so much.
Hello, um, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, um, I'm here
in my capacity as the chair of
the New Mexico Commission on the
Status of Women. Um, we spent
the entire year setting women's
health, and we found out that
there was an enormous disparity
in what uh physicians, OBGYNs in
particular and, uh, maternal
healthcare and obstetrical
healthcare or
paid for their services. This is
a problem nationally, um, and
our, uh, expert who's on Zoom
who literally, uh, just finished
her shift at the hospital, is
here, uh, to talk to you a
little bit about this bill and
how it came about. She is a um
member of the American College
of Obstetrics and Gynecology.
She is one of two national
members that works on coding and
payment, and this is an issue
for the national group for
obstetrics and gynecology. But
when we were meeting with
providers, we learned
that literally for one solid
year of work for a pregnant
woman, that is 15 visits
including the delivery.
Which is everyone here who's a
mother knows delivery is a long
process that, uh, obstetricians
are paid $2200 for a year's
worth of work.
They are surgeons. They are
incredibly well trained and, um,
and they're not paid for their
service. So 75% of the babies in
New Mexico are, uh, those births
are paid for by Medicaid.
And so we looked at what is uh a
rate that the state can handle,
uh, the FIR and this should be
about $12 million.
Right, and here we're trying to
fix the problem of not enough
OBGYNs.
OBGYN is not being paid enough,
you'll see that there is a tie
to the increase in the amount to
75% of that going toward the
providers, the big corporations
that run our healthcare,
especially in rural New Mexico.
I don't have an incentive to
have OBGYNs there because it
pays terribly, right? Increase
in pay means more people wanting
to be OBGYNs. Increase in
payment means more hospitals,
special rural hospitals wanting
to have OBGYNs.
So I want to turn it over to uh
Doctor Lisa Hofler.
Um, who can really tell you
about the work ACOG's been doing
in this role and how it fits
into the bill.
Great, thank you so much, Doctor
Hofler, you're online. Um, if
you will, go ahead and make a
few brief statements regarding
this bill. We appreciate that.
Go ahead and undo yourself.
Um, yes, can you hear me? Yes,
yes, we can. Um, good afternoon,
members of the committee, and
thank you, Madam Chair for the
opportunity for to come before
this committee as well. As you
heard, um, I am a board
certified obstetrician
gynecologist. I'm the vice chair
of the New Mexico section of
ACOG, the American College of
OBGYNs, and I'm one of two ACOG
experts who, uh, advises the
American Medical Association
about maternity care services
coding. Um, and as you heard,
I'm the expert on SB.
370, which is really a workforce
issue. Um, as you know, around
the state, OBGYNs are
increasingly difficult to uh
recruit and to retain, due to
the way that our especially
maternity care is valued, but
all women's health care, it's
woefully undervalued, especially
related to other high intensity
and high risk medical care like
neurosurgery, which I believe is
the only profession who's more
likely than an OBGYN to be sued.
And more pregnancies and
surgeries are higher risk than
they have.
been in the past and especially
rural areas are losing OBGYNs.
However, even in Albuquerque
practices can't hire enough
docs, and there's not enough
physicians to cover obstetrics
and gynecology care.
So this bill attempts not only
to correct the value disparity
in the work of doctors who are
primarily women, um, but also
and provide care primarily to
women, but also to reverse some
of the workforce shortages and
requiring 75% of the increase to
go directly back to the
workforce. Uh, thank you, and
I'll be here for questions.
Thank you so much. And so, uh,
now we go to public testimony.
If there's anybody in the
audience by a show of hands who
is in support of this
legislation. Can you please?
Raise your hands. Great. We've
got 2 so far, 34, anybody in
opposition?
Seeing none. We have people
online and support 2 in support.
All right. So what we're gonna
do is we're gonna go to 3 in the
audience, if you will, kind of
line up. We're gonna give you
one minute a piece, and then
we'll have the two online who
will go one minute apiece.
And so, uh, before you start
though, just to let you know,
vice chair will be timing you.
She'll send you a 3, she'll show
you 32nd timer, um, please wrap
it up online. You will get the
same thing. We'll get to those
in just a minute. Go ahead,
Carrie. Uh, Madam Chair members
of the committee carry Robin
Brunder. I'm representing the
New Mexico Medical Society, but
I'm also a board member at the
nonprofit birth center in our in
Albuquerque, Daralo's Birth and
Health Center, um, we're a
nonprofit and it's a volunteer
board. Uh, it's important to
remember that
OBGYN care doesn't just happen
in our hospitals, it happens in
our clinics. It happens with our
certified nurse midwives. It
happens with our physicians and
it's to take care of women
through all stages of their life
in pregnancy and outside of
pregnancy because of
gynecological care. Uh, these
increases would be very
significant for our healthcare
providers across the state. And
we think it's a very smart
investment to be making in our
children and in our women. Thank
you so much.
Thank you. Good afternoon, Madam
Chair Al Park registered
lobbyist on behalf of the New
Mexico Hospital Association. We
want to thank the sponsors,
Senator Cervantes and Senator
Doha. We stand in strong support
of the legislation for all the
reasons you heard, in
particular, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, access
to these types of healthcare are
really critical throughout the
state of New Mexico. Uh, we all
know we're familiar with the
phrase of sort of food deserts,
but we also have obs obstetrics
deserts as well, and this is a
very good.
step in the right direction to
make sure that all of our
families have access to this
very critical necessary
healthcare, so we stay in strong
support, Madam Chair, thank you.
Uh, Madam Chair, my name is
Teresa Hassey. I'm a patient
advocate and I'm also a mother
who had two babies here in the
state of New Mexico, giving
birth is by far the riskiest
thing I've ever done in my life.
And my provider should be paid
fairly for taking on that risk
and for protecting my life and
the life of my children, uh,
increasing their pay will ensure
better care and safer care for
patients across the state, which
isn't everybody's interest. So I
stand in strong support of this
bill. Thank you very much.
Great. Thank you so much. Now,
we're gonna go to the 2 online.
So Jennifer will let you
Pop up first, uh, and then
Melissa after that, uh, you will
have one minute what you will
see at the 30 32nd mark is a, a
warning in the chat, so if you
will, if you do go over one
minute, we will cut your mic. So
if you will please pay attention
to that, uh, Jennifer, you're
welcome to go ahead and speak
for one minute.
Good mor good afternoon, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Jennifer
Raphael Goetz. I'm the director
of the New Mexico Commission on
the Status of Women. I'm here to
speak in support of SB 370. This
year, the commission is focused
on access to women's health and
in our regional events around
the state, we hear time and
again from women about their
concerns over access to quality
reproductive healthcare, at
least 6 regional hospitals in
New Mexico have closed their
maternity wards in the last
decade, which has contributed to
the maternal health crisis in
our state. These include
facilities and
Gallup, Las Vegas, Artesia,
Tupam Kerry, Clayton, and
Albuquerque. I'm reminded of a
woman we met in Las Vegas who
spoke about driving in the snow
and dark at night to Santa Fe to
reach the hospital where she was
able to give birth. Increasing
Medicaid reimbursement rates to
OBGYNs is important because of
the demanding nature of their
work, which includes high-risk
procedures, complex patient
care, and often long hours, not
to mention the years of
training. The current climate in
our country is driving doctors
away from the field about
obstetrics causing a shortage
that could be
Catastrophic to our families in
New Mexico for these reasons,
they support the women in New
Mexico by passing SB 370. Thank
you for your time.
Thank you, Jennifer. Melissa, if
you will, please, you've got one
minute, you'll see a warning at
the 32nd mark. Thank you. Thank
you, Chair Hamlin and members of
the committee. My name is
Melissa Lopez Sullivan, and I
serve on the New Mexico
Commission on the Status of
Women, and I'm also the
executive director of the New
Mexico Doula Association. We
stand in support of SB 370, the
OBGYN Medicaid reimbursement
rate, AKA OBGYN fair pay bill.
We know that OBGYN care is
dramatically underpaid for the
important work.
of caring for women and people
across the full spectrum of
reproductive experiences that
they may have in a lifetime.
Additionally, 80% of OBGYNs are
women who are further subjected
to pay disparities. We need more
qualified providers throughout
the state, and especially in our
maternity care deserts. I urge
your support for SB 370. Thank
you.
Thank you so much. So Senator
Cervantes, if you choose, you
can go ahead and respond to any
public testimony, but I think if
you want to go ahead and go to
the committee, we can do that.
All right, committee, do we have
any questions or concerns or
comments?
Just gonna do one quick
question. Thank you, Madam
Chair. I'm just wondering, did
we, did this $12 million
appropriation end up in House
Bill 2.
It's not.
Do you have plans on getting it
there? OK, thank you. Thank you.
That's all. Thank you for
bringing this.
All right. Senator Sher, um,
thank you, Madam Chair.
So my only question here was
why.
Just OBGYNs, Why not
cardiologists or internal
medicine of the whole package,
all, all the specialists.
Madam Chair, uh, Senator Sher,
uh.
The issue was really addressing
what uh our executive director
for the commission on the Status
of Women, uh, was talking about
and that is we did events all
over the state all year and what
we heard over and over was the
lacking uh obstetrical care and
uh and then when we started
talking to providers because we
held meetings just with
providers that provide women's
healthcare because we're the
commission on status of women,
uh, it was overwhelming, the
disparity between what other
fields of medicine.
are paid and what obstetricians
are paid, in particular. So
that's the reason why is special
to obstetrics is because, um,
Orthopedic surgery by uh
comparison is 80% men were
obstetricians are 80% women, up,
uh, orthopedic surgeons, our
surgeons just like, uh,
obstetrician gynecologists are,
but they are paid 3 times.
Um, what an obstetrician is
paid. So this was a place to put
an investment that is small by
comparison to the need.
Um, to do a great amount of good
and fix what we heard all around
the state was lacking, which is
not.
Um, orthopedic surgery, it's
obstetrical care.
So, Madam Chair, in Farmington,
Uh, we have one OB doc, and he
sold his practice in.
Now works for the hospital cause
he couldn't afford to work for
himself anymore, even though he
did for 20 years.
Two others moved to Durango
because this
Has nothing to do with getting
paid, has everything to do with
getting sued.
And, and the insurance price of
that.
And
Yes, I have children. I have 10
grandchildren. I wear a
different grandchild tie every
day.
I don't have 60.
every day
So I'm not opposed to this at
all.
I just think that there's
There's something else going on
here.
One, we've all heard about it.
Don't know why we
We're still struggling with it,
but Medal is clearly a problem.
And then my other concern was
not concern, just question.
Why not everybody?
Every specialist, because we've
also heard that too, hey, you
know, cardiologists.
Isn't getting paid enough
either.
From Medicaid.
Maybe getting paid a lot more
from commercial insurance. I
have no idea.
So, those are my questions, my
comments.
Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Sheriff.
Other questions or comments from
the committee.
Ma'am, I'd like to move with you
pass. We have a Du pass from
Senator O'Malley. We have a
second from Senator Figueroa.
Anybody in opposition of the
DuPass.
Seeing none. Let's go ahead and
record all those present in the
affirmative. Congratulations,
Senator I've mentioned you all
before if I can take a minute
more, my middle daughter is
doing her residency in
obstetrics, gynecology at Baylor
in Houston. We'd love to have
her come back. Right.
Absolutely.
Thank you so much.
Right now we have Senator
Jaramillo. He's going to do
Senate Bill 351A, so there's an
amendment to that.
Right.
Madam Chair, Senator Nava will
be coming up to join me.
Right, Senator Jaramillo, we see
that there's an amendment.
On here
You want to go ahead and we can.
Explain the bill first and then
we will talk about the
amendment.
Thank you. Madam Chair, members
of the committee this summer, I
have the opportunity of
attending the New Mexico State
Prison, a program that allows
inmates to learn a skill,
getting them ready to be
released with a skill set and a
life coach that helps them with
their resume.
While in the prison, I met 12
remarkable men who were working
on changing their lives and
learning the culinary art skill
from chef Fernando Ruiz and his
assistant Ralph Martinez and
Chef Luis is here. He's a
three-time Food Network
champion, and he goes into the
penitentiary to teach inmates
how to cook and then offers them
a job contingent upon release
and joining him as my good
friend, um, Isaac Sork.
was one of those men who was
behind bars, learned how to cook
from the chef and is now working
with the chef. He was released
on February 14th of this year,
and made true to his promise
when we met that he would come
to the roundhouse to show me
that he made it and to remind me
about the program that made a
major impact in his life.
Now what this bill would do is
it's an appropriation that would
ensure that we could increase
the number of programs that we
would have behind bars, so that
inmates could learn a skill
getting them ready to come out
into the workforce. By doing so,
this would cut back on getting
them behind bars and address the
issue of homelessness that
sometimes happens when inmates
are released and they don't have
a place to go, and they don't
have employment. This would also
ensure that they not only learn
the skill, but that they.
understand that they can be
contributing members of society
based on the skills that they
learned. Now this is a
bipartisan bill. It's uh
sponsored by myself and Senator
Nava. Senator Sanchez and
Senator Brantley, and with that
I'll yield to my co-sponsors,
Senator Nava. Adam Cher, thank
you for having us here. Uh,
this, I'm very proud to
co-sponsor this bill along with
Senator Jaramillo, um, and
others, and I want to know that
the appropriation of 13.5, uh,
would also
by the creation of up to 272
individual training accounts to
be used by persons released from
custody of a correctional
facility or a jail in the state
for career enhancement and
credentialing and also for the
expansion and leveraging of
work-related employment
supportive services, as well as
funding to be dispersed
regionally by New Mexico
Association of Regional Councils
throughout the state based on
location release data for
persons released from custody
and on performance and
evaluation.
indicators related to programs
for released persons that aligns
with the standards set in the
federal workforce innovation and
Opportunity Act standards. I
would also like to know, Madam
Chair, that research shows a
reentry programs matter.
They were they reduced
recidivism, they help with job
placement, they provide housing
support that reduce instability,
and they provide mental health
and substance abuse support.
Public safety is about more than
incarceration. It's about
successful reintegration.
Thank you very much.
Thank you so much, Senator
Jarami. Madam Chair, we do have
an expert with us and she will
be here to help us answer
questions if need be.
Great, thank you so much and so,
um, now we need to discuss the
amendment.
Do we need a motion for
discussion. I move Amendment.
231511.1 for discussion.
a second.
Yeah. OK. Any objection to the
amendment?
Go ahead for discussion
purposes.
Madam Chair, we're bringing up
one of our experts, which is
Roger Gonzalez, who will walk
you through our amendment.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, the amendment is to
address two issues identified in
the sister bill running on the
House side. The first one is to
ensure that the fiscal agent is
appropriately addressed, so
you'll see that the first light
items reassigns the fiscal agent
authority, also members of the
committee wanted to ensure that
this appropriation was aligned
with many of the.
Strategies within the multiple
departments, so they had us,
they had us add the 4 bullet
points that Senator Nava
addressed to ensure that um if
appropriated in um through the
Senate finance process of the
budget, it was easy identifiable
within the departments to
operationalize.
Any, any questions on the
amendment? Go ahead send it for.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
I believe one of the sponsors
mentioned the number 272.
And how did that number get
created?
If I divide 13.5 million by 272,
I get 49,000.
Basically, is that what's going
into each of these cats. Oh.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative
Figueroa, actually, the 272
individual training accounts are
just part of the overall
comprehensive workforce plan.
So every, every year we're told
that 1800 individuals are
released from state-run systems.
All those individuals would
receive comprehensive workforce
development and case management,
however, in addition to that
case management, um, the
department has been working very
closely with the various
workforce development boards and
using weola dollars, that's the
workforce innovation Opportunity
Act.
We will use this 272 ITAs to
leverage and breed in addition
to federal resources to add more
to those accounts, so of the 800
individuals, 272 will also
receive up to $7500 in a
scholarship to get a credential
base or certification. An
example discussed by the sponsor
was the culinary arts program by
Chef Ruise. We also have another
facilities.
CDL training, um.
Uh, certification and heavy
machinery equipment, and there's
others, all those um opportunity
programs have to be vetted by
the Department of Labor and be
approved on what we call the
ETPL list, the eligible training
provider list. So all those are
vetted by the Department of
Labor and if authorized by the
department, then they're
eligible activities within the
ITAs.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you for the explanation. The
other question is about the
definition, I don't know if
there's one elsewhere in statue,
or if you might consider adding
a definition as this.
Bill goes through the process,
but what is work related
employment supportive services.
Mhm
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator, work
related services is defined
within the Department of Labor.
It's already a definition within
the weowa statute, and each
workforce development board is
able to identify what those
support services are based on
their workforce. What this bill
does is allow us to supplement
and increase some of those
thresholds for populations
specifically, uh.
Addressed by this book.
Thank you, Madam Chair, so it's
defined elsewhere in labor
statute, good enough for me.
Thank you. Thank you, and I did,
I have to apologize to the
committee. I kind of jumped the
gun because, um, I do wanna see
if there are folks in the
audience who, uh, by a show of
hands are in support of this
bill.
OK. Anybody in opposition?
Anybody online that goes to you.
OK.
So I do have Pascual Maestas
online in in support. So if I
can, can I get just 4 folks?
To get up and speak, I'm gonna
give you a minute a piece.
And then we'll go to Pascual
online.
Hello chef.
My name is Fernando Reese for
some of you that don't know me,
um, I did my prison time and
jail time in Arizona, and living
in tents wearing stripes under
Joe Arpaio.
Uh, like senator said, I am a 33
time Food Network champion.
I am an ex-convict.
I'm in a felon
I just built a restaurant in
your neighborhood.
More than
35% of my staff are convicts or
felons.
Some of them have ankle
monitors.
Um, this program's working.
We got 5 people that came out
already.
3 of them, we got our hands on,
2 of them are halfway houses
that are on probation or parole.
Um
We're just here to help, and
This would help. So, thank you.
If you will, please make sure
you say your name because we
want to make sure we get that
for the record. Isaac.
No. Can you give your, your last
name, Isaac? Thank you stand in
support of this bill because
it's helped me.
Like I've been in prisons in two
other states.
as well as here.
In a
Opportunity that I've had, it's
something different.
It's like my, my past.
My past has been bad, but now I
finally have the opportunity to
actually make it a.
I thank you guys in New Mexico
like.
Cause I've been in, I've been in
Texas. I've did time in Texas,
and eyes are really good to me.
I appreciate everything you guys
are doing it.
Thank you
Hi, my name is Taylor Cook. I'm
the director of homeless
initiatives for the governor,
um, and I'm here to speak in
support of the bill. Uh, I'm, as
the director of Homeless
initiatives, hoping that we get
really good as a state at
building supportive housing and
transitional housing where we
need that and that we improve
our services, but I'm really
hoping is that New Mexico gets
really good at not seeing people
become homeless, and I think
that this kind of bill and this
activity is what's gonna get us
there. So thank you.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Winter
Torres. I'm an attorney licensed
here in New Mexico and in
Colorado, CEO and founder of the
New Mexico Eviction Prevention
and diversion Program. And um
just as Taylor said, I have been
exploring our housing issues and
what other places are doing for
the last year and trying to wrap
my head around why we don't do
prevention better. It's cheaper,
we know who's at risk and um
I've seen these guys do a
presentation in the Santa Fe
community.
Connect program that New Mexico
Eviction Prevention and
diversion is part of. And I also
want to say that the Public
Safety Coalition, um, a
coalition of 11 organizations
who care about grass, um, uh,
core issues, uh, that lead to
public safety, um, issues.
I, uh, and part of this bill.
Thank you so much, Winter. All
right, Pasquel online, uh, we
have you recorded is that you
are in support. We're gonna give
you one minute at the 32nd mark,
you will see your 32nd warning.
Uh, go ahead.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, my
name is Pascual Maestas. I'm the
executive director of the New
Mexico Association of Regional
Councils and just want to say
today that we are in support of
this bill and are committed to
ensuring that the funds are
spent properly according to
procurement guidelines, as well
as ensuring accurate reporting
and um fairness of spreading the
funds around the state, uh,
regionally, and um we're excited
to uh act as fiscal agent for
this project.
Thank you.
Thank you so much. Uh, sponsors,
you can go ahead and respond to
any of the committee or or of
the public response, or we can
go ahead and go to the rest of
committeesal leads the agency,
which would be the fiscal agent
who just made some comments and
apologies to my good friend
Senator Bergman, who's also a
sponsor to this pill.
And I know that we have Senator
Sanchez here as well. I don't
know if you want to make any
comments or we'll go ahead and
go to the committee if there are
any comments.
You move a due pass, so we have
to make sure, uh, it has to be
as amended, but I want to make
sure that
And we have to vote on the
amendment first. Um, yeah, I
know you're, see, you're just as
excited about this bill as I am.
You certainly can if your
colleagues don't want to ask any
questions, you're welcome to do
that. We have a due pass on the
amendment.
On the bill on the amendment,
uh, and, and we have a second
from Senator Ramos.
Anybody in opposition of the
amendment to the bill.
see none show all in all present
in favor of that.
Any questions on the bill as
amended.
Senator Ramos, Madam Chair,
Senator, thanks for bringing
this in front of us today. I
really, I've had some, uh,
family members that have been
incarcerated and, uh,
unfortunately, they didn't have
this type of program, but I
think this sort of made a really
huge difference in their life.
Thank God they're doing better,
but uh thanks for bringing this.
I, I think we need this type of
program and other programs like
this to get started to help us
with this recidivism problem.
And uh I thank you so much.
Thank you, Senator Ramos.
Any other questions or comments
from the committee?
Senator Sanchez
Sure, I have a pass from Senator
Sanchez. Do we have a second?
Second from Senator Bergmans.
Anybody in opposition of the
DuPass motion.
see none. I'll, uh, let's, uh,
let the record show all present,
so you have a 10 to 0.
And I think, uh, I'm looking
forward to food recipes,
somebody who likes to be fat and
happy. Very excited about that.
Madam Chair, even better, we
think we could invite you to the
next catering event here at the
state penitentiary. What?
Yes.
I'm on it
I think that the committee might
be uh all excited about that. So
thank you, and we would love to
taste your food. Thank you. All
right, Senator Jaramillo, you
are now on to Bill 350.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Senate Bill 350
accompanies this bill in the
sense that it would appropriate
$6 million for transitional
housing support needs for people
in the reentry population, but
there, there could be some
housing stabilization, and they
could have a roof over their
head as they get on their feet,
and they start to come back into
active members of society.
Madam Chaunvie 350 invest in
transitional housing rental
assistance and long term
solutions that are needed every
year, nearly 1800 individuals
were released from state
correctional facilities, many
without stable housing,
especially if released if if
they released individual is not
on parole or probation without
that immediate support they face
higher risks of homelessness,
unemployment, reincarceration,
which strains public resources,
public safety, and law
enforcement.
Madam Chair, we'd also like to
yield to Nina Chavez of Goodwill
Industries, who's been a major
champion in ensuring that these
both these bills have been
drafted.
Madam Chairwoman, members of the
committee, thank you for the
opportunity to be here. My name
is Nina Chavez. I'm the director
of government relations for
Goodwill Industries of New
Mexico, and I'm here to
represent the coalition of
providers, um, with established
prison and jail workforce
development and housing programs
serving this population we met
over the course of 2024 about 12
months. The coalition is the
proud coalition partners for
re-entry opportunity Workforce
development, you have additional
materials, um, that break down
both of those bills, um, a
drafted budget and so forth.
Outcomes of some of the
programs, and thank you for the
opportunity to be here and ready
for any questions.
Great. Thank you so much. Um,
going to the audience, uh, are
there those here in the audience
that are in support of this
bill?
12, OK, 345, very energetically,
5, hold on, anybody online?
Nobody online. Anybody in the
audience in opposition.
Right, why don't we go ahead and
get 3 folks up here for one
minute.
Go ahead, Brent. Adams of the
committee, my name is Brent
Moore. I'm a registered lobbyist
for the New Mexico Association
of Realtors, we stand in support
of the bill. Housing is needed
in New Mexico. Thank you.
Fernando Rez again, um.
If Isaac didn't
Isaac's living with me.
At my apartment here in Santa
Fe.
He didn't have no support, no
family, no job, no money, no
housing, he would be homeless
right now if it wasn't for Ralph
and I. So,
Please help us with this bill as
well. Thank you.
Taylor Cook, director of
Homeless initiatives for the
office or for the governor, um,
I'm speaking in support of this
bill. We're very excited to work
on reentry, particularly um
opportunities to work on reentry
at the county level. That's been
a key point um we're
underfunding has existed in the
past. Um, so just really excited
to work with counties on
building out their homeless
services systems and um being
able to leverage some reentry
support as well.
My name is Isaac Sork, and uh, I
just wanted to get up here and
say that like the 1st 60 days,
I'm in support of this bill
because the 1st 60 days are like
the most critical.
So like the first thing, because
I've, I've gone from that side
of the fence, the first thing
you think of when you get out is
like housing.
I, I stand in support of this
bill because I feel like within
the 1st 60 days, you got to have
everything paid.
Cause then if you don't, after
that, everything kind of gets.
It
Thank you for giving me the
opportunity.
Thank you for being here.
Right, at this point you can
either respond to uh public
testimony or we can go ahead and
go to the committee.
All right. Any questions or
comments or uh from the
committee?
Senator Bergmans, thank you,
Madam Chair. It seems to be the
question I ask everyone, but
first of all, thank you for
bringing this and having
everything drafted and put
together.
The FIR mentions that there is a
large sum of money that was
included in House Bill 2.
But was this specific line item
part of that, or is it somewhere
else in Haville too?
Madam Chairwoman, members of the
committee, um, Senator Bergman,
thank you for the question. We
are reconciling with legislative
finance Committee about the line
item concerning approximately
$38 million for reentry
facilities or housing
facilities, so we're continuing
to reconcile with them.
This funding is specifically
programmatic.
OK, thank you. And
Something we've also looked at
with a few other appropriation
bills like this is you have the
remaining bonds were reverting
at the end of 2026. Is that
enough time?
Madam Chairwoman, members of the
committee, Senator Bergman's,
what we've learned from the
healthcare authority with the
reset and Fresh Start program,
which is what many of the
providers utilize, such as New
Mexico entry Center and YDI who
are part of the proud coalition
is, um, these two programs are
very new, but they spent down
their funding with less than 2
quarters once it was available,
um, so this population is very
much utilizing it, um, and, and,
and it's showing that the demand
is there.
And the need is great.
OK, thank you. That's all.
Thank you.
Other committee members.
They know other questions or
comments. What is the will of
the committee?
We have a due pass from Senator
Sheriff. We have a second from
Senator Bergmans. All right.
anybody in opposition of the Du
Pass motion.
See none if you will, please let
the record show that all in all
in attendance are in support.
Congratulations, 10 to 0. Thank
you, Madam Chair and members of
the committee on behalf of every
New Mexican who deserves a
second chance. Thank you.
Thank you so much and thank you
for being here in your house.
Right now we get to hear about
liquor tax rates from senator
Scherer.
Senator share. Now this is a tax
bill. This is one of 4 tax bills
that we have today. So this is
one committee that we will hear.
Did you know the drill. We can
ask questions, um, but we will
hold that for potential
inclusion in a, um, possible tax
package, which hopefully we'll
know about in the next week or
so.
We have a look.
Oh, we do have a committee
substitute on that, so.
Senator Bergman's rely on you.
Um, so if you will,
Explain the committee substitute
and then we'll.
Yes.
No.
So, if you want to, I can move a
do not pass on Senate Bill 378
and it do pass on committee.
Senate Tax, Business and
Transportation Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 378
for discussion. That's
absolutely fabulous and almost
flawless. Almost. It's OK.
Almost. I'll take it. If you do
that enough time. I'm sure. All
right, Senator Sher, please go
ahead and with this, this is a
uh increase in taxes. I know
that's weird coming from, but I
think this is important for a
couple of reasons. One,
As, as it's set out here.
We don't have to create any new
systems. There's other bills
floating around out there where
you've got to create different
system for everybody cause 1
after 1500 retailers, uh, that
don't, that aren't set up for
this. This increases the taxes
through the wholesalers or the
distributors, uh, that are
already set up to do this, so
it's certainly makes it simpler
than that, um.
It doesn't change any of the uh
the distributions where the
money goes, goes to DWI programs
or anything like that, Senator
Armilo had a a bill the other
day would not have any negative
effect on his bill. I would help
it. Uh, it does.
put money into the behavioral
health.
Uh, fund that we created, so
money gets put in there.
Um,
It also, because it's already uh
the system is already set up.
TRD doesn't need any more people
or anything like that. It's just
gonna happen.
And uh I think the last thing
here is.
Did it also
Move some of the cannabis money
also into the same.
Uh, same, uh, behavioral health
systems.
So
With that
Stanford question. All right,
thank you, Senator Sher. Very
simple, before I go to the
committee, I just want to see,
there's anybody in the audience
that's in support of this bill.
Anybody in opposition?
Can you guess which
Senator.
All right, um, and do we have
anybody online in support or in
opposition.
One in support.
All right, why don't we go ahead
and we will
Let's have the opposition come
up first. I'm gonna go ahead and
just have 4.
So I'll let you all fight it
out.
Match style there or for one
minute.
So it's like old home we member
of this committee. My name is
Leland Gould, and I represent
the New Mexico petroleum
marketers. Our members are
hundreds of small business
owners in every city in New
Mexico, typically we are, are
against increases, tax increases
because it does impact um our,
our customers, but of all the
liquor increases that we have,
um, in this session, this one is
certainly more palatable for us,
so thank you.
Thank you so much. Thank you,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Jared Najar on behalf
of Saarak Company, um, we
appreciate the intent of the
sponsor, but we reluctantly
stand in respectful opposition.
Um, we believe this is a
regressive tax at a time when
the state is flush with cash and
for that reason, we opposed.
Um, Scott Scanlon, registered
lobbyist for Premier
distributing, soon to be called
Hensley, um, we also stand in.
Opposition to this bill, um,
we're opposed to tax increases,
however, we can read the tea
leaves.
Um, and so I would just want to
remind this committee that this
is the same uh tax increase that
this legislature passed two
years ago in the tax package
that was ultimately.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. Good evening.
John Thompson, I'm a registered
lobbyist for Admiral Beveridge
and Southern Glaziers Wine and
Spirits.
My colleagues did a pretty good
job of making comments before
me. I will know as well that.
be generally opposed tax
increases, and we can, we're
familiar with the arguments and,
and been around here long
enough, so I appreciate Senator
Scher and uh look forward to
seeing how this goes forward.
Thank you.
Great, thank you. OK, I wanna
make sure you are in support of
the bill.
All right, and then the other
person online isn't support of
the bill. All right, so Carrie,
I'm gonna give you a minute and
then we'll go to the person
online.
Hello, Madam Chair, members of
the committee. I'm here for
total wine, which you don't
often see me for, um, total line
does actually support this bill,
total wine supports tax raises
that are reasonable, uh, in cost
and that are fair in terms of
impacting everybody in the same
way, and that also are levied at
the wholesale level. Uh, this is
a bill that makes sense to us in
terms of meeting those criteria
of being reasonable and fair and
remain.
cleaning at the wholesale level.
And so that is why we actually
do support this legislation. Um,
we think that it was something
that was unfortunately vetoed
several years ago. We didn't
want to see it veto then, um,
and so thanks a lot.
Thank you so much, Carrie. Uh,
and so we have Joan Dickerson
who is online. Joan, you'll have
one minute if you'll please
unmute yourself at the 32nd
mark, you'll see, uh, uh, an
indicator such in your chat. So
Joan, go ahead.
Yes, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh, I'm Joan
Dickerson. I'm with the Veterans
and Military Families Caucus,
and unfortunately, alcohol
misuse affects veterans more
than the general population.
This tax has not been increased
in about 30 years.
Uh,
the tax that has not been
increased in about 30 years,
funds the county DWI programs
and an alcohol harms reduction
program in the city of
Farmington.
And with inflation, those
programs face increased costs
and the funding, uh, can't keep
up with it if it's not
increased.
Uh, also, we, uh, respectfully
suggest that the sponsor
coordinate with the sponsors of
House Bill 417, which seeks to
reduce alcohol harms by way of
tax reform, as this bill would
be complementary to that effort
and would optimize the use of
these phones. Thank you very
much for your time.
Thank you so much. So Senator
Sherry, you have 5 minutes if
you want to respond to public
testimony, otherwise we can go
ahead and go to the committee.
No.
So I take it, uh, so let's go
ahead and go to the committee.
Are there questions or comments
from the committee. So I'm gonna
go to Senator O'Malley first and
then Senator.
So original co-sponsors, so I
have to admit that. Uh, the
concern I have is that, um, and
we have another bill, a house
bill.
17 and so the idea was to try
to, you know, coordinate an
effort and try to, you know,
work with them and, but, um,
They really felt strongly that
um
The, um, the excise tax
obviously would generate a lot
more, uh, especially given that,
uh, and the point was that it
hadn't been raised and I think
something like 30 years.
Um
You know, that it's true that
that, you know, this did pass
and the governor vetoed it. Um,
I'm not, I haven't asked why,
but um,
So I just feel like, uh, I
would, you know, I, I think we
should try to have more
coordination between this and
the, and House Bill 417, which
is, you know, also making its
way.
Over here. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Senator O'Malley.
Senator Figueroa.
Thanks, Madam Chair, and page 2,
2% to the behavioral.
Health program fund. I just
wondered if that number, 2% is
is small and specific.
So why 2%.
First of all, uh, Madam Chair,
Senator, uh, under the.
Committee substitute, uh, we now
have 4% to the new fund. There's
also 4% that goes to a Medicaid
reimbursement for the
community-based uh program. So
that's, that's new. 45% still
goes to the DWI grant fund.
Under the committee's
substitute.
Madam chair and sponsor.
Clarify that, I think I'm
looking at the committee
substitute, page 2.
Lying
Uh, 21 says 2%.
to the behavioral health grant
fund, it does say an additional
2% goes elsewhere to the
healthcare authority for
Medicaid reimbursement. So when
you say 4%, you mean each of the
2% pieces added together.
So
Madam Chair and Senator, are you
on?
Uh
The 202 number 231137.2.
No.
No, madam chair, that is not the
committee said we were handed in
our books, we have one.
There should be a point too,
Madam Chair.
And so hold on just a second.
Uh
But
figured it out. Yeah. Yeah.
Um, I think we need copies for,
um,
Yes, Susan, you got him. So,
Madam Chair, on that very same
line of line 21, it says in an
amount equal to 4%.
It also changes the date uh to
July of 2026, July 1st of 2026,
so that we're not messing with
the formula for this year.
So those are the two things 1
and 2, it moved it to 4% and
changed the date. That's thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you,
sponsor. I'm gonna move, do not
pass uh Senate Bill 378 and it
do pass on Centerville Taus
transportation Committee
substitute for Senate Bill
378.231137.2 for discussion.
We're moving the correct
substitute this time around.
Just so it's clear, we want to
make sure we're all on the
legit. We want to be too legit
to quit.
Yeah.
We have all had a long day, and
if you get that 80s reference,
good for you
You did, I know, I know, we're
connected that way.
All right. uh, thank you for
that, madam. Now I need to read
the new one, so for now. OK.
Other questions from the
committee.
Looks like the pressure's on
you, Senator Figuero to speed
read.
OK. Uh, Madam Chair, really,
that was the only change, 2 to 4
and the date, everything, all
the other words are the same,
OK.
OK. So remember this is a tax
bill, so we are not voting on
it. We are just holding it. If
there are no other questions or
comments from the committee, so
we've got that. Thank you,
Senator Scherer. Uh, Senator
Bergman does have a quick
question. I'm just too fast for
her and
She's just got to like poke me
to make sure. Go ahead, Senator
Bergmans.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
I think you can answer this,
Senator share, um, so that
In the behavioral health grant
program fund that this is
creating.
How would that interact with
One Senate Bill 12 or 3.
Which everyone had the funding
in it.
1 or 3.
Um
One is the funding mechanism 3
is the guardrails around them,
so this would go to number one,
Senate bill wants to go in
there. OK, so this would this be
like a separate fund probably or
would it be absorbed into that
absorbed into that, but the
All of this really the whole
fund, but this particularly, uh,
goes in to then get the Medicaid
match. So what you're doing in
the local communities is you're
getting not only that dollar,
but 3 more from the Fed, so you
end up with 4. So that's, that's
what this is about, is how do
you make a $1 into $4 for the
local.
Uh, treatment.
OK, thank you.
Great. Thank you so much.
Any other follow-up from the
committee.
All right, thank you, Senator.
Appreciate it. All right, now
we're going on to our new
business today. We are going in
order.
Uh, Senate Bill 445, we have
Senator Gonzalez and then we
will have two bills from Senator
Steinborn, myself, Senator Pope.
And then we will finish off with
House Bill 47, I think I saw
Representative De la Cruz here,
so, uh, we will do that.
And we have moved 497 to uh our,
our power team on Thursday, uh,
of a bunch of a bunch of tax
bills that are gonna be heard
that day.
Senator Gonzalez, it's all
yours.
Thank you
Excuse me.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, um, I,
uh, like to start off by um
Uh, Senate Bill 445. This was
presented to you uh.
Last year
And I passed the Senate, passed
the House, so that uh.
Uh, the governor did not act on
it.
So, uh, um.
So you might be familiar to some
of this.
Excuse me.
So what this would do is, um,
Uh, for your water and
sanitation, grocery receipts
tax.
And I passed this legislation 18
years ago.
And uh this would remove the
requirement for seeking.
Reauthorization of a 0.5% gross
receipts tax.
Every 6 years, and this would
permit the proceeds of the
attacks to be used for bonding
or for by the water sanitation
districts.
Uh, ma'am sure members um.
Uh, the things that are
happening here is, as I
mentioned, this is going
already.
Um
This uh sanitation districts, so
some of them have enacted this 3
times, so which is 18 years.
And uh the uh.
They do um.
It's expensive for them, and
they really don't generate that
much money, you know, so once
that they have for uh
holding their election.
And none of them have ever
failed. They have all passed.
The other part is that on this
does put um.
Uh, a little bit of a handicap
on him because so the majority
of the bonding is always 10
years.
And this song
Comes due every 6 years that
they would have to come back to
enact for the voters.
So, uh, this is the request uh
this is um.
Been very successful elections,
so there's never been any
problems at all. That's the the
nature of the bill.
Thank you, Senator Gonzalez, and
just to remind the committee, so
this, this is a bill that we
will vote on.
This has no physical impact, and
so, uh, at this point, I'd like
to go to the community to any
public testimony. Is there
anybody in the audience who is
in support of this bill?
Anybody in opposition?
OK, the record shows neither,
and neither online.
So at this point, I'm gonna go
ahead and go to the committee.
Are there any questions or
comments from the committee.
We have a due pass from Senator
Sher. We have a 2nd. I'll let
Senator Wirth and Senator
Figueroa fight that out later.
All right. Is there anybody in
opposition of the DuPass motion.
Seeing none, if you will,
please.
Show all those present are in
support. You have a 10 to 0 due
pass.
Thank you. Thank you, Senator
Gonzalez.
Next we have Senator Steinborn,
you're gonna be doing 2. We'll
do Senate Bill 45 1st.
And this is as amended.
Ser amendment here or is this
already amended?
OK.
All right.
All right. So we have Senate
Bill 45 as amended, Senator
Steinborn, you're welcome to go
ahead and start. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Mitty, thanks for
hearing this, Bill. Uh, Madam
Chair, this bill expands the use
of what's known as the county
Assistance fund, or what's known
as county indigent funds. County
indigent funds are created by
law, the Mexico legislature
created the county assistance
funds by virtue of counties
assessing a little GRT and then
being able to use this fund to
help people pay for healthcare.
that kind of fall outside of
normal parameters of programs,
um, every county is
understandable, but one has this
fund, they all kind of use it
for slightly different purposes.
But as you'll see in the bill,
Um, the added language, which
was really the original intent
is to allow counties to pay for
direct premium assistance for
people, direct health care
expenses, and this is something
that
An advocate in my community
named Yoli DS, who runs an
organization called CARE, it
pays for basically non-medical
expenses for people with cancer.
She has seen how many people
fall through the cracks.
Who don't have insurance, who
end up dying basically without
advocacy.
This is a vital source of
potential funding that already
exists.
That counties can use completely
optional as they choose to cover
populations that are kind of
falling through the cracks.
And so, um, our county and
others, some others in the state
are completely excited about
this bill, including Donana
County and I'm Jamie Michael may
be online, who's our county
Health and Human Services
director.
But
But uh I was supposed to text
her and things have been going
fast. But anyway, Madam Chair,
so that's what the bill does.
And I will have to stand for
questions.
Alright, thank you, senator. Is
there anybody in the audience in
support of this legislation.
Anybody in opposition?
All right, let's go ahead and
have you up. And is there
anybody online? You got that?
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Randy Valverde. I'm a
registered lobbyist for Donana
County and Donana County, we
have approximately 3000 people
in our healthcare program, and
we strongly support this much
needed effort to provide
affordable access to care.
Thank you, Randy. We have
Uh, I believe it's Erica
Sanchez.
Thank you, you will get 1 minute
and 30 seconds you'll see a
warning come up in your chat box
if you will, go ahead and speak.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Erica Sanchez with New Mexico
Center on Law and Poverty. We
stand in support of Senate Bill
45 as amended and thank the
sponsor for bringing it forward.
We believe all New Mexicans
deserve access to quality,
affordable healthcare, and we
know that counties provide an
important safety net for New
Mexicans who face the greatest
barriers in accessing care. This
bill gives counties the option
of additional flex
ibility in administering county
healthcare assistance funds to
cover premiums and out of pocket
costs, meeting a need identified
by patients and counties, while
offering an option to leverage
indigent funds to have an even
greater impact. We ask this
committee to vote in favor of
Senate Bill 45. Thank you.
Thank you, Erica. So you have an
opportunity to respond to that
or we can go ahead and just go
right to the committee agree
with their sentiments, madam.
Thank you. Any questions or
comments from the committee.
Senator O'Malley.
Samale chairs. So this just
expands really, uh, when you
talk about
the indigent fund being
available for hospital care and
healthcare services.
You're expanding it to monthly
premiums for health insurance.
And out of pocket costs.
Copayments, deductibles.
Ultimately though, uh, this is
the county commission that would
decide how these funds would be
expended in their budget.
100%, Madam Chair, Senator, it's
completely optional. It just
expands the use of the county
may use these funds for.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, thank you, Senator
Figueroa, and then Senator
Scher.
I have no questions, madam
Chair. Thank you. Then I jumped
the gun. I was just kind of
expecting that Senator Sher.
Madam sure I don't think I can
ask a question without Senator
Figueroa doing it first.
So
The, my question is the
The counties have a pool of
money today, and so we're gonna
say, OK, you can do other things
with that pool of money, is that
dilute their mission? I mean,
they're, they're doing indigent.
Payments
Uh, to the hospital.
Um
They're trying to get people on
Medicaid.
For Medicare, depending on what
the deal is, so they're actively
signing people up that way.
Why would we need to pay for?
Premiums, which are commercial
insurance product.
Madam Chair, uh, Senator, that's
a great question. And so one of
the populations that this covers
are people who don't qualify for
Medicaid, who just fall out
outside of the boundaries of it.
Um, the other thing is this
language, literally almost
verbatim, although we, we added
this amendment about public
programs is almost verbatim of
what was in the original bill
when he created this fund and
that that language was line out
and veto.
our previous governor, um, and
so,
There's long been an ambition to
kind of restore it and um so
that's what this bill does. And
no, it doesn't dilute it in the
case of Donana County, they,
they have this money like they
can do more with it if they only
have the statutory authority to
do more with it. Donana County
alone raises about $99 million a
year from these funds. So they
have the money and again it's
optional. It doesn't, it's not a
mandate for them to spend money
in new ways, it's just expanded
use if they choose to do so.
So, um,
Thank you, Senator.
I have some ancient heartburn
with this. It probably has
nothing to do with this.
Before we, before we turned into
this system, San Juan County had
its own indigent fund.
And they paid
For all their indigent, I mean
the hospital was made whole.
Patients were made whole.
Everybody was made whole just
from the money from San Juan
County.
And then somewhere along the
way, somebody says, oh, it's not
fair for someone can't have that
much money, so we gave it to
Donana account. It really kind
of bugs me.
And that was it.
Um
OK
Thank you, Senator Sher, Senator
Wirth. Uh, thank you, Madam
Chair. So I'm just curious, is
there a definition of indigent
person.
In the statute.
Madam Chair, Mr. Leader, I
believe there is, uh, so I think
that question's come up before.
I'm sorry, I don't have a
precise answer for you here.
there
It is
OK.
OK. It's in a different. It's a
different statute in 275-4.
It doesn't say what the
definition.
is
I can probably Mr. Google or
Mrs. Google can miss Google.
Senator Bergman's is gonna work
on that. I, I guess the reason I
bring it up is Senator Sheer's
question. I mean, if you don't
qualify for Medicaid,
Are you indigent?
I mean, I just again.
You, you don't have, there are
no premiums and there's no out
of pocket costs if you're on
Medicaid. So I just want to, who
are we trying to get to here and
I just I'm trying to figure out
what's the, if we have a
definition in the statute that's
of indigency that's in the
Medicaid range, then we may,
this may not work.
Well, Madam Chair, Senator,
this, this is already serving
this population in Donana
County. So we're not, we're not
actually expanding. You can see
higher up in the bill in
existing statute in order uses
the same language. It is
patience. It's just expanding
the use of it. So this is the
existing population that they're
serving now that they've been
serving for years, um.
So, I guess they do meet the
definition according to Donana
County and the others that are
using this now.
So I guess by my question
though, but this fund right now
is limited to one expenses of
burial or cremation to ambulance
transportation or 3, county
administrative expenses.
So
I mean, yeah, this seems like a
a different paying premiums and
out of pocket expenses.
seems to go, I mean, I think
Senator Bergman's has found a
definition.
It's a very long definition,
which also says the county must
adopt.
Its own resolution defining it
as well.
You have sort of an answer for
that.
So
Uh, I, I don't know what section
of law it is, or otherwise I'd
be a little more specific, but
Uh, the way we've defined images
somewhere in our law is 200% of
Poverty level of federal poverty
levels. So if the federal
poverty levels, uh,
$100
If you make less than $200 then
you're indigent.
Uh, now, we've also addressed
that in some places, making it
as high as 4.
Oh
100%, but 200% is the standard
in New Mexico for indigent of
federal poverty level.
And Madam Chair, if you're, I
mean, this is an interesting. So
if you're at 200%, you qualify
for Medicaid.
OK, so
If you're over 200%, so I mean,
again, I guess the question is
that if you're 210%.
You're not considered indigent,
you don't qualify for.
Medicaid
I'm just trying to see, figure
out what to get, what
Where this is going and and
Senator Bergman just pointed
out, there's, there is a long
definitions in counties can
define it, which they may have
in this case.
I'm sure they do, ma'am, because
we're already serving this
population. This will just allow
them to do more for that
population, but just, but you,
but you're not serving them out
of this fund.
Right
Well, when I say we're serving
them, I mean, we're already
serving them out of this fund.
The population that we're
serving, my county probably
health directors about probably
joined online. She says each
county gets to set their own
criteria, in general, someone
who's unable to afford
healthcare services.
So it's flexible.
So, so, I'd be curious, I mean,
so basically, and maybe you can.
Text with your
person there, I mean, uh, cause
I, cause I think expenses of
burial cremation. I mean, you
can have folks that are on
Medicaid where bare information
is not covered, so this makes
sense.
I just, I'm trying to figure
out.
Again, it, I guess, I guess if,
if it, if it doesn't work, then
you don't get to use the funds.
It's that simple. So it doesn't
hurt to expand it, uh, so
anyway, I just, I, I would be
curious to kind of figure that
question out. Also, I would note
in the analysis and in our
analysis that in July of 2025.
There is a new healthcare
affordability fund program
that's going to provide premium
and out of pocket assistance to
those also who are above the
Medicaid number. Uh, I think
this
I saw something.
Yeah, so those between 138% and
400% of the federal poverty
level.
So there's gonna be another
option there, so that's all I
have about you. All right. Thank
you. And Senator Steinborn, do
you know if Jamie is able to log
on? She says she's on right now.
I'm sure.
Yes, that's who it is Senator,
if you, what I want to just say,
the, the nice thing about this,
if we do this, is that it's true
the county the health
Affordability fund is expanding
the programming, but it's also
subject to appropriations. It's
subject to the health care, you
know, the affordability fund and
the mechanism that raises that
fund. This is another layer of
assistance that we can be able
to provide it for whatever
reason that goes away.
And supports vulnerable
populations. So I think it's
smart for us to do it, and
again, it's totally optional.
And before you ask Senator
Worth, um, so Jamie Michael is
now on, uh, so, uh, Jamie, uh,
you'll hear questions and uh you
are welcome to uh answer those
questions as we continue on.
Senator Wirth.
So, uh, madam chair, can you
just explain the amendments that
went on in Senate Health? Yeah.
The Madam Chair leader, the
amendment that we added in
public health, you know, the
original language in the bill
talked about monthly premiums of
insurance coverage, but there
now is discussion about, you
know, Medicaid forward for
discussions about the high-risk
insurance pool. These are public
programs that have kind of a
private insurance component. And
I think we wanted to make sure
that by using the word public
here, that we were kind of
referencing those programs
specifically and not just some
private insurance product.
Even though those public
programs are serviced by a
private sector kind of a
contract.
And just Madam Chair, I note
that uh our one doctor in the
Senate voted against this bill,
uh, Senator Hickey and Senator
Boone were no votes. I'm just
curious what Senator Hickey's
issue was if, if you remember.
I, yeah, I'm sure it's funny. I
don't even remember him voting
against this bill, but maybe
they were oh yes, they were
excused. I'm sorry. Thank you.
That makes sense. I was gonna
say that it's possible. I don't
remember that.
Senator Boone and Hickey little
caucus is interesting, so that's
why I caught my attention.
That's all I have.
Senator O'Malley, thank you,
ma'am Chair. Uh, I just could
just circle back a little bit,
um, in terms of the, of the, um,
uh said what uh the term
indigent.
You know, the, what it means and
is that um there's a state
define that, or is that
something that counties define.
Madam Chair Senator, I think is
Senator Bergman's pulled up in
our expert on the fly research
is that the losses counties get
to define that, and that's
exactly what my county health
director, who's online right
now, said, because I asked her,
what's the definition of
indigent? She said each county
gets to define their own
criteria, and that's what the
law allows them to do. OK, sorry
I missed that
conversation. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Right, um, any other questions,
Senator Ramos, Madam Chair, um,
senator, thank you. Um.
You mentioned
This helps people outside the
boundaries, just just clarify
that for me again, outside the,
uh, the boundaries of, I guess,
Medicaid, so, so if somebody's
making $10 more.
And Medicaid allows. This could
be used to help them. Madam
Chair, Senator, exactly.
Just wanted to, and this, of
course, is all local options
which are always like, um.
So if
County commissioners can can
create their own.
Uh, criteria, and they already
do this with their.
With their uh monies that their
account is bringing in for
indigent.
Madam Chair, interestingly, no,
because we statutorily create
this fund and we create the
authorized use of this fund in
law, which is what this law is
in front of you right now.
It's expanding the use of this
fund. It says right here, if you
look at page 2 A, this fund may
be used for and we, we, we
authorize specific uses and
we're expanding the use of it.
So Madam Chair and, and
senators, so.
I guess what I'm trying to get
to.
is if somebody.
doesn't qualify for Medicaid
because they're making too much
money.
How did they qualify as
indigent?
I mean, that's the county gets
to define that.
I just don't make sense.
Well, ma'am chair respectfully,
you know, even if somebody falls
outside of Medicaid boundaries
doesn't mean they're rolling in
tall copy financially, so to
speak.
So, you know, things are really
expensive out there and
Healthcare can be an option for
some people, like an optional
living expense, as opposed to
rent and other kinds of
expenses. So
There's people out there working
people out there who may be just
above the Medicaid line, but are
basically living paycheck to
paycheck, and, and they, and
they're people who are part of
our economy and this really
helps support Madam Chair, when
um, senator, when it comes to
dollars.
What, uh, what can a person to
call or I guess, where's the,
where's the line where someone
is disqualified for Medicaid
when it comes to dollars. Do you
have that?
I don't know that, but probably
Jamie would know that she is
online if she's Jamie, you're
welcome to chime in.
Thank you, uh, Jamie Michael
with the County's Health and
Human Services department. I do
not know the upper income limits
for Medicaid, but the statute
also, the, this statue, the um
indigent Health and Hospital Act
also defines a maximum income
for county healthcare assistance
programs, and it is much higher
than the upper limit, um, for
Medicaid. So this program is
designed
For the working poor,
essentially, so it is um folks
who have some type of income,
don't qualify for, for Medicaid
and um as Senator Steinborn
said, the cost of health
coverage or um hospital bills,
doctor bills is beyond their,
their income level, but I don't
know the Medicaid, um.
Income levels, it changes
depending on the number of
people in your family, but
county healthcare assistance
programs, the income is higher
than Medicaid.
And Madam Chair in Senator, it's
not that I'm against it because
my district's probably one of
the poorest districts in the
whole state. Of course, I want
to help, but I just got to be
able to answer these questions
with my constituents ask, you
know, why them and not me.
But thank you very much.
Thank you and Senator Bergman
said you want to read that
definition? No?
It's way too long, right, other
questions from the committee.
What is the wish of the
committee?
Manager move a do pass.
We have a do pass from Senator
Bergman's. Do we have a second?
a second. All right. Let's go
ahead and
No, we don't need one.
Sophie will go ahead and take
the role.
Senator Figueroa.
Yes.
Senator had a meal.
Yes. Senator O'Malley.
Senator Paul.
Senator Ramos.
Senator Sanchez?
Senator share.
Senator Wirth
Senator Bergman's.
Senator Hamblin.
Uh, got a pass
but
So 8 to 2, you have a due pass.
Thank you.
Thank you, committee. And so
Senator Steinborn, you're next
with the uh search and rescue
emergency responses. Right.
Along with Senator Pinto, I
thought I saw her in the room
here earlier, but I think she's.
vacated the room.
Yeah.
Go ahead, Senator Steinborg.
Hey, thank you, Madam Chair. So
all the orange shirts that have
patiently waited all these
hours.
Now this bill, madam chair,
committee is to help search and
rescue in New Mexico and speed
up search and rescue times and
save lives. Um, this bill really
at its essence requires one new
thing.
And it requires that when a
dispatcher gets a call to a
local area,
For meeting the qualifications
of a search and rescue.
Emergency, someone in a remote
area is lost, injured, etc. But
basically that dispatcher is
required to call the state
police.
As well
Cause it's state police under
the New Mexico Search and Rescue
Act.
Under the New Mexico Search and
Rescue Act, who actually has to
dispatch search and rescue,
which is really fascinating,
search and rescue, all these
fine people here are volunteers.
I mean, they're the most amazing
people, and thank you all for
what you do. But they're
basically volunteers with high
levels of technical proficiency
to do everything from scale
mountains to
climb cliffs and do stuff you
can't even imagine to try to
rescue people and uh they they
um
They have unique capacity that
local governments that simply
don't have.
And so, um, but the way they go
and help people is they have to
be dispatched by state police.
They have to be given a mission
number. That's part of our law.
So what this bill does is it
says again, if you get a call
from someone who's in emergency
dispatch, you call the state
police so they can dispatch
search and rescue right away. In
addition to the local response,
so that we get that extra
capacity going to try to find
and help that person
immediately.
That's what the bill does. It
involves a lot of collaboration
between stakeholders as far as
setting rules and parameters and
training, we have a delayed
implementation date so that they
can train all the dispatchers on
this protocol before this law
goes into effect. Um, I want to
say that this bill was developed
in collaboration with search and
rescue all over the state and
emergency responders. It's, it
was really a product of amazing
collaboration. And so with that,
I'm really appreciate, uh, Bob
Rogers, who actually is our
State emergency response
coordinator for the state
police.
Who's my expert witness today,
and I'm sure Bob, if you wanna,
but before you do though, that
that we have a committee sub, so
um we do need to move that
committee sub.
And then after that, if you'll
explain how it's different, then
we'll go to Bob. Sure.
had.
I'm a committee sub.
You know, 2 or well, I move do
not pass on standard bill 353
and a do pass on the committee
substitute,
which is 0.230850.4.
Is that the one you have? Yeah,
it's 04, you got it. OK, for
discussion purposes. All right,
so Senator, Senator Steinberg,
if you'll explain how the
committee said is different.
Thank you, Chair, it's just,
it's got a lot of kind of little
tweaks to the language about the
collaboration and the process of
how state search and rescue
interacts with local groups. It
has some new language that local
groups had wanted, frankly
saying that if search and rescue
um doesn't have immediate
resources ready to, ready to
respond to a local.
emergency that they will
actually try to help and find
some resources to help them. And
so, uh,
So it's, and also we had a
definition for Indian, um sorry.
Tribal
Tribe or tribal, which includes
federally recognized Indian
nations, tribes and pueblos.
So, and of course,
Joined here by my co-sponsor,
Senator Pinto.
Sarah Pinto, do you want to say
anything before we go?
you're in support of the bill,
right on.
All right, um, Bob, do you want
to make any comments before we
go to public comment? Any brief
comments?
Yes, ma'am. Excuse me, ma'am
sure members of the committee.
My name is Bob Rogers. I am the
search and rescue resource
officer for the New Mexico State
Police Department of Public
Safety.
I am the chief administrator of
a very large program that
consists of about 980
volunteers.
I am down 38% from 22 years ago,
due to lack of calls, lack of
notifications, that kind of
stuff. I support this bill 100%
as written, because this is what
needs my volunteers to get out
there and save lives.
My volunteers that you see here
in orange shirt are a highly
dedicated, highly trained.
Very motivated.
And low cost to the taxpayers of
the state of New Mexico.
Thank you so much. So now we go
to uh public comment. Uh, so by
his show of hands, can I see how
many folks in the audience, I
mean, it's kind of obvious.
Um, if I will, so, I have a
feeling that we'll probably hear
some similar things. So if I can
have just 3 people, um, get up
and speak. And
uh Robbert, and then teal.
And then we do have Kiefer
online, uh, who is also in
support, will go to keeper after
this. Go ahead. You have one
minute, Madam Chair, members of
the committee, thank you for
today. Um, I'm just a civilian.
I'm a civilian who, I'm sorry,
my name is Tangerine Volen. He
recently retired from the La
Familia Medical Board. I was a
disability advocate with them. I
have a 13 year old brain injury.
It's one reason I'm passionate
about this bill. I'm also the
woman who has been responsible
for leading all of the civilian
searches for both Esther Barnes.
and Jose Orozco, who went
missing 8 months apart from each
other in Santa Fe County.
Uh, unfortunately, Esther died,
Jose may no longer be with us,
and I, I'm here to tell you from
my incredible learning curve in
uh in less than a year that had
this bill already been in effect
in the past year, I think we
would have been able to save
Esther. I can, I can back that
up by email if you need me to.
I'm not just saying it. Um, and
I also think that we would have
had a far stronger chance of
finding Jose. I personally have
gotten 300 people out,
civilians. They're all in
support of this bill, um.
We have hundreds of followers
online. We've had a lot of
people come out. They all know
I'm here today and I'm
representing both the Orozco and
Barnes families because they
both lost precious family
members. And these people are
trained, they're free, and
they're not gonna cost the state
anything, and we should not be
squandering any resources by
calling them or activating them
as late as we have been. We need
a lot more interagency
collaboration, and we need to
get SAR, these amazing people
out so much faster. Thank you.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Robert
Garcia. I'm the president of the
New Mexico Search and Rescue
Council. We're made up of over
30 member teams and most of the
counties in all of the state,
all of the teams stand in
support of this bill too many
times, including myself as a
commander, have I seen
notifications 2 weeks after
someone has gone missing.
And frankly, it is.
Sad to me, my father, my
grandfather had dementia and if
my family
You know, if he had gone missing
and I hadn't been helped, you
know, it just make, would make
me feel horrible as a citizen of
the state.
We have a program. It works. We
are trained.
Just let us go to calls, and we
just want to be notified.
Thank you. Thank you so much,
Madam Chair and members of the
committee. I'm Till Harbin. I'm
the Mexico searchy medical
coordinator and search and
rescue advocate, um, so I don't
think I need to reiterate the
point that people already are
dying, um, and have suffered
unnecessary injury, waiting for
us to be called. We can save
lives. But the other points I
want to point out is that we are
not delaying any other agencies
from responding. We all need
those other agencies there, and
while the other agencies do
provide some aspects of search
and rescue service.
is only New Mexico search and
rescue can provide the full
spectrum of services because
search and rescue is an entire
field on its own that goes
beyond any other agency, the
capability of any other agency.
The other thing I would like to
point out is that we are one of
the few states with a statewide
search and rescue program.
And that's pretty awesome. We
are leading the way already in
search and rescue. We have other
states that are watching us. We
have Nevada, California,
Washington, Colorado, Utah that
are all wanting this bill to
pass and hoping they can
possibly replicate it in their
state because they have the same
issue, but we have the power to
change it here in New Mexico.
Thank you.
Thank you so much. Now we'll go
online, Kiefer, you have one
minute, you'll see a warning at
30 seconds in the chat box. Go
ahead.
Thank you very much. I am CL
Keeper now. I'm a volunteer EMT.
I do not work as an EMT in my
real 9 to 5 job, but I volunteer
with Santa Fe Search and rescue.
Over the past almost 10 years
that I've been with the team. I
have served in a variety of
Capacities president also
training coordinator and the one
job that I thought would be the
easiest.
Social media.
It turns out, out of all of the
missions I have ever seen.
The only time my heartstrings
got pulled.
Or when we were getting
contacted.
By family members by community
members going, we need your
help.
And me having to say,
We can't be deployed until state
police deploys us.
I want those.
communications with our team to
stop. I don't wanna say we can't
come.
We need to be out in the field,
and I really think that this
bill will help get us there
quicker, so that people like
Esther can be found and
potentially not die.
Thank you.
All right, thank you so much.
And so, uh, you can go ahead and
respond to your public testimony
or just go ahead and go to the
committee.
Madam Chair, I, I just wanna, I,
I don't have any response
because I just want to thank all
the search and rescue volunteers
who put on a lot of time into
this, but I want to thank TL
Harvard, who's done a lot of
research to help set this up,
Bob Rogers, and just everybody
here actually contributed. It
was amazing. We sent the draft
out to over 700 people before we
ever introduced it. So many
people had little feedback,
um, and so, um, sharing her
experiences in the Navajo
Nation, how we've included
tribes into this. Um, it's just
been an amazing collaboration,
um.
this is really gonna move us
forward. It's going to invest in
search and rescue system and
training and collaboration and
as we grow our outdoor, it's
just, it's just a great step
forward for us, so stand for any
questions.
Right, thank you so much,
Senator Ramos. Madam Chair,
thank you and uh Senator
Steiner, thank you, Senator Pino
for bringing this uh in front of
us today. You know what, I have
the he hea National Forest in my
backyard and I'm very fortunate
and I thank each and every one
of you for what you all do it
it's a, it's very you're very
special people to volunteer and
do this type of work.
But what my question is, what's
the current process?
What's going to be the new
process, and what's the what?
is happening that there's a
disconnect.
Madam Chair, uh, Senator, so
right now it's voluntary when
when a call comes to a local
dispatcher and says,
I'm lost in the Gila where my
loved ones lost in the Gila.
That local sheriff's department
or EMS gets to decide if they
want to call him or not. What
happens sometimes is they decide
not to.
They decide they're gonna go try
to offer help, and then they
find out that they're kind of in
over their head. Hours later,
maybe that call then comes and
they say we got a call and we
got to call search and rescue,
we got to call state police, and
then a person's been exposed,
maybe they get hypothermia, we
lose people every year.
What this bill would do is it
would train local dispatchers
that when they get that call,
they have to call search, they
have to call state police
immediately.
To then dispatch, so state
police can then decide do they
then create a mission and
dispatch search and rescue.
So that's the difference. Right
now, it's optional, and the
disconnect is, believe it or
not, it doesn't happen.
Doesn't happen far too often
that that call comes in because
they're trying to deal with it
themselves at a local level
before they discover that they
need help. Sometimes the local
first responders themselves get
In a bad situation and they need
help.
So it just would make it kind of
automatic, where they, that call
would come in.
And, and Bob
So Madam Chair and Senator, so
What, I mean, what's to keep the
state police from not calling, I
mean, is it, are you writing
something in the law here that
says they have to call you right
away, because, OK, and I guess
I, I must have missed that part.
and you don't have to go into
it. I just want to make sure
that that is gonna be.
Proper protocol from now on.
That's proper protocol and, and,
and, uh, Madam Chair, I'll just
add to it. This bill also speaks
to a situation where state
police is the first one to get
the call.
That someone is, let's say they
don't even call the local
dispatcher, they call the state
police, but this bill also
requires the state police is to
then notify the local people
that they have dispatched search
and rescue, so that then the
local sheriff's department is
made aware that search and
rescue has been dispatched in
their jurisdiction, so they
could also dispatch, so it
actually closes the
communication loop all the way
around.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair.
Thank you so much. Any other
questions or comments from the
committee?
What is the will of the
committee?
We have a new pass from Senator
Sanchez. Do we have a second?
Second from Senator Bergmans.
Anybody in opposition of the Du
Pass motion.
Seeing none, go ahead and record
all those in attendance. You
have a 100. 0, good job, team.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
committee.
All right. So while we have you
here, we've got a very quick
bill that not you all can, you
can take off. Don't worry, you
can take off, but, um, Senator
Bergmans is gonna go ahead and
chair.
Thank you, Senator Hamblin.
And just as a note to the
committee, this is a tax credit
one that we will not vote on.
So, go ahead, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Madam Chair and committee.
Um this is along the theme of
our search and rescue, uh,
champions here. Senate Bill 473
provides a small tax break for
our search and rescue volunteers
who uh would either volunteer 6
times a year or at least 60
hours in a taxable year and they
may be able to claim the tax
credit.
As you can see and you've heard,
we have 900 plus volunteers
statewide, 36 volunteer teams
across the state. They work at
the behest of New Mexico State
Police. However, much of the
gear that they have, the stuff
that they have purchased out of
their own pockets.
And given the amount of times
that they have rescued people,
especially in southern New
Mexico, we have the Oregon
Mountains, Desert Peaks National
Monument, um, and our search and
rescue crew, uh, is out there
on, um, not on a regular basis,
but because the monument is so
beloved in our community. We
hear about that, but they don't
always, uh, necessarily are out
in national monuments or public
lands. We had a young individual
who also was autistic who roamed
away from his family and the
search and rescue was called out
to um to try and find
this young person and thankfully
they did. And so what the bill
allows is $500 if the taxpayer
volunteers between 6 and 11
times, or volunteers for a total
of between 60 and 120 hours or
$1000 if the taxpayer volunteers
12 times or more, or volunteers
for a total of at least 120
hours. What happens is, is that
if they seek to claim the tax
credit that they shall apply for
certification of eligibility
from the resource officer and I
believe uh Bob Rogers might be.
that person, uh, or their
supervisor there that can go
ahead and fill out that
paperwork, um, and the reasons
for this is that we do have
dozens of individuals throughout
the state that volunteer their
time searching for, rendering
aid, and preserving the lives of
people who are lost, stranded,
and entrapped, injured, or in
distress, and removing these
people from the site of a
disaster emergency, or hazard to
a place of safety. They pay for
their equipment, their climbing
gear, their first aid kits,
lights, backpacks, helmets, etc.
out of their own pocket and just
for full.
transparency, one of my closest
friends is a search and rescue
person, and on a regular basis,
if we are having a function, uh,
she will let us know. I can't go
because there's, there's
somebody who needs our help.
And so, um, I'm very, very
honored to be able to, uh, to
present this to you and um and
be able to make it a little bit
easier for the people who are
doing an incredible service to
our state.
And so at this point, um, I
opened it up for discussion or
public testimony.
Thank you, Madam Chair, by a
show of hands in the committee
room, how many people are in
support of this bill.
Yeah.
Thanks. I get like 15.
And are there any online
support?
Is there anyone in the committee
room in opposition?
Thing done. Is there anyone
online?
So how about would 4 of you like
to get up and speak for one
minute in support or if the
committee wants to move on this,
we can also go ahead and do
that.
But
they are very passionate. I say,
would you like to say something?
Sure, go ahead.
We'll do too.
Hello, Madam Chair and
committee. My name is Marina
Hein. I, uh, serve on the
Socorro search and rescue team
down in Socorro, and I am on the
New Mexico search and rescue
council as the secretary. Um, my
team down in Socorro is
primarily consisting of
undergraduates and grad students
at the New Mexico Institute of
Mining and Technology. And one
of the first things we do with
our new recruits is we walk them
through the cheapest way to get
their gear. These are students
who are by and large putting
themselves through school.
Um, and eating primarily ramen
and rice and beans and a
vegetable if I can throw one at
them. And this kind of tax
credit.
would make a world of
difference. I myself an alumni
of tech where I went for my
masters, and this would have
fundamentally changed, um, my
budgeting experience as a
student at tech.
Thank you. Madam Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Robert Garcia. I'm the president
of the New Mexico Search and
Rescue Council for all of our 35
member teams. A lot of our teams
are nonprofit.
They raise their own funds. We
have teams that get donations
from churches, hospitals.
Um, it wasn't so much an issue
1020 years ago for what tools we
were using averagely ratios were
$100 for analog radios. Now
they're digital. They cost 300
to $400.
What tools that we were not
using years ago, such as drones
and I'll tell drone will run
about $10,000 to have a clearer
package put in. Um, we use
drones routinely, we find people
very quickly with our drones,
especially we had one in er C.
Dementia walk away, found her
very quickly with a, with a
drone, with a thermal drone. Um,
it is very common that.
We, our equipment is getting a
little bit more expensive.
But also with the state losing
38% of its volunteers over the
last couple of years, it would
help.
To boost our volunteer numbers.
Thank you for your time.
Thank you, Madam she looked at
anything else? Um, no, just
briefly, Madam Chair, this, this
was really inspired by uh the
selfless commitment, not only
these people in the room, but
the people that I know near and
dear to me in southern New
Mexico, Shawna, Chuck and
Cormick, uh, who are, uh, ones
who go out and are risking their
own lives to uh try and save
somebody in distress. And so,
uh, I'm open for questions from
the committee, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator Hermiel.
Madam Chair, not a question, but
a comment I'm happy to
co-sponsor with you because as a
senator who represents rural New
Mexico. The job all of you
volunteers do is a vinyl in our
rural parts of the state. I'm so
very thankful for you. We've had
some issues near the El Rito
area where you've been deployed
and so you were a major reason
why teenagers in rural New
Mexico are still with us because
you were able to get to them on
time.
Thank you for that, Madam Chair.
No questions.
Thank you.
That are work. Uh, thank you,
Ma. I believe center Deanic has
a similar volunteer firefighter?
Yes, Madam Chair and Senate
Majority Leader. We had had the
conversation about uh having
this part, having this amended
into the bill. However, after
working with the bill drafters
and also understanding that the
criteria for firefighters and
EMTs a little bit different than
search and rescue just because
of the number of trips that they
do a year.
So that's why it's a separate
film. I appreciate that. That
makes sense. I just think.
Again, it's powerful to have
people stepping up.
You know, we've got a, we're,
we're all stepping up. Let me
tell you, this is pretty much
volunteer. We're here doing this
and I appreciate you guys what
you're doing. I mean, I, I
really think this and the
volunteer firefighter, it's,
it's a small amount. We've done
that before from this committee.
I remember Senator Brandt had
something for school teacher
supplies.
Which seems pretty obvious, but
we were able to put that into a
package. And I just think as we
try and figure out if this is
gonna happen, these two both
discredit and the volunteer
firefighter are ones we should
really push for, again, given
how important this is and boy,
it's a small little mouth that
can make a huge difference, so I
just wanted to say that.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
senator, it may seem like a
small amount, but it means the
world to these people.
Um, and it makes it a lot
easier.
Thank you. Is there any other
questions?
Ma'am would you pass
I'm sorry. I think if we are
voting on it, we'd be voting on
it.
That's confidence in Senator
Ramos. Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you. Senator Pope, you're up
next.
If you could take your question
or your comments outside. Thank
you.
Whenever you're ready, send
Pope, but a note for the
committee. This is another bill
that we will not vote on.
No one's listening to me, but
I'll remind them in a minute.
Uh, just a reminder, this is not
a bill we will vote on. It's,
we'll hold it. Go ahead, Senator
Pope. Thank you, Madam Chair,
committee members, um, I hate
Santa.
Simpleville, but I'll, I'll lay
it out that way. Um, this deals
with our uh income tax here in
New Mexico. And what this bill
does is
Basically, anyone making $40,000
or less than pays no personal
income tax in our state.
Anyone who was married and files
separately.
Um
It would be 30,000 or less would
pay no income tax. And if they
are married, filing jointly, it
would be $60,000 or less would
pay no personal income tax.
Uh, that is basically the bill.
And with that, Madam Chair, I'll
take any questions. I don't
believe there's any public
comment that I've brought in,
but we'll see what happens.
Thank you, Senator.
Is there anyone in the committee
room in support of this bill?
Anyone online?
Is there anyone in the committee
room in opposition to this bill?
Seeing none, anyone online?
OK.
Are there questions from the
committee?
Senator O'Malley, thank you,
Madam Chair. Um, so Senator
Pope, uh, is this gross income?
Is this what or modified gross,
what number are we looking at
for this amount?
Madam Chair, Senator, we're
looking at a modified gross
income.
levels.
Mm
OK. Thank you, ma'am.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Sheriff.
Um
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Senator. Approximately how many
people are we talking about
here?
Madam Chair, Senator, I
Have some information, I think
from.
The FIR.
I think
Looking at some of the numbers
we're probably talking.
A little over
I'm sorry I'm looking at the
numbers.
I want to make sure I guess it
kind of covers for the current.
tax brackets on the married
filings separately.
Um, but we're probably looking
at around.
6.
100,000 folks, I think.
OK.
So, uh, Madam Chair, I'm just
wondering how that compares with
the total number of taxpayers.
It's very this earlier today we
talked about indigent and.
That's
Or somebody that's
Single one person is $40,000 so,
you know, maybe it makes sense,
they're indigent.
Anyway, I don't know.
Just wanted to figure out how
many it was.
Thank you.
Yeah, Madam Chair, Senator,
looking on here the analysis I
have it, and it says it's gonna
cost around.
90
$2 million to the general fund
from what I'm seeing.
Are there any other questions
from the committee?
Uh, Senator O'Malley again.
again
So, um,
It's interesting that this
bracket is also
A bracket that a lot of times,
um,
It's not able to take advantage
of uh any kind of like project
of services or things like that,
they either make too much. I
mean, it's really interesting
how
Even though by the modified by
the time you get to modified
growth, which would probably be
about 20, 20,000 or something
like that.
They really, they usually are
not able to, like I said, um,
make too much to apply for like.
Some of the affordable housing
project, I mean, um, uh.
You know, I've worked with
families like this and
And um it's kind of a shame. And
then even beyond that,
Folks at the, what is it?
Above 602 even 150, they're
paying, you know, a lot of
income tax there.
They basically paying probably
the bulk of it, you know, cause
that's what's, that's what
happens with middle income
folks. I mean, they're paying.
Um, in terms of a percentage,
you're paying the largest
percent of the of of attacks.
And so, um,
I guess, you know, it's, I, I
don't think probably that one.
Be all that popular because of
the sort of hit it takes to the
budget.
But I could see how these folks
could
couldn't really benefit, not
maybe from 100% of a, you know,
not having to pay, but certainly
reduced. So
anyway, I thought this
interesting that you brought
that up because
I'm sure it's gonna pop up in
conversations. It needs to at
some point, cause we are
We are really putting a lot of
burden on the middle class, you
know.
Thank you, ma'am.
And Madam Chair, if I could just
respond. I know it wasn't a
question. I, I think you brought
up a good point, and I don't
know what this number should be,
maybe should be 30,000, 350.
But you're right, we also
probably have to look at other
programs and uh what we offer
and um.
I think we need to look at, look
at those as well and see.
How those aligned to where
folks.
Kind of fall off the cliff and
get no support, kind of like
what we were talking about the
prior bills, but, um, just
wanted to really bring this
forward to really
kind of have that discussion and
see what that number could be to
just uh provide relief for
folks.
Are there any other questions?
I just have one question,
Senator, um, in the FIR on page
3.
In the technical issues in the
second paragraph.
It mentions that the
The modified gross income is not
typically where.
The taxes are
Considered and
Instead, the federal adjusted
gross income is more typical.
I'm just wondering why you chose
to use.
The modified gross income.
Um, Madam Chair, uh, committee
members, they, um, just coming
up with the bill, um, that's
kind of what I was told to kind
of go in the direction of once
it was more of a look at.
So
Um, but I would be willing to
kind of look after looking at
this FIR.
Probably have to consider that
as well.
Yeah, that might be a good idea.
To read through the concerns
within here cause I feel like
there's more than just that one
also. Yes.
Also the cliff effect.
But that's all I have. Thank
you. Is there anyone else?
Seeing that there's no other
questions. Thank you, Senator.
Pope. We'll keep this for our
tax package consideration. All
right, thank you.
You have time to get to your
class.
All right, thank you. Thank you,
Madam Vice Chair. Um, we, our
last bill of the night is our
first guest from the house.
Representative de la Cruz.
This is the veteran property tax
exemptions, um, so
Representative, just to give you
a rundown of what we do, so
we'll get uh 10 minutes of the
presentation and then uh that
includes your expert. And then
if there's any public testimony,
then we'll go to the, if the, if
you wanna respond to the public
testimony, you have 5 minutes to
do so, then we go to the
committee.
A
No, actually, I did, I checked
in on this. This is something I
can read to you.
Pardon? Yeah, we definitely
vote. This one does not have a
general fund impact, so that's,
uh, the, it's enabling
legislation from the
constitutional amendment passed
last year. So this is something
that we actually vote on because
this came over from the house.
Yes. So, Representative De la
Cruz, you're welcome to start.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, rather
than winging it, I think I'd
just rather read a statement if
that's OK and my expert witness
this evening is Stephanie
Chardon Clark, the secretary of
Tax and Ref.
The HTRC committee substitute
for HB 47 is a simple bill that
effectuates the two veteran
property tax exemption,
constitutional amendments that
were approved by the electorate
in the November 2024 general
election.
The first constitutional
amendment increases from 4000 to
10,000, the exemption that may
be claimed by any veteran or
veterans surviving spouse. In
future years, the 10,000
exemption will will be adjusted
for inflation. The second
constitutional amendment expands
the disabled veteran property
tax exemption to include a
proportionate exemption
reflecting a veteran's partial
disability.
The current exemption only
provides a 100% exemption for
100% disabled veterans. The HTRC
substitute ensures there is no
confusion about the, about how
the two exemptions are to be
stacked together so that county
assessors can implement them
consistently statewide.
Madam Chair, members, we stand
for questions.
OK, secretary, did you want to
make any statement or would you
rather us go to a public
comment. I'm, I'm fine standing
for questions and going to
comment. Thank you. All right,
thank you. Is there anybody in
the audience that's in support
of this legislation. All right,
if you will go ahead and come on
up. Is there anybody in the
audience in opposition.
All right, Charlie, we'll get
you after this. So if you will,
you have a minute apiece.
Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Uh, my name is Eric James. I
serve as the deputy cabinet
secretary secretary, the
Department of Veteran Services,
uh, Department of Veteran
Services fully supports this
bill, stands as a great
recognition for the service of
our state's veterans and also
Um, shows a great signal uh to
the veterans and family members
of veterans to move to the
state. Thank you.
Thank you so much.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Brent
Moore. I'm a registered lobbyist
for the New Mexico Association
of Realtors, the realtors have
stood in support of these
proposals over time. We believe
that it's something appropriate
and it's the least that we can
do for our veterans. Thank you
very much.
Thank you. All right, we do have
one person online and then we'll
go to you, Charlie. Uh, Joan
Dickerson, you are registering
as in support of HB 47, if you
will. You are welcome to speak.
You have one minute, you know
the drill. You will get a 32nd
warning in your chat.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Joan
Dickerson. I'm with the Veterans
and Military Families Caucus. We
strongly support this
legislation. Is it enacts the uh
wishes of the voters, which were
overwhelmingly in support of the
property tax exemptions for
veterans. We ask your support as
well. Thank you for your time.
Thank you so much, John, and we
also have Enrique Nell who is
also raised his hand. Enrique,
you have one minute. You'll get
a warning at 30 seconds in your
chat. Go ahead. Thank you so
much. Thank you so much, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
Enrique Nel with the Greater
Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce
here in support of House Bill
47. New Mexico is home to
141,000 veterans who are proud
of their service and defense of
our country. The chamber is also
proud of them, and we want to
make New Mexico more attractive
for veterans to
serve here and to stay in our
great state. House Bill 47 is a
good investment in New Mexico's
economy and the many veterans
who are business owners,
consumers, and contributors to
our state's success. We urge
your support. Thank you.
Thank you so much. All right,
Charlie, you're speaking out in
opposition. If you will please
come on up.
Art do you mind handing him that
microphone?
OK.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Charlie Marcus
registered lobbyist for the city
of Gallup.
Uh, we stand in support of the
measure, the way it's concept.
These veterans have earned this
right.
Um, but the city of Gallup is
So I strap for revenue.
So they're concern is what it
does to the revenues.
They have no other way to make
it up.
So
That for that reason there's.
All right, thank you, Charlie.
So Representative, you do have 5
minutes if you'd want, like to,
uh, respond to any of the public
testimony?
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair, uh,
not so much the, the commentary
for the most part, other than uh
what Charlie said, the vast
majority of assessors in the
state actually support this
measure, uh, so that would be a
little bit of an outlier. Now
that being said, this bill is in
fact time critical because
assessors have to give notice.
The property owners and so uh we
actually needed to have this
enacted yesterday, uh.
Madam Chair and sinners, so we
need to get this to the floor
and as quickly as possible
because it is, that's why we
declared it an emergency because
of that issue.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I'll just add to
that, um, I do understand the,
the county mainly and to some
extent municipal revenue
concerns. Just want to mention
yield control, which, um, for
the most part, if we narrow the
tax base by taking certain
properties out of it, yield
control, mainly acts to raise
the rate on what's left, but the
rest is.
than what was taken out that
that increase is very minor, um,
and I'll just say that
These changes are necessary to
reflect the state constitution
that was amended by the
electorate.
Thank you so much. Any questions
or comments from the committee,
Senator O'Malley.
miniature and I appreciate the
basically it's enabling you have
to get it done right away. I
think there's still some other
issues the assessors have, but,
you know, I mean, we're running
out of time, so, and so I
appreciate, I appreciate that,
but, um, you know, the fact is,
you know, it's got to be made up
somewhere, and as you said, you
know, that that that was
probably with yield control and
we'll, that'll probably go up.
Um
Anyway, that's pretty much all I
have to say. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Senator
O'Malley. Any other questions or
comments from the committee?
See none what is the will of the
committee. We have a due pass
from Senator Wirth. We have a
second from Senator Figueroa.
Anybody showing in opposition of
the DuPass measure.
See none, if you will, please
record that all in attendance,
excluding Senator Sanchez, or in
support. Congratulations, you go
to the floor.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members.
Alrighty committee, we are done
for the evening. I just wanna
let you know that um several of
you have RSVP. We have the
associated contractors of New
Mexico who are uh providing us
uh who are taking us to dinner
tomorrow night. Uh, you'll have
those details, but I do want to
thank the Associated contractors
of New Mexico, uh, and Jim
Garcia in particular, we will
have uh bills on Thursday. We
also will have the basketball
games, so hopefully our floor
session will be a little bit
short, but, um, we have
Bills from Senator Padillaz,
Senator Scott, Elle Woods,
Spanskki Ramos, Nava, Stewart,
Townsend, and Scherer. And so
