Kernan.
She's not in.
Yet senator Sanchez I see his
name.
I'm here okay thank you senator
Clemente.
Senator Wirth.
Senator Padilla.
And Senator Shendo so you've got
one two three four five six
Senator Shendo so you've got a
court.
Are you counting a hearty meal
on that count.
I yes I am.
Issue.
All right the go ahead and get
started and I'm sure this will
join in the pretty soon
I don't know if
Senator Morris is.
Here for just be two ninety
nine.
If not we will move to the
Senate bill eighty nine
installment is in.
Is not in yet.
Okay what what will skip to a
Senate bill two forty three.
Senator Hickey.
I did
Important Hickey as we're doing
with other all the bills that
have tax credits we will have
the presentation but we will not
take action so with that of
Senator Hickey go ahead and
present your Senate bill two
forty three.
Thank you Mr chair I greatly
appreciate that I do have to.
Two expert witnesses are coming
made to date Ryan center while I
hope he's not and mark Fleischer
and
I'm.
Do
seeing them at the moment
I hate to keep having your rules
stuff that I'm gonna need to
they probably didn't think we
were going quite so fast could I
have one more bill and then I'll
present Mr chair.
Mr chair can I can I can I have
one more step yes we're going to
do that we'll go to Senator
Griggs is bill okay thank you
under Senate bill three twenty
one Senator Griggs.
You're you're muted we can't I
see your lips moving but I can't
hear what you're saying okay
probably.
You
don't want it now you do you do
you're probably yes now since I
moved up I know I was I was
shocked in order.
But anyway let's let's let's
talk for a minute I I do have
and I don't know whether she's
here
Marquita Russel to talk about
maybe some of that the technical
stuff but let me go ahead and
and crank up and tell you about
the bill
maybe a little bit of background
all of you that Otero County is
home to the twelfth judicial
District Court which is housed
in a building although it's been
remodeled a couple times is
still over fifty years old.
At the twelfth judicial District
Court also utilizes the forecast
and cares Otero and one judge is
has there.
The four other judges are housed
in the Alamogordo facility.
Every county and I just want
every county that has a a
courthouse is required to fund
the construction and maintenance
of those buildings hundred
percent even though those are
state courts.
What's been going on in in Otero
County is been going on for for
several years as the judges have
been very concerned about the
condition of the courthouse.
And the county commissioners
have been struggling over the
lack of revenue.
And in an effort to raise
revenue for the for the facility
the county passed all three one
eight increments of the hold
harmless to.
Unfortunately the vast majority
of the money they then bonded
out raised.
Had to go forward to the county
detention facility to upgrade it
and do things to that that
facility.
The counties uncomfortable with
trying to raise much more in G.
R. T. because that's going to
push Otero County institutions
of Alamogordo whose were most of
that gets paid at.
Close to eight and three
quarters percent.
The lack of movement on the
counties part has forced the
judges to file a lawsuit against
the county because the county
has failed to act.
So here we are.
We Senate bill three twenty one
as a way to help County raised
money in order to.
Add on for jailed additional
courtroom space.
What the builders is it in
action the county courthouse
bonding Act and creates a
monthly one million dollar
distribution to go to the New
Mexico finance authority from
gross receipts tax.
The financial authority will
use this revenue stream to bond
with and create funding for
remodeling and renovation for
the construction of courthouses
including equipment and
furnishings but excluding the
purchase of land or building.
Counties in this bill will be
required to match.
That funding by fifty percent so
be a fifty fifty split shows the
county needs twenty they got to
bring ten to the tape.
So Mr chair I don't know if mark
Peters on to talk about any of
the the particulars of the.
Way this works but what it'll do
for counties like yours mine.
Hurry there's according to the
the association counties about
half the courthouse space in the
state is in need of of
renovation in hell schoettle
it'll it'll give everybody an
opportunity to apply for
proceeds from these bonds to to
work over there forecaster show
these so that's in essence what
the bill does
I'm hopeful that we have a
little bit of a discussion and
maybe move it finance to see if
the if the actual mechanism is
the best way but but I know in
in Otero county in Alamogordo.
This would be highly appreciated
so with that Mr chairman I will
I will stand for questions
unless a marquee addition
occur Senator great I did text a
market and she is on but you you
have a committee substitute
right.
Wrecked Mr chair.
What I would if you want me to I
would move do not pass on the on
Senate bill three twenty one and
do pass on committee substitute
for Senate bill three twenty one
okay good for discussion
purposes and we'll go ahead and
turn to our Marquita your expert
witness of our give.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee so the
committee sub basically update
some bonding language of what
was in there before with some
relatively outdated language as
it relates to competitive bond
issues so it updates that part
it also provides for these bonds
to be purchased by the PPRF the
public project revolving fund
that that language in there find
for the authorization to the
fight for the finance authority
to be able to really cost
effectively issue these bonds so
with that link which we'd be in
a position to buy them right
into the PPRF there are no fees
associated with that and at the
a million dollars a month that
would support over five years
with support about a fifty nine
point five or so of bond issue
and so that's the amount that
would be made available on day
one and then lastly we've asked
for some non impairment language
to go in that's a those systems
that some standard language that
we typically have a when we
issue bonds that are backed by
the source of state revenue
streams and we're I'm certainly
happy to answer questions.
Great thank you are Marquita so
at this time we will go to the
public for.
For Senate bill three twenty
one.
Or public comment we do not have
anyone register to speak in
opposition are there any members
of the public who wish to speak
in opposition of Senate bill
three twenty one at this time
you may raise your hand.
Steve Coleman.
Okay I found that hand disappear
there anybody else wishes to
speak in opposition.
Right.
Those who wish to speak in favor
first off we have Brian Moore.
Steve Coleman.
Thank you.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Steve
Coppell then on the executive
director New Mexico counties I
wanted to I think Senator Griggs
and senator Byrd we think this
is a really important bills are
not just for counties but for
the district court's also
Senator Griggs indicated are
counties of obligation to
provide the district courts with
building security it cetera is a
major unfunded mandate that
really is very difficult for
some of the smaller counties
that don't have the revenues to
be able to keep these buildings
up to speed.
There is a legal obligation to
provide adequate quarters and is
Senator Griggs indicated
situation really implemented
down enough Otero County we're
trying very hard now to get it
back on track but this bill
would be a really important one
it would help supplement the the
the revenue stands at counties
having we really strongly urge
you to support this bill thank
you.
Thank you very much next up we
had judge Angie Schneider but
you did not appear to be in a
meeting are there any other
members of the public who wish
to speak in support of Senate
bill three twenty one please
raise your hands.
All right final call for Senate
bill three twenty one anyone who
wishes to speak in support.
All right that concludes public
comment at this time thank you
very much.
Thank you Kara so now we'll go
to the committee for questions.
Members of the committee.
Senator Hermio.
Thank you Mr chairman at Senator
Griggs as a former county
commissioner I can see how this
would be important for counties
and I can see the importance to
this bill and so if there's no
other questions or comments Sen
at chairman I would make a
motion for a do pass.
I would second that Mr chair.
Who is that Senator Hamblen said
okay sorry okay no I don't see
any hand so we have a due pass
motion by Senator Hermio second
by Senator Hamblen of.
Any opposition to the motion.
See none you have a due pass
intercepted a bill Senator
Griggs.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
committee.
Right.
So now we will.
Senator Tom and will move back
up to the US Senate bill eighty
nine.
Mr chairman Sir Brandt good for
second.
Senator go ahead Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman if you
would like me to this is not a
very you'll have to search all
of that I can present to
certainly are still important
since he's not able to be with
us okay yet I asked earlier so
if you want to put that on that
we can get that and I know we've
held over twice now so we've got
Senator is Mr chair let him go
ahead Senator Brandt go ahead
because I got a contact my.
Expert witness.
Let me know if okay go ahead
Senator Brandt go ahead with the
Morse's bill thank you Mr
chairman this is a bill that
we've actually seen the last
couple years ago the bills
really simple it allows so if
you have a special plate like we
have on our vehicles Senators or
if you have a better plate or
something like that and you want
to spend your handicapped so you
qualify for handicap plate this
allows a handicapped sticker to
be put on whatever place you
have so right now.
You have to either either get a
handicapped plate or you have to
get the specialty plate this
would allow us to occur to be
able to go on your your normal
plate so that its handicaps.
Play it wouldn't really costs
the state much and actually
could save the state quite a bit
of money longer.
Thank you senator thank you
senator thank you Senator Brandt
of at this time we'll go to
public comment.
First Senate bill two ninety
nine.
I appreciate your patience as I
look at it did not have any
members register to speak
against other any members of the
public who wish to speak in
opposition of Senate bill two
ninety nine at this time please
raise your hand.
Okay.
Members of the public who wish
to speak in favor of Senate bill
two ninety nine please raise
your hand.
Concludes public comment at this
time thank you Senator Brandt
just for your information we did
have the proposed amendment.
Of so.
To send a bill to ninety nine
can you put the.
Better.
No I I just see the listing on
your email.
Yeah stand for.
It's it's highlighted what it's
not okay it will.
Right.
Okay Mr.
My okay now can you hear me yes
Mr okay all right yeah it's just
a.
A to believe is a technical fix
on the.
On the bill the thing
substantive.
Mr looks like it's just some
technical clean up it allows the
department to help with if
there's not room on the plate.
To be able to put the sticker on
there that they would be able to
get all their.
Okay.
Any any questions on the members
of the committee.
See none of any opposition to
the amendment.
See none we'll have a amended
bill.
So we're we're back on the on
the bill now any other questions
of the committee members.
Seeing that Mr chairman I moved
to pass within the past by
Senator Padilla.
Second by Senator Hickey.
Any opposition to the motion.
The non with the pass on the.
Senate bill to the line thank
you Senator Brandt.
The use gentleman I think that
was just on the amendment but
also good for the whole bill.
With there was no opposition
amendments of the thing I was
immediate so we're we're we're
good.
Thank you Mr chairman that was
quick thank you
thank you SO fast you notice.
All right so we'll move on to
of.
Senator Carmen are you ready.
Our test okay of.
We're you gonna present again
like we've done with other bills
since this is so having to do
with the.
You know of we will hold this we
won't take action but the.
We'll have the hearing to go
ahead senator Cormann.
Well thank you thank you this is
the Senate bill of eighty nine.
What does this what does this
bill do this bill restructures.
And broadens the personal income
tax brackets to provide a more
gradually progressive tax
structure with the top rate of
six point five versus the
current five point nine.
Mexicans are in lower income
would see a small tax cut.
Middle income would remain
roughly the same.
Was maybe slight increases on
the higher levels of middle
income and higher incomes would
see an increase this
restructuring is needed because
when personal income taxes were
cut two thousand three.
That not only lower the top rate
from eight point two to four
point nine but also eliminated
the top three brackets for
higher earners this may our tax
rate sensually flat.
Which meant that a very.
Filing jointly would have the
same marginal tax rate of four
point nine regardless of whether
you are a twenty five thousand
dollars or two hundred fifty
thousand are over a million
dollars despite these families
are having a very different
ability to pay and even with the
current rate of five point nine
that applies to taxable income
over three hundred and fifty
thousand for merry filing
jointly.
It only affects the top three
percent governor's.
So again.
Mr chair the top right
current top rate of five point
nine which affects incomes over
three hundred fifty thousand
only affects the top three
percent Werner's so a family
earning twenty five thousand
okay the same top rated four
point nine as a family earning
two hundred fifty thousand
dollars despite having a very
different the ability to pay so
in addition to improving
fairness in our tax code sure
changes proposed would increase
revenues for the general fund
and help reduce our over
reliance on more volatile
resource so revenue sources.
So it is estimated.
We have to estimates one from
LFC and another from what they
call the consensus revenue
estimating group.
LFC staff is estimating
For fiscal twenty two would you
want to be a.
Roughly half a year would
realize thirty eight million and
for the first full fiscal year
twenty twenty three.
they're estimating seventy eight
million whereas the consensus
revenue estimating group.
This estimating fifty one
million for.
Fiscal year twenty two hundred
four million for the first for
you first for you your of
operation of a hundred four
million.
So Mister chair I have a.
Ten reasons why
I think we should do this number
one.
We know that the worst of the
health and economic impacts of
the pandemic have largely by yes
wealthier higher income families
but have taken a much larger
toll among lower income families
in those of color so this L..
The New Mexico's earning lower
incomes it said small tax cut as
I said before what those earning
higher incomes and see an
increased number two raising the
personal income tax and higher
income earners would help
stabilize our revenue streams
number three.
These changes are long overdue
because a two thousand three
personal income tax cuts
overwhelmingly benefited the
higher earners in our state and
fail to create promised jobs
governor Richardson didn't do us
any favors.
We didn't grow the we didn't
grow the economy.
New Mexico is one of several
states.
During that time that
experimented with lowering tax
rates in the last twenty years
to attract high income
households and stimulate
economic development.
But there is little evidence
from New Mexico or other states
the district was successful
number four.
What sharing of our tax system
is long overdue New Mexico needs
to get off the roller coaster of
oil and gas volatility and and
its over reliance on these
declining industry.
Number five this is I said
earlier this bill raises about a
hundred million dollars.
What are you for years so Mr
chair right now we have three.
We are a.
Generating about three billion
dollars in oil and gas.
So over the next thirty years.
Most if not all that's going to
disappear.
So it's a hundred million so if
increased revenues.
Hundred million dollars a year
it would take thirty years.
To replace the hundred million
dollars a year to replace that
thirty million three billion
dollars that we're going to have
to replace so this is.
Hundred million dollars is only
US three point three percent of
the money that we of the three
billion dollars that we need to
replace so this is a small so
people are wondering why we
starting now well the longer we
wait the more we're gonna have
to come up with.
That's number five number six.
Is
The Rockefeller foundation
Under road eight hundred forty
patients a study of what.
And and make some
recommendations of what the city
and the city former city manager
what we should the state should
do maybe ten recommendations of
what to the.
Thank you do to raise
some money.
Number one the first
recommendation I made was
reinstate the P. I. T. rate
structure with higher marginal
rates of higher income levels
New Mexico is one of several
states that experimented with
lowering rates as I said before
however that there was little
evidence is that work so that
was their number one
recommendation that's reason
number six reason number seven.
Is.
I came across you can terrible
trust which puts out written
almost every port every day well
respected well financed.
Article that caught my eye is
that despite diminishing federal
eight total personal income beat
last year's well I I did a
double take you know most people
think obviously income fell well
it interesting enough it will Y.
two reasons one.
Because of the federal
government.
this.
What
How many trillions of dollars
into the economy and the second
reason was.
A lot of that.
A very high percentage of the
higher earners
you know people making over a
hundred to.
Thousand dollars a year did very
well last year so consequently.
personal income grew five point
nine percent nationwide in the
third quarter of last year.
So that's no reason number seven
number eight.
Low taxes are not a compelling
reason.
To.
To attract business and why is
that.
Well.
You know hundred years ago you
had to be near a natural
resources in a river.
Today you can go anywhere.
Because of modern communication
so what were the companies look
for the look for quality of
life.
They look for skilled workforce
a look for a.
Good schools low crime.
Good parks and.
Nice.
Cultural activities that cost
money that doesn't come cheap so
you can't.
We could lower the taxes to
zero.
We still might not attract a lot
of business why because we have
a high crime.
Though we don't have a skilled
workforce due to our educational
system so that's what tax is not
a compelling reason to generate
economic
activity that's reason number
eight.
Reason number nine we've been
talking this year about.
Getting revenue from the sale of
cannabis with talking about
maybe raising money from the
counties cigarette tax the
permanent fund.
Well the problem with cannabis
as I contend that we're going to
spend more money forcing it and
In educating metal surface and
mental health services we're
gonna raise up at least the
first two years.
And
cigarette taxes.
We're a thank I guess connected
raise eighty million dollars but
that's just a one time thing.
We we.
Much respect we're pretty much
at the maximum how much we're
going to raise cigarette taxes
that's only eighty million
dollars in the permit fund I
don't think that's a proper race
ways way to raise revenue and
there again that's just a one
time thing is not a necessarily
at well I guess it would be
recurring but I don't think that
one.
Investment.
financial investment experts
that would recommend.
Doing that.
So.
That's number a number six.
And
The.
I lost my place I had a tents
reason.
Okay bill world would nine.
Okay one more ally to Senate ten
million eleven.
The last one and I'm sure you're
getting impatient I'm almost
done.
Number eleven New Mexico
deserves
New Mexico devices significant
smaller revenue share from its
personal income tax than do
other states twenty three
percent of our tax revenue comes
from the personal income tax
well the average across the
United States is thirty seven
percent so we're fourteen
percent below the the amount of
tax revenue that we generate
from personal income tax so that
concludes my remarks I have to
up.
Two expert witnesses secretary
Stephanie Schardin Clarke who
answer questions technical
questions and I have a page
Hey your last name.
From places for children who is
on standby and I think we would
like to make a few remarks at
this time thank you Mr chair
thank you I believe it's rate
tonight.
Hi good afternoon Mister
chairman and members of the
committee my name is Paige
knight and I am a research and
policy analyst with New Mexico
voices for children at thank you
to senator Tom employers
sponsoring this legislation and
for inviting me here to help
explain a little bit more as
that the merits of Senate bill
eighty nine.
So Senator Tallman are you did a
great job of explaining the bill
and why it's necessary so I'll
just add a couple brief points
to what he's already set.
So at we believe this
restructuring as needed and
warranted and for a number of
reasons so first among those is
that it would improve the
fairness of our overall tax code
because the personal income tax
is the only major source of
state and local revenue that
could be based on a taxpayers
ability to pay which is
especially important given the
equal recovery from the COVID
nineteen pandemic and economic
downturn that senator Tom and
talked about.
And just to dig into that a
little bit more so the personal
income tax as we all know is
just one tax we pay and our
overall state tax structure so
we also pay gross receipts tax
many of us pay property taxes
and other access taxes that are
more regressive meaning these
taxes take up a larger share of
income among lower income
earners compared to higher
income earners so that leaves
higher income earners with more
disposable income.
So because the personal income
taxes only tax that is actually
based on your ability to pay we
need to have taxable income to
pay income taxes having a
progressive tax structure can
help remediate some of that
regressivity from consumption
taxes and make our overall tax
structure more fair as a whole
by asking those with the means
to pay a little bit more in
income tax for the programs and
services that benefit us all as
a community.
So in addition to improving
fairness in our tax code
restructuring their rates as
proposed in SB eighty nine but
also increase revenues for the
general fund and help reduce our
over reliance on more valid tile
sources so the two thousand
three income tax cuts that
senator Tom and discussed that
brought our top rate from
eighteen point two percent on a
four point nine percent cost New
Mexico hundreds of millions of
dollars and reliable recurring
revenues every year and this is
revenue that could have been
invested in our families and
communities in quality education
affordable health care modern
infrastructure and broadband and
all the other services that
create a strong economy and help
families and businesses thrive
so this awesome Revenue just
made us all the more reliant on
revenue of from the boom and
bust oil and gas industry so
this over reliance is
particularly dangerous because
research shows that the oil and
gas industry was already in
decline before the pandemic you
can begin.
So the steady growth of
renewables in changes in energy
consumption patterns mean we
cannot continue to rely on this
industry as an ongoing source of
revenue and while the industry
has certainly contributed
significantly to revenues over
the years our children in our
classrooms and our communities
they just deserve more funding
reliability.
So this this body this
legislature has made important
progress when it comes to
diversifying our revenues and
sharing sustainable ways but
there's more that needs to be
done especially given all of our
unmet needs that we have as well
and we believe that the personal
income tax needs to be part of
that equation when it comes to
diversifying our revenue since
again it is the only source of
state tax revenue that is based
on your ability to pay.
So I just like to conclude by
saying that increasing the
income tax for higher income
earners so those who have been
relatively unharmed by the
pandemic and are in the best
position to afford it we can
take an important first step and
generating a stable revenue
necessary to invest in the
programs and services like
public education healthcare
health care modern
infrastructure all those that
promote shared prosperity and
well being for all New Mexicans
I'm so thank you for your time
and again thank you to senator
Tom and for having here today.
Thank you.
Thank you page go ahead since Mr
chair.
Madam secretary are you here
this for questions or.
Yes thank you Mr chairman I'm
happy to answer technical
questions to the best of my
ability okay thank you at this
time a I will go to a public
comment.
Senate bill eighty nine first
stab are in opposition we have
JD Bullington.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee this is JD Boeing
Fund speaking on behalf of the
greater Albuquerque chamber of
commerce which believes
increasing taxes on small
businesses and families in the
midst of a pandemic and after
the hardest years of their lives
for the most part is not pro
that are small businesses pay
taxes to the personal income tax
rate because they file as sole
proprietorships and single
entity passed throughout the New
Mexico is not in a dire fiscal
position right now and raising
taxes at this time is
unnecessary the best way
distribute our revenue base.
The best way to restrict our
revenue base is divided versifi
our economy best way to
diversify our comedy is by
making our state more
competitive for new jobs new
businesses and new investment
thank you.
Thank you very much next up we
have Carlos on tech.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee on
Carlos contact the president of
the New Mexico business
coalition our focus is always
been to make New Mexico a better
place to do business so that New
Mexicans have jobs and can
provide for their families.
We respectfully.
Propose this legislation and
there's some interesting things
that I'd like to point out one
of the things that many people
forget.
When they are looking at raising
taxes is that in New Mexico the
vast majority of businesses.
Have pass through income so that
income from the businesses taxed
at their personal right so when
you raise the taxes like this
you are really going after small
business owners in our state
which we really cannot afford to
do right now after what they've
just been through in the
pandemic
Other thing that I found very
interesting United van lines
just did a study from twenty
twenty about why people early.
Thank you very much whether any
other members of the public who
wish to speak in opposition of
Senate bill eighty nine at this
time please raise your hand.
Jason Espinoza.
Chairman members of the
committee Jason Espinoza state
director with the national
federation of independent
business and we do stand in
opposition to the legislation
as was discussed eighty five
percent of small employers are
structured as are pass through
entities and so they pay their
tax on the personal income tax
rate not the corporate income
tax rate
and especially during this
pandemic many businesses of
learning the need to have larger
reserves to withstand many
unexpected events so this would
have a significant impact on
them as they're trying to build
the reserves to raise we're
synced after for for the.
For the year so it would mean
less dollars for small business
owners to reinvest into
increased wages expanding their
business and creating new jobs
thank you Mr chair.
Thank you very much moving on to
those who wish to speak in favor
of the bill first off we have
Bill Jordan.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee on Bill Jordan
with voices for children I want
to thank Senator Coleman for his
persistence and bringing this
bill back again this year
there's a lot of talk about the
need to diversify revenue
sources and the need to make our
tax system more fair especially
for families of color imagine if
we had done this at the
beginning of the last recession
I suspect we would not be
calling at the lost decade I
suspect we would have bounced
back faster and stronger instead
of near last in the nation.
We urge the committee to give
serious consideration to a
personal income tax increase for
high income earners this year
because it is one of the few
taxes that'll make our tax code
more progressive and New Mexico
stronger this is our best most
fair and equitable source of new
revenue thank you.
Thank you very much.
Next up we have heard preacher.
Yes new Mr chairman and members
of the committee my name is Kirk
record on the director Liz
at extreme District Mexico
leaders advocacy ministry also
speaks on behalf New Mexico
conference of churches.
I'm here today to state our
support for SB eighty nine and I
would like to begin by thanking
Senator Tallman for his
sponsorship of this bill as I
stated to this committee when I
spoke in favor of a similar
bill.
We support tax policy works
towards correcting the
regressive tax system that we
have in New Mexico and we
believe that the citizens of New
Mexico should be taxed
progressively in relation to
their ability to pay we do
believe that SB eighty nine is a
step in the right direction so
for those reasons and for the
arguments made by previous
proponents as well as by this
night.
We urge your support for SB
eighty nine and thank you for
this opportunity to speak to
this afternoon.
Thank you very much next up we
have Charles good marker.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
members of the committee for the
opportunity to comment thank you
Mr Thomas Senator Tallman for
sponsoring a bill
on this bill I'm speaking on
behalf of New Mexico voices for
children action fund and also
the policy solution Institute
used for your support.
Secretary taxation and revenue
should Schardin Clarke was asked
a question directly on point
with this January fourteenth at
the legislative preview event of
the New Mexico Society of
associating Association
executives and the tax research
to question the second is there
any proof at all that the
personal income tax cuts or the
corporate income tax cuts in
recent years resulted in any new
jobs being created in New Mexico
answered well there is no proof
where she went on to explain far
more but I noted the greatest
economic growth in New Mexico
was higher when we have the it
rates any point to that it is
now.
There is no evidence that.
Restoring or even this partial
right restoration will harm our
economy in anyway.
You very much next up we have
support in the past.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee my name
is to pour and nefesh nine the
registered lobbyist for New
Mexico thrives New Mexico
thrives stands in support of
Senate bill eighty nine it
brings equity and progressive
ready to the tax structure and
if we want to attract business
and people to New Mexico we need
to be able to invest in New
Mexico in education and in our
social systems thank you very
much.
Thank you very much next up we
have Richard Mason.
Yes Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Dick Mason
and chair the action committee
the league of women voters of
New Mexico as a legally said tax
system should be progressive
inequitable taking into
consideration people's ability
to pay how the tax system should
generate adequate revenue to
meet essential needs which is
what really attracts businesses
so they they they also believes
in diversifying our income
sources so on all of these SB
eighty nine fills all of those
goals voters and we urged
support for S. B. one ninety
nine please give it to pass.
Just to clarify this is Senate
bill eighty nine I'm sorry I did
I say I think it would be eighty
nine is what did advised
misspoke I'm sorry.
Thank you are there any other
members of the public who wish
to speak in favor of Senate bill
eighty nine please raise your
hand.
That concludes public comment at
this time thank you.
Kate thank you think are of no
we'll go to committee I have
Senator Griggs.
Thank you Mr chairman and and no
thank you Senator Senator
Tallman because I believe to
that this is a discussion to
have on the on the income tax
brackets but I don't I don't
really like having the
discussion on it in a vacuum I
mean I think there's a lot of
other things when you talk about
taxes and tax policy you ought
to be considering when you when
you do this staff because when
we look at things and just real
quickly what is what is New
Mexico do that surrounding
states don't do we we tax social
security we tax military
retirement so we have well we
have with this we will have a
higher top brackets than
Colorado and Arizona and we'll
have your text and have an
income tax so those are those
are things that we need to we
need to look at when we we
address it we we talk about we
talk about the fact that you
know it didn't do much when we
dropped the tax rate.
And I am I'm not gonna be a big
bill Richardson fan but we need
impose the when he did this for
work for that what loan right
after that that we had the Great
Recession we had things happen
we had federal jobs which in a
lot of instances or the high
paying jobs in New Mexico eight.
Sandy labs Los Alamos national
lab different things happen they
kept their work for those jobs
left now a lot of those jobs are
some of those jobs are back
maybe we've been increased job
with those places.
But at the same at the same time
lot of those guys have found out
maybe they can work from places
other than New Mexico because
they can work remotely of COVID
has you know has done lots of
things to our our world and I
don't I don't know what those
also meant Altamont results from
it will be.
Senator Tallman to absolutely
right and people look at New
Mexico or look for quality of
life they look for places with
with low crime businesses look
for workforce all of those
things are true.
But they consider you know the
retiree usually if you're
looking for them what they
consider a variety of things
that I think I think Senator
Tallman has actually worked on
some social security bills so he
understands he understands that
as well.
But you know I I don't know I I
don't know that raising taxes on
higher income or.
Is going to have the results you
want Senator Hamblen works in
the in the nonprofit world
there's other other senators and
work in the nonprofit world and
they may they may actually see a
benefit if we raise taxes on
higher earners because it may
see an increase in charitable
contributions to avoid paying
taxes of.
Those sort of things happen.
I'm not I'm not sure really that
That this is the right approach
at the right time and I I
appreciate you all the comments
Senator Tallman may.
Because I believe we do need to.
We do a valuation certain things
and figure out how we do all
what we ought to be do.
This can play a part of that I
just don't like some of the
stuff when it's just a
standalone deal where we can't
look at at a broader approaching
and Senator Shendo Mr chair I
know you're putting a lot of
these things in one in one pot
I'm not sure we'll be able to
bring him out and and decide
which bill actually is the is
right one or not we will create
this over arching tax bill I I
don't know would be cool if we
did but
but I don't I don't know how
much I want to give you guys an
idea I mean you we talk about
New Mexico we we talk about how
we're going to raise money out
we're going to do things and I
you know I just want to get I
want to get a little stirring
out there because I know this
will do it
but in New Mexico and a lot of
you I know have heard the whole
tech project in the southeast
the Holtec project is to get a
license Holtec is engage in that
and may have it by the middle of
this year.
That license is to store high
level nuclear waste.
In on a temporary basis.
Temporaries at licenses forty
years of renewable a renewal of
forty years I think that's you
know the discussion we've had
about that good bad or
indifferent.
The.
If indeed that move forward.
I think the state of New Mexico
needs to talk with the federal
government about us she solving
the federal government's
problem.
Federal federal government has a
problem right there they're
required to move the staff to a
a temporary storage or a
permanent storage.
And what I think should be done
is we should at that point.
Tell the federal government
because we're solving your
problem.
Will allow there's ways to come
into New Mexico but we want
somewhere in the vicinity of ten
billion dollars fifteen billion
dollars a year to restore that
way.
You create some jobs you create
a heck of a lot of right.
Show a show Mr chairman and
members of the committee I will
I will leave it at that because
I think if you if you consider
something along that line you
wanted to grow in your permanent
fund you wind up having all the
money you need to dress schools
roads without having to deal
with increase in personal income
tax without having to raise.
Gross receipts tax with you can
be an even you can create your
kid to increase minimum wage
probably at that point to so
thank you Mr chair thank you
senator Tom and for bring in the
bill.
Right now I have Senator of
Hickey.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Senator Tomlinson and fellow
senators and especially Senator
requests for broadening the
perspective of this discussion
I'd certainly like to learn more
particularly the
Revenue consequences of which we
just discussed but I also am
wondering if we're taking that
if we're adding a hundred in
here where we maybe taking at
our jobs and so forth and so my
first question is maybe this is
to the chairman who maybe has a
broader perspective Senator
Shendo
is there a bill to eliminate the
social security tax New Mexico
so if the security tax winding
its way through some committee
of one champ or the other are or
maybe Senator Padilla can answer
that.
A good Senator Padilla Mr
chairman district weekly test
answer question yes this is the
the bill a couple years we try
to do this Mr chairman my most
recent effort attempting to do
this with was with the late
senator Jim white.
And why you're speaking
Senator Padilla Mr chair Senator
Padilla
would would passing this bill
helps to pass that bill because
I I think I've heard that it
would eliminate about a hundred
million in revenue I'm not sure
that.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Hickey
can't hurt first of all but the
latest estimate the last time we
attempted it which would have
been it was last year I believe
it was the two thousand twenty
session Mr chairman that
estimate was somewhere just
north of seventy million dollars
and we have secretary Schardin
Clarke animal she recalls that
number but that's what I believe
was.
Okay thank you Senator Padilla
and and Mr chairman my next
question Mr chairman and senator
Clemente maybe our no matter
what on the spot Kelly
o'donnell I have read through
the FY are about three times and
my money get comes out tangled
every time and I'm not sure what
the conclusion of it is is this
a logical regressive.
Tax structure
that scan parables other states
that have that yeah I do
so can you maybe and in layman's
term in light and us on the
panelists to is this a fair
progressive structure.
Thank you
Mr chairman members of the
committee I yeah I'm on the
dates are.
In the the.
The rate structure are proposed
in SB eighty nine is very
rational I mean it you know it's
a progressive rate structure I
it's predicated obviously on
increasing income it increases
the productivity of the tax it
tops out I believe it's six
point five percent which is
higher than Solomon lower than
others either so it's it's it's
it's not an out liar by any
stretch of the imagination so I
I am I.
And I don't I don't personally
think that it would be a six a
top six point five percent rate
would be a massive disincentive
but you know that those are
those are value judgments I I
think you asked me if this was a
fairly typical to at progressive
income tax and I would say it
is.
Thank you
Isn't on offer that information
that's very helpful for someone
like me
I I have lived in Mr chairman
and senator Tom and I lived in
New York state staff for a good
while
kind I don't know how you say
taxes shape at the for New York
but it was was a very high rate
so.
The six point five percent is
different than the eight point
two percent Senator o'neill
proposed the other day and Mr
chairman and senator Tom the and
my guessing correctly that this
will go into some group of
leadership where these will get
resolved and come back to us.
It gets a this is a Senator the
chairman and that yes we were
going to be.
Looking at other various built
in on those that generate
revenue and and those that are
not provided for tax credits and
things like that and and we will
have that discussion.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
and
senator Tom and thank you for
bringing this bill I I I agree
with you the we.
We need revenue in this state
desperately every other it's
coming through tax or through
joint ventures or whatever it is
we've got to grow the hi not by
quarter inches but by two feet
so we can do this and so I know
this is one way to do and I know
we're not voting today but I
really appreciate your bringing
and I remember your discussion
Senator on the LFC resented this
bill
and this seems like a more
logical progression and I would
just like to offer that comment
to those of you who are going
to.
Ryan him of these issues out and
also as we get this
Now that I'm a member of the
social security well
I a right right but I did during
my campaign wow did I ever hear
about the moving that taxed or
one of the few states that have
the same.
So that the party discussion
with that Mr chairman and
senator Clemente thank you an
idea of.
Thank you a Senator Hamblen.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator Tom and for bringing
this forward I I have actually
just kind of quick question just
because of my background in
terms of looking at small
businesses and there been some
folks here who've been speaking
in opposition of the bill and
maybe miss night or secretary
Schardin Clarke can answer this
question up how does this or
maybe even Mr Donald can ask and
answer the question how does
this affect small business
owners.
Are we gonna rock paper
scissors.
Mister chairman Senator Hamblen
I you know that the your
testimony was correct a great
number of small business owners
including myself up pay their
their business taxes to the
personal income tax and in fact
a great number of small
businesses small business owners
will be a large component of
those folks who end up paying a
higher marginal tax rate that's
because they have those whose
who are qualified to pay that
six point five right have higher
incomes owning a business
sometimes comes with a higher
income so you know.
I you can see this is a tax on
business or you can see it all
as a tax on people with higher
incomes it's it's in many ways
synonymous.
Thank you Mr chair thank you Mr
doll for answering that I
appreciate it.
Scissors.
Senator Hamblen the okay
settlement of the secretary.
All all had one bit of technical
information I'm I'm here for
technical which is that the fund
to kind of put that question in
perspective as you know to the
extent the tax at the higher
brackets
increase the tax for small
businesses or the general
population currently the five
point nine percent top marginal
rate takes effect at two hundred
and ten thousand dollars of
income for single filers and
three hundred fifteen thousand
for married filing jointly and
head of household.
And that effects of those income
levels affect about the three
percent highest earning
taxpayers in New Mexico so to
kind of put it in perspective
three percent of of earners
earned more than two hundred ten
thousand if they're single or
three fifteen thousand if
they're married and so to the
extent
you know I I agree with Mr
Donald that it it there is pass
through income and it does
affect businesses
but I wanted to be clear that
the levels of income we're
talking about changing it it's a
pretty minimal percentage of the
population of filers.
Great thank you so much I
appreciate that thank you Mr
chair.
Thank you.
I don't see any hands up the.
You.
Mr chair a yes.
Respond real quick to
Senator Hickey and centre
Greg's.
Thank you.
Thank you for your comments that
you mentioned
Massachusetts and referred to is
tax it uses but.
Read the other day the Boston's
one of the top.
Six hi tech.
Regions in the in the country.
Sure it has I taxes but the
economy there is doing quite
well as far as a social security
a just want to add to its what
secretary secretary Senator a
deus said there last year there
were six bills.
Introduced regarding social
security.
Senator Padilla had one I had
one that I co sponsored with
the.
With that Daymon Ely.
And
Anymore
Got through.
For reasons that I'd rather not
to state publicly.
The response and the finally the
Mr chair Senator Griggs
mentioned the weather were that
I.
Entertain all these tax bills
It together as a package and and
you said yes and also
interestingly enough result we
see one of our neighboring
states.
orders approved in the November
election last year a ballot
measure that will levy a three
and a half percent surcharge on
income over two hundred fifty
thousand for individuals five
hundred thousand for joint
filers bringing that top rate to
eight percent an income above
those thresholds so.
Utah it your zoom is now
Higher than us even if we have.
Implement the my proposed a.
Six point one.
And finally Mr chair that came
across the.
Sure this is effective tax rates
by states.
The local governments as a
percent of income.
And we ranked the.
Number twenty six right in the
middle so I have to states have
a.
Effective tax rates as percent
income higher than us and the
other half the lower so we're
we're right in the middle.
So nobody can accuse us of being
a high tax rate or low tax rate
for right and that metal thank
you Mr chair for a loan me to
share that and I thank everyone
for their of into discussions
thank you thank you I do have a
Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
the server Hickey house bill
forty nine
is an exemption from social
security tax and this year it is
in the house tax and revenue
committee and just kind of stuck
there for a while so I don't
know what the of the table that
are not
but I'm with you.
This one of the things I hear
the most about is that we need
to quit double taxing.
By taxing social security
and that's that's one of the tax
reliefs that I think we should
be giving.
Sir Tom and I want to commend
you
I think your bill is much more
reasonable than some of the ones
earlier doesn't mean I'll be
voting for it but I do think
it's a lot more reasonable and I
do appreciate that I mean you're
you're kind of re aligning
everything you're not doing a
huge increase and I did I
appreciate that so
it seems like you're you're yeah
set of jumping it from you know
five point whatever it is to to
you know eight point nine
percent you you've taken kind of
the middle road actually even
the lower end of the middle road
and so I really appreciate that
I think that's a good approach
Center grades and I have talked
about
What yes this alternative
income source that he brought up
and and I think actually it's a
really unique idea.
if you really want to diversify
the income stream to our state
the if we were able to get the
Feds to face fifteen billion a
year for that
well we could instead of
charging taxes we could pay
people live in New Mexico and we
get more people here because
that's almost double what our
actual budget is right now so I
think that's an interesting
thing to look at Mr chairman I
do think we need to take a look
at all these are I think it's
kind of a strange situation that
we're in right now because.
We actually have a surplus of
income and we're talking about
all these tax increases
and you know we.
Need to do like we said the
other day we need to look at the
entire tax picture in New Mexico
and honestly right now is the
time to do it.
We have a surplus is the time we
need to come and say okay here's
how we're going to revamp the
tax system in New Mexico so it's
more understandable so it's more
reasonable and so maybe it does
help bring more business to New
Mexico
you know you know.
One of the things that circle
and talked about that is
absolutely right about is we can
charge zero tax but we don't get
our crime rate under control.
It's not gonna matter you can
pay people live in New Mexico
but we don't get our crime rate
under control it's not gonna
matter people all live here
companies don't want to come
here the other thing that
companies are looking at let's
just be Frank education we'll go
to the top things other
companies look at when they
consider New Mexico.
Crime and education and maybe
they go hand in hand because we
have reached the bottom.
In education and we've pretty
much reached the top in crime.
and maybe that's just waiting
you know those those two are are
unstoppable yeah we when you
don't have an educated
workforce companies don't want
to come here so people can get a
job so they end up.
Doing crime and so we need to
look at all that as a big
picture not one thing
individually in a silo we need
to look at the whole thing.
And I'm hoping that that's what
we can do although we are
running out of time it Mr
chairman if if I could have a
minute after this bill before we
move on to the next bill I would
appreciate it thank you.
Mr Chairman.
on that point.
So sort of on that point just
once I filed so many bills is
here Mister chairman I forgot so
I think for the Senate bill
seventy eight is also on the so
security exemption center if you
thank you Mr this year right
okay so Senator Hickey for the
second time.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator Tom on the bell Senators
Senator Brandt I always
appreciate your observations and
the up about where we are crime
and so forth and I I said maybe
you're been around long enough
member Alaska when the oil was
coming in there actually any the
people in the state for the Ohio
but
not so much anymore
they're they're kind of been do
you do right now is every doctor
Makowski and and I agree with
you that we definitely need to
expand the revenue but we also
is as well as having a surplus
in tax and actually yes one
article I read an article four
and a half percent above last
year
but the other thing I do want to
remind you of Senator Brandt
fell Senators we also have
Justin radical surplus of maybe
starting with education battling
crime disabilities getting out
of the fifteen year waiting list
and so we can use all that
revenue I thank you Mr chairman
and fellow senators for our
reading my second committee
thank you thank you Senator
Brandt.
the local forming one of the
actual we're not we're not
voting on this bill Senator
Wirth like we've done everything
else so that's what the vote for
the bill I mean I on the bill.
Not all of yes so we're we're
like we were trying to be
consistent with other so we're
not gonna take action on this
but the.
thank you Mr chairman and so I
wanted to I Senator Pirtle has
come to me and and want me to
bring to the committee he has
tried to work with the sponsors
of Senate bill thirteen Senate
bill three sixty three from
Saturday as well as his bill and
they're at an impasse
and they they cannot reach any
kind of compromised and so
you know I think we need to work
with the Majority Leader and
look at putting those bills on
so that we can move them forward
or whatever gonna do with them
so the judiciary can take a look
at the.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you with that the Senator
Dahlman thank you for bringing
to go forward and then now we
will
Move on to the Senate Bill.
Two forty three.
Senator Hickey.
Thank you Mr chairman and fellow
senators
so.
The what the other reasons for
that last bill is help out a
little bit on this bill
we are asking in Senate bill two
forty three to in gauge industry
and grow industry and grow
entrepreneurism by allowing the
solar.
That generates
this the electricity is not just
solar it's the walls and so
forth to continue to receive a
G. R. T. R..
reduction for a period of about
ten years and and we would
certainly give the reporting on
it so it it it does a number of
things it will help grow.
the material aspect of solar in
the community by allowing solar
to be on property that isn't
that the property that's getting
the electricity are defines the
time that the gross receipts in
there and I again also does
reporting and that and
definitely sunset I have to
experts and I apologize to them
for having imposed to well I
make my comments that Ryan
center wall is one of my experts
and mark Fisher is the other
they would be allowed to address
the committee thank you Mr chair
thank you go ahead I'm not sure
who wants to go first but the
gentleman.
Hello ladies go first.
Right.
Good afternoon Mister chair and
and committee members it's an
honor to be before the committee
my name's Ryan center on the CEO
of affordable solar we are a New
Mexico solar developer and
contractor we've been and in the
headquartered in Albuquerque
since nineteen ninety eight and
work in the western US
a quick overview of this bill It
it essentially does eight it
removes eight words from the G.
R. T. deduction in those words
are to the property on which it
is installed as a requirement
for the G. R. T. deduction.
For solar energy property and it
also adds a sunset on the G. R.
T. deduction and also reporting
requirement.
And the purpose of this is that
is straightforward of course the
eight words to the property on
which it is installed allows the
the G. R. T. deduction on the
construction of offsite solar
assets so large scale solar
projects currently are taxed
are subject to G. R. T. tax on
like solar projects which are on
the roof topper on the property
to which they're installed in
this deduction would allow us to
be more competitive with
surrounding states to to
leverage our position in what I
see is a
sustainable competitive
advantage for the state and
leverage the position of us as a
renewable energy costs leader
and also to eliminate the the G.
R. T. remitting that exists with
the taxation of both the energy
output and the G. R. T. on the
construction.
And with that I'll be happy to
stand for for any questions if
it please the committee.
Thank you Mr stern also of mark.
Yeah I let the ladies go first
because you dress nicer.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I'm
mark Fleischer I'm already
should lobby for portable solar.
Early this year there there's no
gross receipts tax on rooftop
solar equipment.
Is not practical butchered
entities such as U. N. M. New
Mexico state to have solar put
on fifty different buildings on
their rooftops.
SB two forty three would allow
for solar replaced off property
but serving the property to also
have a G. O. T. at G. R. T.
exemption on the solar equipment
as the what if it was on the
rooftop.
This also is important for
economic development purposes as
we compete for data centers with
surrounding states that do not
tax of site so we're good.
This bill does have a sunset and
review to ensure the result is
beneficial to the state the F.
I. R. shows no fiscal impact
your need to support SB two
forty three.
So it's more of a of the support
that is an expert witness loaned
Mr Chairman thank you.
Okay thank you.
So at this time we will go to
the public.
For public comment for Senate
bill two forty three we will go
directly to those here are there
any people in the public wish to
speak in opposition to Senate
bill two forty three at this
time please raise your hand.
Seeing no hands for those
wishing to speak in opposition
will go to those wishing to
speak in favor for those wishing
to speak in favor of Senate bill
two forty three at this time
please raise your hand.
Thank you very much that
concludes public comment.
Thank you now we'll go to the
committee questions from the
committee.
Senator of Majority Leader.
Thank you Mr president so I just
I want to understand exactly
what's.
What's happening here this is I
understand it was senator
Stewart's.
Bills originally and it's the
law that Senator Stewart put in
place.
And so.
Are we so we're we're taking
away the requirement that it has
to be attached to a building so
I assume that means that you're
we're now giving a G. R. T.
exemption for a community solar.
Still is the am I reading am I
understanding this correctly.
Miss a Majority Leader I would
not necessarily equate with
quote community solar
they're in the same area right
that this is definitely not the
same bill.
So I guess so I I just I'm
trying to figure out.
You know if this allows in
affected G. R. T. exemption to
be put on commercial solar let's
put it that way are that's not
attached to a building I'm just
trying to figure out how there's
no fiscal impact to this and and
I am getting.
I'm being told that there's
going to the LFC has is now
saying it's gonna then be FIR
because they're they're
concerned about the fiscal
impact of this.
so I just I'm trying to figure
out what's going on here and I
and I can't and senator Stewart
also did express some concern to
me about this particular bill so
that's that's my question maybe
maybe I can go to your to your
experts to understand.
What the thinking is because I I
I are all the people that
currently get the G. G. R. T.
exemption for solar attached to
property.
Also are gonna they're gonna
still be able to get that G. R.
T. exemption.
Mr Fleischer.
Senator Mister chairman Senator
Senate Majority Leader a yes
they would still get the
exemption this is for new solar
for the equipment only would be
placed off of the property and
we question why there was no
fiscal impact either we assume
the every argument is that there
is nothing there now so the fact
you create solar and it's off
site doesn't cost the state
anything.
I thank them in the tax.
We have our of our analysts the
Dr Donald.
Mr chairman members of the
committee the LFC FIR states
that the that the solar right
that they that it's capped and I
think that is why the initial
estimate was no fiscal impact I
think had they not assume the
cap on the amount there would
have been visible impact.
So it's very helpful yep I'm
sorry Dr o'donnell the battle go
ahead Dawn yes very near yeah
and and again I so so that's one
question and I do I do think
we're gonna need to admit the
bill moves forward we're gonna
need to take a look because I
understand there may be an
updated FIR and we just need to
make sure that we exactly what's
happening here and I think
there's some question about that
second question is why why are
we it is the current G. R. T.
exemption for solar sunset.
I'll take a stab at that but
I'll also ask my experts why
isn't ultimately sensitive
because at some point we're
gonna have so much so there
there's going to likely be
taxation that that that has to
be within a period of time which
said the investments are able to
depreciate appropriately and get
a return on the investment for
doing this and then at some
point I think as we.
Actually welcome the issue of so
much solar that we're actually
able to taxes in the state and
ultimately because we produce it
cheaply going out of the state
nice to see a doctor o'connell
has another observation force.
Mr chairman members of the
committee I just looked at the
new well the new LFC FIR state
indicates a negative fiscal
impact indeterminate but looks
like about possibly ten million
dollars.
To the general fund.
And eight million dollars to
local governments.
And so Mr chair and.
This o'donnell so that that FY
are just just came in.
and sits posted now okay great
that it came in at the moment
just that
like a lot of data that comes in
I think when this bill was
presented before it was way over
and
originally and then they came
back and lower so hi I'm
gratified that this bill will
not be voted on today
kind of a little surprise here
but as we do in medicine now we
have peer review and we do peer
review so that you can count on
the accuracy and so we would
want to go back and take a look
at that for we commented on the
fact that it's just you and
originally in the first bill had
been substantially higher and it
would significantly reduce.
Yet again I I don't I'm not
trying to mess with the bill per
se I'm straight just I'm trying
to figure out how it makes sense
that you are adding a whole new
category.
Of solar not attached to
buildings in giving it a new G.
R. T. in there was no fiscal
impact it just didn't make sense
to me but I do I do I do want to
understand maybe our experts can
answer this so is the current
solar G. R. T. exemption that
you're that you're amending in
this bill is it sunset it now.
Mr chairman the Majority Leader
it is not sensitive now when we
had this a bill drafted they
told us that they are now
putting sunsets on every
exemption that is written and
that's what they would add the
exemption under this bill we had
no objection to it.
Was that really isn't that it's
review.
Yeah so that makes sense I just
want to make sure I understood
and let me just say I'm I'm the
biggest fan in the world of of
solar but I'm not the biggest
fan of G. R. T. exemptions.
And I that's my challenge and
I'm just gonna tell ya how I I
then yeah I just I really been
kind of goes against all of them
because we we've narrowed the
base and raise the rates and and
I think we're actually talking
about doing a G. R. T. I. G. R.
T. rate reduction that costs us
you know as you know just sixty
million Bucks to get it done
eight and so and the reason for
that is just during my time in
the legislature we you know back
in the day we store rollout
hundred million dollar tax
packages every year could cut
Christmas tree of all these
exemptions deductions and and
it's just challenging so again I
appreciate certainly what what's
going on here and appreciate.
Appreciate the solar.
You know piece of this this
legislation for sure what I was
getting a signal that there was
some issue with the FIR side I
mean again it is I agree with
you it's a little strange that
it just shut off the light I did
thousand didn't think that was
gonna happen but it is what it
is so I appreciate it thank you
Mr chair.
Thank you chairman of then
Senator the the argument for the
no FIR is the fact that there is
no loss of business by doing
this we're UNM New Mexico state
data centers are not have the
option of putting on this.
Of this equipment and pay the
tax we're not doing it most of
will not do it with the taxes
that you might is being made to
motivate them to go solar with
they wouldn't otherwise.
Which I would like to add Mr
chairman and fellow senators
that as as that allows she that
saves money because it then the
source of electricity is not
coming from that without the
respect to my fellow senators
and some part of the state is no
longer coming from wild which is
more expensive and so that's the
savings and so it's a it's a
very large picture I understand
that and Mr leader I do want to
say I really appreciate your
efforts to address the G. R. T.
as a business person I have
dealt with it it is maddening
this crazy and that was a great
idea you mentioned the journey
Jones way back when and he was a
brilliant man when I was to have
a fact the practice at UNM he
helped us restructure and some
really great ways it's a good
idea but it's it's it's it's a
monster now and we've got to do
something with that probably
second there are maybe even
ahead of social security during
my campaign I heard about the G.
R. T. and how unfair and how the
rulings and you can even if you
can't even get president because
different judges thanks it's a
mess so thank you for your
efforts in that really do
appreciate it and Mr chairman I
believe that we will be voting
on this day I do however want
to.
Not sure what the.
The phraseology as I definitely
want a chance to review the FY
are the new ones have my experts
take a look at it and see if we
can't come to a better consensus
route that for becomes
officially accepted and I see
the other senators have some
comments on that and so I can
answer questions otherwise are
you.
Thank you Senator Brendan
Senator Griggs.
Thank you Mr chairman so glad to
see that me in the Majority
Leader are in strong agreement
on.
This issue a new coalition.
Nine years now to find something
the two of us can work for that
reason alone no that's just a
joke we actually do a lot of but
if you look at page two of the
FY are
it does have a graph down there
is I I really range they didn't
reflect this on the front
because of the page to the
basically project that would
have an impact or would have if
it was still in place and so
let's I'm confused on the bill I
wonder if we're just gonna.
There was just a mistake we all
talk about how messed up the
flowers are
I think I wrote one of yesterday
in Education Committee that was
completely wrong on a bill that
I have done they they they got
about everything you could get
wrong on that FIR.
and so.
Appreciate that those things are
not always perfect Sir Senator
their goals are worth US gonna
remind you because like I made a
mistake the other day and said
someone my mic was on that once
you do the same thank.
Yes the so on this bill you know
at first when I looked at it
Senator Hickey I was like man I
can support this bill I thought
you're just adding a sunset
clause on to the current.
Exemption
but then I realized that you
were not here expanding at you
are adding a sunset clause so I
appreciate that I think it does
need a sunset clause I think all
these things the sunset clause
But I I think that I agree with
Senator Wirth on the this would
open it up for community solar
to get these credits it doesn't
say it wouldn't so being that it
is opening it up to non
structures� I think that it will
are you do you not see it that
way Mister chairman Senator
Hickey.
I'm gonna have my experts take a
stab at that comment thank.
Senator Brandt in this
Representative so.
Mister chairman Senator Brandt I
agree with your analysis that
the security deduction would be
applied to community solar the
the one thing that should be
noted for community solar is
that the.
The actual output of the arrays
for community solar plant would
be would have G. R. T. on the on
the actual payments for the
community solar participation.
Mr chairman of Mr Senator.
is that because they're such a
large output on those to raise
verses what we normally see on
home.
So it.
Mister chairman Senator Brandt
said the the the home array
would have a what would have a
one time cost you do put the
solar array on your house and
you would you would avoid here
T. it's time of construction
would there be no ongoing
payments for community solar
plant the developer would would
pay the gross receipts tax on
the construction of the right
and then the individual
subscribers would pay tax all
along the way for the term of
the of the period or for their
purchase of a share of the
community solar array so we're
we're trying to close a what
what I see is appear amending
loophole here and added
deduction because.
In addition to community solar
offsite solar such as utility
solar solar for plant like
Facebook they're often avoiding
gross receipts tax through an
industrial revenue bond process
but the alternative is to pay
gross receipts tax on the
construction and and then the
utility will sell the energy to
retail users and there's a gross
receipts tax on that retail
sales well.
Mr chairman Cerdic you we love
of your amending in their state
it is the way we fund everything
is there are G. R. T. peer
amending
and so yes Sir Wirth is actually
right we really need to take a
look at the G. R. T. this is one
of the issues just like with the
last bill that we just need to
take a serious look at our tax
structure if we're going to be a
competitive state I do think it
is something that companies look
at is taxes it's something you
pay it was only two things you
never going to get out of that
staff in taxes right so it is
something you always a real look
at wherever you're going to what
of.
So.
When we continue to make these
your T. carve outs for companies
and this is what the majority
years talking about I can't even
count on the last nine years how
many car about slicing I can't
imagine how many the Majority
Leader saying who's been here
longer than me
it is just our tax systems
Representative Harper always
puts its like a block of Swiss
cheese.
There's you know we've got the
tax system that we just drill
holes in chart this out carve
that out and it's an absolute
mess we need to fix the system
so the overall it's simple for
people to understand that
companies can say that's a place
I can do business and I can be
successful because every company
wants to make a profit.
Whether they want to make a
profit a small profit or large
profit.
Whether they want that profit to
be used for for good or just to
pad their own pockets every
company wants to make a profit
you cannot be in in business.
If you're not able to at least
make your pay roll.
and have a small profit level
it's just it's impossible you
can't lose money and be a
business and so you take all the
cost of being in business
together
so I went on a tangent I'm sorry
but I'm sorry Mr.
Chairman sorry leader
on that.
Thank you everyone of these
bills on this gonna remind
everyone you really got to deal
with our tax system
I don't.
Know that without the subsidies
that we provide to solar that it
would be less expensive than oil
and gas I do know that are least
expensive form of energy is
actually nuclear energy.
Of of the the initial cost is
the most expensive but it is the
least expensive overall form of
energy for the consumer.
Europe especially in France and
Germany is now going almost a
hundred percent towards the
nuclear route almost everything
they're putting in new is
nuclear.
we tend to be afraid of nuclear
of because we like to watch old
movies that show us that you
know nuclear melts all our faces
and gives us all three or four
legs or three or four hands and
we buy into all that so Europe
is much more to use your term
progress of then we are when it
comes to energy and they're
looking up literally the
cleanest source of energy that
there as and that is nuclear and
it's also the cheapest form of
energy that they're just and so
I have
not gonna support something
subsidizing I was hoping you
were just putting a sunset but I
do appreciate the sunset so
thank you for putting us on so
on this.
I do appreciate that but I won't
be able to support your bill but
I don't think we're voting on it
anyway because it's a tax credit
so thank you thank you of thank
you Senator Brandt Senator
Griggs.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Senator Hickey and I I I
agree with your expert witness
in staff and and.
Senator Brandt.
And I am you know I thought this
was gonna be just really pretty
much a deduction or and then
into the credit.
Assumption for the credit
and then I thought initially in
addition to bed you'll just be
able to set the solar panels on
the.
On the property next door but
you know it really opens it up
much larger than that I think
when you when you strike that
it's not on the property
addition stalled.
It could be anywhere.
And that means.
The community solar that means
so regarding that mean it means
all forces.
and I think that with with that
change to it.
I think it makes the bill very
very difficult to
your support and I believe that
those open the door for a whole
lot of lost revenues for the for
the state.
on economic development projects
like Facebook there might have
been maybe there was something
that that could have been used
through other approaches other
than a
Your shoulder tax credit I I
don't know when
Mr chairman and senator Hickey
and and your experts I think you
need to really be careful around
that language right there and
really see if each doing what
you mean individual and what you
mean then you know there'll
probably be people agree with it
and probably be people that
don't agree with it.
so I would just encourage you
when you talk about what.
What what to use flat be up
front about that that it's
designed to give
rooftop solar geysers
help if they can't put it on the
rules but they only look in
their own lot next or whatever
it might be or you intend this
to be for solar for community
solar because it looks to me
like it it exactly fits that
show a show Mr chair Senator and
the and experts side I'd sure
appreciate it if you look at
that awfully hard.
Thank you Mr.
Mr chair Senator Griggs thank
you for your insight into.
Thank you for your insights and
we will take that back there are
some implications that I think
we can work on as we also work
on the F. I. R. and I do want to
point out to Senator Brandt my
last comment is that Jane Fonda
when the Golden Gloves award for
the best person and she really
got famous in the times and from
so thank you.
And.
Thank you thank you Senator
Hickey so we as we say we're not
gonna take action so thank you
for the discussion the debate I
think it's a it was good so with
that we'll move on to Senate
bill two eighty.
Senator pope Representative
Garrett.
Thank you Mr chair
On the zoom I have my
representatives joy Care in
district twenty nine I also have
city council president since you
were a go in district five where
the sale dinner take
up it's located in that city
council council district as well
and she'll be on as an expert.
The sale down R. J. the widening
project is reaching six
significant it's essential to
the safety and economic
development of both Bernalillo
and Santa Fe counties.
By connections as a major archer
road for commuters and workers
travelling on roads on the west
side of Bernalillo county as
well as Sandoval County.
It needs to be widened for the
sake of public safety first of
all because it only has two
lanes from kick to rainbow.
First responders addressing road
and resident emergencies are
frequently blocked by the
traffic losing precious times
time as police fire emergency
vehicles rush to address
accidents second focus on our
today is one as well arterial
roads connecting from east at
tram way to west of the Crisco
Vista and Bernalillo county.
On the west side of Albuquerque
a transport that transports over
two hundred thousand cars on a
daily basis and connects I
twenty five golf course sponsor
which most traffic from both
Santa and Bernalillo county's.
I also like to note that on the
west side the sales current
furthest western arterial is the
truth school based on which is
where Amazon has been completed
and located their warehouse
distribution center and it is in
point up to two thousand New
Mexicans in phase one.
Legislators on the west side of
the district and even including
some of Santa Fe County have
contributed nearly four million
a capital outlay and the City of
Albuquerque has raised twelve
million dollars from bonds
dedicated to the sale.
This project is listed on the
statewide transportation
improvement program or step and
the City of Albuquerque states
that the project as currently
planned requires almost eight
and a half million to be
complete.
The design is currently under
way.
We're asking that the state
board of finance we authorized
to issue up to eight point five
million a severance tax bonds to
fund this project.
Right now I'd like to give
Representative joined Garrett an
opportunity to make any comments
if you would like.
Thank you Mr chair and
representative excuse me Senator
pope sorry about that Senator
it's a great delight this is my
first time in front of this
committee I've been listening to
the discussion and it's just
been inspiring to see how you
work together I do want to
correct one fact that Senator
pope shared we may be up to two
hundred thousand cars in twenty
years but right now it's about
twenty thousand cars and the
only thing I want to add to his
overview is that concealed oh
Norte's like a spinal cord of a
northwest Bernalillo county
southern Santa and all these are
Trujillo roads are like those
you know veins and Reds coming
out of the the spinal cord so
it's just a really vital piece
of the whole safety economic
development
the area west of the Rio Grande
river and it's an area that's
kind of the stage one of further
development as we go further
west there's future road to
develop already planned so it's
just really important that we
bring endorsed this bill at this
time and and with that I yield
back to Senator pro.
Mr chair I'd like to give a
curfew city council president
city of Oregon opportunity to
say a few words.
Go ahead.
Your muted.
Let's break up.
There you go can you hear me now
yes.
Thank you thank you so much for
the opportunity to speak to you
all today I've been listening to
you all afternoon actually thank
you Mr chairman and senators for
your time on the agenda
thank you to senator pope for
inviting me to speak and
Representative a joint Garrett
for her comments I want to thank
all of you senators for the work
you do because it's not easy
especially during this time of
COVID
so pesado del Norte is a
regionally significant
transportation routes in
Albuquerque and it also will
look into the future because it
connects of course to atrisk of
this stuff and probably
eventually will connect to the
sale double con.
So it's an immediate need in
Albuquerque primarily for safety
reasons and we've had the
Albuquerque fire department to
get a study that showing the
problem that we have that can
act now pesado del Norte begins
at tramway and runs all the way
across East West Albuquerque and
it goes up the escarpment edge
of the petroglyphs as it goes up
to escarpments it it changes
from four lanes to two lanes and
crosses the river also at that
point around can make Boulevard
often times the traffic in
regular times when we don't have
COVID it backs up all the way to
I twenty five so we have some
significant traffic problems in
this area the Albuquerque fire
department study did show that
there are problems getting
through because on both sides of
the two lane area the the soil
is basically sand so you can't
even get a vehicle to go around
any of the vehicles that are
waiting in line to get home.
It adds a better our
time to people's travel times
that once they cross the river
which is a significant amount of
time that they could be spending
with their family this area that
it serves is basically been
tanna ranch area there's a high
school out there volcano vistas
a new elementary school the new
junior high school much to see
there was states there's a
significant number of residents
that live out in this area so
at this point in time
the sale del Norte we have
almost eighteen million dollars
two of two and we've already
started our design on the
project but we the city has
attained funding in the amount
of seventeen million seven
hundred and forty nine thousand
dollars
and that was a pain in the neck
and the twenty nineteen and
twenty twenty state legislative
sessions we also obtain some of
that funding from our
transportation tax that would be
our city transportation tax and
what we're asking the
legislature to fund at this
point in time in twenty twenty
one is eight million two hundred
fifty
Dollars in and the reason for
that is that that would actually
complete our tyre amount funding
if the project is a forty five
million dollar fund funded
project but the city's portion
is twenty six million dollars so
that eight million dollars with
essentially complete the entire
look of funding for this project
the design is as I mentioned is
already under way it should be
completed in the fall that is
at a price tag of two million
three hundred sixty thousand
dollars and at the top of
suicide and Unser where they
intersect the two roads
intersect
we are there is a planned
commercial town center and and
that's that would be basically
up a higher type of commercial
the center for such as
Albuquerque's uptown
the significance of this project
is that it is a of regional
economic development projects
because it intersects with Unser
Boulevard which we are also
working on Unser Boulevard which
is in progress right now for
design as well we are asking the
federal government for the
funding for that project which I
mention is also a twenty six
million dollar project
so we sort of.
Cut up the the pie I guess you
could say to ask the state for
the sale del Norte and the Feds
for Unser Boulevard and as you
know Unser Boulevard intersects
with Rio Rancho so that's why I
mention that it's a it's a
significant regional these are
significant regional projects
what's important about these pro
about the sale del Norte is once
it's fully funded you know we
will be looking at increasing
our gross receipts our
construction our jobs are
economic development for the
northwest side of town
and I think is a really
important because the sale del
Norte at the very on the very
western edge intersects as our
Senator pope mentioned with the
true scope this to address the
Vista is the area where double
eagle airport is located and we
have been doing some the city
has prevents MacRumors to that
particular airport in addition
to the county whose bills who's
been working with Amazon so as
you can see there's been a
significant amount of work
that's already gone into this
into these projects
and I just want to point out
that the mayor has been very
supportive more Keller
Lawrence right L. you all know
that name attachments whereas
our director I would point out
that your cabinet secretary
Michael Santa has been very
supportive along with it the
staff Justin Reese just a Gibson
Paul Brasher and then I'd like
to also recognized do we K. from
the Mr call who's worked with us
on on Sir project
Senator pope and Senator Duhigg
Representative joy Garrett who's
really.
Why to work with because she's
spearheaded a lot of the work
for us at the legislative
area and then arena rather Jacob
Candelaria senator Candelaria
Representative Karen bash Daymon
Ely moe Maestas Georgene Louis
all of these individuals have
contributed funding to this to
this price tag and I know it
sounds like a hefty price tag
but at this point we only need
eight million dollars to
complete complete this shovel
ready project it would the
design should be completed
in the fall.
And then we would be ready to
actually start construction in
twenty twenty two so I stand for
any questions that you may have
and the thank you again for all
of your work.
Thank you at this time of.
We will go to of skews me
Senator I believe you have a.
Amendment.
That is correct Mr chair okay of
I'll.
And it for discussion purposes
we've got the.
Amendment on the screen.
Indigenous insert the for a
place of two or three different
places.
That's correct Mr chair
basically
The Burbage said two lanes when
we're actually making its
already two lanes were going to
make it total of four lines two
lanes on each side great thank
you at any of any discussion on
the back of the amendment.
Yes the amendment Mr chairman
okay we do have a due pass on
the amendment.
Do we any opposition to that.
See none.
Senator you have been amended
bill so we're we're back in the
bill.
Of.
At this time we will take a
public comment.
Do not have any members of the
public registered in advance to
speak in opposition of Senate
bill two eighty are there any
members of the public here today
that wish to speak in opposition
of Senate bill two eighty please
raise your hand.
We will move on to those who
wish to speak in favor of the
bill beginning with Melissa
Sanchez.
You and good evening Mr chairman
members of the committee my name
is Melissa Sanchez I'm the
executive director of the
Albuquerque westside business
association and I am in support
of the bill as previously stated
the expansion of the state down
our day is absolutely vital to
our economic development and
growth on Albuquerque's west
side many community members have
expressed their concerns about
the lack of jobs in commercial
development in the area where
there is plenty of room for
growth and at the cap of council
president stated commercial
center is planned for
development on the corner of
answering to seo del Norte.
In order for this and future
developments to happen the road
must be widened so Mister chair
members of the committee I urge
your support on Senate bill two
eighty.
Thank you very much are there
any other members of the public
who wish to speak in support of
Senate bill two eighty please
raise your hand.
Thank you very much public
comment at this time.
Thank you we'll go to the
committee I have Senator
Padilla.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator pope in Representative
Jared thank you for doing this I
know this is been a lengthy
project for you and
Representative Gary you've been
at this for quite some time and
I think I want to thank our
council president I don't know
if she's still on with us I was
happy to contribute to this
project I think twice in the
been a request that came along
so I'm I'm sure it's just an
oversight there when she was
mentioning who contributed to
the project but happy happy to
help with that we are we
leveraging any of these dollars
and I don't know if this is for
the cabinet secretary secretary
some of our if we are or how we
leveraged you know federal
dollars Tiger dollars in you
that type of money because this
is a it completely pilot project
for this part of of New Mexico
this this really doesn't just
satisfied the northwest part of
Albuquerque I mean that you know
you have multi
national and international
companies going into that area
which provide jobs all over the
region do do we have any federal
dollars coming into the project.
Mr chair Senator Padilla I'd
like to defer that question to
the secretary if you'd like or
other counsel Borrego
Representative Garrett would
probably have more information.
Thank you Mr chairman Mike Santa
secretary of DOTD the the
majority of the funding that's
been obtained has been through
the local process either through
capital outlay I'm not sure I
think
of concert brigalow can try
answer what federal funds we are
supportive of getting this done
it is a local road and so we
have not put in the state money
into it however we do recognise
the regional significance in the
connecting
options it has with some of our
state roads I think I met with
the council break quite a few
times on this and I think once
they get closer if there's
anything that they don't meet
were to try and help them with
some state funding but we
haven't put any state funding at
this time
and so there what they are is
this is a half million dollars
short right now.
I appreciate that Mr chairman
and you know again as you heard
from Senator poke a little while
ago you have one of the largest
Amazon facilities in the in the
world find it right there it's
on the the the just over the
line of my district on the
northern tip and you know just
just a super duper important
project I just want to remind
everybody that all boats rise
together and when a company like
that comes to New Mexico you
know that's why I got involved
in helping with this project
very early on and you know that
brings other companies here
secondary tertiary vendors to
that company and and other
organizations and and you know
we talk about Amazon having you
know eleven hundred or fifteen
hundred jobs as your senator
pope and and Representative
Garrett and and the madam
president but I will probably
know the exact number but that's
gonna multi multiplied by three
or four times everybody on the
committee so I urge the
committee to strongly strongly
urge the committee to support
this request this is something
that is going to pay dividends
for decades when we talk about
bringing a company like Intel to
New Mexico a long time ago that
project would never have
happened had we not gone through
the transportation viability of
the project and and I see that
this is something else that
would help in that in that
building and also want to remind
people that west of Albuquerque
so the grants area and a few
other areas that are just west
of Albuquerque will have jobs
but you know avail to them as
well by putting this project
together
The other question I have for
you is it do we have estimates
that you know I I I kind of we
we got all the money together Mr
chairman to redo the I. twenty
five real problem interchange
took us about five years I I'd
love to say that I led the
charge on that but many of us
did it we got that done you know
what's what's interesting is
when we get these roads done and
we get these projects done this
way they're they're at capacity
by the time the last shovel of
pavement is put into them what
we see the next step for this
region because that's going to
be an economic driver for the
whole you know sort of I'm sorry
central part of New Mexico is
this going to meet the need for
how long would meet the needs.
Mr chair Senator Padilla you
know I agree in that you know
that's always a concern and I
think the sales been a concern
since I purchased a home in two
thousand nine with the traffic
but I think mentioning you know
Amazon the symbols of the
companies hopefully in a way
that can alleviate some of that
commute you know that goes more
to downtown Albuquerque in other
areas so that's helped but I
guess what I like to do is ask
Council Borrego if she would
like to comment on that.
The settlement counselor we
can't hear you met your muted.
I.
Mr chair if I can speak at Cindy
you're still are muted I'm we
envision the next project we
have a tryst COVID stuff and
then over the next decade of the
sale double con which is further
west and funding has already
been under way for several years
for that.
Thank you madam Mr chairman and
and Representative and was very
also very involved in helping
get that funded as well there's
a whole contingency of about
twenty six twenty seven of us
legislators are hoping to get
that done but again I just want
to encourage the committee to
support this I know there's and
it's not about all the work
that's been done this is just a
you know it's it's it's a
critical item I will tell you
there's a project just south of
Albuquerque in Los Lunas on the
west side of Los Lunas not too
far from the Facebook data
center that's you know probably
twenty five miles on my district
but at the end of the day that
projects going to you know I I
felt on that project and the
reason I mention that is that we
want to ask everyone here to
help us on this project is those
are jobs that will be you know
maybe avail to the people that
live in my district because that
takes a Senator approach to
traffic away from the city to
employment economic development
for those families so so I just
hope that we'll have a much
broader mind and getting this
thing done because they're
almost there and and I highly
recommend it thank you.
Senator my needed now that of
can you hear me
do we.
Can.
Senator pope do you still want
her to make comment or we move I
guess Mr Mr chairman again allow
council break it just make a
comment okay thank you very much
and I apologize to Senator
Padilla but has I have a very
long list here of people who
have really wanted to see this
in New I also want to thank him
as well
the county commissioner the
county commission has been
supportive as well matter fact
they just put in an another
a hundred hundred thousand
dollars into this project
so you know a little at a time
and that's kind of what we've
been doing
the sale del Norte is actually
we we came to the state for the
funding on that particular
project and and our strategy was
that we would go to the stats on
Unser and that's what we've done
and we kind of stuck with that
plan with that strategy and I
think it's working so I'm
you know I I'm all always open
shift to money of course but we
do have stuck with the state on
the sale del Norte.
Thank you Mr chair.
We have a Senator Brandt Senator
Tallman.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Sir pro Representative Garrett I
really appreciate you mentioning
of my project
your response to Senator Padilla
and I think you may have got me
on board by mentioning that so
just so you know.
The sales Holcomb so we have to
put sales ones to sell them or
J. that is really helping with
some of the traffic issues
effect Representative Lewis one
of the big funders of the seldom
or today in.
And I twenty five when his first
year in office up here that he's
no longer office but so there is
his legacy in that way lives on
and now you guys are trying to
extend out I am on that road not
every day but the probably at
least once a month.
that's sometimes a good of golf
course to jump on the cell the
lower today in those two and so
that area does definitely needs
to be have a permit done is to
be expanded.
I see Purcell the Vulcan playing
in as well because maybe we can
keep some of the traffic off of
that area.
As well as off by twenty five by
getting that road finished to
give another route out of Rio
Rancho and that will co write
the right past the a new Amazon
facility is and and the desert
eagle airport road out there so
those are some regional road
projects that we really need to
get done I did have a couple of
questions on the funding source
just so I'm understanding it
completely.
So
these bonds what are they
normally used for.
Mr chair and Senator Brandt I
think I wanted to for that to
Representative your requests
from start.
The.
I'm Mr chairman and and senator
if if US secretary Santa is on
I'd like you to explain that but
severance tax bonds
Funds are used for a lot of that
D. O. T. projects
there is a Senate bill Bobby can
order Senator Gonzales has I
believe it Senate bill one
twenty one that you've already
heard in this committee that
increases the bonding capacity
and moves the date that that can
go into effect earlier time but
if secretary Santa could talk
about the bonds that would be
very helpful.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Senator so well the severance
tax funds are used for capital
outlay purposes
so a lot of their senators use
that when we bond through Senate
bill one twenty one we go
through New Mexico finance
authority and we put those bonds
out for people who are
interested in purchasing them
which is a little bit different
but it sounds like these are
this isn't this isn't a D. O. T.
bill or supportive of of getting
that road completed it looks
like these are the severance tax
bonds and
that would be a here you if this
bill were to pass should be
allowing them to use.
And so with that would affect
any other projects that are
already in place or how how
would that work Mr Chairman
server Representative
if we're going to be taking part
of that money out for this
particular project I'm asking
some of these questions because
I'm we want to do the same thing
next year so in all based on how
that went on sale with
Wilkinson.
Mr chair Senator Brandt I will
need to defer this question you
know I I I got I had a little
understanding about the
severance tax funds but I don't
want to miss speak on this issue
so if I could have
Representative Garrett or
secretary Santa Fe speak to this
I appreciate of course.
And yet Mr chairman and senator
if sectors edible can continue I
will say that house
transportation had a magnificent
presentation on bonding today
that's an area of my own
personal growth and I know that
Senator Paypen myself hope that
the whole mid region
metropolitan planning
transportation group that we can
meet over the interim to go more
into this whole topic because
it's are a really.
potential source to get some of
these projects done.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator I would have to get back
to Senator Brandt
I'm not sure exactly if the
counties requesting to go out on
their own for these bonds and
create their own of funding
source to pay them back and
that's maybe something the the
Sanchez no but if they were to
go out on their own then
obviously they'd have to pay
these funds back using local
funds whereas when capital
outlay is done then obviously
they're not required to do that
one when money's put in capital
outlay so normally what would
happen to capital outlay is you
identify these this money going
to this particular project that
money would come to D. O. T. we
would enter into an agreement
with the county or the city we
would kind of manage the project
make sure they're spending the
money accordingly but the county
would not be required to pay
those of those back and so I'm
not sure what kind of bonds the
city or the county is requesting
in this particular bill but that
would be the difference as to
whether they have to pay it back
or not and I think that would be
a question we could look into or
maybe the Sanchez now.
Mr Chairman Mr secretary Santa
sorry
it really just puts the ball in
the state board of finances
quarter on that so it doesn't
really say that it would be
using any kind of local of
taxing authority to raise that
those funds
so I think you're correct that
it would go through the state
severance tax Fund.
My understanding Mr chair
Senator Brandt.
Okay and Mr chairman of.
Secretary Santa do you know what
the bonding capacity is right
now
and do we have some additional
capacity we might be able to use
to to fund this.
Mr chairman and senator the DOT
doesn't really deal with the
severance tax bonds basically
that's something that the
legislature does and then that
money is provided through
capital outlay so we rarely get
any money through severance tax
bonds other than what's been
directly earmarked appropriated
we manage them but we usually
don't use the severance tax
bonds for DSP projects so.
I I can look into it to meet
with the Sanchez and find out
I'm not sure if this is taking
away from other areas in capital
outlay or this is in addition to
but that would be a conversation
of need to have with the Sanchez
because if this is in our bill
like I said before but I am
supportive of this project
getting funded just because of
the economic development in the
connections it's making to some
of our DOT projects such as in
their interest go and Senator
Kaneria.
Thank you Mr chairman secretary
Santa agree with you on that and
and that's why I'm going to
support the measure I do have a
little bit of concerns we may
need to look at as we go forward
we've already turned in our
capital outlay request now we
could probably stick of the
executives and I would be fine
with that being the their
support that completely so this
is a statewide project even
though it is in Albuquerque it's
time the east and west side has
a statewide benefit my opinion
so thank you and appreciate
bring the bill out of the sport.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator Senator Tallman.
Thank you Mr chair of Senator
Brandt the address my questions
about financing thank you.
Chair thank you Senator Brandt.
Thank you of.
Senator Griggs.
Thank you Mr chair and and and
thank you senator and
representative for bringing to
ring the bell I I mean I I think
it's a good deal for Albuquerque
I'm I am concerned about the
approach and.
And senator Paul.
Why was in for this initially
just put in as an appropriation
bill.
Mr chair and not Senator Griggs
just talking with the drafters
and how initiated this and being
a new Senator come in this was
just kind of the approach of
that you know I I was told to
kind of taken was suggested to
me just because coming in at at
the time to where the budget was
already being set so I
you know taking the approach of
the appropriation I guess is
another option and and I'd be
willing to to try that but for
what I've been told that was not
really a viable option at this
point.
Okay thank you Mr chairman thank
you senator I you know I think
it's probably too late for
that food for sure but there
are.
You know it is it is different I
I just want you to know the.
Severance tax bond is the source
of of all there all of our
capital outlay dish particularly
here some years we do a
combination of severance tax
bonds and general fund this year
it looks like everything's
severance tax so I don't know
where this will where this will
fail but it you know it is.
It's one of those deals that I'm
just young please that they help
you get it done it just looks
way way different to me and and
so I'm I'm on the fence at the
moment so thank you Mr chair
thank share pope thank you
Representative.
And Mr chairman and and Senator
Griggs Senator Paypen we're
going to continue to be working
on this as it passes through as
you know of Bill it's never done
until it's done so we're
committed to taking this
feedback to the to the next
committee and improving the
bill.
And and and Representative inch
what what I'm concerned about is
in the year right but I don't
want it to be something that
ultimately hurts our community
that I represent because they've
taken more money out to to help
their community you
representative we're of you know
Carlsbad Alamogordo Cloudcroft
might have been able to to
benefit because this money was
re routed basically to go to
Albuquerque that that's the
concern show up so thank you Mr
chair into and thank you both.
Right.
Senator Senator Brandt it is
still up for second time in yes
Sir okay go ahead.
Thank you and yeah I appreciate
what Senator Griggs is is saying
and and we've been texting back
and forth a little bit as well
but you know we have done these
projects several times where.
Yes they may be most beneficial
to one community.
I can think of a certain well of
that we all put a lot of money
into.
call Brian well and that really
only benefited that one
community but it was an issue
that we as a state needed to
deal well
Senator Griggs probably has some
some infrastructure needs in his
community and and we do need to
take a look at how we fund some
of these infrastructure projects
around the state because those
do that that does bring up some
concerns and some of the ways
that we do this
but Albuquerque is our largest
city has the most traffic
and
Rio Rancho building a suburb of
Albuquerque we run into that
program traffic all the time and
so those are some regional
issues that we're trying to deal
with through the US as well as
through
some other roads that hopefully
we can get done pretty quickly I
hope that my grandson isn't
driving before Purcell they'll
mortem is done.
He's three so let's let's hope
that he's not driving before
that road was finished because
it really needs to be done now
and so I I appreciate the
approach I'm gonna watch how
this goes and and
you know we may need to look at
certain things like this that
need bigger dollars then we can
all put in our small capital
outlay that's why I encourage
all of us to get together
regionally with each other and
help do different projects in in
our districts thank you.
Thank you thank you Mr chair
Senator Brandt I just like to
say is echo what Representative
Garrett was saying we just
wanted to try this different
approach we want to continue
working and I understand the
concerns of of taking this money
out of the severance tax
severance tax bonds to where
that would reduce overall all
the capital outlay that we get
and I understand there's a need
you know for for projects in
each district and this was in it
and approach we took and we
understand that but I would also
argue that this is a regional
issue and and the state issue I
don't want anyone to think this
is just you know big data
Albuquerque trying to come take
this money for project I think
it's important to the entire
state.
Great Senator Griggs.
Thank you again Mr chair I
appreciate you let me bring this
back up of my good friend
Senator Brandt mentions the
Brian well and I I just want
everybody to remember the Brian
well was debated in a separate
bill at links.
Crossed the legislature
and throughout the throughout
the session and it started early
in the session.
Show all right well I appreciate
the comments and I I understand
we're gonna have some some
challenges sometimes because we
don't all live in the same
place.
And I do appreciate the fact
that
Albuquerque's our largest city
we help Albuquerque a lot we we
do that we help Albuquerque a
lot.
But I just wanted to be you know
I can't I can't just you know
let the little pointed stick
come out at me and Carlsbad
without without coming back to
the to the response so.
You guys it is a.
It's quite the project it'll be
beneficial I know that I just I
think we may need to really
vision about how we handle some
of that in the you know in the
future to where everyone
everyone gets it.
and I'm you know I'm excited to
well I'm not a Mr chair I'm
gonna vote for but I'm excited
to see it happen and you guys
move forward move ahead so so
thank you Mr chair in a.
I think sure brand if you're
still on there anymore.
Okay Senator Padilla said time.
Thank you Mr chairman I think
everybody on the vehicle but I'd
like to move to do past.
On the table okay I don't have
any problem second motion for do
passed by Senator Padilla second
by Senator Tallman lane can you
please take grow.
Senator Brandt yes Senator
Griggs can I vote maybe.
One defense.
Senator house I I will go do I
will yes thank you Senator
Hamblen yes Senator Hickey yes
Senator Senator how to meal yes
Senator Kernan.
Senator Sanchez.
Yes Senator Tallman.
Yes Senator Wirth yes Senator
Padilla yes Senator Shendo yes
then with one excuse.
Thank so anyone you have a do
pass senator pope Representative
Garrett.
Moving on thank you Mr chairman
thank you committee.
Thank you Mr chair and we just
want to continue working on this
and and I agree with Senator
Griggs I I think going forward
you know legislation like this
needs to happen a little more
maybe entire body to have these
discussions with the priorities
are and Senator Griggs that was
before my time I know nothing
about any wells or anything so.
Not me.
Sorry I think all right thank
you moving on we'll go to we're
gonna do Senate bill two eighty
three and Senate bill three
sixty see how far we get before
midnight.
Mr chairman Pat Woods here all
right Mr Senator Woods.
You got a real simple bail here
on two eighty three.
Real simple just two pages last
words last words and Mr Chairman
what it actually does it's a
amendments to the real estate
broker disclosure act.
And the broker disclosure act I
don't know how many have bought
real estate lately but when you
go close on a on a property.
There's several things that
shows up in this disclosure
statement this there's
settlement statement.
And
A couple the one thing that it's
happening in agriculture is that
the requirements of that
statement is not an accurate
view of the next year taxes
And first of all on the page one
of the bill we've added new
definition that talks about a
buyer's broker which means a
real estate broker acting on
behalf of the perspective.
Our residential property
purchaser.
And all the
second page of the bill.
We talk about this a definition
of residential property which
means real property consisting
of one or two for dwellings but
does not include real property
with our without dwellings so
what we're talking about here is
is farmland or ranchland without
dwellings on it.
And that also goes on to say.
That is subject to the special
method of evaluation pursuant of
section seven thirty six twenty
eight AM this is a a special
agriculture
type of abalone of tax that you
actually determined that taxable
value by the amount of
income that can be made off of
it that year if it's farmland
they do a combination of crops
grown in the area and they
actually figure if there's any
profit made on those crops and
and it's kind of tax according
to what the land will produce
different your ranch land it's
the same with Dalin what's
cattle are are she for goats or
whatever run in that part of the
area and those values of those
commodities is determined by the
New Mexico State University the
the livestock value is
determined by are going to local
sale barns and actually.
An average of a lot of those
classes of animals.
I know let's get way down in the
weeds here and then I apologize.
anyway go on through this
amendment it says a.
Real property consisting of
structures that are primarily
used for temporary are a
transit.
Human population including
hotels motels or similar
structures and.
That that again is a.
Added on there too and I'm not.
Yes your one that said on there
tell you the truth Mr Chairman
be honest with you.
But I've got some expert
witnesses I hope that are on the
line.
Are with me today is of Randall
majors.
Levi's on the line if if if the.
So master will check for him.
Mr Chairman.
We have.
the massacre has not been in the
able to identify your expert
witness okay Senator Woods this
well let me tell you Sir this is
a essentially as I tell you
what happens is when you have a
settlement statement one of the
things the settlement statement
tells you just how much you're
can be expected to pay in taxes
next year.
That's in the settlement
statement so there's no here who
are well it's kind of to help
the bank figure out what you're
capable of buying this property
if you're able to maintain the
property through taxes what it
cost our most real estate
property all real estate
property taxes is bigger on the
value of the property and then
one third of that value as time
the mail right of the tax in
that area in that county.
It Ag of kosher is not figured
that way agriculture's figured
off of the cost of the the
production of the land it's
actually the production of the
land but the calls because.
The wording of this disclosure
document it it didn't allow for
you to use the radio our tax
value in the county it made you
use.
The the real estate value I I
I'm not yield to Senator Griggs
on estimate maybe he can be my
expert witness Mr chair.
That pretty dangerous but the I
will let him speak.
Mr Chairman
it I know it.
Whatever Senator Woods says is
absolutely correct.
The.
You know.
In.
All residential properties is
defined in in real estate law I
believe is one to four single
family dwellings and senator
Wirth would know would know that
I think as well because he he
works in some rates are stable
but but I think he would
probably be better and he's got
to stand up so he would be
better to to address some of
these issues so I'll be happy to
help Senator words but I think
senator Wirth maybe better in
this all right.
Jordy floor leader your.
Thank you to my my wonderful
fellow members on this committee
I did I actually jumped up and
grabbed the statute book.
Because I was drawing to see
exactly what's being executive
and I would say in Senator Woods
I think you know you and I have
a little discussion about a bill
on the Senate floor that needed
goes Senate Judiciary well
that's what's called the Senate
judiciary are just to make sure
we get this right so I I just
wanted to make sure I have what
I'm looking at is you know we're
exempt as I understand what
you're trying to do is exempt.
Certain properties.
You know from the definition of
residential property correct I
mean that's yes that's the goal
yes so I just want to make sure
and I just was looking up seven
thirty six and it and a key
section it's page two wine that
it's these four section sites.
Seven thirty six dash twenty.
Basically is.
Special method evaluation land
use primarily for agricultural
purposes yes.
So that's really that's what's
driving your bill I think yes it
is twenty three.
Special method evaluation
mineral property in properties
in connection with mineral
property except for potash and
uranium so does that so are you
we're we're out is that oil and
gas property here I mean what
what we're I am Mr.
That's a question for me and
and.
I had no it to yet to include
anything about oil and gas
properties okay.
This is great what you know this
is our way it was brought to me
R. Senator was was simply about
the.
Madam statement yeah and and how
the taxes were stated on the
settlement statement.
Because the way it was written
on the settlement statement the
one that the realtors have to
use it says you have to use the
appraised value of the land in
order to ensure that as the the
cost you know use that as we
normally do on all real estate.
Other real estate it's one third
of the appraised value times the
mill rate is the expected taxes.
Ag or court your land.
It's it's a different story and
I was wanting to make sure that
when they did this ranch land
are are are just farmland
transaction.
They didn't give the the buyer
of that shell shocked by giving
him the wrong tax rate okay so I
guess I guess the key thing
though are we exempting and
maybe miss o'donnell can help
with this I didn't pull up the
section were actually amending I
could go grab forty seven dash
thirteen dash one point one.
I mean I I guess I want to make
sure are are we completely
exempting.
From any disclosure.
These these different.
Definitions of of residential
properties are getting pulled
out so for example the one of
the and that does make me as a
lawyer go okay what does that
mean so real property consisting
of structures that are primarily
used for temporary or transit
transhumanist and including
hotels motels or similar
structures.
I guess is there is there an
argument now that hotels are
considered residential property
or is that an issue.
There's something about that are
not so I apologize that I didn't
get my expert witness here.
But there's something about that
that has.
Has a particular statement of
those being.
I residential I think you're
right a residential our long
term residential.
Property.
Yeah I guess it's it's just
trying to understand exactly
what what's going on here and I
and I apologize I also didn't go
moving at high speed with double
double since going on here once
but I guess that that's the
question is what.
You know so it also a real
property and what and the other
thing too were delimited say
we're we're expanding
residential definition so now it
says real property consisting of
one to four dwellings.
So I guess you know I don't
understand exactly how that's
drafted because.
You know right now if you attend
Wellings.
You know it is it's get sounds
like it's considered residential
property so we're limiting the
definite we're limiting the
disclosure that's required and
maybe that's getting you know
maybe it's assumed that
residential property.
You know doesn't have I
dwellings on it but again I I
just don't know what the
definition of dwelling is either
I mean if you've got a big you
know if you got a big ranch
spread.
And you've got.
You know some.
Home and guesthouse and
different you know you could
have and maybe that's what
they're trying to do is make
sure that's not part of it so I
just maybe and maybe I'm just
reading this wrong and.
But it does raise its build the
lawyer in me is would raise lots
of questions but this is going
on to Senate Judiciary our.
Senator Wirth out.
Mr chairman senator Wirth I'm
sorry Mr chairman for leaving
you out Mr chairman and senator
Wirth in real life.
You're you're dwelling on
agriculture property.
As as journalist cracked off
with two or three acres.
And that is charged at a
different rate than your
agriculture property.
And if you have Here adds and
Barnes and that kind of stuff
that is also separated and in
appraise different it just
lacked in more like
a home in town.
You know it may be a different
rate but it's a it's rated
different but the agriculture
property itself.
Has a different evaluation as
United got it.
Yeah I get what you're trying to
do Mr chair I just I just want
to make sure that there's not a
whole bunch of other things that
are happening as a result of
that I know you do too yes I do
too so you know Mr chair I mean
Mike my suggestion given where
we are in the timing of this
session and this bill needs to
get you to the judiciary I mean
I feel comfortable you know
moving on on no rack to
judiciary I think I I just don't
feel comfortable wouldn't vote
for the bill on a do pass but I
do think that it's again what
you're trying to do and and and
just for anyone who's listening
in the no rectus moves it to the
next committee it doesn't it
just signals that this is kind
of an issue area that you know
we didn't have all the answers
to
so that's just my thought if I
dug into this if we held it up I
might be able to.
Well I would be able to figure
it out I just don't want to hold
up given where we are and given
you know where you're going
which is where it needs to be.
So I don't Senator Wirth yeah
Senator I was going to make the
same recommendation to pass with
no REC.
House second.
And and I don't know Mr chair to
did miss o'donnell I see I see I
can see her did did you have
anything to add on this one now
Mr chairman members of the
committee I was I was baffled
to.
Mr chair I think senator Tom has
made a motion with job I will
second okay we have a motion for
a no record.
And we have a second.
Second second Mr chair the
goodbye Senator Wirth motion by
Senator Tallman so.
Then.
Local.
I think we lost my sectors must
going on here I do.
Sorry I'm just sitting there
waiting for you to say are you
gonna do grow okay Senator
Brandt it's alright that I did
okay.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen yes Senator Hickey yes
Senator have a meal S. Senator
Kernan.
Senator Sanchez.
Yes what.
Senator Tallman yes Senator
Wirth yes Senator Padilla yes
Senator Shendo yes.
Two excused and line of nine
yes.
All right Senator would you have
a do pass a no REC.
Thank you and I will do some
work on this bill I apologize
I'm I'm I'm falling behind on my
work to.
Thank you very much for your
consideration.
Thank you all right of so I I I
didn't realize that the Senator
Lopez is on so we're going to go
ahead and do Senate bill two
ninety two and then we will do
is Senate bill three sixty and
that will be done for tonight.
Thank you Mr chairman good good
evening everyone I am here in
front of your committee was
Senate bill two ninety two and
it Mr chairman members of the
committee what
it the tile says that we are
asking to making appropriation
to economic development
department to manages to support
small business incubator centers
throughout our state but Mr
chairman members of the
committee the official name is
actually called the New Mexico
certified business incubators
and if I could Mr chairman for
brevity I'm I would love to be
able to
I think it's my time to our web
only by this I'm who was the
director of our small business
incubator in the south valley of
Albuquerque so our way if I
could ask you please.
What are thank you.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee thank you for the time
thank you Senator Lopez
identical so divided I'm the
executive director of the Rio
Grande community development
corporation who manages the
south valley economic
development center
our center is one of the seven
certified incubators across the
state those incubators are
located in Don Juan called
County house and I've been
McKinley very Leo and going out
I County R. in the latest two
thousand nineteen our economic
impact developed for the New
Mexico business incubator shows
a little bit of the impact of
our work so I'm a bit of a
summary of that is that we had
supported and and also just to
the apprentices that that fiscal
year for that impact reports
that thousand nineteen because
that was the last year that
this is the department receive
funding to create this and
support that the two greatest
fiscal.
Are you created economic impact
report and also to support then
if you beat us across the state
so in that report in the state
that we supported about two
hundred businesses who reported
about of funding of thirty point
thirty point five million
dollars in equity injections
Revenue and contracts
additionally indirect Revenue
west of seventeen point four
million dollars making a total
of forty seven point nine
million dollars between the
direct funding and that day and
indirect funding mentioned also
this budget created the hotter
and six hundred and forty four
jobs were created and sustained
by their companies and with an
annual revenue of twenty twenty
four point six million dollars
then total annual taxable gross
receipts generated by those
businesses from revenues what
thirty five point four million
dollars that taxable spending by
direct and indirect and induced
workers was five million dollars
and spending by those businesses
was three point three million
dollars with a total impact on
gross receipts of eighty nine
point eighty six million dollars
additionally to that that report
also mentions that eighty one
point four percent of the
graduated companies remaining
operations with a similar impact
which is in a summary of total
revenue of seventy eight point
nine million dollars five
hundred twenty seven Travis
Streeter sustained by those
companies are paying an annual
salary of fifty three point six
million dollars and total gross
receipts about the the point
nine million dollars.
Now does thank you better start
with pain by several sources of
revenue which includes private
foundation individual and
corporate donors Peter county
contract a federal grant program
feet and use receive support
from the state but Alaska fiscal
year that happened happened.
Now we are struggling at this
moment uses continue their
operations budget prime out this
is saying and the increasing
growth of that demand of our
services particularly by the
impact of the pandemic which.
All businesses need additional
support and also individual the
loss job are searching for new
ways to provide income for their
family so also if you will serve
on the fiscal impact report then
state
the New Mexico State University
also reported that is this bill
is approved they will be able to
support additional hot out of
the about an additional hundred
businesses which is something
similar that we will be able to
do so in our center I just did
you a little bit of perspective
right now we have a waiting list
of over two hundred thirty
businesses in the waiting list
to start using our services just
in our incubator which is
something that we cannot serve
across the state in those
terrifying feeders additionally
there is the and their fiscal
report also mentions that there
are some other rural areas that
are going through the process
started I appropriations so this
bill will also be able to for
those of you incubators
in the past there have been
allocation of about a hundred
forty thousand every two fiscal
years which translates to about
a forty thousand dollar for each
debater support that represents
about five percent of our total
budget in average so that
definitely if the if the.
Work but now with this growing
demand.
We we're we're also struggling
to keep up with that that demand
so this is the summary and and
thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee for the
crime and an early in the office
for providing this information.
Okay thank you thank you Mr
chairman I will stand for
questions okay at this time
we'll go to the public.
Carl.
Senate bill two ninety two we
will go directly to the members
of the public here today are
there any members of the public
who wish to speak in opposition
of Senate bill two ninety two at
this time please raise your
hand.
Okay moving on to members of the
public who wish to speak in
favor of Senate bill two ninety
two please raise your hand.
Johnny Montoya.
You are muted.
You may go ahead.
Johnny Montoya.
Okay your support has been noted
thank you very much that
concludes public comment at this
time.
Okay great now will go to the
committee have Senator Tallman.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator.
Lopez for sponsoring this bill.
Eight hundred thousand dollars
to be used distributed.
Two seven
Thank you bear is at the rate of
a hundred thousand dollars.
Each so what.
Happens to the remaining hundred
thousand dollars.
Mr chairman of course where
would you be able to answer that
place.
It was an average of from the
Economic Development Department
it does state that the impact
report that has to be done to
measure the impact of being to
visitors as well as I I would
assume that administrative
expenses but also the fiscal
impact report does mention that
the department has the capacity
to operate this this funding so
I I I think that that the number
there was at an estimate amount
but it would be
the department who would at
great act that determination and
I'm assuming.
Thank you Mr chair so you're
saying this is for manage.
Administrative overhead.
That that's my assumption but
also reading the fiscal impact
report I'm not able to reading
it as it than average per
incubator if it's allocated
evenly but that's my my
assumption as well but also I
know that there's a cost for the
creating that you get economic
impact report because it's a
third party you violation a
company that is contracted by
the department thank you Mr
chairman thank you
For your response also.
Your chance to look at the F. I.
R. so.
West price center.
Their headquarters now
Albuquerque they have offices at
least three or four.
The cities around the state.
So they're they're much larger
operation than the.
Some of the others thank you
pages mentioned in in the
analysis so.
Why would they be getting the
same amount of money even though
they're much bigger operation.
It depending on the number of
clients so it it also that the
department had allocated that
amount even we based on their
criteria but definitely it is
something that that the
department could take a look
into that elderly depending on
the type of the firms the for
example our center it usually or
at an average support about
eighty three two hundred
businesses every fiscal year in
in contrast with the other
incubators that point between
fifteen and twenty but also if
you do that that different types
of sizes of businesses very
eight depending on the type of
industry industries that we
support in the food industry of
course it is a live in more high
volume of the number of
businesses that we support but
the fact remains the same so as
we look at the different
industries that those incubators
support that they support we can
be also the impact at the end of
the day not just by the number
of businesses are.
Thank you for your response
thank you Mr chair thank you.
Thank you Senator Lopez that's
all I have thank you thank you
Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator so my understanding is
it goes to the Economic
Development Department and then
they dispersed around the state
so it's statewide for incubators
throughout the state is that
correct.
That is correct where do we
actually see these programs
taking place and we have Erro
head down New Mexico state and
then I think we have one U. N.
M. are there any others.
There is in fact one County
House county benefit McKinley
and also Bernalillo county we
are looking at early county and
also what is located around the
county including going on a now
that's where we have our
physical location so for example
are Senator about seventeen the
code and the county but we're
looking internally but we do Sir
more than just where we are
located and that the Miller
between Jan with it and the rest
of incubators.
Right Mr Chairman
Story of my mind I still work
that read small print so I can't
see your name sorry about that
but I think yours takes care of
my community as well which is
Rio Rancho correct.
That's correct awesome thank you
that's all I I just want to make
sure I was understanding the
statewide it's not directed
towards so I I think sometimes
get very frustrated Senator as
you know when we have one of
these that's coming for the
program in next County I want to
see if the statewide so I am
going to support your bills
because it is a statewide
initiative and not limited to
one area thank you.
So I have Senator Hamblen and
Senator Padilla.
Mr chair I believe Senator it
was was performing okay I'm
happy to go out to you center
and I'm I'm gonna make a motion
okay great thank you I'm I'm
just more of a committee
actually because you know
Senator Brandt was talking about
with the arrowhead center down
in Los crucis you know there are
a number of organizations and I.
love Mexico state house way what
what we're talking about and and
really being able to share that
information all over the state I
mean we've had small incubators
in Los crucis and we just don't
have the right thing to make it
work like what you've done and I
would really like to be able to
use what you do is a model you
know in the meantime we have the
arrowhead center we have west we
have the small business
development center we have the
green chamber we have the
greater Las Cruces chamber we're
all working to help our small
businesses especially right now
but I'd really love to you know
after the the session is over be
able to pick your brain to see
how we can really maximize those
collaborations with those groups
and offer up is incubators
because what we are finding is
that there are a lot more
solopreneurs out there that I'm
need help and so if we can do
that and really capitalize on
the different partnerships that
are already existing throughout
the state that I think is like
Senator Brandt was talking about
that we can really make an
impact statewide.
And really help our small
businesses and help those
individual business creators
really expand and just use the
resources that are available to
them so thank you so much for
your presentation and and and in
your comments I'm really excited
about what you do you Mr chair.
Thank you.
Senator Hickey.
Your your hand is a yes thank
you very much I'm sorry
I.
really appreciate that this bill
has been been brought forward I
have to take care of a multi
cast I apologize.
The agency over the presentation
on the other hand
I did read through this this
this this is the future and and
it in in entrepreneurial
activities they will often tell
you it's the jockey not the
horse and
the one of the things to that we
need to do is not only get the
the right jockeys in and and the
more you go through these things
and and value here is good yeah
here is that you learn so much
and then you become a really
good jockey and
also the that the stable of
folks who ride the horse
exercise of data analytics the.
The financial people the
software engineers know that
we're we're training up in the
state and but you know people
just sometimes need a little bit
to go and I know that there's a
lot of hands up apple in this
state that wants to go for you
know this maybe around day they
want to go for around the around
see
and I think they the those folks
who are want to invest I have
friends out of state you'll see
a bill coming from me
yeah and the Here I'm sorry I'm
sorry Majority Leader there we
can cross receipts
or something in the air just a
credit but anyway there's
there's a lot of capital and I
hope you do a lot in health care
I have been involved in the
number of private equity in
health care and they have so
much money they are just
desperate for places to invest
so thank you for bringing this
forward
and
it's going to so much for the
state so thank you and I
apologize for is dropping in
the.
Thank you I don't have any quick
more questions from the
committee I have Senator Padilla
for Senator Padilla.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator Lopez and I know Senator
Lopez you been ardent supporter
this programming for much longer
than almost all of us that are
here in this committee I think
we all of us you started when
you were twelve right
so and in Mr chairman I I can't
say enough about gross where the
doctor is just a rockstar super
international sensation with the
work that he does.
Outstanding I agree with
everything that everybody said
so with that I would move it to
pass.
We will motion for the past the
second by Senator Hickey.
Thank you need to call Roca.
Senator Brandt yes ma'am Senator
Griggs yes Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Hickey yes Senator how
to meal yes Senator Kernan.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator Tallman.
Senator Wirth yes Senator
Padilla yes.
Senator Shendo yes we have three
excused and eight present and
voting in the positive.
Thank you senator you have a do
pass Senator Lopez thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee.
Thank you and I hope you are
fine a bill for tonight that's
uh Senate bill three sixty
Senator Padilla thank you Mr
chairman I will be this seems
possible respect to the
committee three sixty one point
three sixty
You're going to get sick of the
committee talking about
broadband but here I come again
you know we have a real
opportunity here that it had
been sinking in for a while Mr
chairman on something that we
could do for the middle mile if
you will and I think that's
exactly what we have here with
the Senate bill three sixty I'm
gonna talk about your for a
little bit but with your
permission I'm going to ask that
you allow an expert witness John
Hawkins he is the executive vice
president one executive express
presents over PNM resources he's
going to say a few words after I
introduced the bill but what I
would say Mr Chairman is we have
this really huge problem of how
do we get over the vast expanses
of New Mexico I wish Senator
would sit state on on the line
with us I'm gonna pass to but I
do want to hold him up but he
said something a long time ago
that really got me to thinking
and and that was that you know
and I'm not trying to be clever
funny or whatever you know we do
we have more cows than people
along you know our our acreage
chair New Mexico and and and per
mile so when you look at the
cost of driving broadband across
those bass large expanses being
the fifth largest state in the
union get the forty six the
largest with population if you
will you wind up with a huge
contrast if you take a mile
across broadband across state
New York state you might have a
million customers and consumers
along that mile which brings
down the cost of a proliferating
broadband on that mile
if you take a mile a broadband
across New Mexico it's super
expensive because there's very
few consumers along that route
well well it just dawned on me
and others and and and some
utilities here in New Mexico
it's a wait a minute why don't
we utilize the easements that
are already in place that don't
disturb the land they don't
disturb you know things that are
already in place reduce the cost
of capital to to to drop Rod
band across the state and
utilize the easements that
utilities already have for
program so so that's what I
bring in you know to you today
it's that middle mile we're just
broadband start and where does
it end will right in the middle
that really long to.
Since the a component portion of
it we have capacity along these
a utility our lines and utility
transmission lines that have a
tremendous amount of capacity
available to them I also have
Carlos Senator who is one of the
other executive vice presidents
over a PNM resources who is with
this is what I'm asking is if
you weren't but I just wanted to
say that leadership Albuquerque
has taking this project on Mr
chairman members of the
committee as one of their key
projects I'm just gonna
highlight for you just one or
two things that they said about
this project you know that the
bill it would reduce the need to
build new broadband
infrastructure cost expensive
tech territory are using what we
already have to reach out our
most vulnerable communities and
that capital investment is
really what chokeholds our
ability to do this so you know I
I I and others have brought a
tremendous amount of of
broadband legislation this is
just another one of those no
brainers I can't believe we did
do this long time ago also from
a leadership Albuquerque the
electric utilities of the state
would provide middle mile
capacity as I mentioned earlier
Mr chairman so the fiber optics
could be used to provide
internet access to most anywhere
that it's lacking such as Pueblo
so I could sweat equity or in
small rural localities like
estancia in among the bill
eliminates the need for large
capital investments as I
mentioned Mr chairman members of
the committee to be invested in
order to acquire these rights of
way because it it's already been
done and so I just wanted to
cover all of that I'm gonna ask
my experts to say just a few
words on what we're up to here
tonight and I'll give each one
of them a minute or two with
your permission Mr chairman Mr
Hawkins.
What.
Thank you good evening Mister
chairman Senator pretty and
members of the committee when
the pandemic hit here in New
Mexico utilities along with
other industry wrasse you know
what we might be able to do to
help get broadband
infrastructure to areas of the
state that really needed it the
whole world basically went
virtual almost immediately with
the increased demand for video
meetings an online information
things like telemedicine online
distance learning and even
emergency response depend on
broadband access in many rural
communities did not really have
adequate infrastructure to
support those needs
electric utilities have
communication of the structure
in the form of fiber optic
cables in place that we use to
ensure the grid is operating
reliably and safely.
However utility sometimes excess
capacity on that communication
infrastructure so we saw an
opportunity to partner with
telecommunications companies to
get broadband to some of these
rural areas using transmission
lines however the problem was
using that fiber for broadband
could potentially mean
contacting hundreds or maybe
even a thousand individual
landowners to renegotiate
additional communication
easements along those
transmission line.
This bill would allow utilities
to use their existing utility
easements for the purpose of
leasing excess fiber capacities
to the telecommunication
providers for broadband their
voice there by speeding up the
ability to expand service to new
areas faster use of the excess
capacity can have a very near
term positive effect for rural
communities during this pandemic
but this bill also have
potential to provide long term
benefits as the need for
broadband continues to become
vital to our economy and our way
of life we think Senator Padilla
for his leadership in bringing
this bill and I'm happy to stand
for questions thank you Mr
Hawkins in Mr and Mr chairman Mr
Senator did you have a comment
or two.
Good evening terms show sure to
send a members of the committee
Carlos settle here with the
Public Service Company Mexico
you know I was gonna say my
comments for public comment but
since I was in a promoted to
executive vice vice president by
Senator Padilla but I would just
make a few comments but I'm not
really I just want to recreate
right you know we really think
the senator from his work on
expanding broadband you know
across New Mexico for you know
over the years and and really
bringing Senate bill three sixty
to the session you know again we
we feel that this will help
expand broadband record of our
state your natural partnerships
between not just the energy
companies but with the
communication providers this
will help our rural communities
in providing internet service to
our kids and teachers find
options for telehealth
telehealth any and economic
development catalyst to grow
business I mean really
especially during this pandemic
we're we're realizing you know
the the need for more broadband
and and to to our rural
communities so really you know
overall in again in the sports
sent about three sixty eight
with so there there's the
benefits of the expansion of
broadband we can just really
help these New Mexico Mexico
special rural areas and you
don't really compete and I'm not
be left behind by you know by
other states so I mean this is
just a real opportunities so
those are my words thank you for
your time.
Thank you Mr Mr.
Mr chairman I think that's going
to if you with your permission
go out to public comment but I
just wanted to note that before
before the a little tired Mr
chairman what will but so so
missing the deadline to sign up
for public comment was The New
Mexico exchange carrier group
but take us on the on is there
executive there there the
president CEO and of their
eleven rural carriers Mr
chairman across the world cares
across the state and they just
today voted to endorse this
piece of legislation so I just
want to make mention of that
thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you senator but yes at
this time we'll go to public
comment.
For public comment for Senate
bill three sixty for those
opposing we will go directly to
those here in this meeting are
there any members of the public
who wish to speak in opposition
to Senate bill three sixty at
this time please raise your
hand.
Terry call I have you for a to
speak in support is that
correct.
Okay thank you very much so now
moving on to those who wish to
speak in support of Senate bill
three sixty first off we have
Bernice mattress.
Thank you members of the
committee as part of leadership
Albuquerque I'm grateful for the
opportunity to speak to you
about a genuine need for New
Mexicans throughout the pandemic
the lack of access to broadband
has taken a great toll on
education for both K. twelve and
college students especially
those living in rural areas our
utilities currently serve the
small communities and in in many
cases already have dark fiber in
place allow broadband into some
of the most underserved areas
additional shortcuts to
different extent the difficult
and expensive process necessary
to allow communication companies
to access utility fiber and does
so without increasing the cost
to ratepayers.
Students in rural areas
throughout New Mexico would need
to drive so far or park outside
home improvement stores to do
their homework the internet is
the greatest source of
opportunity and no longer
commodity but a necessity for
all New Mexicans and it is our
responsibility through this bill
to fill that need thank you.
Thank you very much next up we
have mark Arnold.
Yes thank you I'm also a leader
a member of leadership
Albuquerque and my background is
working in caring for
individuals with developmental
disabilities I have coordinated
care with individuals and their
guardians in rural areas across
New Mexico I can testify the
importance of care that these
individuals need and how many
now more virtual world it is
essential we help them have
reliable access to internet the
way Albuquerque or Santa Fe does
any related video video visits
meetings or appointments that
are necessary for their overall
well being I have an uncle with
the developmental disability and
he's lucky to live in
Albuquerque where there's
reliable connectivity to
internet for not only is
essential needs as once as well
it is the right thing to also
provide this to other.
Others in small rural areas they
deserve the same opportunities
and access to be able to do is
it's with medical professionals
are people are family members
and friends that will make their
day I appreciate this time to
speak to you guys and ask for
your support in this for this
bill.
Thank you very much next up we
have actually Wagner.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I'm
Ashley Wagner director of public
policy for the New Mexico
chamber of commerce we support
this bill because it will expand
broadband to rural New Mexico
and in turn help these
communities access distance
learning telehealth and to be
more competitive from an
economic development standpoint
the fiscal impact report noted
that internet service providers
have to deal with the cumbersome
and costly process of navigating
right of way issues with
multiple government and tribal
jurisdictions this bill will
significantly lessen this burden
and make use of the
infrastructure we already have
and we urge you to support it
thank you so much.
Thank you very much next up we
have mark Fleischer.
We have a renegade ten.
Mr chairman members of the
committee I am also
participating in the leadership
Albuquerque program through the
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
and my colleagues and I
represent various industries and
leave the access to broadband is
critical to the recovery and
success of our state
I work personally in the
health care industry were
Telemeds over the last years
become a critical piece of
expanding access to care in New
Mexico and as a group we urge
you to support Senate bill three
sixty thank you.
Thank you very much next up we
have Terry Cole.
Members of the committee I
wanted to.
For.
Section one.
This is a great wall are you
I think the hundreds of miles of
your I.
Right now you can
access will be across the state
one more
yes is also popping off.
Thank you why every second
right.
from your readership publicly
accessible for very proud of the
selected this project is for we
stand by them one missile thank
you very much for the next we
are working towards one thank
you.
Thank you very much we also have
know that Kevin Grunwald was
registered to speak but he does
not appear to be in the meeting
so finally we have Mendham a
conical.
chairman members of the
committee I represent Economic
Forum and we are very very
pleased with this piece of
legislation we are addressing
something holistically and
looking at how we can if you
will create a daisy chain
through our tire rural community
environment is going to make a
difference for everyone and we
are very excited that this is an
important piece of this entire
package and we encourage support
of this bill thank you.
Thank you very much is there any
elected members of the public
who wish to speak in support of
Senate bill three sixty.
Mr chairman I have one other
that messaged me.
Thank you Mr chairman I just
wanna let the committee know
that I did receive support also
from Mr Josh.
Are you I believe is the name
you he's the general manager of
Tularosa basin telephone which
is one of the enemy CG members
that voted to endorse this piece
of legislation to but the reason
he message me wanted to share
with with the committee that
this move is going to allow
fiber access to their company as
an example to begin serving the
significant needs with Holloman
Air Force base to to keep that
based writing in moving forward
and doing the good work that
they do so so this is just
another valuable reason why we
should support this type of
initiative thank you.
Thank you.
We have no other members for
public comment thank you all
right thank you the car will now
go to the committee for
questions I have Senator Griggs.
Thank you Mr chairman I don't I
don't really know how you might
want to want to handle that but.
It was pointed out in the
analysis that on.
On page two I think it's line
eleven the word power appears
twice.
And that.
Do we want to try to.
A man that.
R. forty we want
Senator Padilla to amended
before it goes to genex commit.
Mr Chairman I'm happy to however
you'd like to handle that I'd
like to correct in here if
you're willing that way goes
adhere if we get out here and
want to make assumptions but but
if we get out here I'd like to
to to leave clean so it's us I'm
certainly appreciate the Senator
finding that I didn't spot that
myself thank you senator rates
Senator Griggs of what rate
again.
Side so late it's page two Lima
let I'm sorry Senator Griggs so
page two line eleven of the last
word towers if you look three
over towers was listed twice Mr
chairman that's the that's the
amendment let me the amendment
all right now we could take care
right here today.
So Mister chairman that we just
removed the second towers.
By comparison probably the comma
Pasha in that case we should
move the first hours and that
just makes it cleaner water
okay.
I will I will certainly however
Senator Padilla performers and
we'll just.
I'll make the motion he
consecutive maybe what we'll
clean it up.
I would second that Mr Chairman.
Okay any opposition to the
motion.
I see none.
You have an amended bill so
we're thank you Senator Griggs
and senator break you're sure
that's that's all I've got the
current.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator I
just I was just wondering
the do you feel any passion
about broadband I just confused
a little bit
no I'm just kidding of.
And I have no idea dreaming
about this stuff during the
session when I came in the same
distance the chairman the same
day to this crazy Senate and I
dream about this now right now.
Yeah I have nightmares about
things about this place to so
it's all right
I I did want to just ask with
this change what is the effect
on the property owners
where we're now giving.
And they've already given
easement so what do you see as
the effect of the property
owners As will be involved in
renegotiation of helices Spencer
used or how does that work.
Chairman I'd like Mr Hawkins to
to to reply to that but but also
what I would say in what's
beautiful about this proposition
here is that the the the the
landscape the land whatever
nothing is disturbed it's
already there so so really the
the the landowner doesn't see
any change to their property but
Mr talking can you if you dig a
little deeper into that
response.
Yes Mr chair us Senator Brandt.
Senator B. as it is exactly
right it's an existing easement
so we're already there with a
transmission structure so
actually it would it would have
no effect on the on the property
owner it's utilizing existing
rights of way and
I I guess potential you could
even say it will it might even
help where a communications
company wouldn't have to come
back over the top of that with
another easement.
Thank you Mr chairman this is
though Senator Brandt they
wouldn't even realize that it
happened it it just suddenly
utilizing surpass it already
exists Sen planted there for
decades in some cases.
So Mister chairman Senator the
so the issue is that right now
to do this you have to get with
every property owner of the that
is part of the easement and
renegotiate with them is that
what what happens is the
renegotiation because there's an
increased value or white wire or
just to get permission for some
of the story there Mr Chairman
I'm I'm gonna let the expert
talk on that one.
Mister chairman Senator Brandt
yes so the so there's a second
commercial easement that that
today is required and thank you
we what we would end up doing is
utilizing it and really there's
no change to the infrastructure
whatsoever it is just utilizing
the wire that that is there to
put more information on it so so
there's no change.
In in infrastructure it's just
allowing a telecommunications
company to use it.
Mr Chairman the struggles I I
appreciate that but the reason
is because it's it's difficult
to go back to get all the.
Mr Chairman you have to get the
permission to change the.
Of what's being run through the
wires that are I'm trying to
understand completely Mr
chairman Mr Hawkins.
Yet Mr chairman Mr Browde
apologies for for for not
answering that question probably
as as well as I could the yes so
so today really what happens is
say I have a hundred and fifty
mile long transmission line
crossing.
Five hundred properties
what we would literally have to
do is go notify them and and let
them know and then renegotiate
those easements the state by the
way they'll be additional
communication coming across here
and so really what that does is
it extends the time that it
might take to be able to utilize
that so if you could imagine
going and saying and contacting
five hundred property owners
some may be in state some maybe
out of state you know of you
know property owner out of state
and negotiate error and amend
those contracts right those
those land use contracts and
then and then have to go back
through that process could take
significant a significant amount
of time whereas if we were to
all were allowed to use the
existing state that I'm actually
presenting a bill right at this
moment are excuse me if we were
to be able to use the existing
easement we could make that
happen in a matter of weeks
whereas if there's multiple
property owners and and and
quite a few of them that could
literally take years to be able
to you know months or two a year
to be able to get through that
process and really extend the
time in which
we would potentially it would
take to get broadband to an area
with thank you Mr chairman thank
you Mr Hawkins I think I
understand the reasoning my mic.
I guess my question on the value
issue is.
Your hand taking a wire the
reusing for one thing you're
going to use it for something
else and you're going to make
money from it I'm guessing is
that something that you would
normally have to go back to the
property owner and renegotiate
what they've been paid to where
they would be losing of a source
of revenue or is that something
that normally wouldn't happen it
would just be a matter of
getting their permission.
Mr chair Senator Brandt you're
you're correct it is just a
matter of per.
just a matter of permission it's
not really increased value it's
just because the easement
doesn't spell out that use.
Thank you I appreciate it thank
you Mr chairman service.
Thank you Mr chairman I
apologize got a call from the
governor right when you said we
were having this discussion
certainly appreciate you telling
the governor that I was way more
important thank you so much.
Senator Tallman.
One way to get a bill done Mr
chair.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
thank you Senator Padilla for
bringing this bill forward I
agree with you that.
This is a no nonsense logical
method to expedite the
development of broadband and and
like you I'm surprises have
really made use of this
possibility sooner therefore I
am moving to pass.
just a second I have a question
Senator Padilla of for the
current the.
Fiber what size fiber is
currently on the transmission
line that PNM is talking about.
thank you Mr chairman okay
Mister Hawkins to address that
one is I'm not the.
The engineer that you all think
I am.
Mr chair the it.
It depends on the route so as
these structures have been built
over time and as this five
percent put in overtime it's
there's been various amounts
that we've had to put in mostly
because it's serving our
infrastructure primarily but as
we're putting it up it might be
state ninety six fibers in some
places that might be more
hundred fifty six fibers it
depends on the route some places
we may have no capacity that's
available and we would not be
able to utilize that but in many
cases we have
it just depends on the route.
So so so for this fiber that
you're willing to lease or use
we talked how many strands are
we talking one strand to
stranger.
So Mister chair
I did it again it depends on the
route in some cases we might
have the I who knows I know
quite a number of fibers in in
some routes we may have we had
may have none but kinda as we
move through the communications
world right it used to be two
fibers was you know you know
what they call the T. one which
is one point five Meg and now
two fibers can be ten gig right
so
if we have if we have capacity
there that we would be using for
our utility purposes we have a a
significant opportunity.
Okay yes the debate nice to see
the president of a curious not
over all the transmission lines
go but you know we're talking
about rural areas but you just
indicated that if the
legislative and not available
there certain areas will still
not be served and I'll be
curious to see what those
communities are because I would
feel it might be our tribal
communities.
Our our reservations and so
service so that's something that
I just dropped a be nice to see
that map once it's available
Senator.
Yes yes thank you Mr chairman I
mean the good news is I think
what you're gonna find this
areas that had no idea that they
could have the highest capacity
or or or or and with certainly
would have been available to
their to the last mile a minute
company comes in and delivers
that to them are some
organization comes in and looks
at you that that is what makes
this proposition just remarkable
because we don't have to make
that massive capital investment
you know we talked about you
know this easement example I'll
give you one is you know if they
if a company wants to come in
here and take you know broadband
across the same stance of land
there might be three hundred
easements that they have to to
work through if they get all the
way to the three hundred these
men and that that individual you
know does not whatever then
suddenly that time that energy
that money that exercise that
investment it's just all for not
so I I just think that we have a
real opportunity here.
I appreciate that and I think
it's a wonderful idea I mean I
know easements are are huge
undertaking and so forth so I
don't have any further questions
we do have a motion on the floor
for a by Senator Tallman we have
a second.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Brandt lane for new of Conroe.
Senator Brandt yes ma'am Senator
Griggs yes Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Hickey.
Yes Senator how to meal us
Senator Kernan.
Senator census.
Yes.
Senator Tallman yes Senator
Wirth.
He's on this other.
Zoom meeting Senator Padilla.
Yes and Senator Shendo yes.
to excuse in line voting yes.
Okay you have in the past most
of sensitive materials to pass
as amended as amended correct
thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I sincerely
appreciate the help.
Great thank you committee
members that concludes our of.
The committee meeting for
tonight thank you for a.
For your your time I know it's a
long night but but we did cover
quite a few bill so appreciate
that and we will see you
tomorrow.
Thank you anything Senator
Shendo all right thank you.
Good night all.
Hey everybody.
Can I come by.
The we're.
