Um, or off trying to make sure
something happens like it's
supposed to. So, uh, we are
going to roll House Bill 7 to
Thursday, and committee just for
your information, that will be
included if there are any other
um consent bills.
That and Tuesday, uh, I'm sorry,
Thursday will be our last
meeting.
So we'll bring tissue
OK. Um, and, uh, maybe Senator
Sher might have a libation or
two.
You're gonna have a libation at
12:01 on Saturday.
And, uh, and so what pardon?
901. Then it will be a good 3
hours.
Um, and so, uh, what we are
going to do is then have House
Bill 586 with uh Senator Doig
and representative Skupanski,
um, and so we are gonna let you
go. This is not your first time
in this committee, so you, you
know the deal. Um, so let's go
ahead and, why don't you go
ahead and start?
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members, um, I have before you
the healthcare consolidation
Oversight Act, um, and this
legislation is building off of a
law that was passed last
legislative session, that law
was uh a intended as a stopgap
measure. So it uh automatically
repeals on July 1 of 2025. And
we have spent the last year
working on this topic, um,
conducting meetings.
around the state, um, and where
we, uh, what you have before you
is the bill that was passed last
year with the additions of
public comment, uh, uh, public
process, enforcement,
whistleblower protection, and we
are moving the entire oversight
process from the Office of the
Superintendent of Insurance to
the Healthcare Authority. And so
what this legislation applies to
is any change of control to a
hospital.
Or the acquisition of a
healthcare practice by a
healthcare provider organization
that is affiliated with an
insurer. So those are the only
entities that are in this
legislation, um, that would go
through a review process. And
basically what we are reviewing
for and what the healthcare
authority would be looking for
is whether patient uh care, the
quality, affordability, or
accessibility would be
negatively or positively.
impacted by a transaction and
whether the workforce conditions
would be negatively or
positively impacted by a
transaction. Um, and I want to
extend my appreciation to the
hospital association, um, as
well as loveless and
Presbyterian, they have done a
phenomenal amount of work with
us over the last just 5 days, I
think, um, to, uh, have this
legislation and uh a form that
they find acceptable, um, and I
really appreciate their effort.
hurts. Um, it's been great
working with them. Um, we also
have with us, um, the secretary
of the Healthcare Authority as
well as the secretary of the
Department of Health, um, and I
want to thank my co-sponsor,
Senator Doig. She's put in a
tremendous amount of work on
this topic as well, um, and I'm
sure she, she may want to add
something.
Madam Chair members, I think,
uh, the representative really
covered it, um.
I'll just say that up until we
passed 5 SB 15 last year. We
were one of, I think, only 11
states in the country that
didn't have something in place
to look at these transactions.
Uh, we also have the highest
percentage of private
equity-owned hospitals in the
nation here in New Mexico. The
goal of this legislation is just
to, it's not to stop
transactions. It's just to make
sure that when transactions
occur, it's not at the expense
of healthcare in New Mexico.
Thank you so much. Um, I don't
know if you want your expert to
speak or if you want us to just
go ahead and go to public
commentary, we can do that
first. Um, and then a reminder
afterwards, you have the
opportunity to respond or we can
go straight to the committee. So
just by a show of hands, um, who
in uh the room is in support of
this legislation.
12, please keep your hands up,
123456789.
All right, we have 9. Is there
anybody in the room in
opposition of this bill?
And we have 2 people online who
are in support. Um, so just for
time's sake and out of respect
of the committee as well, we're
going to go ahead and just have
4 people get up and speak.
And you will have a minute
apiece, you will see the 32nd
warning from the vice chair.
Go ahead, cap.
Thank you, Chair and members of
committee on this incredibly
windy day. I feel like a
tumbleweed. Um, Kat Sanches with
Bold Futures New Mexico in
support of HB 586. 1st, we want
to thank the sponsors and
secretary of the HCA for the
work done to move this bill. I'm
deeply appreciative of ensuring
the voice of community that is
maintained in the oversight
process. This is more than just
business transactions. This is
engagement with community for
the care of community, keeping
notifications and forums for
community that is impacted by
these transactions goes a long
way in keeping the the trust in
relationships with healthcare
entities. Thank you.
Good afternoon, uh, Madam Chair
and committee members. My name
is Deanna Warren. I am a uh
reproductive rights and gender
equity attorney with the ACLU of
New Mexico. The ACLU has a long
history of advocating for a
community-oriented oversight of
health system consolidations,
because we know that these
partnerships and consolidations
often reduce or significantly
change access to care for both
patients and those employed by
the healthcare entity,
especially in places like rural
New Mexico, where access to
healthcare is already limited.
We
ly appreciate this bill because
it includes a clear mechanism
for community participation in
the decision making process.
This is crucial because in in
those commun those community
members will be directly
impacted by the cost, quality
and access to care available to
them and changes to employee
conditions and benefits.
Oversight of health system
consolidations with direct
community participation helps
ensure these consolidations do
not harm community access, but
rather improve access to
quality, affordable.
healthcare services for all New
Mexicans. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Troy
Clark, uh, president and CEO of
the New Mexico Hospital
Association. Uh, I appreciate
the representative's comments,
and we reflect those back on the
work of the sponsors, uh, and
the many people who were
involved over the past year in
finding a, what we believe is a
reasonable balance that does
not, uh, have a greater negative
potential impact on access to
care where we can still have
that oversight for the
protection of our healthcare
industry and those services to
our state and yet still offer
those services.
uh, without impact of care.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Dan
Najar representing Loveless
Health Systems, and I echo the
comments of the hospital
association and express our
sincere appreciation for the
efforts of both sponsors and the
administration, not.
5 days, but over the last 12
months. I've also been asked to
express the same comments on
behalf of Presbyterian, and I
echo that for that.
Thank you so much.
So we do have uh Dick Mason and
Erica Sanchez, um, Dick and
Erica, we're gonna go ahead and
just uh note your support, um,
but as we are getting a little
bit closer to getting back on
the floor. Uh, we have recorded
your support, uh, in, in for
this bill, but we're now going
to go ahead and go to the
committee, if I may. So thank
you both for dialing in. We
appreciate that. Now I go to the
committee.
Questions or comments, concerns
from the committee.
Senator O'Malley.
Did you Figueroa our share that
I always look to first. Oh, OK.
Don't need to put that pressure
on you.
My last.
Well, I just also wanna
say thank you very much for the
work that you've done as well,
and I know that it was
This work was as a result of all
the frustration and the hard
work that was done, uh, you
know, some time ago that, you
know, basically created this,
it's uh the reason behind doing
this and uh
So now that we have, you know, a
way to move forward. We have a
structure, we, uh, we have, you
know, all those things in place,
so something like this occur in
the future, um, I'm really, I'm
really glad that you uh were
able to work with the uh the
hospital association and the
others there, so that we could
move something like this
forward. So thank you very much.
Thank you, Senator O'Malley. Any
other questions or comments from
the committee.
Senator Figueroa. I also want to
speak up, Madam chair in
appreciation of the work that's
been done to accommodate the
concerns of the hospital
association, but also to include
the public information part the
whole section in here of this
bill, I think is really
important and a tremendous
improvement. My only question,
Madam chair, is why the move
from the Office of the
Superintendent of Insurance in
last year's bill JHCA in this
year's bill.
Um, mountain chair and Senator
Figueroa, um, the, uh, the
reason for that was because the
healthcare authority already
does licensing of all of these
facilities through the division
of Health Improvement, and so it
seemed like a logical place, um,
and it was also at the request,
uh, one of the requests of the
hospitals that uh that would be
the appropriate entity, so that
was the reason that change was
made.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator Figueroa.
So
we have to like mark that down
and I do have to say that the
photo of the two of you, I
really hope Senator Sheer was
talking about how the press
doesn't always put in things
from Republicans, positive
things, and I think that look
that you two made earlier, I
hope, I really hope that it's
the photo of the day.
Let's try to do. We have a pass
from Senator O'Malley. Do we
have a second? Do we have a
second from Senator Bergman,
Senator, it's go ahead and read
the bill and the substitute just
a number. Yeah, we have a
committee substitute.
So then we would.
Uh do not pass.
Where is that?
I think it's just the SP15 has
amended no, no, just a pass on
that just to do pass.
Oh, the House Judiciary
Committee substitute.
I lack of sleep, amongst other
things, if it's any consolation,
Senator O'Malley, I still screw
up the whole amendment process.
So
We're all good. All right, so we
have that motion.
OK, thank you. Right. Is there
any opposition to the DuPass
motion?
See none. Let's go ahead and
record all present.
Uh, which is 9 to 0, uh, do
pass.
Really, thank you so much. It
has been such a pleasure working
with you, and I'm sad that we
have one more day, but then I'm
happy that we have one more day.
We are adjourned.
