Thank you.
Before we begin, I always ask
our committee secretary to
establish.
But we do have a qua present.
Please.
in our block.
Senator Charlie.
General Gallegos.
And no.
Pinto.
And stop
Serio Lopez.
And our Hickey here.
And I love this.
Yes
We have current present.
And I, I know that when we left
at our, our last meeting, which
seems just a few days ago, which
it was.
Um, we did leave.
Uh, with a few of these bills
for carryover.
And is representative Sapanski
in the room?
Are you, are you presenting on
her behalf?
OK. If you wanted to come
forward on House Bill 129.
Public employee probation
period.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I
have here with me as an expert
witness today.
Lindsay Hurst.
Welcome, and Senator, if you'd
like to go ahead and present.
Thank you. Now Bill 129. House
Bill 129, Madam Chair, house
129, um, simply reduces the
probationary period for state
employees from one year down to
180 days, which is
Equivalent to about 6 months.
Um, there's was an amendment in
the um house that took out the
words in the title moved to a
different state.
And change that to commence
another classified and then
service assignment, providing
exceptions.
And the um the amendment that
they did was rather than
transferring to uh to another
service assignment because there
can be confusion there. Um,
commence another classified
service assignment inless that
employee has a break-in service,
and so there, there it is
challenging and in some cases,
the interpretation of that
probationary can start over
again, and this
ri f ies it that that doesn't
happen.
And with that, madam Chair will
stand for questions.
Thank you very much, Senator. Is
there anyone in the audience in
support of House Bill 129.
Anyone in opposition?
See now, is there anyone on
Zoom?
OK.
Thank you.
Those that we have on Zoom in
favor of House Bill 129.
Uh, John Lipshutz.
Thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
John Lipshutz with the New
Mexico Federation of Labor. I'll
just simply say that we stand in
strong support of this measure
and in support of our public
sector, uh, uh, workers, and we
very much thank the sponsor for
bringing this up. Thank you.
Thank you, Dylan Lang.
Yes. Hi, um, good, good
afternoon. My name is Dylan
Lang. I'm the, uh,
State personnel director for the
state of New Mexico, we believe
that, um, this bill in front of
you is a great compromise
between the benefits and, and
the interests of employees and
employers for the state, um,
and uh uh ask and request your
uh your passage um of House Bill
129. Thank you.
Thank you.
And Keller. Good afternoon,
chair and committee members. My
name is Ann Keller, and I'm an
eleven-year state employee and
treasurer of the CWA local 7076.
I'm here in my union capacity. I
stand in support of this bill
and request your support as
well. A 6 month probationary
period for classified service
state employees would promote
employee recruitment and
retention by bringing New Mexico
in line with the city of
Albuquerque. More than 20 other
state governments, including
our neighbors Texas, Colorado
and Utah, and private industry.
I respectfully request that you
support and pass House Bill 129.
Thank you for your time and for
listening.
Thank you.
Um, with that, we'll go to
questions or comments from
committee members.
Senator Scott
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Oh
about training programs or those
typically.
Done and evaluated in the
six-month period or
Good.
long
Madam Chair, Senator, I'm gonna
let my expert witness answer
that.
chair and senator, thank you for
the question.
Um, it depends on the position.
So, uh, typically, um, a lot of
physicians will have a shorter
training period, um, some, um,
the field that I work in, it, it
took probably over 2 years
before I had completed all of
the follow-up training for the
position. So training is
ongoing, essentially for a lot
of our, our specialized
professionals. So Adam Chair.
Senator, this would be
applicable to.
All of
Those new employees, regardless
of the required length of the
training program.
Madam Chair, Senator, that's
correct. It would apply to all
classified employees. Let's keep
in mind that exempt employees,
which is the other kind of
service in state personnel, um,
are, are
Fire at will.
OK, and I see here Maam here.
senators take personnel of 66%.
Classified service completed
their proportionary period.
In FY 24 and 8%.
For involuntarily terminated.
