Thank you because Mister chair
and members of the committee
thank you is yes it actually
take that often hold it rather
than leaning over.
The money that may be dangerous
Mr chairman.
so Mister chairman and members
of the committee thank you for
your time today I'm going to
make a few brief comments about
what what's in the slides here
and then some in your packets
but really I think the the bulk
of this will be allowing Charles
to walk you through some of the
portal that's been developed
just to give you an idea of its
capabilities and then I think
certainly we you know this is as
you've heard mentioned something
under development something
we're working to validate and
verify it but we're very
interested in an additional
things that we could implement
as part of this to help answer
those types of questions and I
think that's that's really where
the value from this is going to
come so Mister chairman and
members of the committee on
slide three there
depending on your understanding
probably pretty good in this
committee about the tax data
that's available the two reports
we talk about the R. P. eighty
in the R. P. five hundred one of
them is the source side the
gross receipts tax collected
based on reports the five
hundreds the disbursement side
how the money was then issued
back to the counties and the
cities and that data is is
available in bulk on TRDs
website and you know there's
there's a ton of data there if
you've ever looked at it and
that's the picture to the right
it's in the spreadsheet that is
pretty cumbersome until you've
learned the format and then when
you want to start talking about
looking at years of data so that
you can have trend line so that
you can see you know maybe
spikes or valleys being able to
take all of that data and
combine it is really what we set
out to do and so with with
Charles in the team of
developers there at tech what
we've been able to put together
so far is a back end database
that contains all of the data we
pulled from those R. P. five
hundred reports and then some
processing on top of that and a
web frontend that allows you to
then take various looks at that
data and I think probably two
very key parts of that are one
over time and then to buy those
industry codes of those various
and.
Destry divisions that are there
and this is so we're working on
making this portal I think ready
for prime time the five hundred
it is in there we're working on
the R. P. eighty data as well
but on that on the next slide
just to give an example of what
what Charles is going to walk
you through
for example the that first slide
is just showing you a copy of
the comparative distributions
based on the R. P. five hundred
for all of the all of the county
and municipal data entries from
that sheet you can do things
like track the date range look
at different segments of that
and then another thing that we
did was implement to report that
the municipal league had given
to us is an example of one they
provide to their members where
month over month they would go
in and take that R. P. five
hundred data process it into a
sheet that they could give them
and hopefully we'll be able to
give them that and an automated
fashion
I think really the rest of the
presentation Mr chair and
members of the committee is
squared are really just
screenshots of what we're going
to walk through live with you on
on slide six we did provide the
road map but I think we've
spoken to all of those points so
Mr chair and members of the
committee if you're okay.
And fingers crossed to do a live
software demo I will say that
there is a version of this
portal that's running on the
private cloud infrastructure
that we have in New Mexico tech
and I Costa I believe what
you're going to be looking at is
actually running on trials as
laptop because it's the most
current version of the portal so
we really are in that phase of
development still and Charles if
you're ready.
will fired up but maybe a little
slow at times because it's
running on a laptop.
So okay.
Programs yes.
How do you want to do with the
microphone or you want me to
voice over.
Okay.
Yeah.
What's that.
For the some jazz music.
Okay.
All right so
So okay so so Mr chairman
members of the committee this is
the and and apologies for the
the members of the audience
trust me it's amazing.
The so the slide that you're
looking at is the one that was
on the slide we just talked
about so this is on the portal
where you can see each of the
different entities and by this
is kind of the entire state
overlay you do have the ability
to filter that again by
different time periods we've
also for the purposes of this
play today we push this into
quarterly debt data but the data
behind the scenes is indeed
monthly
if you so yes I was just going
to demonstrate picking an
arbitrary time window there.
So yes those doomed out quite a
bit we do have you know we do
have a couple areas where we
know there's a little missing
data that we're working to to
fill in from the source data but
otherwise does seem to be
pretty close pretty complete and
robust the so this is a report
that I referenced earlier and
that gets automatically
generated went away there's why.
In a world.
Sorry.
So so yes so that you see and
and also with with much of this
data you can just you know
things like cover over it soon
see which entities are looking
at in that case the City of
Albuquerque.
And then hello.
because if you wanna scroll down
so we can see there we go thank
you so this this particular view
is the is the one that was
developed based on the internal
report that that AJ at the
league had provided us when we
were first working on designing
this that essentially gives you
a based on the most current data
we have what was the change from
last month in terms of
disbursement what was your
change and this month a year ago
today and kind of what is that
trend looking light up you know
upper down kind of with the red
yellow or green so so yeah so
that's the that's that's kind of
the main page I think the.
Okay so let's see so this is for
an individual region now for
example.
So yeah okay City of Albuquerque
key.
Okay now Santa Fe County.
Okay so handed over the age of
Mr chair.
Mr chair Senators this one.
Is for speaking of the whole
committee but specifically
Senator Kernan right we know
we've.
We asked the question what
happened a destination source
and will now this in hindsight
we can see the the immediate
shift because now we're looking
at the.
The distribution side of it so
if you look you can see the the
city in the county trended
together for many years until.
The be able to implementation of
destination sourcing and so you
can see the immediate flip with
the revenue and it starts to
trend part.
So the whole idea here is we can
ask these questions before you
pass a bill we can hopefully
give you the answers on the
outcome before it's enacted
because right now historically
we've always.
Had the had the gas right on
average and then we figure out
the damage after the fact and
then we spend the years
correcting it now we can just
the system what's going to
happen if we do this and that's
the key and I think the Carlsbad
in the county data really shows
the outcome of that legislation
so now we can ask it.
On the front and now.
Thank you.
All right
let's see.
Thank you Charles.
so Mr chair and and members this
this slide gives you so what you
saw above was what he was just
talking about as far as the
disbursement below what you're
seeing is a comparison of the
industry categories that brought
categorical levels between two
entities for example again based
on those in a ICS codes so you
can see things like retail trade
other in that case mining
construction so if you wanted to
be able to take a look say it
County versus city or maybe two
cities relative to one another
maybe even and you know
completely different areas that
is something that you can look
at with this with this view and
then also by time frame as well.
let's see.
We want to go next terms.
Senator Senator.
Yeah I think what we'll look at
one more view and then the pie
turn.
Okay.
All right so so at the pride
last one that will walk through
and then let if you have any
questions or things you want to
see so this in this case this is
just a further breakdown of the
industry categories for time
period for single entity in
center looking at one location
you have the ability than to get
a little bit more detail about
each of those categories and HM.
The Mr chair members of the
committee with this this is your
industry level data so for our
purposes there's an internal and
external purpose here critics
are purposes making sure we
provide you all with as much
data as you would like the
internal purposes our membership
we can now provide industry
level data and trend lines to
the membership right where
should they focus their economic
development all.
How should be addressed their
zoning issues based on industry
trends within their community
now have the ability to dig down
in the city by city on what's
happening with the industry we
can see the trend lines we know
which ones need help and we know
which ones are trending in the
right direction and so right
most of the policy that comes
out of this committee right
there is data for everything you
do right because it's tied to
the distribution so when we look
at the industry level we can
actually see the trend lines
obviously we focused on
attorneys accountants architects
lately we can now see trend
lines within communities
so we know who needs help and
who may not be the health.
Mr Chairman when you look at
that industry in those
industries data the big thing is
enables for of quicker program
evaluation so you have a theory
of action we're making a public
policy and here's what our
theory is is what's going to do
taxed right open affect a
particular industry we're going
to grow a particular segment of
the economy now with this you
can actually see the impact in
tax how that is impacting
communities are what was the
effect of that particular policy
so as you start adding in these
inflection points of policy
considered to have an effect or
not and you can measure that
over time and as you go back you
start having a data leak so you
can begin to then work with your
economist because now they have
historical data and they can run
scenarios against and you can
put those algorithms in and one
nice thing is you could have a
you know a a community may want
a a report there may be an
indicator that really concerned
with and they get you know if
you have bonds outstanding in
your taxes are moving you may be
a technical default at some time
so you want to know that as a as
a city manager account manager
so that you can you can do
things with our elected
officials the other thing you
can do is alert you to you may
have a particular indicator
you're looking at good or bad
and it will send you a
notification of that particular
indicator so those are some
other things that are not
necessarily the intent of what's
being done but these are some of
the these this what happens in
the richness of analytics and
you're starting to to us.
We can stand for some questions.
Thank you thanks for the
presentation we can get the
lights.
And one of our major flooring or
fall asleep or.
Already
so folks in the committee of
question the.
Senator Hamblen will go to
Senator Kernan thank you so much
for this I I'm excited that I
just couple questions so can we
as legislators have access we
need to go through you to get
this data.
So.
Mr chair Senator he is.
To have an open portal we're not
there yet all right right now we
are.
We go back and forth daily when
we have a question of the
datasets the tech team will run
the data we'll do the validation
and then we go back and forth in
each other's methodology each
other's work so we're not quite
there to have an open portal
I think I think the tech
alternately
That's that's that's up to them
but for our purposes now it's a
lot of verification validation.
thank you Mr chairman and just
because during the interim this
coming year all the Cherry
economic development policy
committee and I would love when
you are ready to make that vote
because and giving the the
committee an opportunity to look
up data on their communities and
so I would really like this I
just want to plant that seed so
that we can start getting that
information out because part of
it is you know many of us we we
hear about these incredible
programs but then we're lousy at
advertising that we we have
these incredible programs and
and I feel that happens in in in
in a couple of things and so I'd
really like to be able to do
this first and foremost to
inform us as legislators but
also to let the general public
understand the impact of some of
the things that are being that
are being done here in Santa Fe
and that are being executed
throughout the entire state so I
I do appreciate this and and I
do want to be kept in contact
because I would love to have you
is like a an afternoon workshop
on this.
So that's a Mr chair thank you
very much thank you Senator
Kernan.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
very much I mean this is
wonderful information and I've
talked with AJ about this we
talked about it throughout this
the interment and was aware of
it you were moving in this
direction and it's really very
very helpful and I think that
serve to work because he asked
for the data and then we kind of
got to a situation where the re
retrieving that are.
Work from our local community
businesses was going to be a
real party this way you can
reach that goal without doing
that and that was a concern of
taxed record which I appreciated
and understood their concerns on
that some now moving forward
we're gonna have what we need
especially about industry
because and I will get into it
too much but of course we
realize after
our city actually went to the
enterprise system we have one
individual with the city who had
a forty to go in and actually
tracked the industry in the
businesses could not share that
information and I'm assuming you
can't either I mean these are
not businesses at specific
carpet by individual so that's
not available for sure to Mr
chair Senator this is the all
the roll updated per industry so
we have no individual taxpayer
identification as we don't we
don't even get into that
individual data this is all the
roll of pre district and that's
what's gonna help Mr chair is
having it by industry you know
we talked about the problem and
how rural spending
and everybody kept saying well
it's you're not out of the
pandemic you have on here to you
what's that happening in my
community very clearly we're out
of that and yet we're still
saying that decline and so we
did have to have a person that
could do the up front we did
determine that clearly some
mining sector
you could see the businesses
that we no longer reported to
the city and they were reporting
elsewhere and so this is really
very very helpful and I
encourage communities you might
be very surprised at what you
are I reviewing your data
through this method because I
think that
you don't know and we know that
many communities doubt and so
now we're ready to move forward
we know the issue we're going to
try to fix it but this is really
helpful and I appreciate so much
you all going through this and
helping us understand thank you.
Thank you Senator Wirth thank
you Mr chair thank you for the
presentation thank you for doing
this you know I couldn't help
but think of.
The vote in two thousand four on
the food tax when it was
Representative that the one half
G. R. T. increase the impact
that a whole bunch of people was
going to be sufficient to pay
for the lost revenue with the
food tax and your predecessor
every red flag bill whistle was
going off and that's why we
ended up with a hold harmless.
And again because I think Bill
folgen Eddie realized that what
was being.
Protected was not what was gonna
happen he had a sense of that
and I just and of course that's
been a.
You know incredibly challenging
with the three eights and the
whole deal with that but I I
can't help but think of and we
had information like this before
making a decision like that I
just think you about a very
different policy outcome is my
sense the other thing I would
note that we have done in the
criminal arena with all the
penalty bills and this is
something that took a long time
and I give Senator survive days
credit for this was really
realizing that when you pass a
whole bunch of new criminal
penalties there's a big cost of
the system and so Senator Smith
John Arthur Smith former chair
Senate finance began the policy
of any time we've got new
felonies in bills making darn
sure those go through the
finance committee so that they
can do the scrub and make sure
that the courts the public
defender's the dust that the
system can handle that it's just
another example of the
importance of of having data I'm
gonna say I was sitting here and
and when Senator hand was asking
about the availability.
I mean it would be super
interesting for you know the
municipal league when one of
these bills comes through to be
able to you know run the data
and hand us in fact the it's a
local FIR if you do this this is
going to cost set Santa Fe
seventeen million dollars stipe
identically and I tell you what
that would have a huge impact on
all of us and I know you know
we've got another bill here
Senator Kernan has been working
for ever to try and fix another
issue which these tax bills you
just don't know that's the hard
part it's really hard to figure
out what the impacts are but
this is what you're doing here
which I just think it's super
important so it's eight you know
really it's it's.
Having the data available when
we're in the situation of having
to make these decisions this
that's what I would love to have
so is that I mean we're we're
moving in that direction is that
fair to say.
Mr chair Senator gas and all
touch on the local FIR
absolutely and our our plan and
we're in the process especially
impairments right we see her
million dollar impact.
Okay your your point on food Mr
chair Senator that was off by a
hundred percent.
Is pure meeting really a hundred
million we don't know.
But we do know is based on our
estimates we can now go to our
governing bodies and we can ask
them we can ask Albuquerque if
you're meeting takes away thirty
million dollars from Albuquerque
how does that affect your budget
what are you going to have to do
to cope with a thirty million
dollar loss so that our local
FIR will just be too here's a
number that will hit Santa Fe
directly here's how the
governing body will have to
implement that cut in your city.
Well as you know.
And again it's just this is
where.
At the information to be able to
make informed decisions is huge
and so again I know that that
chair of the revenue
stabilization committee was.
You know flagging right and left
Hey if we do Karia meeting I
understand it's not just.
State level as a whole local
impact and I know you're on it
so I just appreciate this and
think it's a great.
Right idea and help down the
road I think things are gonna be
done much differently thank you
Mr chair.
Questions that
to questions but it's one of the
COVID thank you of I know that
this federal went very well with
the finance committee and I
think you know the more data we
have you know timely data to
make the effective decisions.
What part of us because we do we
talk about these unintended
consequences and we're making
policy decisions and.
Making guesses about what may
happen and I think we've learned
just a Senator Wirth is
mentioned with the with the food
taxed the owner certain.
Alarms are going off but you
know we're paying attention
because we didn't have the those
are available with the so for so
but the but I appreciate you
know
the municipally and New Mexico
tech and the fact the research
is there.
Something that you've developed
for other purposes have
technology can now transfer over
to help us no within the state
with our policy decisions and so
forth and I to the lecture of
the chair in the revenue
stabilization Tax Policy
Committee no intermission
certain as this gets develop
certainly I think that could be
helpful to the committee as well
as we are discussing you know
our tax policy and and changes
to our tax policy system and on
all of that so with that I don't
have any body else on the list
for questions and I want to turn
it back over to the Carl's in
ages for any last minute
comments thank you Mr chairman
and when you look at these tool
sets these are things that are
not stick of any system these
can run on I classes private
cloud the ground the state's
club they can run so we're not
tied to any software vendor all
this stuff was built by a cost
us out for developers it's a you
know and so we have the the with
the cost is the is the labor
hours of the scientists the
labor hours of the agency fully
putting their staff time into it
and the software tools developed
are are grown by Costa so you
look at that you know and we'll
move we make this portal
available as Sir Hamlin asked is
that something that we just have
to have a place to put it and
make sure we put all the you
know the data security polices
and policies in place for that
of but this is not something
where you have to pay a
subscription for it so you're
not going to be locked into
these things you want to move it
into an eight W. S. cloud you
want to move it into a chair it
doesn't matter and and that's
the stuff that I cost is been
learning is really how do you
make things totally vendor
agnostic so that the state gets
the best bargain price and so
that's the one thing that will
always commit to to each of you
and the other thing that was
brought up in the finance
committee by the by the chair
was you know what we're gonna be
able to do to train people in
the agencies so we have.
Find people who could take let's
say a short course in data
science so they can understand
and dive into the data within
their in their areas and so
that's one thing that we want to
work with is to develop these
courses so that every group has
people our skillful and
understand how to analyze data
you know it is a is a very
important tool set for policy
makers and will work with the
agency police also so that
cities and will be able to have
these kinds of folks to analyze
information at their fingertips
thank you Mr trump.
Mr chair Senators you know for
us in the in terms I'm I'm in
all of your communities Hey I go
to your governing body meetings
I spend time.
It in every corner of the state
and we're all different.
We all have different industries
have different sectors that
drive our economies our goals to
make sure that you all have the
data the information to make
informed decisions so that we
don't see what we've seen
historically where we take a
guess and it's all on average
we're we're we're all two
different hundred six
municipalities thirty three
counties were two different to
do on average decisions so we
just ask that please use the
system please use the Mexico
tech we have a phenomenal asset
in New Mexico that the US
government uses other countries
use.
Let's just use them that's our
us so thank you Mr chair
Senators thank you all thank you
for your presentation.
All right so so with that we're
gonna move on to the Senate bill
one fifty seven in the two
ninety two Senator Kernan.
That.
Senator.
Okay.
Okay Senator go ahead thank you
Mr chairman and they needed to
get rid of these they need to do
not pass on the original bill
and it.
The pass through rate.
Representative okay.
All right thank you very much
and really appreciate
presentation right before my
bill that kind of helped a
little bit to set the stage with
what we're gonna talk about and
I'm not going to go into all the
details that we went into when I
presented one thirty seven last
year and I think I have another
bill related to the same issue I
think everyone's kind of aware
of what has happened in both
Hobbs and Carlsbad and frankly
these two bills are identical
one is related to hop together
for Carlsbad so if you the FIR
associate it it's probably in
your books is not correct
because that was based on the
first bill and as this did with
that
Mr Taurus CD reminded me that
they aren't allowed to do a new
FIR until the new bill is on the
table so basically the
difference between the original
bill in this bill we are not
asking for recurring
appropriation this is simply a
one time appropriation
to compensate Hobbs in in the
other bill Carlsbad for the loss
of revenue based on house bill
six which by the way I didn't
vote for I think that probably
was the only Republican that did
and I really saw some good
things in that bill and frankly
did vote for that but then we
didn't have the information that
we're going to be able to get in
the future about how that
affects our particular
municipalities we found out very
quickly that
because of the changing
destination based sourcing that
many of the companies that we're
support in Hobbs ending Carlsbad
we're now reporting to the
county when I did the FIR to
return mining that one's
industry sector back to the
municipality the F. R. I. F. I.
R. stated that the cost to the
state would be fifty million
dollars and we quickly realized
that that was that's what we
were losing and so that's when
we really recognize that it was
true that because.
Mining had been taken out move
to the county that the state was
really the bigger winner and if
we move that back that would
come back to our communities but
the state would would be the
closing just to let you know we
are working in drafting two
bills one is more for discussion
purposes the second bill I think
really does have potential but
it's not going to be ready I
mean it may be introduced but
it's not going to be ready for
passage this year and so what
we're doing today Senate bill
one fifty seven is basically
asking just for an appropriation
of one time appropriation for
the city of Hobbs in in the
second bill for the city of
Carlsbad to to give us an
opportunity to catch our breath
to make sure that we can
continue to bright provide
services
to the community which supports
the industry that is providing
so much money to the state of
New Mexico so with this
appropriation point I read the
bill it said in subsequent
fiscal years our question Pam us
and does that that that's not
what we wanted we just wanted
one appropriations and that
means that the city would have
time over time to spend that
money that would not have to
spend it all at one time which
is extremely helpful because we
we don't know for sure put the
call backs are going to be what
the costs are going to be going
forward that gives us time not
to waste the money but just as
we needed to spend it in to we
can get a permanent resolution
to this issue I want to in full
disclosure tell you that our
county in lady not in Eddy and
Lea County has recognized that
there many services that may not
be able to be provided for
because of the loss of revenue
in the city and so they have
been in talks with the city to
potentially also offer some
assistance but again that's very
temporary as well so this
appropriation would actually
provide twenty five million
dollars to be spent over time.
Time as we needed to give us a
little bit of time to come up
with a permanent solution that
could help us get back on track
in issue see the county is
exploding with with you know
they're they're in pretty good
shape that our city certainly
has not seen the same increase
as it should as the industry has
it's really been very active in
production has been up so with
that that I want to know do you
know teacher at a Trujillo he's
here's my expert witness and I
don't know if you have anything
to add or which is right for
questions nothing that Mr
Chairman representative thank
you to so
What will go ahead in a deal
with the one fifty seven first
okay thank of.
We'll go to the committee for
the questions is anybody in the
audience that in support of a
substitute bill for Senate bill
fifty one fifty seven.
Anybody in opposition.
In the in we have no one get
more organized with the great so
we're back to the committee.
Any questions the committee
Senator Wirth is certainly
available for this item again I
appreciate the work.
Doing and just raising the issue
to just I want to make sure I
understand so we went from a two
million dollar distribution and
other G. R. T. from twenty five
million out of the General Fund
just tell me what the thinking
is so Mr chairman the two
million was for every month for
one year so it was twenty four
this is one lump sum
appropriation to be spent over
whatever amount of time we need
to take advantage of that okay
good so that makes sense dollar
numbers are close very close and
the difference.
Why I mean it is originally you
were going to go out of the G.
R. T. fund and outside of the
general fund of just what's the
thinking
the money into that I think just
as an easier pathway and just go
through the appropriation just
straight appropriation five of
the state and makes I because I
was a little bit concerned it is
if it's it's coming out of the
G. R. T. fund that means it's
not going somewhere else all
those educated stream funding is
much cleaner than that such as.
That's all I have Mister chair.
Senator Griggs.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator once once the the
members of the committee to note
that this all of this protein
maybe not exactly like with
caution.
Last year there was an
appropriation bill good
competition.
Very similar I.
And Senator Shendo care to bill
last year do with hold harmless
which stopped and actually
actually improved.
The the hold harmless payments
to the city Gallup C. Shannon
Faye the City of Talesh I think
you see Carl.
And
And a few others shortage it's
not like although.
Your maybe this produce a little
bit different it's not like
something we we have a tried to
do to help.
A certain communities that will
not help.
New Mexico Shaklee flexibility
is here in the mail I believe
eight.
She these instead of air
pollution.
And so I I think.
You know we've sent oppression
in some ways to do something
like this so I think it would be
worthwhile to ensure that we
know which there and move for.
Thank you.
Nobody else.
But.
Of the two passed this we
need to pass a bill she did.
Discussion purposes yeah so
within two.
The second the second motion.
Already so we we have a motion
by Senator Hermio for the past
and the Greeks of second.
Any of these court wrote Senator
Brandt yes.
Senator great yes trying to get
the picture yeah.
Senator Hotmail.
Yes Senator Kernan yes Senator
Lopez yes senator Sanchez.
Yes Senator Tallman of.
Senator Wirth yes Senator
Hamblen yes Senator Shendo yes.
Nine four and one half.
Low of percent of Senator Corman
okay.
Okay.
It would be the best phone one
fifty seven so we'll move on to
Senator to act on the to do that
pass on Senate bill two ninety
two and a deep pass on
Committee steps to to ninety two
for discussion purposes pops.
The opposition to see none.
We will move on to two ninety
two.
But Mr chair it's just a replica
of the previous bill that we
just discussed and so we're
we're doing trying to do that
for Carlsbad as well and they so
both go to finance and we'll see
if there's the capacity to do
this okay great.
The questions from the committee
senator to just share what one
comment because I think is
important but on the records and
Senator Griggs brought up the
the other bill in certain
certain local governments being
treated differently the reason
they're treated differently is
because they were in a situation
where they didn't put on the
three aids so we created an
across the board situation to
deal with hold harmless and
certain communities but on the
three eight and are still
getting to this day the whole
marvelous payment on top of that
well for some communities that
didn't put it on us it just
there was a again as a checker
board there and that's the
reason.
Behind that bills I just want to
put that for those two groups.
And it just because of that I'll
put some other stuff on the
record for wells The there are
other communities that have not
imposed to to actually didn't
get help the show is it's the
the formula in the bill which
will to me it was problematic
and there was a separate bill
that we felt that the.
But I.
That I filled with more batch
the.
Regardless the whole point of
the state.
We have have built we're we
attempted to help shown
communities.
Didn't help other communities in
the state for that question
thank you Mr federal thank you.
Two thousand questions what's
the pleasure of the committee.
The motion for the past by
Senator Lopez second by Senator
Griggs.
The growth Senator Brandt yes
Senator right yes Senator how
to view yes Senator Kernan yes
Senator Lopez yes senator
Sanchez yes.
Senator Wirth yes Senator
Hamblen yes in addition to yes
nine and one.
Thank you.
We have Center for.
Or is here.
Hemphill you're here in the.
The Senate bill sixty eight.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee Senate
bill sixty eight AM and six six
dash three dash four to allow
electronic signatures to remove
notaries
requirements for vehicle title
documents during a total loss
claim settlement so Mister chair
and members of the committee the
bill is really to modernize the
title transfer for a vehicle
owner resulting from a total
loss claim
a total loss is a very traumatic
event and a challenging time for
anyone involved in the bill will
decrease the time the vehicle
owner is without a replacement
and it'll help New Mexicans get
back to their lives quicker and
rate and a much more timely
manner for their total vehicle
loss the bill creates no
additional technology
requirements for the motor
vehicle department that meets
the national highway traffic and
safety administration regulation
requirements which were just
updated and chew two thousand
nineteen to accept electronic
signatures and Mr chairman my
expert witnesses mark mark
finder and he's from Mexico
parts director of government
affairs and Vicky Garcia and I
would like for mark to say a few
words.
Thank you chairman members of
the committee if you can
introduce yourself
Representative over my name is
mark binder be I and D. E. R.
and with Copart.
Thank you Copart is a what we do
is we provide for the movie
storage and transport of whole
for wholesale and families and
parents but for a lot of
insurance companies rental car
companies charter charities and
other health and other
businesses the Garcia is our is
our manager of our New Mexico
facility she's in the back and
she's also.
Representative part of this bill
with the provides for vehicles
in a very targeted situation of
an insurance total loss claim
and will allow if you call title
be transferred to an insurance
company with removal no
requirements to also offer
electronic signature during the
process this will significantly
reduce the lie.
For New Mexico citizens during a
total loss claims and get them
back on the roads much quicker
and without those muster up
disruption or lawyers this this
bill will greatly improve the
claim experience for all
involved especially those of
single family callers single car
families think about it
currently a total loss requires
the shipping and and transport
documents provided Kerrier.
Now the if this bill passes they
would be able to be settled
instantaneously we can have a
second same day Madam want to
normally take a week to the.
The center this center process
could be reduced just one phone
call I read the firearm wanted
to offer one clarification this
change would not have an impact
to the motor vehicle division
other than them accepting a hard
copy electronic signature.
Instead of a notarized signature
affirmative first was on this
for specific situation the bill
concept is common throughout the
country one example is Committee
and that just happened a
majority of those we we had
approximately eighty thousand
vehicles that we service for our
customers and then pass majority
of those were sort of like
tronic signatures.
In twenty nineteen that's a
change serve ruling to allow
electronic transfer of title
electronic signatures included
and it's we were just hoping the
New Mexico statutes to align to
this for insurance total loss
claims.
And we do have the same and I
just the level two requirements
and it's requires in their new
updated rules and that would be
applied if this passes.
Thank you for your support on
the Senate.
Mr chairman we also have an
amendment.
Members.
Okay with.
To have a motion to.
For discussion purposes by
senator.
If any of.
I see none with Mr Chairman do
you need a copy of the movie.
The full credit you have yet
with their to be kind to build
that okay I'll turn it over to
my experts witness to explain
the amendment.
The some of the most requests
just to specify the power of
attorney forms would be included
in this statute it's understood
but we wanted to make sure it
was stated.
In addition other documents.
Okay.
Already the.
Okay we'll go to the committee
we'll go to the audience anybody
in support of the Senate bill
sixty eight.
With the amendment.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is more of a
registered not.
Politics.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Roy Moore
I'm a registered lobbyist for
the American property casualty
insurance association we are in
support of the bill in the
amendment is actually coming
from my client to they wanted
clarification that powers of
attorney were also included.
On occasion Stewart title is not
easily found by the insured that
we will need a power of attorney
in order to create in order to
get a new title generated so it
helps us support this bill we've
been working on this concept for
awhile we were unaware the
Copart was also working on it
more more than happy to support
the bill as amended.
Scott Scanlon registered
lobbyists for Copart and I think
the the bill's been explained
it's really a consumer friendly
bill and I just would like to
remind all of the elected
officials here on January thirty
first you filled out your
disclosure and filed it with
secretary of state electronic
signature and we lobbyist did
the same thing on January the
fifteenth electronic signature
so it's you know it's convenient
and for folks that are in a bad
situation having their car
totaled out I think this is a
good bill thank you Mr chairman.
Williams.
Okay all right we'll go to the
committee and.
Questions from the members of
the committee senator Wirth.
Thanks Amanda it's going to
Judiciary still have this
discussion I will tell you the
other way they've got distracted
is the not withstanding.
Basically saying not
withstanding any any law we're
going to do this and I I.
You're gonna that's something
that's going to it's just a
drafting issue we're trying to
get away from that I mean you
really shouldn't say here's the
law but not withstanding a lot
we're going to do something else
so that may be something you
want to think about it seems
black that I will send out a
little bit of reservation about
the power of attorney being
added without a notary.
Is that is that under this
amendment so basically you could
electronically sign a power of
attorney that would not be
notarized.
Mr chair members of the
committee
the clarification for adding the
power of attorney was to simply
make sure that it was added in
the idea of notarization not
being available I don't believe
is the case it's seven something
that we could work on and
clarify as we move forward in
the process it is the intent to
add in power of attorney but not
to to remove any requirement is
my understanding but happy to
clarify that.
I can clarify the the power of
attorney is specific for an
automotive vehicle only and the
instead of the notary there is a
two part authentication to then
I just need to process so the
person is authenticated through
the approved process by next so
as not to just signing signing
electronically they're
validating that there is a
actual person.
Yes that's important Mr I just I
think
we should know we have a loss
title is a whole different
wormhole that you're going down
and I just.
Again I'm thinking about it
seems like that's a little bit
of a different situation go to
motor vehicles and I gets even
more complicated quite frankly
that what you are what you're
dealing with if you've got that
so I just think with this is
gonna move I certainly want to
move forward it's going to this
year those are gonna be
questions you're gonna get.
When you get there so just
flagging those issues but
otherwise.
Certainly make sense I mean the
idea you'd have to.
You know track tracking down
other east this difficult and
complicated so and this is just
the one I think that just
applies when you've got us a
total loss.
Correct this practice thank you
all right Senator Hamblen thank
you Mr chairman and this is
actually going off on on senator
Wirth comments so I'm thinking
we're talking about power of
attorney I have an elderly
mother I have a financial power
of attorney whatever the other
power of attorney is and if she
were to pass and we can't find
her title then that gives me a
little bit of easier access to
the ownership of her car and
when she passes is that correct
is that what we're what this is
about.
Mister chairman Senator expo
this is turning is specific for
the automobile online that
that's a with the vin list of by
the name of the owner and the
owner sciences it's not a parent
it's so the insurance company
can provide transfer the title
and for the vehicle owner at
that time it has nothing to do
with the state's or anything
along those lines specific an
insurance for.
Needs for signing documents over
a total loss thank you for that
clarification thank you often.
Senator Griggs.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator and course I think I can
see this better in the event of
you know our catastrophe where
there's a lot of stuff going on
the where they're judged
educational.
Into the I.
You know I I I.
I don't know I don't know Vigil
a difference one way or the
other but
Before.
It seems like before notary's
words big deal and senator Wirth
might.
Help me on this one a little bit
of a weight nations.
Two signatures were required.
Not just here so I used didn't
sign something in and it would.
Everybody agree with me of
course I had to be witnessed so.
That's similar to a notary but
not the actual.
No re itself and requirements of
the no.
Issues we're Senators changes
would have to sign that I wish I
wish meet.
and I don't.
I don't know I mean I I think I
know where you're going I know
why you're doing it I think
I don't know that I I see it in
New Mexico is the same
challenges my to be where these
other venture.
But the but I think of support
but I think we ought to look and
see if that something that
should be considered the main
cage.
I mean I can think of I can
think of the fraudulent of that
something you're giving your
giving it back to the insurance
company only.
But do we care about with the
insurance company is a
fraudulent signatures.
Hello but
sure that's what I would I would
you suggestion here would you
guys think about the the witness
cited this signature instead of
requiring the notary because you
can almost always find a witness
for you can always find the.
So thank you Richard thank you
chair.
Thank you.
Those who list what's the
pleasure of the committee for
the past most of the past
Senator Hamblen second by
Senator current state wrote.
Yes ma'am Senator grace yes
Senator how to meal yes Senator
Kernan yes Senator Lopez yes
Senator sentence passed.
I was looking.
Senator took home.
Senator Wirth.
Okay.
Senator Hamblen yes syndication
yes nine one eight.
That.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee didn't
make me blush at all.
Members of the committee said
Senator.
Thank you all right then we'll
just go back to the Senate bill
fifty four and then we'll work
with them Senate Bill Evans sent
over.
Thank you Mr chairman and I
thank you for.
Be able to we're just back in
after Representative Tuesday
Senate bill fifty four simply
does one thing it's a one page
bill as it is but if you mostly
just takes the sun set off of
the taxation on military
retirement.
Please remember that military
folks move every two to three
years when they retire they want
to set up shop and and have a
permanent household and live in
that particular state that
community for the foreseeable
future if you sunset this it
really defeats the purpose of
taking the tax off of the bill
so we're simply asking that
bill passed so we take the
sunset off of it and we can see
the ball full benefit of
military folks staying here in
the state or coming back to the
state of New Mexico because
they're now getting a a break on
the military income
through attacks purpose
it is it's it's pretty simple
and we want to make sure that
this is right message to our on
good friends who've given us so
much through their devoted time
in the military
I see a lot more but I'll open
it up for questions Mr chairman
of that be okay thank you
Senator Burt
we go to the committee go to the
audience anybody have a the
audience in favor of Senate bill
fifty four.
Do we have anybody on soon.
They want to see the order of
the just want to be named.
The reason for the okay of
Cerro fitz Gerald.
With the help of the chamber of
commerce towards the season.
And
Brownlow.
Support of the.
And and it Mr chairman if I may
I had a conversation Turkle from
the Albuquerque chamber of
commerce who also nor Seville
okay are.
Right anybody opposition to the
bill.
Protected right now because we
have one way that they have but
I don't know four of them.
Support for okay all right that
will go to the committee the
questions of the committee.
What is the pleasure of the
committee.
Westen Senator goal of.
thank you Mr thank you for so.
It is characterized in so to
speak.
This budget is.
Montoya.
Thank you center for the
question I don't think it's
discriminatory at the time this
bill was passed we one of nine
states that had not given our
veterans a break on their
military retirement pay this is
look at my most states as I
thank you for the years of
service they have given to this
country people who have not been
there for the birth of their
child because a man.
Of the promised to in in their
job they've been sent to
somewhere around the world
they move every two years they
have a commitment to serve and
protect this country and the
states that have been instituted
this which again are
over forty states in some way
shape or form some states just
don't have any income tax at all
but in some way shape or form
the the dresses and it is simply
a pay back.
To people who have given their
lives sometimes their lambs or
at least twenty years or more of
their life and the process of
securing and protecting this
country wherever they are our
but till to to do that very job
and that's the importance of
this.
Thank you Mr thank you for this
you could say the same thing
about police they were approved.
There was no danger.
And this kind of sunset.
In twenty eight yes Sir process
all of the predicting that the.
Twenty thirty that we're going
to have a significant decrease
in our Revenue well gas revenues
so.
This is a really good policy to
the.
Decrease in revenue.
and gas at the same time
is.
Decline Mr chairman and senator
what I would say to the stages
are committed.
For the next five years to give
them a break on their pay.
Yes I'm talking.
Doing away with this committee
your medical yes.
Like this sure we get the votes
of the.
Was fine I ate and I appreciate
that very much appreciate the
questions it is
something that.
The other thing I will tell you.
Is that when they retire when we
come here in the military they
live on base of the rental place
they bring the cars to bring the
household goods with them they
claim another state is their
their home state so the state
New Mexico sees no benefit from
that when they retire and they
move here they buy a house so
you're you're taxing their home
the property tax usually there
are two income households so now
you're taxing the the income
that they have the return forty
to forty six when they retire
they're not going to just sit
and play golf the gonna go
either started business to
support New Mexico and the need
to New Mexico we're going to go
to work for someone else.
These people of the vast
majority of them have a college
degree they have managed
hundreds maybe even thousands of
people in their military career
they manage budgets of hundreds
of thousands of dollars maybe
millions of dollars at their as
different positions within the
military and so when they get
out instead of losing them
somewhere going to state taxes
to become managers something
like that or some some or a
business owner we want to keep
them here to increase the
quality of our an employment
pool for big corporation
Rosselli for big companies big
corporations businesses to come
into the state one of the
biggest concerns they have as we
don't have a a large enough well
educated employment pool this
will help eliminate some of that
profit.
Because they're not going to go
play golf for Fishin at forty
two to forty six years old they
will buy a business they will
create a business with go to
work for someone else at a very
high rate of pay.
Thank you for that answer.
The dedication.
The tactic of being on what is
Mr chairman I haven't done this
so I would be able to go to the
their entire.
Early forties so to the ninety
that's fifty years.
They're not paying taxes.
But the Mr chairman and senator
they are because if they.
The fact that there is a thirty
years house payments which is
helping financial institutions
the title companies the you know
paying taxes on land their two
income households how much are
you going to make in the next
twenty thirty years and how much
taxes will they generate into
the state of New Mexico over
that especially as their income
grows because theoretically they
go to the latter so there is a
pay back on the back in Sen.
Genders of.
We don't have the option of of
stating.
The where.
I think the ticket office right.
It's.
We want to cramp your style.
Already the okay thank you
senator till in the videos of a
do okay we have a motion for the
past where Senator Brandt
seconded by Senator census.
The growth.
Senator Brandt yes I have
Senator Griggs yes Senator how
to meal yes Senator Kernan yes
Senator Lopez yes senator
Sanchez yes senator Clemente.
Just.
Senator.
Four th th Senator Hamblen yes.
Senator Tomlinson.
So it would not affect current.
Yes.
Senator Shendo.
If I could lower.
Thanks.
Yes.
So it wants to use the line
yes it would just thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee.
So
Senate bill eleven.
I
find.
These are.
Mr chairman we get one more
chair of certain are still
students know the chair down.
Yes
It's got six
okay
yes I.
To see how things.
I I do.
So Mister chairman shall we
begin.
The show Senator.
we do have and the.
Hello wait for one of my
minions.
Swirling around to give the two
one.
So Mr chairman and members of
the committee.
Senate bill eleven.
Is the creation of a family and
medical leave insurance program.
That would ensure up to twelve
weeks of partially paid leave
for employees to welcome a new
child.
Care for a family member with a
serious health condition or
manage their own serious medical
conditions.
Of last week was the the thirty
year anniversary of the federal.
Family medical leave act thirty
years ago was stop radical now
it's thought of is not adequate
it's for only businesses with
fifty people or more and there's
no insurance of any kind of Hey
so I think because of that
eleven states and the district
of Columbia have all implemented
paid family and medical leave
programs.
It might be interesting for you
to know that the United States
of America is the only
industrialized country that does
not offer paid family and
medical leave so we we seem to
be behind the times and this
bill tries to make New Mexico in
that vanguard states who are
trying to do this of the eleven
states that have done this
already have and we have full
evidence on this they reduced
infant mortality child abuse
injuries and nursing home use.
They've improved parental
physical and mental well being
and they've continued job
stability this bill really will
be beneficial for our small.
Of businesses but we actually
did a little polling we call the
people and said would you like
this program and we thought that
seventy seven percent said they
would support it when we said
that the program the cost to
workers workers would be between
two dollars six dollars a week
then that support expense to
eighty one percent.
so this is well designed of we
there is actually a bill last
session that did not pass so we
got a bill started then in the
interim we had a full blown Task
Force with
was comprised of business
interests labor unions advocates
experts economist and staff from
the department of workforce
solutions including our new
secretary Mattis so read and I
are so as a result of that that
task force and the meetings
where we looked at other states
we tried to find the state that
had looked most like New Mexico
there were major changes that we
made because of the business
community
so because of them we are waving
employer contributions for sixty
six percent of our employers
that have fewer than.
Eight.
Of the employees will still pay
and but those employers want now
it's sixty six percent of
employers but it's only nine
percent of the work force which
is why the numbers still work
for the funds.
we've set a minimum length of
employment before you could use
this of ninety days we've set a
minimum increments of leave to
have an easier time
administratively and that for
hours and we are delaying the
benefits of this plan
significantly we're giving a
full year and a half for hiring
staff
having a I. T. system that's
where the money is needed in an
IT system and although we are
asking for nonrecurring funding
to start this
in the back of the bill you'll
see the provision that says
starting when we start the funds
we pay it all back at six
million a year so any non
recurring money that we need
this year and that's about
thirty six million and next year
the number keeps going down so
I'm not quite sure what addition
all of that will be paid back by
the sun so for that time line
then it would start people would
start paying into the fund
January one of twenty twenty
five.
It's four Bucks for every
thousand dollars of wages for an
employer and it's five Bucks for
every thousand dollars of wages
for an employee I have people
around me that will stop me if I
make the statement so just
warning you if I get a kick
it'll because now that's not
quite right so the fund then
would start and it would start
working like the funds January
one of twenty twenty six we're
taking our time we're getting it
right we want to do this right
we have so many other good
models so you'll have to hand
out to trick that they have to
yes okay so so.
There's also a cap on this pay
out you can have twelve weeks a
year but again it's for having a
baby it's for serious medical
illness for family member or
yourself so if you have minimum
wage you get your full weekly
replacement of four hundred
eighty dollars it if you are up
to the state average way based
on bureau of labor statistics a
right now that fifty one
thousand eight hundred sixty you
would get sixty percent and
percent above the minimum so you
would get eight hundred twenty
seven dollars as a weekly
replacement cap on this
replacement of wages is that
nine hundred ninety seven
dollars so you have a limited
amount of time but at least
you've got it think about the
fifty percent of the women in
New Mexico are not in the labor
force why not of in your
twenties or thirties or forties
and if you think about senator
Morris now in your fifties and
you're a woman you are of child
bearing age and suppose you have
a C. section that takes six to
eight weeks of of of recovery.
After you have worked for an
employer for ninety days then
you are eligible to start up
being part of this program
I think I said that already.
The text that's right.
My first agency that.
Go ahead of so the future so for
the record please yes thank you
Mr Daniel in the policy at the
Mike because we also casted that
meant here so my name is Tracy
McDaniel I'm a policy advocate
with southwest women's Law
Center and just a a minor
corrections so an individual
would be able to pay to receive
compensation from the fund if
they've paid in for at least six
of the last twelve months
however their employer would not
be required to hold a visit the
same or equivalent or greater
position for them in less
they've been employed for at
least ninety days prior to the
commencement of the early
period.
So Mister chairman this is
really designed to help
businesses to help people
you know under COVID the states
that have this kind of program
did much better with COVID than
states without it
This is designed to not be a
burden on businesses and we
certainly have plenty of large
businesses that are in the
office.
And they can waiver out if they
want what has happened in the
other states is that this is a
better program it's cheaper for
the employer it's run by our
workforce solutions department
not by the employer so they can
be part of the offer more they
could offer more than twelve
weeks they could offer more if
their salary replacement fat
what's happened in other states
is that of the larger employers
have gotten on board with this
so we certainly have the
economist at the bureau of go
through all this which is why we
think we can pay for this fund
with in this way.
So I'll pause would likely that
and Senator Padilla is my co
sponsor if I could turn to him
and allow him to six.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
thank you madam pro tempore
the so I took a look at this
legislation very early on when
it was being revised and I
volunteered actually is as a
business owner I thought we
probably need to have a business
person at the table discussing
this and helping put this
together what have you Mr
chairman members of the
committee and so I
begin to read the bill provided
my own feedback a lot of that
was accepted I I I was very
excited to see how this actually
benefits businesses in a big way
it reduces actually cost a lot
of weight ways and when the
feedback was rolling in I I
found out which I didn't know
that there'd been several
meetings along the way to put it
together I then what once the
the pack in the legislation was
actually introduced was about
ninety nine point ninety percent
ready to rock and roll and and
be filed I met with the pro tem
I said let me take this and and
then fan out to the business
community I have a relationship
with and so I did send this to
the New Mexico chamber of
commerce I see in the audience
today the Albuquerque chamber of
commerce the Santa Fe chamber of
commerce and the Los crucis
chamber of commerce and I sought
feedback from them they did find
some very valuable information
of the several days ago and
we're sorting through all of
that you know at this point I
was very impressed with the fact
that that the fund itself
I get like you know if you
didn't have a successful program
like this or something that
worked for your employees this
is exactly what what what's
going to help you know to you to
become an employer of choice a
number one number two the cost
to the employer I was surprised
that it actually wasn't more at
them I'm actually happy the way
wound up the coming together we
already have mechanisms with
workforce solutions with which
we pay fees as business owners I
know Mr chairman you and your
business and and me and mine and
others in this committee we
already have those mechanisms in
place that will be augmented
staffing to help manage the
program there's going to be
reporting in.
Alice's at setter I really you
know we took the business
community's feedback and said
let's push back as you heard
from the pro tempore while ago
the actual implementation of the
program which is going to help
to make sure that it's put
together appropriately and and
and launched appropriately there
are a number of very positive
things that we received from the
business community as we re
wrote the legislation before was
introduced that's a lot of what
you see here and I think that I
love the fact that you know
we're a year and a half to two
years on on implementation the
implementation ramp so as the
the program is you know should
it be successful and get a
signature from the governor and
all that and be implemented we
have just another session in the
middle there that we could do
other very positive things to
the legislation to make sure
that when it's actually
implemented it's done the right
way so I I think that there's a
positive path here a positive
path forward and I think that
the pro tem had it right this is
not just for the employee this
is for the employer also and
this is for that for the
business that it really needs
something like this to both take
care of their employers and to
become an employer of choice
thank you.
Give.
Mr chairman we met with many
people we had all kinds of
revisions to this bill we fail
to meet with one group and
that's why you have amendments
before you so we have amendments
are mostly clarifying and
they're from the of the
organized labour in New Mexico
and we can do them whenever you
want to go ahead and present
okay and I have with me Mr
Steve.
Thank chairman and members the
committee my name is Steven
Curtis I'm an attorney from
Albuquerque representing
employees and labor
organizations.
So Mister chairman one of the.
Major things says that we've
changed the term earnings to
wages throughout the bill it was
not consistent that's the
majority of the amendments I
will talk to about the
amendments that are not that so
amendment seven that's on page
nine one one if you're following
in the bill.
But this clarifies that
employers can't pass their
portion of the premium on to
their employees that this
purpose of number seven and if
I'm going too fast to stop
making.
amendment eleven is this is made
to ensure that employee medical
privacy is protected while
providing the employer with the
necessary information about
their lease.
Amendments twelve and thirteen
clarifies that the subsection
seventy is referring to leave
otherwise available to the
employees through the employer
that's different that's
available through the FMLA
program.
And amendment sixteen to
eighteen at two representatives
from labor organizations to the
advisory committee that will be
convened by the department of
workforce solutions during rule
making and the initial
implementation of this act.
And I have the attorney here who
can answer any questions.
That is with.
Visitation of the bill with yes
yes.
But this time we'll go out to
the audience of the in the favor
of bills.
I know we have a quite a bit so
this may be called on.
Google before here's to make
comments chair.
It is remarkable much phone the.
I
you're doing that if I may
Mister chair if you're wanting
to come in and talk on the side
just to make this go quicker I
want to get in line.
But there might be limits right
but yeah let's let's take for on
the side and four on this site
and we also focus on soon to so
chair members of the committee
Jessica how three CHI St
Joseph's children re run the
largest home visiting program in
the state serving families as
they journey prenatally until
their child turns three years
old so we know very well that
this is an important to act and
we support it with our child and
mother well being as well as
decrease in child abuse and
increase in overall well being
in the family so thank you so
much we believe that twelve
weeks from other should be a
minimum and hopefully up to six
months in the future for
maternity leave thank you.
Mr chair members of the
committee on Jean Hambrick if
volunteer advocate with the A.
R. P. New Mexico and the
constituent of protein Stewart
we want to thank all of the
sponsors
A. A. R. P. was a member of the
task force that has been
referenced and
which studied the issue and
propose the recommendations we
believe that the policy is not
only important for working
parents but also for those
caring for elderly or disabled
family members especially those
in the rural areas.
Personally I could have
benefited from paid family and
medical leave when my father was
dying of cancer and my mother
was also taking care of her
brother with a brain tumor she
had to drive five hours to get
treatment for him leaving my
father alone because I was here
and couldn't get time off to go
help out I wasn't there when my
father died.
But about a year later my firm
which was only about fifteen
people saw the benefit of
keeping me employed and they put
this policy in place it
benefited them and it benefited
me
this was after I was diagnosed
with with a mass which is a
chronic disease so on behalf of
the two hundred forty thousand
members of AARP we ask that you
pass this legislation and we are
in strong support thank you.
We can make your comments to two
minutes or less absolutely Mr
chairman thank you so much I
Marshall Martinez and the
executive director of equality
New Mexico where the statewide
LGBTQ civil rights organization
LGBTQ people grow up in a world
full of isolation often facing
traumatizing and heart breaking
families of origin that forced
us to create our own what we
would call families of choice
these families do not exist with
any less love respect our
responsibility to each other so
first and foremost you want to
think Senator Stewart and the
advocate to ensure the queer and
trans families in all of the
ways that we are configured are
included in this legislation.
On the topic of families it is
critical to note that when LGBTQ
people for my family's we
predominantly working hourly
jobs and still are significantly
Representative as under insured
individuals everyone who forms a
family of any configuration
deserves access to the time to
take care of that family no
matter where we work or where we
live we're in strong support of
this legislation thank you.
Thank you chairman members of
the committee my name is Leah
Sanchez yes a beta and I are the
co executive directors of the
New Mexico Public Health
Association we served on the
paid family medical leave task
force and are here to give
strong support on this to this
bill on behalf of our over three
hundred fifty members who are
public health workers all across
the state.
excuse me.
As public health professionals
we know that the main drivers of
individual and community
wellbeing our social and
economic factors and yet many
New Mexico communities face high
rates of poverty access to paid
family medical leave would
greatly improve the financial
security of women and families
particularly low wage essential
workers who kept New Mexicans
safe and fed to during the COVID
nineteen pandemic the paid
family medical leave task force
process was open fair and
transparent we urge you to give
a do pass to this bill.
Mr chair.
Mr chair members of the
committee on the river Holly
bomb on organizing director of
interfaith worker justice New
Mexico I'm also a small business
owner believe it or not for the
last twenty years were much too
small for to be impacted by this
but I'll tell you as a business
owner you study the landscape
and what benefits businesses and
one of the things that we seldom
talk about is the incredible
costs to businesses by employee
or worker turnover it's
estimated that businesses in
this country lose somewhere
around a trillion dollars a year
because of the loss of workers
or employees who choose to quit
working for that business so
when we talk about wanting to
attract good businesses to New
Mexico we also want to attract
good workers and employees to
New Mexico what if New Mexico
continues to be one of the few
states this does not offer the
standard benefit then we're
going to continue to put
ourselves at the end of the line
so I encourage you if you are
interested in good businesses
it's estimated that turnover of
an employee can cost as much as
one and a half time stat
workers annual wages so this is
a good business of benefit for
workers as well as those we
employ them thank you.
Hi my name is Todd Caldwell home
today as part of fathers New
Mexico me my partner I have two
kids I stand as a part of this
bill would make a huge
difference from my family.
Thank you Mr chairman members
the committee job with The New
Mexico federation of labor.
I'm actually here to tell you
that this bill will not affect
all of our members in fact it
might not affect a whole lot of
our members but that being said
we stand United in very strong
support of this measure for the
over seven hundred thousand
workers in the state that need
this kind of coverage that we
are afforded not all of us some
of us will definitely take
advantage but there are so many
people who need this kind of
coverage and just so you know R.
thirty four thousand you members
stand in strong solidarity with
them believing that this kind of
coverage is that right much like
what we did with our with the
healthy workplaces Act last year
and fighting for paid sick leave
for the most vulnerable workers
amongst us that is what this
bill does this is about the
quality it's about fairness and
we urge you to support this
measure incentive forward and
thank the sponsor for bringing
it up thank you.
That Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is my seat
the.
Can you hear me now.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my seat though the
American heart association hi I
don't think you know workers
have to choose between you know
keeping their jobs and taking
care of their sick ones are
taking care of their health and
you know it's also equity issue
and so we strongly support this
legislation for all the reasons
that were mentioned before how
we think the sponsor for bring
this legislation thank you thank
you of the two of them that we
have for COVID.
We have a
list of.
All right.
the ones that are in support
particularly know they got two
minutes and give them a warning
that twenty seconds okay
anything
will serve general.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee my name is Jennifer
Gomez Chavis and I'm a person
living with MS I serve as an
advocate on behalf of the
national MS society and
Representative more than thirty
five hundred Mexicans living
with MS people living with MS
often continue working long
after their diagnosis but some
may need time away from work to
manage what can be a serious
health condition for those who
let's take time off without pay
it can be challenging to make
ends meet at the average total
cost of living with MS eighty
eight thousand four hundred
eighty seven per year care
partners rate average of forty
three hundred each year to
provide care to someone living
with that as we ask that you
support this important piece of
legislation thank you.
What are.
Hello Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is fully think
about it and I will workers
rights attorney for the New
Mexico Center on on poverty we
think the sponsoring producing
this important bill we stand in
support of New Mexicos paid
family and medical leave act
workers and their close family
members not in the
from the abrupt and on the
nature of serious medical
conditions with these unplanned
medical needs arise New Mexican
workers was often decide to
maintain their only source of
income to work according to care
for themselves or their family
members this these workers with
impossible choice that often
results in a dire economic
circumstances for the workers
and their families for results
in their or their family members
health needs going and it either
way this is bad for workers
their families public health and
our economy for the more paid
family and medical leave
supports family caregiving which
recent studies have shown reduce
health care costs and costs to
the station for older
individuals finally working
parents should have the time to
care for him on their new
without this time working
parents and children suffering
the entire family is more likely
to require some form of
government assistance it is
therefore imperative that we
passed paid family medical leave
act for these reasons and all of
it by workers and workers rights
organizations we support
builders Committee to pass thank
you.
Next will be have mostly.
And members of the committee
sponsor Senator Stewart my name
is Kathleen mostly retired
public health nurse and member
of the PML coalition speaking in
support at twenty four I needed
PNM out to take care of my dad
better and chronically ill with
MS in dying from cancer I was
working in the university burn
unit two and a half hours away
from the rural area and without
it than that hello I miss being
able to support my dad mom and
siblings during his passing then
it twenty nine I had a son with
multiple anomalies Stephan
visually impaired and I dropped
out of the workforce for fifteen
years neither of us having paid
family medical leave now it's
sixty six my daughter the
company offering and now she
gave birth during the pandemic
while working and with peace and
now she had a different
experience she and her husband
did not have the but still he
successfully breastfed for two
and a half years while working
thanks to a good start still
working at that business and now
promoted twice they kept it a
great employee during the short
surprising benefit was a mental
health benefits in the tax meant
for a young dad in fact the
positive impact for dad's really
stands out in the data.
Please do passed as the eleven
for New Mexico businesses and
families thank you.
For now I think that's good
enough you can just get the name
for those individuals with the
record okay thank you.
All right now will go to a if
folks are opposition of Senate
bill eleven.
In the I think you might.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is rob black I
am the president and CEO of the
New Mexico chamber of commerce
want to start with I was a
participant in the work force
task force over the interim and
I want to applaud Senator
Stewart and the department for
the work they did I think it was
a model of how to really address
or try to grapple with very
complex difficult Policy issues
I also think Senator Padilla for
reaching out because he did
reach out to the business
community for feedback we
provided that it has it had
chance to probably percolate
into what you're gonna be
looking at today some of the
feedback but I think we're we're
we we entered this discussion
was the chamber actually year
and a half ago went to our
membership and said.
Would we could we find a place
away to support paid family
medical leave program and our
membership came back and said
yes we voted to support one but
around the set the set is seven
different principles and went
into the process with those
principles and many of those
were addressed issues like
preemption coordination of
benefits enforcement and
penalties were issues that we
thought really aligned with the
federal programs and it that bad
alignment with the federal
programs made it much easier to
implement where we didn't get I
think the results we were hoping
for were around issues that
fully respected collective
bargaining rights it's
especially from the employer
side how establish plans are
recognized in aligning with
rules and benefit categories
with the FMLA and then also
premium structures those areas
are areas where we did not come
to agreement with with the
recommendations of the task
force so unfortunately with the
draft today we we said in
opposition part of the reason
that we sit in opposition to
that what with that is is that
we really wanted to see
alignment with existing FMLA
rules this the definitions for
employee for employer thank you
for wages do not align with FMLA
they're much much broader and
for entitlement benefits.
That the state will be
responsible for it creates a lot
of liability and risk not only
for the state in the program but
also for employers so
unfortunately at this time we
stand in opposition thank you.
But good afternoon Mister chair
members of the committee my name
is Mary Kay route registered
lobbyist for The New Mexico
restaurant association.
We respectfully stand in
opposition to this bill our
restaurants are struggling to
still come back from endemic
yes many of them are one
disaster away from closing down.
Increasing their taxes and
administrative burden could be
devastating for them and their
employees well they attempt to
navigate supply chain issues
inflation and administration of
the healthy workplaces Act or
smallest restaurants with only a
few employees will be hard
pressed to hire in in in train
new temporary employees to cover
the duties of those only for up
to twelve weeks.
Restaurant chefs for example
have specialized skills to make
finding a temporary replacement
difficult and this would be even
more so in our rural areas.
Adding another difficult tax on
New Mexicans will only serve to
further disenfranchised are
struggling local businesses we
respectfully ask that you
propose thank you.
Mr chair members of the
committee my names are called
I'm gonna try to do this quickly
I thought I might have a little
bit more time with such little
opposition to this bill.
We represent several groups of
providers
durable medical equipment
providers ambulance providers
home modification providers home
health care providers through
good Sam and child care
providers private child care
providers what all these
businesses have in common is the
revenue is pretty much capped by
reimbursements they receive
through Medicaid and or in the
case of child care early
childhood reimbursement from the
state so we're not like typical
retail businesses that can
increase our prices to cover the
incredible costs that we're all
dealing with coming out of the
pandemic inflation is at an all
time high it's it most
significantly in the areas of
transportation with fuel costs
still through the roof over what
they were four years ago vehicle
cost still through the roof over
what they were four years ago
and labor costs we've increased
our minimum wage over the last
four years sixty percent from
seven fifty to twelve dollars
and we're looking this year at
increasing it to thirteen fifty
and up to fifteen fifty and
twenty twenty five we are only
six months into the time period
where we're having to approve an
additional seventy hours of paid
time off that we've just
implemented if you look at
trying to replace an employee
who has four hundred and eighty
hours off through this twelve
weeks seventy hours off through
the rate health you're looking
at not so much the cost of that
employee but to replace that
employee each of our employees
provide specific services we
can't just find anybody to do
infusion therapy be an EMT find
the child care education for the
durable medical equipment
services so we have to replace
that employee while they're gone
to the tune of close.
To eight thousand dollars I'm
talking about the pragmatic
reality of delivering the
services to a largely Medicaid
community in New Mexico we
appreciate your concern and
stand opposition thank you
committee.
That the okay thank.
good afternoon members of the
committee Mr chairman my name is
JD Bullington and I'm speaking
to you today on behalf of the
greater Albuquerque chamber of
commerce which is opposed to
Senate bill eleven this bill
imposes a new tax on employers
and workers and yet the even
bigger cost is the massive
disruption it will cause to
workplaces across New Mexico
ninety percent of New Mexico
businesses have twenty or fewer
employees they can easily absorb
long term vacancies move
employees around our quickly
hire new or temporary workers we
recently raise the minimum wage
by sixty percent and mandated a
new paid sick leave benefit
combined with inflation works
for shortages and supply chain
problem Senate bill eleven is
simply way too big of a step
right now.
We depend on small employers but
each time a new cost or burden
is added to the backs of the
small business it threatens our
economic diversity and often
result in a decrease number of
small businesses which means
fewer jobs in the long run thank
you.
Good afternoon Mister chair
members of the committee my name
is Amy Dixon I'm executive
director of desert states
physical therapy network we have
thirty sites of outpatient
physical therapy many of them
are much are very small
providers and I'm not gonna take
any more time because Mr hall
did a very eloquent job of all
of our issues as well and while
we recognize that there is a lot
of work done on this bill we do
have to respectfully stand in
opposition thank you.
Hello Mr chairman members of the
committee my name's Charlie
Marcus
I'm here in Rome registered
lobbyist for New Mexico business
coalition.
with all due respect to the
sponsors New Mexico business
coalition stands in opposition
to this piece of legislation for
all the reasons that we're
stated of as by Mister black and
also Mr hall I also represent a
lot of Medicaid providers and
again not to repeat what he said
there is no mechanism for
recovery and so it does put the
businesses in further jeopardy
than what they already are so
for those reasons and all the
other state we stand in
opposition thank you.
Good morning Mr chairman and
committee members have a state
registered lobbyists for the New
Mexico Chile Association we
stand in respect opposition
Senate bill eleven other
previous previously stated but
from our perspective a lot of
our members do not have an HR
department and a lot of times
they are the HR department
they're gonna have a difficult
time managing the requirements
set forth in this legislation a
lot of our folks are already
having difficulty with the
recently implemented healthy
workplace Act and so we just
feel that this is gonna be
another burden to our membership
who do not have a full blown
human resources department thank
you.
Okay I just have one okay.
This is Leri thousand.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
and members of the committee I'm
Larry saw I am a small business
owner in Bernalillo county and
participate in the New Mexico
business coalition that
organization you've heard from
up there lobbyist trying to
market earlier so I won't repeat
that for the I wanted to bring
to your attention a survey was
done I New Mexico business
coalition in which I
participated and.
And it included associations to
other associations besides in
the state ninety four percent of
the respondents were adamantly
opposed to this legislation and
that Representative small
businesses up to national
corporations this bill is
estimated to cost well over four
hundred million dollars and
employees nor employers are
physician to afford this also
want to point out that the fund
is supposed to be administered
by the department of workforce
solutions.
And they have had significant
issues with the funds that they
have expertise.
Which is the unemployment
insurance fund I believe there
was somewhere between two
hundred to two hundred fifty
million dollars that went out
during the pandemic.
That was due to fraud and
misappropriation I'm not sure
that they're in a position to
handle this much more moving
part of this bill would have I
urge you to vote again as the
eleventh thank.
Thank you all right thank you
know those are the ones for the
record appreciate that.
So this point we will go to the
committee Senator Hamblen.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
twelve here and spoke today
that yes just a little bit of
context I have a wonderful honor
of being the CEO bluster spring
chamber of commerce and we have
our sole purpose is to advocate
for small locally owned
businesses and this includes
both the owners and the
employees and we know small
businesses are struggling to
come back after the pandemic and
Senator my colleagues who are in
the same field is money know
that we're still a few years out
from recovery in all honesty
just because of the pandemic of
taking out loans of trying to
get their employees based back
N. as it's mentioned you know we
know that also small businesses
are one catastrophic event away
from closing and so but I look
at this as a means of really
retaining employees and I think
a lot of us can agree that our
restaurants are small businesses
are mom and pops can offer
health insurance can't offer
but a raw higher IRA or four oh
one K. most likely can't offer
vacation.
And so are small businesses are
coming up with really creative
ways to retain their employees
but what we've also seen during
the pandemic is that there are
employees who are saying this
employer respect who I am thing
some valuable and you know I can
think of a restaurant in Los
crucis that is a favorite to to
myself because they have an
amazing self was chicken fried
steak and.
Three with with the cranberries
and and honey and nuts there is
restaurant they have people
waiting for them.
Part of it is because.
Maybe now.
As soon that lower thank you.
I mean my voice is loud but.
and so you know so this this
business has people waiting to
look for them awaiting to work
for them in part because of
their creative ways of training
the front of the house toward
the back of the house the back
of the house work the front of
the house they do monthly
meetings with their employees to
check in they have done what
they can to be flexible to keep
their employees because as we've
talked about there's a high
turnover rate when it comes down
to training new employees and so
I I do want to acknowledge this
that I I see this is a way of
retaining because of all the
limitations of small businesses
have just because they're small
businesses you know they just
don't have the capital to offer
all the benefits that big
corporations and businesses are
able to do and so with this I
just have a couple of questions
Senator pretend
the nine percent point nine
percent contribution right how
was that decided how did that be
you know in and I'm wondering
what would be the example of a
small business.
Just a you know what what they
pay per year on that what is
because there is this idea of
the sky is falling like oh my
gosh every single one of my
employees is going to take
advantage of this that will
knock me out as a business so
I'm just wondering what is the
average cost and how is the
point nine percent contribution
come to.
Mr Chairman I'm gonna give your
answer but then I'm also going
to house Tracy thank you so
At that point nine percent point
four from the employee point
five from the employee that came
after looking at other states
what happened in other states
and of what the percentage was
in other states so the first the
cure of Business and Economic
Research was part of this as
well as workforce solutions so
and
eliminating sixty six percent of
businesses employers from having
to pay with fewer than five
employees was a a significant
that change so it Washington
state that set up there
percentage less than point nine
percent and they had to change
it every year.
Just three years so we we don't
want to go much lower.
and it looks to me like anywhere
from thirty six thousand to
maybe a little bit more than
that are the number of claims
every year so we've got a
million workers.
And we're talking about from
thirty six to fifty thousand
claims a year we're not talking
about the huge number of claims
because it's a serious medical
illness of yourself or your
family for having a baby so the
average number of weeks that
people are taking in other
states are from seven to eight
weeks and and a lot of that is
maternity are poor paternity so
so that's my first answer no
current to Tracy.
That thank you Mr chair and
Senator Hamblen I I think you
answered perfectly and you know
the the calculations it's really
based on the actuarial is on the
economic modeling and looking at
what we anticipate based on
annual disability claims as well
as births and really weird the
projections I think are pretty
conservative as far as ensuring
that that the solvency is it
will remain here to here but
that's really where that point
nine percent comes from I think
it's also important to point out
that aside from Washington state
which did start with a much
lower
total contribution rate and
actually excluded
the way to the employer
contributions for those that
have fewer than fifty employees
it is the only state that has
struggled with solvency even
through COVID which was really
that sort of ultimate stress
test for these kinds of programs
states like California and Rhode
Island we're better able to
respond to employee
it to employees who are able to
then stay connected to that
employer get them funding more
quickly take that alleviate the
pressures on their unemployment
insurance systems and remains
solvent it and so it was really
a demonstration of this model
and no state has ever had to go
above one point one percent of
total country of contributions
in total
and that we we don't expect that
we would need to increase those
at any.
That that you know one of the
things that I think that we that
small businesses are
experiencing.
Is just a lack of knowledge
about the resources that are
available at the state level I
know department of workforce
solutions you know is working on
that I know that the economic
development department is doing
that that's been one of the
conversations that I've been
having with my colleagues is
that there are programs
available for small businesses
to help them
but there is this fear just
because of the pandemic of and
Justice scrambling that our
businesses had to do during that
time
you know I'm I'm I'm wondering
in in in you may have touched on
this a already Tracy is that you
know.
Some some businesses are saying
that if an employee is out for
twelve weeks it will be
difficult to find a replacement
but I also noticed that there's
a supplement in their for
temporary employees.
Am I right on that are temporary
but I see it.
Order somewhere what the so just
the the question is they're
they're concerned it's going to
be hard to find replacements for
them
and I think there's something in
here that might address that is
in my correct on that so Mr
chairman again I'll I'll answer
first and then this is my mop
and clean up over here to my.
So that the employer is not the
one paying for the lease close
to the fund so it's the
workforce solutions passed to
fund.
For employer is not paying wages
for that employee during that
time so think it's certainly
supplement with temporary
And then they get their workers
back because what happens now
they quit quit they're either
too sick to go to work and they
lose their job they're having a
baby at to have a C. section
eighty about eight weeks they
lose their job so it is job
protection it's not it's run by
the workforce solutions and the
fund not the employer so it it
gives some of them of that and
we have large employers right
now that offer this the state of
New Mexico Netflix just keep
going but you in it has a good
program they can opt out if they
want with the way for in other
states we're seeing that what's
happening is that the bigger
employer employers are actually
being part of the state program
because it's cheaper for them
and it's administered by
workforce solutions or whoever
does their fun.
Thank you yes of the.
Thank you the Mr Chairman
Meister so I think there might
have been some confusion early
on and I want to underscore with
the pro tem said and this is the
chief sponsor here that the the
employers not paying for that
time because I've been paying
all along at a very small right
so becomes a huge benefit to
retain that employee and the
quality of work by provided by
that employee when they come
back to work is really not going
to miss a beat as an employer I
want someone to come back and I
don't want to start all over
again I don't so over again
retrain somebody from scratch
and and what the ramp on that is
really horrible to a business
that's one thing I want to
mention that the other one is if
you look at the way the plan is
it in the the program is
structured up to minimum wage
that's paid to the employee at a
hundred percent the on the
minimum wage is paid at sixty
seven percent so when I first
sat down with with the the chief
sponsor centers to approach him
and and we started talking
through this I thought to myself
that's going to be real
motivation for the employee to
find creative ways to get all
the treatment help whatever
they're gonna need to get
themselves back to work as
quickly as they can and the
benefits to the businesses it's
a qualified trained well high
quality employee coming back so
I think that's very important
for the business community to
listen to or two here because
that's what I would want as a
business owner someone to come
back and I've already spent I
don't know how many years
training this person and and
making them worthwhile to the
business thank you.
So Mister chairman at and thanks
to Senator Padilla for for
talking about like that let me
also say that there's a cap we
have a cap if you make three
hundred thousand dollars you
know you're going to be getting
nine hundred Bucks a week so
that's that's a lot of
motivation to come back do we
have people that make three
hundred thousand dollars even if
you're making
even a hundred thousand eight
seventy sixty well we have
people who are in a barely
making twenty thousand dollars a
year and because they're working
more than one job because they
have to support families and
it's a terrifying I think that
they're going to lose their job
because they have an unexpected
illness or something happening
in the family and I do think
that it it does create employer
loyalty but it is a hard pill to
swallow because there is that
fear of of what a small business
is going to have to spend in
order to keep their employees
keep their doors open and so I'm
I'm finished with my questions I
would just say that I think
there needs a lot of outreach
and I I appreciate the task
force but I think there needs to
be a lot of outreach because if
you're so elbow deep in this
bill and you know it back and
forth and we've had groups who
have who've worked on this is
really kind of easing those
apprehensions
because they have a legitimate
reason to be afraid and but also
I think given where we are in a
new era of employer employee
relations most people are
supporting small businesses
based on their values now after
the pandemic we saw how people
treated employees and people and
that is becoming more and more
of a of a I think I've of the
fundamental deal breaker and
supporting businesses and so I
think it's really important for
small business owners to to see
and to embrace treating your
employees and your customers
well and I know there are a.
A lot to do that but doing that
in a way that provides creative
ways of retaining our employees
is going to be something that
will benefit us in the long run
and I understand it's a hard
pill to swallow but I do feel
that it's I our responsibility
department of workforce
solutions responsibility us as a
legislative body to make sure
that those small businesses know
what resources are available to
them so that they're those
apprehensions are eased because
they have plenty on their plate
right now of what they're
worried about and this is one of
the last things we need to do so
I do thank you for your time and
your commitment and your work on
this and I think everybody who
was part of that task force to
provide that information.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Sierra.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator.
Both.
Go forward I page
Twelve of the upright
mentioned several
The issue.
The dress issues.
This
far along at the end of the
shoes and and so what would be
your response.
Okay twelve.
So Mister chair Mister chairman
we see that turn this off by
accident noted
I don't know what FIR you have
the one I have ins on page
twelve so.
A lot of these issues are in
part what we need to have a year
and a half for for workforce
solutions to promulgate rules at
cetera.
So it's.
You know that we we cannot put
every rule and regulation into
the bill that that really is the
purpose of taking our time and
doing it right it's it's a year
and a half between of the time
we would pass this if we do and
this would go into effect so I'm
not sure what you're saying to
the.
Mr chair Senator I didn't need
to.
To ask a gotcha question so that
it doesn't feel like I've got
to.
The.
this.
So.
Mr Mr chairman that.
Our whole institution question.
Senator clients
Are able to raise prices what
would be here is response to
that.
So Mr chairman and senator you
know all I can tell you is that
the.
What's happened in the states
that have done this is that
these it's better for business
they keep their employees they
leave only when they need to
they come back to work so it's
it's really not a matter of fact
using more money to do this yet
they're going to have a fee for
per employee every year they're
going to get it back in all of
the market ideas that we're
talking about keeping employees
having more loyal employees
having them out for free period
of time or a long enough so that
they're either back for their
done with being pregnant cetera
so you know to me it's just good
economic sense I don't know if
Tracy or Senator Padilla wants
to.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator so one other thing to
consider here is if you're a
business owner you're gonna have
a lot more predictability
because if you don't have a
program in place already for
something like this relief
program now suddenly you are
you're going to know how many
employees you plan to have for
the next twelve or eighteen or
higher for longer long range
planning is for your business so
ideally you're gonna be able to
project what those costs are
we're just today you probably
don't because you have no idea
what's going to happen to you
next if you have a wave of maybe
illness or sickness or whatever
this is going to allow you to
predict that and have a way to
compensate those employees so
that they come back like we said
earlier trained and ready to do
work for you whereas there's a
lot of unpredictability every
time you have to retrain brand
new workers so I think you're
gonna be able to budget in your
business a lot better by
utilizing and and activating a
program like this thank you for
the answer.
As the chair.
Would be your response to people
this is say they don't have H.
R. part is very difficult to
administer.
Mister chairman Senator this
this will be administered by
workforce solutions all
businesses right now have things
that they have to pay for their
employees this would be another
item you know they think they
have to pay taxes they have to
do workman's comp they have to
do unemployment insurance I mean
this will be paid family sickly
here's your point five percent
point four percent so it's it's
not.
They don't need an HR department
they're not going to be the ones
doing the program it's a state
rate program thank you for that
answer.
Finally I Mr chairman senators.
You have in the state of the
state of New Mexico has.
Hey at least program correct yes
as chairman Senator.
How the budget compared with.
The budget at UNM and state
compare with what you're
program.
Mr Chairman I'm pretty sure the
U. N. M. benefits are are much
better they don't charge their
employee they give them a
certain amount of time off I
think it's shorter than the
twelve weeks but it's still
significant they can.
They can opt out of the state
program for they can often and
then you know they can make that
decision.
Mr chair Senator so you.
Would characterize this is a
Cadillac plan although Cadillac
probably not a very good analogy
because Chevrolet makes some
pickup trucks cost twice as much
as Catholics.
You Mr chairman I would not call
this a Cadillac might call it a
Dodge dart.
Program will work I had a Dodge
dart for many years many many
many years to work perfectly
fine.
Okay well that that's all I have
is.
Sure except to say that you know
where the
These centers you stated in your
opening.
because this is the richest
country in the world yeah we're
the only modern industrialized
country without a family
please plan here we look at the
big picture.
Really
It's really a plus and has many
benefits is already been
elegantly calculated by
Senator deviced.
Committees so I won't repeat
those so that's all I have
Mister chair and
Well if.
Hopefully have a and will the.
Stop talking so we give others
an opportunity okay all right
thank you Senator Kernan.
Thank you Mr chair thank you I
have some questions first
question in bill basically the
definition of employee here so
this one or more employees in
the small business with one or
more employees would be required
to participate sept get more
reading that correct so Mister
chairman Senator Kernan can you
give us page and line.
Twenty.
So Mr chairman that's the
definition of employer but we
are exempting employers with
four or fewer employees from
paying as employers their
employees have to but they don't
it's about sixty six percent of
our of our businesses.
I have.
For line will.
All apply to through I can use
this morning.
More clearly what it means a
quick moment to have a family
relationship then it is clear
that related by blood to
disclose Association forty for
employee spouse or domestic
partner is the equivalent of.
To help what is that in the
health have reached the setting
so Mister chairman and senator
Kernan this is from the federal
family and medical leave act a
plus something else the blood
and affinity is what's in the
federal law and okay I'll stop
talking.
Sorry but
I do want to clarify though so
so that is that language came
originally from the U. S.
government's office of personnel
management it's the definition
that they use for their own
employees and it actually
originated I think in nineteen
sixty nine during the Vietnam
War for people who wanted to
take very mentally for.
They're essentially they're
brothers and war and since then
they have continued to expand
that from bereavement leave to
now paid sick leave in their
paid family leave benefits but I
think more than anything is an
incredibly important to point
out it as Marshall from the
equality New Mexico pointed out
is we have a diversity of
families in New Mexico we want
to ensure that people have this
act have access to this benefit
to provide care for fit for
family regardless of hell that
family has been established and
you know we have grandparents
raising grandchildren have great
grandparents raising
grandchildren here in our state
and we really want to ensure
that that they have access to
this benefit and I think it's
important to point out that this
the the bill also makes
clarifies that a person has to
be product providing primary
care giving to that individual
that they're taking the for so
this isn't just you know I met
this person and want to take
twelve weeks to hang out with
them it had there's is that
there's a sign off from a
medical professional that says
this person has something that's
defined as a serious medical
condition and needs direct care
giving from an unpaid family
caregiver and this is the person
who will be providing that care
primarily and so it is a broad
definition so that we're
insuring that people have access
to it but it can't be used
Broadly just because you want to
thank you Mr chair I'm still not
sure I understand but it seems
rather brought to me and that's
concerning just remember what we
did last year
as I recall the debate on that
was that just forced for private
employers should.
That for and public.
Chairman Senator Kernan that was
private and so now we're
expanding this to include.
Public the correct service
agencies and.
All of everybody is it you I
thank you state that includes
most people but not all people
just as exclusive Mr Chairman
there are some I think it's some
labor unions that have much
better leave policies and
they'll probably opt out.
So the exclusion Mister chair is
based on the plans place.
And and it's voluntary Mr
Chairman so they can opt in they
can opt out because they have a
better plan yes so Mr chair I'm
just looking at the FIR in the
twelfth week.
And then the payment in the bill
would require employee
contributions a point five for
those employees that have
employees that have for more
and then you it states that you
can opt out.
if it's able to generous than
the proposed plan today so with
that would have to be more
generous
In relation to the number of
weeks or would that have to be
more generous related to the
percentage maybe it's a less
percentage requiring.
And Mr chairman that's one of
those things that's gonna have
to be worked out through
workforce solutions we cannot
put it all in there so and I
think that term is pretty broad
I think most of the reasons
people opt out is that they have
a much more generous plan.
So but what has happened in the
other states is that the larger
employers have taken part in the
state program because it's
cheaper for them significantly
so Mr chair just thinking as
a small business owner and
having experienced some of the
things that you talked about
Center Hamlin had incidents in
mind.
Situation where mindfully had to
deal with the patient has been
in.
The deal with hi I don't need
anybody to tell me how I need to
treat not fully but in the
meantime I had to hire
replacement continue to pay
monthly it also had to pay the
replacement and that impacted by
small business but that's okay
because it is right thing to do
that I will tell you that was.
Certainly at a great expense.
But I wanted to keep that
appointment I chose to do.
And in I guess what concerns me
is.
This small businesses and
employees know how to treat
their voice at I guess I'm just
concerned how we are maintaining
everything as if government can
take care of everything without
getting much credit to small
businesses that that's the right
thing to do and can do the right
thing just keep I just want to
go on really concerned about our
providers we know that that
Medicaid
really difficult to operate
small business with your home
health care whether you are a
medical
with the provider.
It reimbursement is expanding
that they get so much and that's
it.
And so it's not so much
you know the cost of hiring the
replacement it isn't going to be
as qualified in my case my
replacement wasn't qualified it
was all I could find and that's
what I had the stands of that
that that's a group that's a
real problem hello there is and
then another question I have
with regard to that replacement
employees so you there there
three months the employee comes
back the replacement is let go
kidnap replacement file for
unemployment.
The.
Mr.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator so
as is the way the bill is
written everything that would
apply to an employee will apply
in this case as well I'm
assuming that you know if you if
you can if you're managing your
business you're going to hire
the person as a temporary
employee you're going to hire
them knowing when they're coming
in you might use it to a
staffing agency if if it's
something that would allow the
level in your business based on
the type of services or goods
that you find so you're you're
going to have that discussion
with that employee on that
temporary employee on the way in
the door so they know what's
happening.
Allow them to file for
unemployment while they have the
right to do that in they would
be allowed to do that if that
the plies and in the various
scenarios but your if it's a
temporary employee which is I'm
assuming what will be the the
case and in in maybe the the
minimum wage empleo scenarios
the where where the job is
paying minimum wage they're
going to hire temporary
employees not someone that
they're going to bring in as a
regular employee by would that
they would do that.
Yes.
As I write.
Yes.
Mr what was the affected by this
on.
So Mr chairman we don't think
that this law will will affect
that at all they'll still be
under the same you know have
they worked you know a certain
number of quarters you can not
get unemployment unless you've
been working and you have a
certain number of quarters you
don't qualify but let me just
say one thing the difference
between what you did with your
employee and this is that you
would not you would not be
paying your employee when they
were on the fund would be paying
them so you can use the money
that you're not paying them when
they're on leave for their
temporary placement so
Mr chair and senator if that
employee works for maybe for a
couple years and then moved to
another company the amount of
money that employee has put into
that fund to set transfer to the
new company.
So Mr Chairman it doesn't it's
it's not by employer gets by
employee so it stays with the
employee.
Have.
Thank you senator.
thank you Mr chairman thank you
at a pro tem and Senator Padilla
for bringing the bill so I just
want to follow up a little bit
on Senator Kernan where she was
going I I've just is this for
over thirty years with a variety
of different ways right now
we're under the the four number
because of the type of law I
practice do mediations I don't
need apple watch for boys which
is helpful to me but I want to
understand exactly how this
works
You know because I think you
said sixty six percent of
businesses are in the same place
with a small number of ways I
think this was as I understand
it I came a little bit later I
apologize this is one of the
things that was part of the
negotiation occurred over the
summer so if you could just kind
of elaborate on the negotiations
and then I want to understand.
Make sure I think I understand
what you're saying about how
this is gonna in impact.
You know my business Senator
currents business but the sixty
six percent.
so Mister chairman Senator work
so you have three people working
for you you don't have to put
anything into the fund because
you're under that number sixty
six percent but it's only nine
percent of of our work force but
sixty percent sixty six percent
of businesses are are under so
they would pay in and they would
pay in the the point five
percent so five dollars for
every thousand earned and then
is they got pregnant or got sick
or had a sick family member they
would apply to the workforce
solutions fund and get paid to
take leave from your office you
would then not be paying their
salary when they worked on they
would not be getting their full
salary I'm assuming you don't
pay minimum wage if you paid
minimum wage they would get
their full salary
there's a cap so the state they
made the average a state wage
which right now is about fifty
one thousand dollars then the
numbers right here for you they
would get eight hundred and
twenty seven dollars a week.
That that would be the full
amount for the for the minimum
ten plus sixty seven percent
beyond that of the cap would be
nine hundred ninety seven if you
had an employee that made eighty
thousand dollars they would
probably be at the cap that's
all they would get you wouldn't
be paying their salary they
would be getting that from the
fund and and they would be up to
twelve weeks but that's also
depended upon are they sick is
it someone else's are they
pregnant so they all they have
to fill out all of that paper
work with the workforce
solutions Senator.
Mr chairman I think the the the
again the appreciate what
Senator Kernan said about you
know just as a business owner
taking care of your employees
and certainly that's something
that I have always done because
I think the point center for the
update about you know when
you've got good people working
for you all and you take care of
them.
My goodness it comes back
multiple times over but it just
feels to me like this actually
support the situation better for
me as an employer bottom line
perspective
and so I just wanted to point
that piece out and Mr chairman I
could also there's many small
employers that cannot that do
not pay very much and that when
when their employees get sick
and they'd stay home but they
they're done you know they got
to hire somebody new so.
This has a lot of benefits for
businesses that's what we're
finding in the other states.
Appreciate that and I I.
When Mr Lipschutz testified and
said that.
You know.
The groups that he works with
bigger labor organizations most
of them this won't even apply
and I think it's because they're
already doing this and so on
page nine.
No one twenty three is that's
the opt out when you have an
existing plan and I think what's
fascinating is the fact that
many of these larger employers
are actually now.
In other states popping in
absolutely because they look at
what's here and so.
You know maybe you might worry a
little bit from an employer from
an employee standpoint you know
that the state the the Dodge
dart planned.
That we're building here could
be lesser than the Cadillac plan
that was they had before but I I
just think that's a piece to to
bring up two more things I want
to follow up on senator Tom and.
In the FY are I want to just
talk about one that jumped out
at me
this is on again the F. R. we
have is if you are a twenty
twenty three and it's all read
it to you the one paragraph
Senate Bill Levin does not
address it an employee is
allowed to utilize their phone
accrued leave in conjunction
with the paid family medical
leave act and they say you HSD
currently allows employees to
utilize their own Andrew Lee
well approved for Lee taken out
of the family and that leave
medical leave just curious.
What the thinking is on not
having that in there at this
point.
At at chairman senator Wirth
thank you for the question.
So the employee on this leave is
in as it is getting leave
compensation from the department
of workforce solutions so they
would not be utilizing any leave
accruals and in fact one of the
amendments in front of you today
makes it clear that this is this
Lee is separate and apart from
sick leave for the other types
of leaves
The.
So they would not be using I'm
sorry they were not simply
wouldn't be using because they
are not on it the situation with
respect to the family and
medical leave act comes into
play is the family and medical
leave act isn't on paid leave
program it does not provide any
paid leave to the employee it's
really.
You could think of it as Lee but
it's really more accurately you
have to keep the job open for
the employee for period of time
while they are out
the family medical leave act
allows employers to require
employees to use sick leave or
vacation leave concurrently with
the family and medical leave act
if they want you know if they
want to be paid whether out so
that's the situation that I
think is a rising in that
context and I and I hope that
answers your question.
I think partly at us I guess the
question could could put an end
for the use the leave to kind of
cover the additional third
that's not coming out of the
funds.
And again and I don't I don't
know what Human Services does.
Whether that is that's a state
program and and I don't miss
anything answer to this I just
did it it's interesting and I I
just like to understand exactly
what the state is doing because
obviously work this says team
HSD currently allows employees
to utilize their own accrued
leave well approved for Lee
taken I was under FMLA so that's
the difference so it's FMLA so
that that makes sense to me
okay.
one other question of the house.
H. two lines and definition of
domestic partner.
Basically I'll read it it means
a person with another person
maintains a household.
In a mutual committed
relationship without a legal act
legally recognized marriage so
first question with this
maintain a household with adding
renters.
If someone is renting.
Is that a household I mean if
the if you live in an apartment
with someone.
I don't think.
To the.
Relatives of the answer either
yes.
The chairman and as senator
Wirth that is absolutely the
case my opinion no because
maintain a household has a
different connotation than
simply living together as a
renter would and again going
back to the point that Tracy
made earlier to domestic partner
comes into it when we're
defining family relationships
that allow for you to take leave
in order to take care of someone
so it would be the type of
relationship in which you're
going to take up to twelve weeks
off of your work in order to
take care of this individual
and part of the requirement for
application for the leave
entitlement with the department
of workforce solutions is not
only do not going to be doing
other employment while you're on
on the leave but you're also
going to be performing the task
for which you are taking the
leave so in my estimation no it
doesn't just include a casual
interviews maintain a household
is a different concept than just
living in the same building but
also tying it back to the reason
why the definition even comes
into the fact is because you are
taking care of someone who's
need in serious medical
condition
that may be something we want to
look at I just want to make sure
that this is what is a contact
center and very.
For built by act that was six
hundred pages long.
For we are legal same sex
marriage and so we spent an
immense amount of time on these
terms and so I guess that means
the other question is you know
he is mutual committed
relationship to find anywhere.
And I just throw that out.
Attention senator Wirth is not
defined in the act if that's
what you're your question is it
is as you know as a as a lawyer
when when you have terms that
are defined in the act to use
the defined definitions of the
act in the not defined in the
act use sort of common sense
that
everyday usage of those terms in
order to figure it out
what it means but in answer to
the short answer questions now
is not defined in the act and so
as a Mister chair I just think
this is something we might look
at.
A little bit.
Create challenges and and
figuring out that that kind of
language.
So I.
I think that's what I have for
now thank you thank you very
much for.
Thank you senator Senator mail.
Thank you Mr chair and senator I
want to thank you because I
heard from a large number of
constituents regardless of this
bill and echo to much like the
father who spoke if this bill
was placed land the others
partner have a child of this
sort of help tremendously at the
constant theme that I heard from
New Mexicans northern New
Mexicans is no one should have
to sacrifice their economic
stability in order to be able to
welcome a new baby to care for a
loved one or to heal themselves
and so I completely believe that
and so what I think about The
New Mexicans I represented rural
New Mexico who might not have
lied about this bill would
definitely help them to balance
the demands of health of work
and insuring that as New
Mexicans that we all take
responsibility of caring for
loved ones it's in our culture
of who we are as as New Mexicans
and I want to thank you for
bringing this bill forward
because it means so much for
those of us in northern New
Mexico currently don't have
something.
And that's all I have Mister
chairman that thank you
Senator Griggs.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator legislation this is
quite the in there are you know
I appreciate you guys doing that
I'm.
I'm.
Concerned about some things and
I you Senator Wirth is less than
five employees so those
individuals have to pay and as
head of the do that.
So Mr chairman again.
You have to pay I took a
unemployment insurance
compensation for your employees
as an employer this is goes
along with that that's how they
do it.
Mr chair and the and madam pro
tem I've done that I've paid
into that and there's there are
forms that the state has to help
you do that that wouldn't
necessarily reflect this
particular payment show the
state forms of that's going to
happen I believe Mr chair and
senator would have to be
changed.
To reflect that in the end of.
Mr chair and in center that that
push it that puts that on the
four years ago the employers not
having to pay it he's having to
do the important probably
withhold money from the employee
in order to get that done Madam
Mr chair and
Senator that's exactly what we
did so it's not like it's not
like it's something I've I've
never done before and I don't
know that there's there's other
ways although I'm sure there are
there are you know there's
interesting payments that the
state has that we never even
bothered.
To have the employee may we went
ahead and paid them ourselves
motion were less significant
invests but but that's what we
did so that the issues used in
the in the what are we expecting
and it it looks as though even
though which the employees
dollars we're somehow expecting
the import your to pay those.
Sir at least collected rate.
So Mister chairman that's why
we're having more than a year
and a half between now and the
time when people start paying
which is January one twenty
twenty five because workforce
solutions has this big list of
making sure that the forms are
easy and as what Senator Hamblen
said full blown education for
small employers large employers
and employees so you know I've
heard a lot of excitement about
this bill it's still going to
take us awhile to get it so that
really works and and this is one
of those so we can't give you
all the answers now because it
will be part of the process of
setting this up through
workforce solutions it Mr chair
Senator I appreciate that but I
just I need to ask the question
for the you don't get the
response
They're on on page ten and maybe
in another place will talk about
the waiver.
For the for your can I for of
waiver because their plans that
is equal to or better than.
I don't aged explained in here
have termination is usually made
or is it just the statement in
there that they can that they
can apply for waivers and then
the waiver will be granted
boards at.
Again is that something is going
to have to be worked out Mr
chairman I cannot give you the
exact answer because it's part
of the rulemaking and how we're
going to start running the
program.
In September share center that's
we appreciate that the answer
but that's that is the you know
part of the challenges.
My approach I feel better I have
to do something that it just
says a waiver can be granted so
the question we have to have
that will.
So Mr chairman and senator so
ideally and and as the pro tem
mentioned in the rulemaking
process and the employees will
be given a set of requirements
that they can bump their their
leave programs up against and
they can demonstrate that in
writing I'm assuming they'll be
some sort of a way to Sir
they'll be way to certify that
and that would be the waiver
that would be granted if they
don't agree with it there is
also going to be the ability to
to yield and and and send that
in as well
and then back to your first
question I just want to make
mention that you know again as
the pro tem mentioned earlier
also employers already make
multiple payments to multiple
government agencies for their
employees this is simply going
to be another line item that
they're going to submit that
that's one thing if they utilize
like I do a payroll company
these wages the these dollars
but the point five for the
employee the point four for the
employer all of those will be
calculated and submitted through
the payroll company that they
already utilize to make those
initiatives so I I'm I'm again
there's this is not going to add
a to the tremendous
administrative burden on the
company because they already
make those other payments for
various reasons as it is.
Mr chair Senator I appreciate
that I appreciate that you have
more employees and a lot of
people and I I understand a lot
of people as we're talking about
that have less than four.
I'm not sure that that that
Connie scale is there for people
with less than four I'm not sure
that that to I think they're
comfortable with but again as
you work it out that's the the
shore stuff that has to be
determined the carriage.
A lot of those employers Gary
they fill out the paperwork
themselves or they do turn it
over to an agency to do an ad
agency will will have to
consider out they're going to
charge that important for your
to recover their.
So it's it's it's just one more
one more on that basis although
it may not necessarily be very
significant I won't argue that
of.
Mr chairman and.
And madam pro tem we've got we
have the bill set up to where
they can take time off and in
four hour increments each.
Mr Chairman at Senator Griggs
that was a request from the
business community that we we
set a a small amount also along
with you know the the twelve
weeks so they don't want to they
don't want to give an employee
twenty minutes off to or a half
an hour off to drive someone to
a doctor's office thing they
needed a sort of a certain
amount and so that's where we
came up with the for our
students this is community.
And and center right that's
that's probably is a good number
just all the yeah I think in the
in the other.
Act we passed last year would
in hourly increments it seemed
like it was it was different and
this but remember.
Mr Chairman yes I remember it's
totally different than this
totally different concept
totally different system cetera
but yet you got an hour off
after thirty hours of week that
you could use for paid sick time
off sick leave off for if you
had a sick family member up to
sixty four hours here eight.
Chair chair thank you for that
I'm I knew it was different I
just didn't exactly remember
what the number is eight the.
Again and I and I I don't know
who everybody should talk to I
don't know how many small
businesses we've really engaged
with on their bookkeeping
practices hal have difficult for
our income which all for them
and I don't know how easy that
is even for employees to keep
track of their for our acreage
Mr chairman and senator so
that's that's one of those
little things it.
Again I think probably is going
to have to be identified Halych
maintained in in what you do and
Senate chair for the at the
talked about and I believe
everyone talked about the
unemployment and the
unemployment
Unemployment would you collect
unemployment if once you've been
a temp in here and you all.
One of the other challenges in
smaller communities or.
Temporary services for temporary
employees part is readily
available as they are in
Albuquerque in other communities
in the state
what you're probably going to
see in a lot of these instances
is the business.
Will not replace that employee
during that time and so it
should be on basically as you've
stated didn't have to pay that
employees salaries but it is
going to be difficult for
cheering in center for some of
them to recover for that to hire
somebody to work that twelve it
was the whole time that twelve
week week period so those are
the challenges of some of these
people will face as we go on and
we're.
You know I've I'm not I'm not
necessarily opposed to this this
whole concept on I'm a little
concerned about some of the
things that are that are in it
and I don't know for sure if I
was still in business what is it
the I would would want because
there I she some of the some of
the fluctuation in your bill I
still see some of the the
challenges that I think I would
face.
So Mr chair Senator again you
guys I appreciate what you were
to work on trying to to help
folks and in the state so thank
you.
Thank you to rex
Google.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Not to talk which just visit my
coughing fits segment having but
I just wanted to briefly say
thank you Senators both of you
for bringing this forward of
course the because this is
something very important for our
community and for me it was very
prevalent very in the face
during the COVID of how the
affected families single parents
of grandparents who also have to
work to provide for their and
the grandchildren and how this
really would make a difference
even to have compensation for
even if it's for hours
participate because every dollar
that they lose made a huge
difference in their budget.
So I just wanna say thank you I
mean there's more technical
stuff that we have discussed
already I just wanted to say
thank you.
Thank you senator.
What questions I don't know if I
was clear or the answer was
clear Senator Kernan asked and I
have the same thing so the
twenty employee contributes to
this one.
And then they move to another
employee here.
Is that transferable is that
what was.
Senator my I answered at once on
the left Tracy and.
Thank you Mr chairman
so the the answer is yes it's it
becomes a portable benefit and
people for instance who are
working maybe two or three part
time jobs if every of one of
their employers is paying in and
they needed to take leave they
would be able to apply to the
Department and receive
compensation for all of those.
As long as they have paid in for
at least six of the last twelve
months now if they come to a new
employer and have an accident or
a serious medical condition
that's come up and they need to
take leave they would have
access to the fund but their
employer would not be required
to protect their job they would
not have job protection until
they've been employed with that
employer for at least ninety
days.
I appreciate that and then also
I guess the whole question of
with regards to those
organizations or businesses that
rely on Medicaid reimbursement I
mean I don't know that answer
was ever answer because on like
a business with raised.
Prices for food whatever if
you're set how would that play
out in the woods what.
Mr chairman I can't answer that
very well I don't know who can.
Yeah.
One of the Los.
Thank you my name is Susan Ragan
and I work with you in in vero
Business and Economic Research
and I think what we would see
with that is that home wages in
New Mexico and we're talking
total wages here would remain
constant were there at so even
though Medicaid is fixed for the
business it's not the Medicaid
that's being charged it the the
premium is based on wages home
and I think we would see that
wages would not rises fast
because of this but it wouldn't
hurt the bottom line for the
business because the premium.
There be this sort of when they
first take it on there be a
little bit of heartache but it's
not gonna be that much because I
believe the premiums are very
reasonable for the outcome and
so when I look at this is an
economic home impact statement
depending upon the industry in
the occupations that are
employed by the by the business
it would take two to five years
for the employer to actually
realize a positive outcome with
this so it's not a quick I get
richer you're going to get poor
real quick is a reasonable
premium and within two to five
years depending upon turnover
rates and the the different
occupations the different
businesses I think the
businesses will actually see a
positive an increase on the
bottom line.
Does that answer your question
of thank you yeah I know it's
it's not I guess my question is
not so much anymore.
Are you know if you have a
provider that has no I don't
know twenty employees and then
the yearly premium for the
employee here it is a certain
amount you all play that sort of
that's what I'm talking about
and it's not so much Medicaid
payment but it's deployer that
has to find their sheer into
this fund if you're not gonna
have the ability to raise tax
you know your your prices and
then of course you're dependent
on a fixed you know
reimbursement rates with through
the state or the feds.
I I'm just trying to figure out
how the meeting I think we.
I don't believe that the wages
so the wages for the employees
are going to raise as fast the
way the employer's going to make
back that money initially is by
maintaining the wages where
they're at and not increasing
them as fast as as you would see
without it does that make sense
it makes sense but it's probably
not forty employees.
In the long term though with the
turnover rates I think it does
and I think for families the
benefit back does.
The response and then also on
page the.
One for you refer to tribal
governments.
Only partially but then there's
no definition you know
definitions section of what that
is we are central governments
but they also some cities that
they own it and so this is
probably something that needs to
be fixed it'll move forward
and I know it's an option for
for them as well it's not
something that you know I
That as well.
But I know that the I did this
to the end of a question I think
you need to make a personal
comment or.
Update on that point okay go
ahead the what it's so you have
an often opportunity.
So certain people can choose to
opt in or not what this.
Well under this where it says
no.
I'm specifically looking for
tribal government told Lee
located in New Mexico that elect
to be covered or or to terminate
coverage in the programs for.
Can you clarify that.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
my name is Carolyn Massey and
executive director for the
southwest women's law center and
I'm also turning and also with
the U. N. M. through the tribal
law but what I wanted to say
that is that under this law the.
Generally speaking cover
starting place tribal
governments would not be
included because they're outside
of state jurisdiction however we
provided an operative language
that would allow tribes to as
employers to
participate in the paid family
medical leave program so but
they would Mr chairman is
correct that we did at the
provide the what tribal
governments are in this statute
however there are many other
places in the NMSA for tribal
governments are defined.
Thank you so there is an option
what.
You just right.
Of those okay with that I want
to the final.
For the second time one that I
okay one point.
Thank you shares and in center
are FIR on on page page three.
Says that the bill allows you
Secretary workforce solutions
need to ingest to address the
contribution.
To protect solvency if I may say
you know it could dramatically
increase the contributions for
both.
I guess you could be crucial as
well but that's what that's what
the F. I. R. the statement added
it may.
One of the things we've had
happen to such as employers and
and center for the will member
these pretty good with
unemployment insurance and the
Opportunities for it to go.
Way up option and made it
extremely difficult to to make
those payments so.
You know I I have any idea where
that happened with this or not
but what it does not I think
just because I don't have any
idea and I hope you don't hope
you're right that you won't but
when you're out there and you're
you're the guy making these
payments on some of the stuff in
our.
Some have that fund goes.
The pot in your have ended in
the.
Make it all back up.
It becomes a pretty substantial
challenge so preacher and and
senator your state twenty two to
point that out because at FIR is
clear that they have the they
have the right to make
adjustments to use state they're
in after we have to live with
whatever adjustment they may.
Well and.
No this is this is just one of
the things that go along with
this.
So in the eleven states and
district of Columbia there's
only been one state that set it
too low to begin with and has
had to adjusted upwards and they
also exempted employers under
fifty.
So they just didn't do it right
and they've had to rate the
others have not we anticipate
that we could even a lower so
this is this is been worked over
through bureau
Casey that I leaving the
president's Center I'm not
trying to argue with that I'm
just saying that's what the of
our ownership yeah well I'm
telling you.
I tell you I could tell you what
the challenges are in the small
business side when that sort of
stuff happens to I understand.
Of Senator Wirth
thank you Mr just just really
quick I wanted to follow up
because I think the issue you're
raising a state what's our our
whole raced and again for
certain work where the state has
entered into contracts.
And those contracts are sets and
then we change things
it has impact and I would just
on our agenda tonight Senator
Diamond has a bill Senate bill
ninety eight you know which kind
of will discuss that issue and I
do think we now this is
something that we as a state in
a situation where we have
resources we need to make sure
that these contracts can work
and so I just I want to flag
that because I think we can
discuss that I know we have our
chair Senate finance sitting
back there and.
He's listening to all this but I
just it's an important issue
it's a legitimate issue you're
raising it we're hearing it I
think this can all work together
I really do and I think we as a
state you know when we make
policy decisions of this
magnitude need to understand you
know that there's going to be
other pieces that we're gonna
need to tweak and we can we can
do that where to place right now
where we can have that
discussion I just want to make
that point appreciate that the
Senator and so.
Senator ahead Lee yes thank you
Mr chairman and my question is
actually we have the cabinet
secretary of the department of
workforce solutions here three
more and you know your
department thank you for
agreeing to to to the aspen
questions
your department's going to be
overseen this program and do
you.
feel confident in the your
department can handle it is.
But you know as a Senate pro tem
as as mentioned it's you know
maybe thirty six thirty nine
thousand people out of the state
out of our workforce correct me
if I'm wrong from putting on
might be able to be using this
program how do you see DWS being
able to do that.
Thank you Mr chair Senator
Hamblen I first saw the original
version of this bill between the
date when I accepted the job and
my start date.
And I had a moment but then I
learned about the task force and
did a lot of time and space a
lot of time in both the meetings
in an offline conversations with
the Sanchez and what the center
and and I do believe we ended up
with a bill that is workable but
they're to be keys to that one
is as everybody is pointed out
numerous times it's the
rulemaking and so we appreciated
the extension of time on the
rulemaking but that is going to
be really critical and we're
going to need everyone to engage
in that and having talked to
about half of the other states
that have programs like this
they said part of the key is you
know take your time make all the
rules that wants don't try to
phase it in because the rules
start to affect each other in
ways that you couldn't expect so
we've learned a lot from those
other states the second key to
this being workable is of course
the funding and that is why
we've been I think very
transparent about this is that
this is a pricey ramp up giving
us more time has helped to
mitigate the price so I think
the original start up estimate
was close to sixty million
dollars and I think after we've
taken a hard look at the numbers
with the new timeline we've
gotten it down from there but it
is an expensive program both to
start up and to administer and I
think the worst case scenario
would be passing this bill and
then under funding it because
then nobody is going to be happy
so in my role I think it part of
it is just to advocate to
adequately resource the bill.
If it passes thank you thank you
Mr chair so I have okay thank
you
Mr chairman I I apologize for
interrupting you but you have
amendments before you go to
bring those compression the
committee that before so the
final action that we have.
Mehmet so gonna have a motion to
accept the moments.
One of the whether it whether
with the discussing.
Mr chair I will move.
point two two four nine seven
four point one correct.
To the motion.
C. ninety of amended bill we're
back to the bill so what is the
leader of the committee.
Both just by Senator Lopez.
As amended.
The second by Senator Hamblen of
these call role.
Senator group.
Senator had a meal yes.
Senator Kernan left Senator
Lopez yes.
Senator Tomlinson yes Senator
Wirth yes Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Steinborn yes.
Six four to oppose and.
You
past thank you madam chairman
Senator.
Senator many of us are you
audience.
in a way for the wall for awhile
so one percent two minutes.
Where you go.
All six.
Close video.
I know.
No.
I think.
Thank you.
There is here.
Representative money so Senator
tool for thank you Mr.
Talk about offices reduction
act.
Good afternoon members the
committee said the tool for
clarifies employment including
the C. companies known as P. of
licenses state of New Mexico.
My pleasure to.
I'm sure still may not reach.
P. O.'s license in the state of
New Mexico can continue to
sponsor and offer fully insured
large group welfare benefit
plans to their worksite
employees
we need to clarify this with in
New Mexico's line the vast
majority other states recognize
that peels can sponsored benefit
plans for the worksite employees
most importantly chair New
Mexicans participates as plans
with me today I have a welcome
Salim get and Emily Martian and
bills go over the bill for a few
minutes and we do have a sense
to bill so we may have to move
that serves to first okay all
right go ahead and the.
When a bill that would take a.
But.
I know completed can you hear me
yes and the complete outside
counsel to the national
association of professional
employer organizations also
known as the PO which is the
association that part primarily
represents the interests of
professional employer
organizations with me here is
Emily marsh who is director of
state governmental affairs from
a PO like to first thank you I
think the committee very much
for the opportunity to testify
in support of SB two oh for
today
I'm gonna start by talking a
little bit about our members
professional player
organizations or PO's provide
meaningful HR solutions to small
and mid size businesses in New
Mexico and across the country
they do that by entering into
Mexico employment relationships
with the small and mid size
businesses and they legally
assume certain employer
obligations on their behalf.
Payroll benefits HR tax
administration and regulatory
compliance assistance or some of
the the many services that PO's
which are referred to under New
Mexico law as employee leasing
contractors provide.
They're currently subject to
licensing and regulation by the
New Mexico regulation and
licensing department under the
New Mexico employee leasing Act.
existing law provides the PO's
are able to provide any benefits
required by law by employers to
employees the New Mexico
legislature has clearly and
explicitly recognized PO's as
employers including for the
purposes of providing health
benefits so when a business
contract for the PTO the PPO
will contractually assume those
employer responsibilities such
as payroll and payroll tax
collection and remittance as
well as employee benefit
obligations by providing health
plans retirement plans and
workers compensation coverage.
As an employer in in and in
accordance with longstanding
practice in New Mexico many PO's
or the employer sponsor of fully
insured large group health
insurance plans that provide
comprehensive coverage to their
worksite employees.
These fully insured health
insurance policies are regulated
by the New Mexico office of
superintendent of insurance and
they're also fully in compliance
with the federal affordable Care
Act.
Very importantly when PO's are
offering their worksite
employees coverage under these
plans they're not selling
insurance instead they're acting
as the employer sponsored the
plan and so they're providing
their worksite employees with
access to health insurance as an
employee of the P. E. R..
Maybe a supports this
legislation and ask for passage
of this bill which would clarify
that employee leasing companies
licensed in the state of New
Mexico can continue to sponsor
an offer fully insured large
group health plans to their
worksite employees as to a vast
majority of other states the
recognize the PO's can sponsor
such plans for their worksite
employees and also need you it's
been working for some time with
the office of superintendent of
insurance to develop a
legislative solution that will
allow PO's to continue offering
health coverage in New Mexico as
the done for many years so we
wanted to think OSI for their
cooperation and the helpful
comments that they offered
throughout the process of
preparing this legislation and
with that I'm very happy to
answer any questions or comments
the committee may have.
Early one of regular comments or
I just wanted to reiterate
speaker in the Mike Reese yes I
just wanted to rate reiterate
what Malcolm sat and we're very
appreciative of the opportunity
to work with it was legislation
and come to an agreement so we
we were we were very much
appreciative.
Yes yes yes I will go to the
audience anybody in support of
Senate bill two four.
Richard has got CLR issue.
The sources it is a as a result
of the future.
Have anybody on the phone the
lady in the opposition of tool
for.
I see none go ahead and I'll
take a motion for the
substitute.
This you have a.
Hi
has it in their books.
There is.
Do not cancel send.
Here sounds.
Committee substitute for.
So I think that.
Second by census.
Okay any opposition to the
motion.
We're on the subject.
Thank you Mr chairman and
substitute we changed.
For I'm sorry in the fourth have
to explain
Yes the the essentially what we
did in the substitute was this
is going to add it to them.
This is going to add a new
section to the New Mexico
insurance co the just
essentially lays out the the
rules for and and again
clarifies the way that
completely sing contractors will
provide insurance
The the the the change on page
four
is to clarify how employees are
counted so this this clarifies
that when you're you're counting
the employee of a PO you're also
going to count the employees of
the clients of the PO that they
co employee so that all gets
aggregated and that's going to
be what's used to determine what
what health insurance market the
policy will be you know they'll
be purchasing and.
Yeah yeah not on page one that's
what I was alluding to this is
the at the beginning this is the
change to the New Mexico
insurance code clarifying these
rules that specifically apply to
employee leasing contractors and
clarifying that if any employee
leasing contractor has more than
fifty employees again
aggregating all their employees
they'll be able to purchase a
large group health insurance
policy for the benefit of those
employees as they do currently.
Really any questions from a
committee members.
Turning the group.
Senator Wirth.
Hello Mister I appreciate the
fact obviously there were check
the superintendent had issues
and yeah the that's the key for
me is Representative work
through this and some great okay
I think most of the passwords
Senator Kernan a second to
second by Senator how to meal.
And what the growth.
Senator great.
Yes Senator how to meal yes
Senator Kernan yes Senator Lopez
yes Senator Sanchez Senator top.
Senator Wirth yes Senator
Hamblen yes Senator Shendo yes.
To use.
W. mass.
No thank being here.
the.
The.
Senator souls.
All right Senate bill fifty
nine.
Thank you Mr chair this is a
bill to spend a billion dollars
of New Mexico that's the other
one.
This is a exactly is a bill that
you heard last year with the
exception of changing the dates
on that what this bill would do
is spend five hundred thousand
dollars to study the feasibility
of putting in a high speed train
by His prima document something
that they're on the order of a
hundred fifty miles an hour or
faster
in New Mexico actually the
training that I think ought to
go from to wall up to Denver we
can't talk about really more
than just our section of it but
it's to do a feasibility study
last year I had Dr beach well
noted economist at New Mexico
state who are the and one of his
comments was this would be game
changing for the state of New
Mexico over the next twenty
years the economic growth and
development that would build up
around a train like this would
be transformational again trying
to channel the words that he
used the last year the.
Five hundred thousand to study
the feasibility I know in the
FIR it talks about D. O. T.
tried to put five million
dollars and leverage money from
the budget to make it ten
million dollars to study I think
that's too big to do a full
study less we know that there's
some feasibility could this
would be worth doing and so more
of a smaller economic study
about what the impact might be
in the FIR I know it also talks
about a couple of places that
are looking that we can large
metropolitan areas with millions
of people quite frankly those
people should have done it
twenty thirty years ago before
it was expensive to buy up all
the land we've got opportunities
now to look up and out to a
different future for New Mexico
by making investments in
infrastructure of this sort
economics some of the basic
principles of that is when ideas
move people move and goods moved
economies improve this would
move people and ideas and to
a smaller scale some goods
certainly would not be heavy
freight but like freight type of
that it also moving very large
speeds and so the idea is I have
no by no means all of the
answers that would be the point
of doing a study of this sort
could be contracted with one of
our universities and departments
of economics whether the bureau
of New Mexico state some of
those people but to do a
feasibility study is whether we
ought to move forward and trying
get by national support and
across state support with
governors to move forward it
shows that this would be worth
doing correct thank you.
All righty so at this time
we will go out to the audience
anybody in favor of Senate bill
fifty nine.
You can come up here as we go
into Mike so that the.
Public and also your.
Thank you chairman and senators
for allowing me to speak we
support the billion dollar bill
as well as this one.
my name is Alex Applegate and
I'm the chair of the
transportation working group of
the environmental justice caucus
and our caucus wholeheartedly
supports this bill.
The transportation sector is the
largest contributor to climate
change and according to the U.
S. dot and also according to the
EPA this also the fastest
growing contributor to climate
change a high speed rail would
help to counteract that.
Damage that's being done.
Furthermore it is like you said
a transitional thing to the
state commission those of you
who do not live near Santa Fe
being able to take the train
home every night and sleep in
your own budget I think that
would be a good benefit to you
all but it further more imagine
a small producer in
Los crucis or catch being able
to get their product to market
within this day they harvested
that would be exponential
transformation of our supply
chain and I cannot imagine a
business that would not before
that Furthermore and finally
for every dollar you spend on
high speed rail you get four
dollars back so the investment
is well worth it thank you.
Thank you.
Okay all right anybody
opposition.
I'm.
Questions of the committee.
For a new path or you have a
question.
Comment to okay common okay Mr
Chairman I think this would be
awesome if we really could do at
a train from Denver all the way
down and there's just so much
more I think.
Economic activity that could
happen which would be really
awesome.
But it's just you know a plus
for that one so with the past Mr
chair.
Okay we have a due pass most by
Senator Lopez and a second by
senator Tom Kricka
Very quick.
Two sentences or less.
Early support as you know the.
Structure built to I signed in
the summer of twenty one.
We provide for children dollars
infrastructure which is far
short of what we need to give an
example.
zero dollars for New Mexico for
high speed rail.
Broadband we need to billion
dollars.
The
In order to provide broadband
for everyone in the state and
that bill and provides a hundred
million dollars is one twentieth
of what we need.
The state engineer.
When he resigned in December of
twenty one city needed two
billion dollars for water
infrastructure by the bill only
provided three hundred fifty
million for New Mexico.
One six of what we need.
Again zero dollars for for high
speed rail China's got twenty
eight thousand miles a high
speed rail years got thousand.
The people faster we're not
going to be competitive.
My other projects bring this
bill for.
Forward is way behind the rest
of the world thank you.
All right thank you senator
Clemente appreciate those
comments I to the appreciate
this and bringing this I had the
opportunity to the.
For one thing.
Not since.
So no I I I had the opportunity
I think the.
and the opportunity to go to
Taiwan as part of the New Mexico
delegation and for the first
time and help you to right one
of those trains that was amazing
I I believe it was kind of a
magnetic thing.
It is so you just never felt
anything will go like a hundred
forty miles an hour you could
not feel any ball it was amazing
and she lied about yes.
But when trying to run me over
this morning just for FY I.
It's an intentional.
Has not by accident.
Already a motion floor of to
grow please Senator creates
Senator Senator current Senator
Lopez yes Senator Senator.
Grant.
No.
Senator Tallman yes Senator
Wirth yes Senator have is
Senator Shendo yes I want to
instance okay okay all right
I would just other bill I for a
billion dollars I know this is
expensive and so I was just make
sure people realize this is
expensive we've got maybe
looking up and out two different
futures I thank you Senators all
okay.
This.
Senate bill sixty nine.
This deal opens we still over
this okay thank you.
With.
All right thank you Mr chairman.
All.
Mr chair committee members over
half a million bikes the bike so
he sold annually coming more
common in New Mexico more come
and
we have not done anything about
about the and I hope we begin to
start to see a bike used to
replace cars were to the
wonderful group of he by folks
to come up with this bill and if
you look at the bill what it
does is it simply includes it
does includes when I I should
introduce my experts a need
Bullington who's here also to
help me with any questions
and but it includes the fire
exit within the within our.
Within our statute that deals
with with helmets can treat that
has a bicycle.
And then it defines what the
lecture consisted bicycle is
which is is very important.
it also talks about the three
tiers of electric bikes and
that's really important because.
The level of power with these
bikes is very low but there are
some bikes that are more
powerful than others and so this
would a classify the bikes and
that would be helpful to many
local jurisdictions when they're
trying to deal with which I
should be on page trail so they
can stable class one and two
bikes on these trails class
three bikes not allowed on
trails but eleven street those
those kinds of decisions would
be made by the local
jurisdictions in this bill
It's specifically will has
already said it is it defines
electric bike has a
Has a bicycle and therefore it
would not need the license and
registration which is I think
they're important because they
are bicycles and not and not
mopeds and motorcycles
in the in it also with section
on page fourteen section sixty
three three seventy eight really
talks about the standards for E.
bikes in our state and the fact
that they need to be labeled
with what is your power level
And then we and on page fifteen
of that new material talks about
the weather class A. and class
two what two previous vehicles
can generally be on trails where
bicycles are authorized to
travel but the important part
here is a political subdivisions
of the state really have control
so if they change this is the
presumption but then if they
change that
they have the absolute power to
do that and and we think that's
important because they know what
they're to rails are are capable
of.
and then on again on page
fifteen the bicycle a bicyclist
shall not write a class three
electric assisted bicycle and
bicycle and pedestrian path.
Unless it's within a street or
highway or the political
subdivisions again says
otherwise.
So that is the bill and we are
ready to stand for any questions
thank you senator.
In comments or deceptive I think
I should just might twenty.
thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator that was a great job
this is so just for the record
and public yes my name is JD
Bollington and I'm the
registered lobbyists for people
for bikes coalition that's who
I'm representing today M.
there's a really key safety
factor here that you should all
understand all of these electric
bicycles are made by the
manufacturers with the class one
class two or class three
designation on them that
coincide with the with the with
the bills that the Senators
proposing.
Without a state statute that
recognizes this classifications
we are left with what we have
right now which is a simple one
sentence regulation from the
motor vehicle division that says
all electric bikes are bicycles
let me tell what the problem
with that is that means they're
all out on bicycle paths.
These bikes are very powerful
and very fast yeah yeah and they
they are some of them have
throttles and can hit you know
almost thirty miles an hour and
they're much closer to electric
dirt boat bike motorcycles but
without a state law that
recognizes these three
classifications it's a bicycle
and it's allowed to go anywhere
bicycle as so this is that
there's actually significant
very significant safety issue
here and this is a this is a
very important piece of
legislation thank you thank you
at this time will go up to the
audience anybody in favor of
Senate bill sixty nine again
very quickly.
The security.
My name is Susan got which.
If you were I own free to roam
the biking which is an electric
bike company I very much support
this bill for the the reasons
mentioned there are fights that
will go up to sixty miles an
hour electric bikes the sixty
eight hundred watt motor and
these currently our legal on our
multi use paths.
Thank you I think you're right
up there it so besides that but
it also gives transparency with
the manufacturers I work with
many manufacturers are over the
spikes are coming from I
wholeheartedly support a level
of transparency that this bill
that stipulates thank you thank
you.
Hi
From the department of justice
caucus.
Thank you
to be surprised to know that
transportation secretary is
still the largest contributor to
climate change since I last
spoke
and taking one car off the road
with a bicycle removes three
thousand.
Tons of greenhouse gases so we
do support this bill it is a
very important I'm also a by
member of bike ABQ they also
support this
because it is the right step to
go the uncertainty in the state
rules are up.
Are preventing people from
making this purchase so please
support the bill.
anybody else.
Yes.
We're not there yet.
Okay so what else is support see
none.
Any opposition in the audience.
I see none.
Go to a Mr question motors I
chose arsenal okay good.
Good afternoon Mr chairman
distinguished senators my name
is John Hashimoto I'm very
opposed to Senate bill sixty
nine which proposes that certain
electric assisted bicycles or E.
bikes be allowed by the fall in
any open space area including us
said nature preserves where
motorized vehicles are currently
not allowed.
SB sixty nine exams E. bikes
from being called a motorized
vehicle which is fine for
registration and titling
purposes but not for use they
obviously are their vehicles and
have a motor to go faster.
Moving forward the default to be
the by are not allowed in open
space areas we're currently
motorized vehicles are
prohibited in jurisdictions
should have to specifically opt
in thank you.
Thank you.
Okay with that we'll go to the
committee I have Senator Hamblen
thank you Mr chair I think that
kind of springboards off of our
online opposition on that in Los
crucis we have the organ
mountains desert peaks national
monument and something that is
bringing more more people to the
area is the monumental loop
you're familiar with that one D.
P. it's for different sections
and there's a loop of bike trail
that connects all of them and
it's become very popular for
bike Packers by the way Susan
remember your business being
recognized at the outdoor
recreation conference that when
you're so congratulations on
that again continuing on with
your business so wondering with
this and understanding that
concern and just the pristine
nature of this monumental trail
of people bike packing so
they're stopping amongst along
the way camping how will this be
enforced
and is is there like if Los
crucis wanted to say now we
don't really want electric bikes
on our bike paths can they do
that absolutely Mr chair Senator
absolutely on page fifteen this
kind of the assumption that the
Slovaks the bikes under twenty
twenty miles an hour would be
allowed bicycle.
but it also says provided the
political subdivisions may
prohibit the operation of the
class one or class two bike so
absolutely if this is really the
focus is on local control just
imagine if the if the locality
doesn't doesn't do anything and
with regard to enforcement the
same way that there in force now
which is at least in Albuquerque
and in the post area the city
police on bikes would come by
and say Hey yeah and and this is
happened to me I've been on a
regular bike the bike will
really cooperating very very
quickly the obviously it it
seems to me like a class three
by hello I am pretty slope.
And
in you know if you could report
it and see if you see what what
will be done but which is
exactly what happens now.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator I mean if if I chose to
ride a bike this would actually
be the method but I feel
exercise is dangerous and so.
So to my healthy and so I do
appreciate that I appreciate the
opportunity to opt out because
we're very protective down south
of our monumental loop and you
know also want to encourage as a
bike safe city so we're we're
kind of navigating that very
carefully but we also want more
people to get out and do that I
want more people to get out and
do that well I just want a full
thank you Mr chair thank you
center I appreciate them Senator
Griggs.
Thank you Mr chairman.
and export I can you Rep Willie
tell the difference between
these bicycle.
This Mr chair Senator that's why
the labeling is important I can
tell because they do go more
quickly so when you're actually
on a bike path you when they
passed you really fast it's
probably a with a tier three but
if there kind of with you or
just a little faster than you
probably to one or two.
House you can but this is
actually that that is a very
important question I'll turn to
my experts to respond up will
thank you Mr chair Senator
insufficiently it's almost
impossible to distinguish
between a because the batteries
are all the same size and same
place you can't see the throttle
very easily because it's pretty
small it's very difficult very
difficult to distinguish
visually.
Mr chair Senator going along
with that there we restricted
sixteen year old from writing
the.
Bigger one but we can't tell the
difference.
Between the big one are we gonna
we also we have the have the
pollution up there with radar
detectors trying.
at the end of your chair Senator
Woods restricted him from doing
it but it it's kind of like some
bill I saw earlier today there's
no consequence you look like so
how do you what what do you
think
Mr president Senator I think
that thank you as you point out
there a lot of lot of laws that
are very hard to enforce but
theoretically they are
enforceable like I said it's
happened to me on the path and
when you see an officer and I
did once I said officer whose on
a bike on the bike path and I
said there is the bike that I
don't think should be on this
bike path the black is laid the
path is is labeled no motorized
bikes which causes ambiguities
is a motorized bike or not and
so the point of this bill is to
slower bikes will be classified
as bicycles faster bikes would
be kept off past like that
because it's dangerous to have
those by expensive so quickly it
but you know if if somebody is
writing of the three tier bike
but they're writing it slowly.
We're really not going to I I
don't see how anybody could
really enforce this.
Sure sure
who is responsible for enforcing
that you know.
You have to take that they're
gonna get I mean I I understand
what you're trying to do I just
don't know exactly how you're
going to get there the
somebody got to confiscate the
by.
Maybe if if they find that it's
sixteen year olds are written
yanking off and.
And it takes a bite down to
impound the impact hello will
new peach jurisdiction tends to
regulate these kinds of issues
and when you pass this
legislation the jurors have
guidance about tied you know the
local jurisdictions will have
guidance about tier one tier two
and tier three bikes because
they will be defined in state
law so I went to the rate that a
lot of jurisdictions that want
to protect the right balance for
you encouraging this will pass
regulations and that's what we
don't want to encourage because
they know that I have better
than we do and what's
appropriate on the street and
what's not so this doesn't take
care of it and then each local
jurisdiction has a different
approach to how they how they
enforce that some more
vigorously than others certainly
to protect the of a precious
monument
I bet there's more enforcement
and would be more fortunate
there then I would be in other
places.
At the share centre I can I can
understand where the.
Additional.
The only question I have is one
of the what are they doing when
they enforce it
so you know are the.
Nothing here so you get it take
it there's nothing in here that
says the bikes getting
confiscated there's
so I met I'm getting gas would
probably needs to happen this
bill will move forward but what
happened in Colorado what
happens in some of those other
states have they had a they tie
that up if they're gonna if
they're going to push that same
sixteen year or more thank you
that that is a good question
again every jurisdiction might
do it differently it might be a
ticket somewhere it might be a
find somewhere it in different
jurisdictions that's winter
standpoint of what happens in
different states they have
different approaches to have a a
regulated it's mostly ticketing
I think what of our youth and I
returned to my experts at CVS
other thoughts about that yeah
Mister chairman Senator Griggs I
think this legislation is going
to foster several local
ordinances and that's where
you're going to see the
enforcement showed up I think
it's going to be enforced by
police.
You know on bicycles.
Electric by six
this vote does also have a class
three.
Thank you okay families you know
they get to pass ordinances they
usually don't get to pass
ordinance just because and with
with families that they live
they usually have guidelines
coming down from the state with
dollars so we're consistent
across the board.
I might want to back when I was
mayor well I might want to I
wonder if you might want to give
these guys a Pat on the back for
going fast and not have a rack I
mean based.
Those are the things I think as
we as we look at this we you
need to probably.
Say some way somehow in their
maybe what the penalty is it for
sixteen year old is riding the
by K. H. about the only thing in
here that you've got that
problematic choose that that Hey
can't do it.
And I can Mr chair Senator that
I just think it be good if you
look to see what the other.
If they do anything
Mr Mr chair I'll turn to my
experts so Mister chairman
Senator Griggs you've you've
raised a good point that is
already an issue an existing law
because what we're doing here is
we're actually amended thank
Senator Lopez is.
The child bicycle helmet law.
That she passed a few years ago
so that we captured the bicycle
helmet requirement but in that
existing law there's there's no
enforcement piece I've come and
and Senator Lopez correct if I'm
wrong but the I don't think
there's an important piece about
about the bicycle helmet so so
that so we are we're inheriting
that problem with the statute
but the best way to actually get
these class.
Was to amend Senator Lopez is
child bicycle helmet law so that
we now have a uniform helmet law
to bicycles and electric
bicycles.
And we're sharing any good JT
you're you're correct you also
have a statement mission these
guys can't ride.
If they're sixteen years old the
bigger by and.
You can't tell the difference
as I I don't know I just think
that the need to be tweaked and
so thank you Mr chair thank you
get thank you have fun with it
it's.
Okay Senator Wirth thank you Mr
chair I think I was around long
enough ago to have actually
carried this on the floor of the
house in two thousand seven as I
remember the debate
The top of page two nine three
right of tricycle the street
child you to wear a helmet New
Mexico so that's and that was a
source of much discussion.
Hello issues so
but I guess that's that's not
where I kind of focus I'm still
trying to figure out.
Why have a presumption why not
have local governments be able
to give them the ability to act
ordinance that allows either a
class one or class two on
trails.
Ms Mr chair Senator
the presumption is that we have
some understanding and so that
when these plaques are sold that
the sellers can say Hey you're
playing a class three by can
generally it's not a lot allowed
on bicycle and pedestrian paths
and so that the seller so that
and and they say they probably
will follow up with to check
your local ordinances so that
there's some understanding with
these bikes are sold because
there's a lot of confusion with
the right now about what they
can do these bikes and Mr I
think that's great with the with
the class three I I just will
tell you I'm having is someone
who writes about bikes and and
also does a lot of hiking in
places where very few bikes are
now able to go having bicycles
that can go twenty miles an hour
all of a sudden going back into
these kind of special places I
will tell you causes me some.
Real concern I can imagine I'm
gonna have a whole bunch of
constituents I've gotten a bunch
of emails on this we're gonna
say wait a minute and so I guess
I'm just.
I mean I get totally the class
three we need a leader over
class three but why not you know
what it could be you know what
class to on trails either and I
think up you're saying a lower
court I want to come in and pop
out but why not require them to
opt in.
Have this discussion and let the
local folks make decisions
versus us trying to say yeah
this is great because it has a
project like that there's a
presumption well eight Senator
Hamblen and senator Wirth
thought this was a good idea so.
You know what we want to change
that I just.
To us on that you know I I I
think that is an interesting
fight but I think the thought
was that if for the for the
special places like that because
in the Boston in in Albuquerque
it says no motorized vehicles so
that right now of I don't think
any and and it's you know
they're paved trails and then
you know what the book is.
I would argue that no E. bike
should be there well the the
truth this is E. bikes are there
and they're being peddled you
don't even realize there any
bike unless it goes really
really fast and so the idea was
to just do something that sort
of makes sense for the vast
majority and then the special
jurisdictions you know the
special places that you're
describing would very quickly
say Hey we're going to need to
make sure the class one that
nobody is allowed here either no
black or no E. bike or whatever
is appropriate for the local
jurisdiction and so that was
really important to this is to
allow the local jurisdictions.
To do this and so if we were to
Alexis to do the reverse in
state and say nothing about what
is allowed then that really
requires local jurisdictions to
do something.
And if they didn't then it's
lawlessness and so that's why we
that's that's that was the
reasoning behind this let me
just give you it is super easy
change I'm not gonna make it
here but it's going to Judiciary
maybe just on page fifteen line
fourteen in front of the word
ride you would put not a person
may not write a class one or
class two
assisted by a lot of industry
password bicycles are often
travel provided with political
subjects such as of the state
may instead of prohibit saying
may allow the operation to
system disorder by the I see do
it in a reverse where and again
I'm not going to make that
change here I also you know as
you know and merry to city
council variance which she has
about this but I do think it I
mean it's good that you got the
local government weighing in on
this I would just point out
though in addition to the bike
that rides along with both again
there are there are there are
the mountain bikes that are just
a whole different level of and
that's the thing I'm more I mean
you've got a situation where you
got certainly going twenty miles
an hour down a path but what
someone going twenty miles an
hour you know up on on on on on
a path that right now no bike is
going on but all of a sudden
you're opening up a whole
Senator it were people walking
out now Pfizer going and can go
if you a lot of.
Mr chair Senator am turning
point to my experts who was
dying to see thank you Mr
chairman senator Wirth you are
you are addressing the core
problem what we need to state
statute.
Because there's another type of
electric assisted bicycle that
we haven't even talked about
yet.
And those are the electric
systems but by coast bicycles
that are not class one class two
class three and they are in an
unrestricted class they can hit
sixty miles an hour.
But they're still electric bikes
right now the only thing we have
at the state level is the motor
vehicle dis Division saying all
all electric assisted bicycles
are bicycles so to your point
right now it is legal fourth any
of these electric assisted
bicycles including the
unrestricted ones to go exactly
where you're talking about where
the money is mountain bikes can
go and I got to tell you that
this is this has got to be
addressed because there's this
unrestricted class out there.
So you've got it you've got to
put in state statute we're
recognizing class one class two
class three years what they can
do yes set it up now for the
framework to control and
regulate where they go and then
you also set up the framework
you've going to have to
recognize there's this other
class of electric system by
that's not a one two or three
and those are going to have to
be more heavily regulated at the
local level but this legislation
is the primary purpose is to
address your issue which is
occurring right now in legal
because we don't have a state
law don't know what I get that
so so you're basically saying
that sixty mile an hour
electrics are not considered
classroom they are not one two
zero three they are unrestricted
and when you buy them they do
not have a number on a at the
end they're going to get even
more powerful.
Yeah I'm and Mr chair why aren't
we food you dressed in this bill
you know why are we doing that
here in just saying we're
modeling after other states and.
And we're probably behind the
times with regard to those I
guess one thing that you could
look at the masses motorcycles.
And and classify those as
motorcycles it's not what this
bill does but that would be a
way of addressing them.
you Mr I am all and I think we
need to do this regulation I
still am having.
I'm trying to determine why we
would let the local governments
make the determine because if
you have no motorized the
interesting thing that house if
if if if you have no motorized
vehicles on trails that I think
these arguably are not allowed
on and this would allow all on
it only that you have taken off.
Whereas if you if you if you did
it the other way around.
You it would be very simple and
local government would just put
in place to make us Ortiz and
deal with it versus.
You know just getting getting
those local governments to go
through all this and go the
other direction it is you're
also gonna have a huge and I'm
just thinking all the different
folks on each side of the issue
and the rules and we don't have
them all here now I think it
should be local governments that
that do this Miss Mister
president Senator I think that
that is a really good point and
we can certainly discuss it as
we move forward I would like to
discuss it with all of the
people that worked on this bill
in and why you know why we did
this and ask their opinion on
flipping it
I'm thinking more of an we
definitely probably live in
different environments but along
the boards skated you will find
seventy seventy five even eighty
year old I'd like with an eighty
year old gentleman on Saturday
morning sometimes and the
electric bicycle is what allows
him to be able to keep up and do
it Jennifer I'm that's yeah I've
ridden my bike down there and I
think that's fantastic exactly
what we're trying to do what we
need to make sure that allows.
you know and that's that's the
interesting piece that because I
could also see you have a local
ordinance that allows them on
trails like the post game but
doesn't allow them on hiking
trails the currently aren't used
in so and if you let the local
government designed all that
where is this right now
basically puts on all the trails
that's my concern absolutely and
and the preference distraught.
For the local governments to
address it but our concern is is
that they don't we need some
kind of guidance and this was
what we chose but I respect your
your position on it
interestingly I haven't gotten a
lot of calls and I know a lot of
bikers
by bicyclists I guess.
so thank you thank you but we
will address that on the way to
sort no.
I'm not a biker I know
a bicyclist senator dole and.
Thank you Mr chair thank yous
Center for bringing this forward
for the new year a long time
property this.
because so since we're often on
the same side right yes and I
enjoy that.
It's been stated earlier that
the the class three by to go up
to sixty miles an hour on the
correct no no Mr chair Senator
the class three bikes would go
up to where is a twenty eight
thousand hours that regular
pedal assist and throttle assist
in twenty eight miles an hour if
I recall correctly.
So the
Go with it what's what's the
What's the exact title of the
bikes that I I because sixty
thousand five
chair Senator there I would call
of motorcycles but that are on
class not with this bill does
their own classified electric
bikes we have no current
language of.
That handles the addresses those
by the this unnamed.
Legislation that correct well Mr
chair Senator that's where of
the local governments could say
and any bicycle with more than
this power is prohibited on
everything pedestrian have an
only restricted to streets if
the local government chose to do
so Mexico class one two and
three and is underinsured so
called Rogers all out on
highways.
Well known for bicycles aren't
allowed on on freeways.
I I I Mr chair up if my Mr
Chairman sure that your
question.
Hello folks go sixty miles an
hour.
And it also could create set up
speed cameras and street where
the a forty five mile an hour
speed limit and issue a ticket
so then have a license for that
have gone down I.
Mr chair Senator that would be
of an issue for the local
jurisdiction to to deal with
but yes they would not be.
I mean I would argue that if I
could go sixty miles an hour
should be Mr but that's my
that's just my personal opinion
not this bill I can answer the
question Senator Mister chairman
Senator tellement.
So the answer the question as to
where this legislation is worded
on page four you have a
definition of electorates
electric assisted bicycle.
And it says electric assisted
bicycles are further required to
conform to one of three classes
one two or three.
If you have a.
What a quote the bike that can
hit sixty miles an hour and
doesn't conform to these classes
then your new statute is not
going to classified that vehicle
as an electric assisted bicycle
as it doesn't fall in the class
one or two or three.
It's going to be in a it's going
to be in and on classified real
of of.
But it's not Alexis the bicycle
it's a it's it's it's it's
basically a and a motorcycle
that's Mr chair and the Senate.
Have some legislation addressing
those.
That's why.
Well I've been working with the
with the groups that are dealing
with the one two three one two
and three class by the E. bikes
that want to be you know once we
recognize and want to be able to
sell these bikes and then be
able to tell their customers
what I
I have not been working with the
people who sell sixty sixty mile
an hour bicycles and but they're
coming and that's something that
we may want to look at in the
future I'm not sure that I you
know we've done research and
talk to people and looked at the
research around the country with
regard to E. bikes that are
pedal assist but I.
You know I'm open to thinking
about those bikes has
motorcycles and class and define
them as motorcycles.
I would like to do a little bit
more research before I did that
the thank you for that answer.
And finally Mister chairman
Senator.
You think it's necessary to put
in to include emergency clause
in case.
Somebody is Dieter Sir Senator
between now and.
The end of the.
June July one.
This Mr chair Senator if we have
that kind of support I wouldn't
mind it but I'm not positive
will have that kind of support
so I wouldn't want to take that
risk thank you thank you again
thank you for that as far as all
I have thank you thank you
Center Coleman.
One of the many also lists or
what is the pleasure of the
committee.
Do that social do pass by
Senator Hamblen and second by
Senator Griggs Ph.D need to okay
US.
This is already the growth
senator grace.
I yes.
Senator really care when the
state local census.
The memo on ask for your.
Senator Tomlinson.
So much yes Senator Wirth yes
Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Shendo yes.
Thanks for the.
X. okay good impasse.
Thank you members of the
committee all right Senator.
JD.
Senator but.
Okay good present.
Senate bill one hundred Mr
chairman honorable members.
This is a
This is a a change to the.
To the editor of trade practices
act.
Trying to solve a problem that
way dealing with the sale of
tickets at events performing
arts sporting events or what
not.
Essentially everything is done
out over the internet these days
and a lot of these websites have
restrictions you can only buy
four tickets rural by eight
tickets or what not.
folks have developed box or
computer software systems that
can buy multiple tickets
multiple tickets so say there's
a theater or that holds three
hundred seats one entity can
purchase toward R. two hundred
to honor the seats.
And then resell about exorbitant
prices with with ridiculous fees
and all that stuff so that's
what we're trying to trying to
stop so what this would do is
add language to them for trade
tracks that to circumvent
No security member measures and
access control systems it's
written in a very ít way but it
essentially would make it
illegal to do this and the legal
to participate in the resale of
these tickets we think that
several states have this is
consistent with the United
States statute obviously someone
could be prosecuted in federal
court under the statute but we
want to give some teeth to state
statute and allow the Attorney
General to go after these these
entities so that it stops in New
Mexico just a quick story the
Hamilton tickets were snatched
up and we're reselling somewhere
in the neighborhood of twenty
three twenty six hundred dollars
so with that I will stand for
questions here and I know you're
partial to.
You know to Dolly but you know
lot of people I come with.
All right.
That we will go to the audience
anybody in support of a Senate
bill one hundred.
All
I go to concerts I think.
Retain.
Funding for the good work.
I need to place W. making five
hundred dollars a hundred
dollars to go to vet think it's
two hundred dollars made with
three hundred dollars of fees on
top of that so there was just an
article in the paper about this
today or yesterday it's a huge
problem Albuquerque and takes
advantage of the San.
Mother stood up and supported
pages as regulars.
I don't think you know your
regulations are not.
As of today so far so good.
All righty of.
Thank you Sir capability in
opposition to Senator one
hundred.
Okay all right committee.
Senator Hemphill thank you guys
gonna be the COVID because of
having to purchase tickets to
paint different Carlisle owners
on a and not being able to
cluster I mean obviously I'm
voting on this and support this
for my own personal reasons
because
I don't think I mean I'm
thinking of like this is our own
version of SwiftKey gate you
know of of of people spending
and not being able to get Taylor
swift tickets and I really you
know it's it's not like to think
about the stuff all the time but
I'm really glad to regain it
center my assistance that's just
price gouging and eliminating
people who don't have access to
a good entertainment and the
having to be fair and equitable
as well so I appreciate that so
that's all I have Mister chair
thank you Sierra.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for that Sir and what took place
under way because I was gonna
ask you will be prompted to spew
you over charge for Taylor
swift.
Okay.
Senator Tallman the associate
with Kate for the folks keeping
score at home prompted the
federal government to pass the
better online ticket sales act
of two thousand sixteen this
what model that but it was a new
story
About the Hamilton show a year
ago I introduce it last year but
failed to get a a message from
the governor's office so I
figured you know have a lot of
time Amanda sessions all drop it
again.
And I just I radically the.
Larry Barker did a big wheel
story on this two three nights
ago so apparently he got burned
while going to take time.
All righty all senator real
quick I I noted the F. I. R. and
we'll talk about this Judiciary
but.
It's important so there's a
federal statutes and that three
general says it doesn't.
Preempt us from doing this again
I just I just want to just
reiterate this gives our new
Attorney General another little
vehicle and just for this
committee get give up more
percent of the revenue this is.
If the state brings action for
that would disallow individual
to bring an action transaction
thank you thank you Mr chairman
senator Wirth so you have the I
was thinking it would be up in a
criminal statute but these will
be tough to track down prosecute
but the fund for trade practices
act is super super powerful in
the state and other tree General
or a person could sue a business
for violating.
The bait basically be an
unscrupulous business person and
get dad damages times three so
it has a lot of teeth in our
unfair trade practices act
straight also provides for
attorney's fees.
So for an individual who gets
burned you know you could serve
transaction to yourself.
I nothing prevents the
individual part of this correct
correct Mr chairman senator
Wirth yes and in the
incentivizes you know lawyers
like wanna take that but it
incentivizes lawyers to fight
the good fight they get internet
speeds if they prevail it really
sends a strong message that New
Mexico is not going to tolerate
this type of activity senator
finest here so we have the issue
with Senator friends bill on the
amendment on the floor that was
trying to change the attorney's
fee provision so this is a place
where we in statute have put a
attorney's fee provision which
you have to put in statute in
order to be able to have it
there and it is an incredibly
powerful tool that does level
the playing field so I just like
that thank you Mr thank you.
Else questions so
For the past senator Sanchez.
Thank you second by Senator
Hamblen.
The road.
Senator Griggs yes.
For tickets confirmation.
Senator sentence.
Senator Tallman yes Senator
Wirth.
Yes.
Senator Hamblen yes in addition
yes.
Or excuse six.
All right.
S. motions Senator my Estes
thank you very much thank you
a Senate bill ninety eight.
Senator Diamond.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee we appreciate your
time especially this late in the
day on Senate bill ninety eight
was the legislature considers
increases both to minimum wage
amended its like paid sick leave
we still have to ensure that the
state contractors and
subcontractors remain
financially viable this bill
proposes that a state agency
that contracts for services
shall include in the terms of
that contract a provision for
increasing reimbursement rates
that a contractor or a
subcontractor for Health
harmless for any of those wage
increases resulting from an
increase in state minimum wage
or mandated benefits there are
diverse set of industries that
contract with the state
assistance severely impacted by
changes to the minimum wage
right now proposals in this
legislators go as high as
fifteen dollars and fifty cents.
Once these businesses agree to
do business with the state we
should honor the changes in the
contract that cost of doing
business with the state so
minimum wage increases will
directly affect the number of
services including Medicaid
providers nonprofit
organizations child care
providers and this bill sends a
message to those contractors
that we will not leave them
behind we will honor our
commitment to them and when we
increase the cost of that there
is there mandated to do business
that we're gonna make make make
them whole so I'd like to before
we move on introduce my expert
witnesses.
Have you look at page three of
the FIR on this chart so the
fifty one million dollars fifty
one point eight point six
million dollars is an estimate
for ten percent which is the
estimate because we go up ten
percent so right now just a ten
percent increase would be a
minimum wage of state of
thirteen dollars and twenty
cents what a quite to that cost
fifty one million dollars I'm
also gonna say in this FIR is
only considering.
Contracts with HSD so the
overall cost of what this would
be would be quite significant I
make this point because minimum
wage bills are often never sent
to Senate finance committee and
as a member of that committee I
think given this information it
should be because it's clear
that there is a great financial
impact to the state with that
said I would like to introduce
my expert witnesses to continue
the conversation to ask any
questions I have Megan Lauren of
New Mexico Association for Home
and hospice care and Jason
Espinoza to say a few words
thank you.
Mr chair members the committee
my name is Megan Lorino and the
executive director for the New
Mexico Association for hospice
care I just want to first start
by saying I truly appreciate the
opportunity to speak in front of
you this evening that and also
to thank you for bringing up
Medicaid providers in your
earlier discussion when you were
speaking about family medical
leave it is at birth the fresh
air for myself and for my
providers there's at least one
of them on this soon hope that
holding on since two thirty
eight just waiting to talk to
you so I'm gonna keep my
comments pretty brief but for us
it is a brother fresh here that
as you're discussing how we can
best support the employees and
the employees here in New Mexico
you are realizing that there's a
huge secretary of employees that
their employers have no choice
and what their reimbursement
rates are that is really set by
the managed care through the PM
PM that is that I the state of
Texas the sorry state of New
Mexico.
Here's the six years but.
I am a native Texan one thing I
do want to point out is that
since twenty nineteen and till
this and then told most recently
our minimum wage has gone up by
about four dollars an hour and
we are very grateful that that
exact four dollars an hour has
been recognized with out this
mandate in place however it's
really important to note that
the cost of just all of the
ancillary I got workers comp
every other taxed
proportionately goes up plus the
cost as a statutory benefits
such as paid time off have been
at sixteen dollars six dollars
nineteen cents an hour so there
is a difference of about two
dollars and nineteen cents that
are that are providers are
losing each at each hour that
their employees work and as
we're looking at minimum wages
to go even higher we don't see
how we're going to keep keep
that keep our heads above water
in case you're wondering how
we've managed to keep our heads
above water I was here the last
week talking to you about the
American recovery plan act which
provided a huge amount of relief
for our providers that we are
hoping we can get in that G. R.
T. exemption for and as you
might recall those dollars are
finite they go away very soon
and so once those all those
dollars have really kept them in
the game and made sure that they
have been able to continue
providing care in the home to
people who otherwise would be in
a skilled nursing facility so I
will leave that leave my
comments there and thank you
again for your time.
Please Mr chairman members of
the committee Jason Espinoza
here on behalf of the New Mexico
says in education employment
losses care just happy to answer
questions thank you for reading.
More service answer questions
thank you we'll go to questions
so what the audience anybody in
favor of US Senate bill ninety
eight.
Quickly.
Mr chair maybe Mr chair are all
on behalf of several of the
Medicaid providers that we talk
about
would be ambulance providers
home health care consumer and
program or put provide.
All of the private licensed
childcare providers that New
Mexico this is one of the
problems we've been point out
with the extreme increase in
labor costs that we're all
experiencing with no ability to
really sell retail products to
make up for that so we stand
very strong support of selection
thank you.
Good afternoon again except as
our State physical therapy now
if we stand in support of this
bill thank you thank you Mr Mr
chairman members of the
committee Charlie ward is read
through this for New Mexico
health care much Senator for
system.
I also represent other states
there again or Medicaid
providers every time increase
because they have no was no
matter.
The federal fix that.
Very often we're just figured
out well we have to figure that
out so this is absolutely
necessary for thank you.
Correct thank you Mr chairman.
What happened with it so seated
builders and contractors New
York commercial constructions
Association and while this bill
does not specify construction I
think that this or that
contractors and subcontractors
with state contracts isn't
lucrative business within a two
week are invited it's actually
very competitive should but is
also usually these contracts are
claims under very the more so
when the state for that mandates
that.
Benefits and wages be increased
but then don't compensation on
this on the state side with
those contracts and COVID
centers.
Thank you for supporting support
thank you I believe we have a
Senator folks own soon better
support if you can you don't
okay first we have Jim Copeland.
For.
As of the date.
but the keep your remarks under
two minutes appreciate that.
Okay.
Director for.
There are four.
I'm back thank you Mr chair Jim
Copeland executive director of
the association of developmental
disabilities community providers
thank Senator Diamond for
bringing this forward and
senator Wirth recognizing the
issue that this bill addresses
are association stands in full
support and we request your
passage of Senate bill ninety
eight thank you.
Next we have Joe Baker.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is John Baker
on the political affairs
director United association
local four twelve I'm also a
voting delegate and NFL the
state that who is endorsed this
legislation
we thank the sponsor for
bringing it forward the
we have many contractors out
there working in a bidding
prevailing wage jobs and
prevailing wage could be changed
while they're on a two or three
year contract and it affects the
the contract maybe a little more
workers on contract because of
those affected there are things
that we have going through this
chamber that that we're
supporting participating family
medical leave that we believe as
these contractors are in these
contracts and lost change that
they should be
They say the contract to be
renegotiated cover those extra
costs so for that reason we
stand in strong support of this
legislation thank you.
Next.
More.
Hello Senators name is winning
wars hi Representative Lujan
options we provide personal care
services to eligible Medicare
our New Mexico Medicaid
beneficiaries our service areas
include rural communities in
northwest New Mexico with the
majority of the clients residing
on the Navajo and Zuni
reservations our agency and our
two hundred caregivers.
Our agency provide services in
rural and remote areas state
experience unique and talented
circumstances in our daily
interactions with our clients
and employees yet the reimburses
me for rural and urban are
identical although the cost of
travel as work policy providing
services in a rural area.
We want to see and and Rosen all
these services but community
center operations you service
see the highest quality of
services in the financial
planners reported to us.
The state wage increase over the
last few years.
At the added additional costs of
above and beyond the war we we
have experienced proportionate
increases as well to work on
this compensation general
liability and unemployment
insurance to name just a few
that were not right thanks we
strongly support that's the
ninety eight and I hope you will
too.
Thank you.
Thank you the two ladies are you
will
go out.
Go ahead choice when you're.
Okay that's not working with
Robert Pollard.
Mr chairman and committee
members my name is Robert over
a.
President of crystal.
Which is part of this
legislation.
Thank you.
All righty anybody opposition.
Of Senate bill ninety eight.
Have anybody on the.
Photos okay all right voting
many.
I have
I would like.
Senator word.
You.
Shares so.
in the FIR their flag in a
constitutional issue about
changing the existing contracts.
You know in the sense that
you've got an existing contract
which is a publication to pay
and they're saying.
Applaud the existing contract
result in increasing
compensation cop important
services that is that is already
obligated for and so again we're
not in the Judiciary Committee
but but maybe you've got a
response to thank you Mr Mr
chair and senator Wirth this
bill doesn't apply to existing
contract that would just be
contracts moving forward.
Mr chair I think that's an
important point and I'm just
wondering if there's something
we can put in here to make.
So I see it as a page one.
line twenty two July first
twenty twenty three.
So it appears that that does
make it make it prospect of not
retroactive so I'm not sure why
they're flying that is what I
want to just point that out
And I guess the next question is
what how what were these
contracts I mean this they're
negotiated constantly how often
do you negotiate contracts.
At Mr chair Senator Wirth our
providers renegotiate their
contracts every year
but if they are providing
personal care services at their
personal care service agency R.
agencies have been here many of
them for years as an example my
the organization is fifty years
old so they have been
associated in providing care in
the community so they would like
to continue those Medicaid
contracts there's not a reason
why they would want to not
renegotiate but those the and I
just want to flag that when we
talk about a negotiated contract
my understanding is that the
negotiation is here is your
contract would you like to sign
it or not so they don't have a
say in the range the way that we
would we would hope and expect
and so those rates are really as
far as we can tell really driven
by the state through HSD down to
the.
Through the PNM through the per
member per month at the NCO
level so yes they could decide
that they're not going to sign
the contract but then they
wouldn't be able to provide that
care in the community which I
could go into but we are not
health and Human Services about
the cost savings that we offer.
I do not care in the home rather
than having somebody go to a
more expensive facility.
That I appreciate that because I
guess it's just trying to
understand.
The F. I. R. you know that would
basically because we that are.
Telling ourselves.
You have to match whatever we do
when it comes to these benefits.
Mr chair Senator Wirth yes
that's correct and I think that
is that part of this
conversation that has been
missed and maybe why we're
hearing like a broadband of
various industry training and
it's that when we're having
conversations about benefits and
and wages for New Mexican
workers how the how the state
interacts with those workers is
is missed in that conversation
Mr this this web this is why I
brought this bill up in response
to your question on the last
bill because this is the issue I
mean again when you're when you
got.
Locked in the rates on that when
we make a policy change we need
to look at that the total impact
of that
you know it's interesting you
you mentioned Senator Diamond we
don't send minimum wage bills
to.
To the finance committee and we
don't do it because quite
frankly there's a contract I
mean again they're not going to.
That that parallel isn't
happening and so again.
You know I mean this this
recognition I think it is
important discussed and you know
I I also have signed on to the
minimum wage bill have had
conversations with
Representative Chandler and I
think and she's worked on issues
for you all in this industry so
there is you know what I said
earlier I think there's a
recognition that there's a a
unique group of folks here where
it does get really.
Difficult what I'm hearing is
obviously you know if we
increase the wage that's going
to help.
Your workers clearly it's just
is it do of all.
You know with the contracts the
state is offering and so that's
the whole point of bills I think
it's a good it's a good
discussion you missed Senator
Diamond the this bill came up
Senator Shendo on the on the
paid leave medically medical
leave bill.
What's raising these exact kind
of questions for these
industries that are in this in
this scenario and so I had
already been made aware of your
bill so it's good good and here
was get on the same day so it's
a good discussion thank you Mr
chair and and senator Wirth
appreciate the conversation I
think that's exactly why we're
bringing four is because there
are indirect maybe maybe not so
indirect costs when we increase
the minimum wage and a large
number of our state services
especially in rural communities
are provided by contractors and
we just in my district alone I
have seen your mail states
Medicaid providers childcare
nonprofits one specifically who
had a lot of concerns my
domestic violence shelter and
Sierra County and and they ask
how are we going to hold them
harmless my fear is that when we
do we do good things like
increased minimum wage is that
the indirect impacts is that
they can't these these
contractors cannot absorb that
cost and my fear is that they
they leave which would be the
greatest lost in a community
that.
Okay Senator Corman.
Thank you thank you Mr thank you
Center for bringing this bill
forward so.
The bill analysis raises the
question does this violate the
state procurement code.
They won't have an answer that.
Mister Mister chairman Senator
commented it's mentioned in
there several times they they're
concerned it may violate
procurement code as it affects
existing contract contracts it
is stated there several times
but I do want to make clear to
senator Wirth point point only
this earlier this bill doesn't
affect existing contracts that
would just be answered this
question would just be contracts
moving forward Mr chair thank
thank you the Sierra and the
just for doing this bill for.
Thank you.
I don't have anybody else on the
list Mr chair just just one
thing I think that the challenge
is that you signed the contracts
of beginning J. July first
twenty twenty three we signed a
new contract and then.
Let's say a minimum wage goes
into a fact at the end of twenty
twenty three so if your if there
will be an existing contract
that is then being impacted and
potentially vast what's flagging
this concern which is going to
apply both for.
For the constitutional reason
and I don't even know the
proposed it's gonna be big black
the procurement issue but I
think that's the that's the
trick because it's.
You know eight I and I get it
it's it's a much easier it's
applying to a future contracts
but when it's an existing
contract and then you have a
minimum wage that goes into a
fact I think what you want to do
is you want you want the old
harmless and so I do think that
there's a question there that we
should look at to see if there's
a way to tweak that somehow so
it doesn't.
If it's truly an issue again I
just it's been quiet for us that
is I think Sierra I think you're
your point is good there maybe
procurement.
Issue but.
Yeah.
That is why I just I want to I
was trying to get my head how
are these analysis and and when
when.
Came up it made sense to me it's
it's all contracts after the
state and of course the minimum
wage.
Good well kick in and affect all
the contracts that have been
signed.
So Mr chairman and senator Wirth
I see a point I think that it in
the data assumed that we would
it would be make clear that was
contracts from this point
forward if you have language
that you think that would would
clarify that make a little fair
that it does not apply to
existing contracts we would be
happy to to.
The suggestions for right now
think of it the decision.
Thank you very we don't need to
do it.
But there may be a way that
because there could be a little
gap there that that you can't
get to but you still can
accomplish what you're trying to
do here sell just like that
great okay so
I don't have anybody else a a
motion by Senator Tallman second
by Senator Sanchez.
Take a growth.
Senator Griggs yes.
Representative yes Senator
Tallman.
Yes Senator Wirth.
Yes Senator Hamblen yep in
senators yes.
All right.
Pass thank you John thank you.
Thank you committee members of
those of all evening thank you
staff everybody.
