Senator brand.
Senator Griggs here.
Senator had Emilio
Senator Lopez.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator Schmitt is
Senator Tallman.
Senator worth here, Senator
Hamlin here, Senator Shenandoah.
Yeah, we have a car.
President Pro TEM, Can you just
clarify? You know what the
difference
You know from last year's
legislation was and this one
just for
Good morning, Mr Chairman. I can
do that. It's extensive.
I'll try to shorten up. So, uh,
we have expanded the causes for
leave to include military
exigency as a cause for leave.
That just means that they need
to get out of town fast or
they're relocating. Exigency
means emergency.
We have clarified the leave
available for bereavement
following the loss for child is
only available of age.
For the solvency measures.
We as added a requirement for
New Mexico Department of
Workforce Solutions to contract
with a qualified actuarial firm.
To conduct an actuarial study by
January 1st 2025.
We have added a cap on any
premium increases.
Ah!
0.1% of wages per year dollar
per 1000.
We have added a requirement that
the secretary report the results
of the solvency analysis to the
appropriate legislative body.
For the contributions.
We have added cap cap on
contributions at the social
Security income cap that
currently exist. Uh
Right now. It's about $168,000.
You are not taxed for Social
Security. Above that this would
be the same.
We've added language clarifying
that employers who have a waiver
and their employees are not
required to pay premiums
contributions added a required
five year waiting period for an
employer to reapply for a
private plan waiver after
there's either been fraud or
issues. Um
After it's withdrawn by the
department. They can reapply in
five years. We have changed the
claims for leave with added
requirement that applications
include a medical professional's
assessment of a timeline.
For expected return to work.
For both family leave and
medical leave.
With the added a requirement for
documentation related to that
military exigency leaves.
We have changed slightly. The
PSM L. A Implementation advisory
Committee. This committee is
designed to help
The secretary and the
rulemaking. It's right now. It's
only for a couple of years just
so that the program is up and
running. We've added a member
representing small business
owners, and we've added
representative with expertise
and benefits and leave
administration.
Uh, the
That that's on page 31 in your
book outlining who else is on
that advisory committee?
Finally
We have verified claims for
leave.
Um, based on an application year
rather than a calendar year,
That's to address the the aspect
of not getting
Leave at the end of one year and
then leave the beginning. We
have adjusted some processing
timelines to ensure that the
Department of Workforce
Solutions can process claims
complaints and appeals and a
reasonable time frame You're
dealing with.
Pregnancy or medical issues.
There's pressure to do it, so
we've put reasonable timelines.
And those are the differences so
far we've had in our first in
our committee hearing this week,
Um Senator Worth brought up some
things that we also need to
clarify that is to ensure that,
um, the waiver requirements
because now it's substantially
the same.
If you your company has wants to
do a waiver requirement if they
have a paid phone medical leave,
that's substantially similar
They can apply for a waiver.
So so there's the changes, Mr
Chairman.
Thank you. Thank you. Central
time.
Um
Any questions?
Brent
He was chairman and I do have a
few questions. But I also want
to object to the hearing that
was held on Thursday.
Because our Senate does not
have, uh, committee process.
But we did not on Thursdays.
As a Senate governing of a
committee. You have to go to
masons.
Mason says You cannot have a
committee.
Seven. So Mr Chair, no action
was taken in this committee on
Thursday. It was basically a
room full of folks and no action
was taken. That's why we're here
today, Mr Chairman.
Mr Majority Leader Mason's
doesn't say anything about
action being taken, says there
must be a quarante present at
the meeting.
For there to even be a meeting.
So Thursday you had a meeting.
You debated?
Which I would say is action.
You asked questions, which I
would say is action.
In fact, action is putting the
gavel down and starting a
meeting.
There was no quorum present. So
I'm going to raise that. Now I
know the charity rule on my
objection.
So, Mr Chair. I think you could
certainly make a motion. Your
point is noted again if you want
to make some again.
Points points noted
Senator brand. Do you want to
make a motion? Mr Chairman? I
don't think there's a motion to
be made. You need to make a
determination to use
subcommittees.
Which, according to Mason's
legal is a strong term in the
state allowed
Well, overrule you and will
continue to go ahead. Senator
Brent, You have any questions?
Thank you, Mr Chairman. I do
have a couple of questions. Um,
Madam Pro, Tim. Um
I'd like to ask the question of
who qualifies.
As family too, can take this.
We've and where is that?
Mr Chairman. The definition of
family we've worked on with
other states this summer. Um,
our coalition went both Colorado
and Nashville. Um, of the 14
states, half of them seven.
Have the same definition as we
do a family. It's necessary just
because it's
You know, we have this mythology
that families has a husband and
wife and a little boy and a
little girl.
That's just not what exists in
New Mexico or pretty well if
you'll wait for a minute off.
find that exact definition.
And Madam mature. I'm
specifically Madam President
Times. It's on page three and
four. I found it. I'm
specifically concerned about
five, which is on Page four,
which is any other individual
related by blood or affinity.
What does that mean?
Uh, Mr Chairman, Of course,
Hunter State. I had all my
experts here. I don't today. Um,
but I can tell you that this
pretty sure this is even part of
F M L. A
Um, but it's
It's a term that will allow us
to adjust to the family members
that might be involved in
caretaking right now we have a
lot of grandparents taking care
of Children. We have what we
call this sandwich.
Uh, group where you take care of
young kids, and you could be
taking care of elderly parents
at the same time.
Um, so this is in here to help
the workforce Solutions
Department, Um, allow people
that need to stake work for a
brief period of time to take
care of themselves elderly their
Children.
Madam president. Is there any
definition of this affinity?
Rule in here so that there's a
clear understanding of what it
means. Who's who has to prove
that
How do they prove that? Um, it
just seems like that affinity
opens it up to anyone. I mean, I
have an affinity for you.
You know, we have a good
relationship. And you know if
you got really sick, Senator
Stewart and so I want to, I need
to be able to do we make sure
it's not abused in that way.
Well, we have left a
considerable period of time
before this program goes into
effect.
Especially so that the workforce
solutions and the secretary can
do rulemaking with the help of
their advisory committee, which
has people on it that care about
this, understand that
Everyone, including the
chambers, which don't like it
very much now.
So that rulemaking with the help
of those advisory committees
will put in place. Uh, further
definition of Senator. Thank you
for that. I appreciate that. I
hate rulemaking, as you know,
because of all the abuses that
we have seen can call out the
pet right now is being one of
those abuses that I think we
both agree. I struggle with
trusting
The department to make rule that
actually works and doesn't open
this up. Um, to, in my opinion,
too great of a group. I just
think it's it's too easy.
For me to say I have an affinity
I'm really close friend, and
that's a concern. I have. You've
answered it. I just want to
express them.
Mr. Chairman, Uh, Madam Pro Tim.
When
What have we seen in other
states as far as the solvency?
Of these programs. Um, I have
been told
But I've been told that most of
them are a couple of years.
Mr Chairman. That is absolutely
not true. We have some of them
that have been going on for 20
years. We've all learned from
those California so there's 14
states. Now, As I said, we went
and visited with Colorado. They
were very helpful there.
Regulators had read Arbil
thoroughly and made some
suggestions to the secretary who
went also
About how to make it easier to
administer the program.
So, um, there was one state when
they started.
They started the fees at
0.2%, so they had to raise them
For a few years. The majority of
states have are very close to
what we're suggesting, which is
0.4 for employers. 0.5 for
employees for a total of 0.9.
Oh, we've now added, Of course,
A, um
Cap.
On any raising of those fees.
We've added the solvency that
qualified actuarial firm
solvency report to help the
secretary.
Um, it is up to the secretary to
do an annual review, um, to see
if what is coming in is matching
with what is going out.
So the other states we've
learned from them. Several of
them had put the cap on wages.
Um so we added that, uh, so, uh,
Both Bieber.
The U. S Department of Labor. In
particular, the women's bureau
have looked extensively at the
math behind this program, and
they both support. Um what we
think of as a very solvent idea
fund and program.
So, um, when you look at the
other states, the average time
for leave is somewhere between
sick average. Um, the percent of
population taking part applying
to the program is somewhere
between 2.6 as a low and
something like 6.4 is a high
So we think that our estimates
are right in line with other
states, and we've paid attention
to other states that have a
higher proportion of healthcare
issues. So moving forward we
feel like we've put in place a
good mechanism to either lower
The fees or raise them. But as
of course we have that cap.
You also have to remember that
people are not getting their
full salary when they're taking
this leave if they have minimum
wage if they get minimum wage,
they get that. But anyone else
only get 67% of their salary of
minimum wage and we have a cap.
Uh, we won't. We won't give them
any more than the
Every tweet mean, which is right
now, a little over $1000 a week.
So that's the most you could
get. You would be making the
mean wage to get that and of
course, we put in the Social
Security income cap.
So we believe we worked on this
for four years now. We've worked
with the use U S Department of
Labor who came in the interim
and had a hearing with LFC, and
their proposal was they've got
it. We've got it right. This
will be solvent and we certainly
every state will go through a
period of where they
They're working it out there
starting it out there, seeing
how it works, so other states
have had to raise their feet
Great, But that's because they
started so low, and there's only
a few of them that have had to
do that. There's several states
that have lowered their feet.
Oh, so
You know it.
We feel good about it. We've
worked hard on it. We've had
experts and economists look at
it.
So we think we're on the right
track.
Thank you. Mr Chairman and Madam
Pro TEM. I appreciate that
answer and
Um I do have some concerns on
the IR where stocks will have to
be. Would that be coming from
the General fund? Will we be
subsidizing this?
No. This fund will work on the
fees Mr Chairman that have been
outlined in the bill.
And we have a cap on not being
able to raise the more than
thank you. And, um I'm sure
they're also show that
The estimate of 206 about the
number we need for unemployment
insurance, But we know that that
department only has about 47%
feel.
Do you have any concerns about
that? Even getting this off?
Mr Chairman, Senator, I do not
because we have been working
with the Secretary of Workforce
Solutions. Um she's planning to
do some rapid hires. We're also
giving them enough time to do
it. Yes, it is expansion of
their workforce. Definitely
true. And that's why we've, um
we have, uh, opening costs for
the first year in the second
year.
All of those opening costs will
be paid back by the fund A
starting in 2028 and going for
six years 6 million a year for
six years.
The estimate now is that there's
about 30 million needed the
first year and perhaps 15
million this second year. Those
startup costs are for hiring
staff and for creating a very
good I T system and those as I
said, will be paid back from the
fund over a period of years.
Thank you, Mr Chairman Support
of this because I'm concerned of
all the other tax like adding
one more is very difficult, but
I do understand why it's why and
So that in that area, I'm a
little bit torn.
But it
I'll continue to continue to
talk, and we can always
appreciate that Senator Brown.
Thank you, Senator Brent. That's
great.
Thank you, Mr President. This is
it. I can't tell where this is
going to be good or bad. So I
hope you can hear me, Madam,
There's there's several things
in the building brand brought up
some of those, Uh and it seemed
like and did I misunderstand
will pay for the expansion of
the workforce.
So the 200 more the funds going
to pay for them as well as pay
for the individuals to take time
off.
So Mr Chairman, Senator Gregg's
We will pay back from the fund
to start up costs, which are
about 30 million, the first year
and possibly 15. The second
year. That's what will be paid
back from the fund over a period
of six years, wants to fund is
up and running.
We will start collecting fees.
January 1 2026, and then we will
start the application process.
January 1 2027.
So those startup costs will be
paid back over six years.
Is that what you asked
Mr Chair and Madam President? I
believe so. We're
You're talking about. I believe
that the $6 million it will come
out that's appropriated to come
in to help with the startup
costs until the startup
compensated.
Yes. And then the concern. I
guess that I have is and once we
get there
We've still got these employees
administrative costs, trying to
pay that out of the fund as
well. Mr Chairman, Senator. Yes,
that's part of the solvency
measures. It's part of the
formula to make this work.
That's how it works. In other
states, the cost for the
employee designed that way.
The same as unemployment
insurance costs for those
employees. Employees come partly
out of state a lot of them,
though. Our federal federal
dollars
And and Miss Sharon and Madam
president several years ago. The
unemployment insurance fund
almost bellied up, Uh and we
have numerous employers across
the state. Very concerned that
their rage we're gonna go
through the roof now.
Ultimately, they didn't for a
variety of other reasons, but
time, so the same thing could
apply to this same sort of
Issue could occur.
So Mr Chairman, unemployment
insurance was impacted by the
pandemic. We had 25% of our
businesses close. That's why we
used $600 million from the
unemployment insurance fund to
pay them And then we as a state
paid that into back into the
fund so their rates would not go
up.
It's very different than this.
You know that was pandemic
related. You know, in a way this
is you know, that pandemic
showed us how easy it is for
people to get sick when we have
sick employees when employees
come to work, and they're sick,
and they had covid they spread
that and it's spread.
Everywhere. So, um, a very
different fund for a different
purpose. Um, impacted by the
pandemic. I mean, unless we've
got 25% of our people in the
hospital dying for something
like Covid. That's not what will
happen to this fund.
And Mr President and Madame
Madame President to be to be
clear as well.
What I'm talking about happened
before the pandemic.
Show what the fund was in deep
trouble before the pandemic. I
had employers coming to me early
in my term, which was well
before.
The pandemic with the challenge
related to the amount
They were afraid that I mean, we
go back and look when that time
occurred, and all that, But I
really remember that very
clearly. And I remember it being
well before the pandemic,
although
I'm sure we had the same
challenge with the pandemic.
Show.
We can. We can talk about that
I'd love to use, you know,
vision with people because I
recall Mr Chair and Madam
President. The I R.
Talks about they ran three
scenarios.
In two of those showed the fund
going insolvent. Could you Could
you address your thoughts about
about that?
Mr Chairman and Senator will you
forgot to mention the one
scenario where you could get a
decrease in your fees. They also
ran that one. You know anybody
can run a scenario you get
different aspects to it. That's
why we put in the independent,
qualified actuarial firm.
Hmm. Independent from all of us
to work on this with the
starting genuine Miss Sharon, in
fairness to Madam president, the
There were there were two runs
that was solve it.
And the question would be
question Who's right who's
wrong? But But those were the
issues and it could be the the
solvency. One was the better
one. I'm I'm not going to argue
that I just I just know that
there were two
Show everything as we kind of go
on a little bit, You know,
Senator Brandt mentioned
The affinity and that is a you
know, It's pretty broad, pretty
broad. And I believe you
recognize that, uh and I don't
and I'm concerned when you go
down to
Who's going to define it.
We have We have two departments
in state government, Mr Chair
and method.
To be kind are challenged with
their running of their
department. See what F d
And Workforce solutions.
And to count on Workforce
solutions, developing the proper
programs and stuff timely even
with
The use of a an outside group is
I mean, I think overly
ambitious.
Uh, we're asking as well. We're
asking.
Them to decide about it. You as
a business owner have a program.
That is
Substantially similar
And I think
Mr Chair and Madam President,
Senator Worth we've all heard
that term.
In in Senate judiciary numerous
times about just substantially
similar
Not defined difficult to define
and
A challenge, I believe, and it's
a challenge for a department.
That is already challenged. So
I'm I'm concerned about how this
is gonna work through the
department that that we've
picked, which is probably the
right department.
But I'm I'm genuinely concerned
about that.
Mr President. We also we use the
term in and and Madam president
might want to talk about that
when we talk about a mental
health counting
And we have a variety
definitions in here and I think
as we move ahead, we need to
look at whether or not we feel
like that to be more more
correct and what we want to do,
right.
I'm not. I'm not going to be
critical exactly one way or the
other. But I do believe as you
look through the bill.
And you talk about some of that.
You do need to be more clear or
more specific on who that might
might be for protection of both
the employee and the employer.
Um
Mr Mr Chair and Madam president
in Section six. Article C. We
talk about, um
Anyone.
Integrate any anyone can
actually filed a claim.
For compensation, and then it
can be for a family member or
another and
Again. I just I just want to
point that out. I don't I don't
want to to
Labor it. I just want to point
it out and see if those are
things that
As this bill moves forward,
which we know it's going to move
forward.
To to look at and see if those
are things that we can we can
more clearly
Um, Mr President and Madame
chair we also talked about in
that employee is gonna make a
reasonable effort.
Not to unduly disrupt and will
provide the employer with prior
notice to the extent
practicable.
Now.
Mr Chair and Madam president.
None of those are defined terms.
I'm gonna suppose we're going to
try to deal with that, through
rule or through, you know, and
And those are challenges to
employers.
Uh, to make sure the right thing
is is occurring.
Should. I think we need to look
at that.
Mr Chair, Madam President, too.
Did you tighten it up? Make it
make it better. So it's more
clear. Should this bill go on
and be packed?
Um
I don't know. All of you. All of
you can recognize that there's
not a bill I'm in. I'm in favor.
Think though I do understand
I do understand why, and show me
instances. This is necessary.
But I'm not sure this bill gets
me to where I feel comfortable.
And I hopeful.
That if it does move along
Because I guess the bill in the
house, which is
The same bill.
Uh, passed its first committee.
And this one will will. I'm sure
pass here.
And then we will we will see in
in Mr President. Madam Chair is
the bill in the house is it's
next year, Madam President if I
said it, right, uh, want to want
to be clear? I'm Shane to, um,
did that Bill is that going to
the appropriation, Mr Chairman?
Uh, the matching Bill's House,
Bill six. It just passed out of
You know, they've got such long
names, Health, health and
everything else there for Madam
president. It's going to
commerce. Okay? I mean, Mr
President, Uh, this one is the
next stop didn't know whether
that one was going to the You
know the term in how they but Mr
Mr Chair and Madam President.
Thank you for the for the
responses forward to seeing
where this where this goes.
Hmm. Thank you. Senator works.
Any other questions. If not
motion
passed somebody passport,
Senator Hamlin, who have second
Senator Senator Lopez. Okay,
call the road.
Senator had a meal? Yes.
Senator Graham, Senator Lopez.
Energy Tallman.
Senator Worth Yes.
In a drink.
Oh, overruled.
That's what you really feel the
first one, right?
Those that are listening,
watching six yeses and two
notes.
Motion passes. Thank you so
much.
Appreciate you all coming in.
