Senator Tallman and it's your
worth.
Senator Hamblin.
Senator Shindo here.
We have seven present for a
quorum.
All right. Thank you.
We're gonna get started. First
Bill up is Centerville 121.
Senate Pro TEM
Thank you so much. Mr. Chairman,
I'm gonna give you some good
news to tell you why I'm so
excited about this bill at fixes
the problem we've been trying to
fix her for years.
So our solar market development
tax credit.
Has been incredibly popular.
It's created a vibrant solar
industry with lots of its
reduced greenhouse gas emissions
from the power sector in New
Mexico since the inception more
than 12,202 taxpayers have used
it to help defray the cost of
installing solar
Average taxpayer is saving
13,522 kilowatts of energy and
100 of 1623 per year on their
electric bills.
So a total of 97.6 megawatts of
electricity generation has been
added to the distribution
distribution systems of date.
C 02 by 70,000 Times. They're so
popular
On. Everybody wants them that
we've denied people that were
eligible to get it.
So this bill
Right now. Our cap each year is
12 million. This bill raises it
to 30.
And it gives everyone who missed
out from 2020 until this year
chance to get back into the
queue and get. Um it's taken
quite a while and I just wanna
thank em nerd and particular for
really trying to work with tax
and rev to figure this out. So
it works. So if you been denied
because we didn't have any money
March 1 2020 Till now, then you
can get back into the queue for
2020. Scott. Just just that time
to do it, So I'm hoping we do if
we pass this bill, Big P s a
Although I think that seldom,
perhaps you'll be sending them a
note. So that's essentially what
it does. I have with me.
Puck stare from update on where
we are right now.
Good afternoon chair members of
the committee.
Um, we just ran the most recent
attacks year. 2023. We are less
than half a million away from
hitting the allocated cap.
And with the folks who have
submitted, but so we have people
in the audience. What bill does
Okay. Great. Thank you. Central
Tammo. At this time, we'll go
out to the audience.
Anybody in favor of Senate Bill
121.
If you guys want to make
comments you can do so. And, um,
that Mike
Thank you so much, Mr Chair, and
Madam pro Tim, also to the
agency for really addressing a
really big problem. I'm Camilla
FIBA Leman here with the Rio
Grande chapter of the Sierra
Club.
And this bill really speaks to
how successful the rooftop solar
tax credit has been. New
Mexicans are really feeling the
heat of climate change. We felt
that heat dome this summer and
that's why so many people are
wanting to help by installing
solar panels on their roof. So
We want to help people who
didn't get the credit. Get that
Make sure there's enough
capacity and we've strongly
favor adding tribes to the
credit. Thank you so much.
And Mr Chairman, I left out
something really important And
that is we. We required
ownership so you'll see on the
top of page two. I apologize.
That was important. Forgotten. I
saw that Mr Chair members of the
committee I'm Stephanie Chardon
Clark with the Taxation and
Revenue Department. I appreciate
the work of the sponsor and the
energy Minerals Natural
Resources Department to work
with us In drafting this, um, we
stand ready to be able to
administer this. I'm very glad
we found a solution for the
taxpayers through
Really through no fault of their
own, have gone about installing
solar in their residence or
business in good faith and then
been denied because of the cap,
So I'm really glad we can solve
that and also solve the problem
of inadvertently leaving a lot
of tribal members out of
eligibility that the current
credit requires that the
property that the solar is
installed and be owned by the
taxpayer.
And if tribal land is owned by
the tribe, they have been cut
out of it. So we'll fix that
going forward. Thank you.
Yeah.
Good afternoon, Mr Chairman,
members of the committee. My
name is Jim Desjardin and I
represent the Renewable Energy
Industries Association of New
Mexico. We have over 660 diverse
members. We've been around since
2004. Our mission is to support
promote and advance the
transmission of renewable energy
in New Mexico.
Solar market development tax
credit has been instrumental in
starting and growing the
residential solar industry in
New Mexico.
As a result, there are over 2000
jobs at 80 different companies
in this industry. Many others
benefit through the economic
ripple effect of these jobs in
this industry. However, there is
more work to be done because of
the funding limitation. In the
last few years, hundreds of good
people
Due to no fault of their own.
Were denied a tax credit and, in
some cases, creating a financial
hardship and a feeling of being
let down by the state.
This bill serves to cure these
issues by creating a fund to
make people whole who were
denied the tax credit.
And substantially increase the
funding for future to ensure
that
No New Mexican. No New Mexican
is this denied tax credit that
they deserve. We urge the
committee to support the bill so
we can keep moving forward in a
just and I could throw away.
Thank you very much. Thank you.
Anybody else in favor?
Anybody in opposition.
None will go to committee or
questions.
I'm sorry. We do have one
online. Uh, we're Centerville
121 Steffi?
Why is Whitesburg
Yep, That's me. Head. You have a
couple of minutes.
Uh, good afternoon, Chairman
Shindo and Committee let manner
members I would like to thank
the sponsors and M nerd for
creating this wonderful bill.
I'm a member of the New Mexico
Solar Education Association and
also the author of the website
that helps New Mexicans Go solar
electrified. Despite this, I
have friends who never think of
asking me for advice and, um
One friend in particular
installed solar last year, not
realizing that she had applied
for the tax credit certificate
right after the installation, So
she lost out on the credit.
Unfortunately, she and her
husband were relying on that
money. She had just quit her job
for health reasons Her father
died, and she had to take care
of her mother, so they really
needed that tax credit. So
please pass this great ill for
the sake of my friend and many
other new Mexicans who didn't
get their certificate.
It's in time. Thank you.
Thank you.
Okay. All right now we'll go to
committee, Senator Tallman.
Second
You have a question, son.
Just in terms of the process. I
think we're talking about this
being part of the tax package. I
don't think we need to move it
out. So we're not gonna We're
not gonna move it out. We're
gonna hear it, and this is part
of the factor. So
Very happy to be part of a tax
Very happy to be part of a
taxpayer and real.
And just Mr Chairman. Let me
just say I think all I've had
A huge number of constituents,
Senator Hickey as well that have
kind of gotten caught up in the
race to do this, and I know
unlike the sustainable building
tax credit, which I been
involved in for years that
allows for a carry over, you
know, this hard line just seems
like a race who can get
Who's who's installer can figure
out the time frame and the fact
that we're already
Beginning of February have used
it up a number all of our
constituents quite frankly,
appreciate. So thank you, Mr
Chair. Thank you. And I also
appreciate the adding that
Tribal piece because I think
there's focus on tribal lands,
and those are common last
You don't have title to those
lands, so ownership of the
they're not taking advantage of
at the moment, so I appreciate
inclusion of that.
Language.
So if there are no other
questions, we're just going to
hold it here. And, uh well,
thank you.
Thank you trying to do this for
four years. I'm just finally
glad we got the smartest people
in the room looking at Chef
Stephanie over here.
All right. Next on the agenda,
we have sent a bill 119.
Senate majority Leader Worth
Hmm.
This is also a bill that we will
hear and hold.
Uh, thank you, Mr
Share. I appreciate that with me
is Bruce Ford, who is two bills
and then represent Chandler is
headed over and we'll be here in
the chair on that Senate Bill
119 is very straightforward.
It's just creates a flat five
and night for all of our new
Mexico businesses, and little C
s s corpse is 5.9%.
There's no reason that see
corpse should get a lower rate.
This just makes that last year
and so okay before we go to
Committee will go out to the
audience. Anybody here in
support of the Senate Bill 119.
Anybody in opposition.
I
believe we have
One individual, Carla Zoom.
I believe so. Senate Bill 119
years
Yes. Thank you, Mr Chairman,
members of the committee on
Carlos San Tech, CEO of the New
Mexico Business Coalition.
I appreciate what the sponsor is
saying about tax being level
ized with
The other tax rates, however,
were opposed to Sanibel 119.
because this is a pretty
significant tax increase for
corporations. The state doesn't
have a lot of corporations that
fall under this.
But it's still very unfriendly
to business. We've got other
bills that are going through
that are actually attacks
decrease and what we have found
if you look at other states that
are decreasing taxes or doing
away with them. It's a big
attraction for businesses to
come here and also to grow their
businesses here, so we would
rather see that we would rather
see our state be more supportive
of business.
And when you lower rates, you
actually get more than when you
increased rates because that
detracts business from growing
and moving here, So, with all
due respect, I hope that this
bill does not go any further.
Thank you for your
consideration.
No, thank you.
That was it.
Okay, Now we go to the committee
for any questions.
This is also be held up, so
we're not going to take action
on it. So it's any questions
from the committee? Nope.
But we'll just hold it move on
to the Senate Bill 181 and I
should have stayed in the
representative along the same
lines, our tax code and 2000
when we did that we took out a
section of the code is specific.
Way into the weeds, which we can
do if we need to again. The
purpose of this, though, is to
make sure the corporations that
pay the corporate tax aren't
using offshore subsidiaries to
shelter in up. Sure.
Our shared. Ah, and this is
actually a vision that was in
our code up until definition of
water's edge.
Thank you, Um
I appreciate very much.
Senator Worth and and thank you,
Chairman Sheng Co. So in brief
and I'll try to be very brief,
Some part of income came in the
federal tax code in 1962 by
President Kennedy.
And basically says, if you have
passive investment income in an
overseas corporation, you at
income is subject to tax
immediately in the U. S. It's
not something that gets deferred
forever.
And this as uh, Central were
said this was part of our tax
code and and basically, uh,
It is the first anti tax abuse
statute that, uh, that affected
international taxpayers that
Congress passed back about half
the states currently have it.
It got tied up with a litigation
over actual true foreign
dividends way back in the
nineties. I won't go into that
detail.
As it as a result of that it got
pulled away when New Mexico no
longer taxes. This doesn't
affect that at all. This is tax
haven country countries rate
That is passive income. It means
not active income. It means
Uh, insurance income and also
includes bribes to foreign
officials. They Congress doing a
lot of interesting stuff, but it
is. It is passive investment
income that's held overseas and
And so it's It's not a big chunk
of the percent.
But
But when it comes to
When it comes to calculating the
corporate income tax. These
small numbers mean a lot.
Uh, just because of the way,
gross versus networks, it's kind
of complicated, but even a small
number. It means a lot.
So that's the first half of the
bill.
The second half of the bill, Uh,
will will eliminate something
also came in in 2019.
Which is exemption for U. S
companies.
That have 80% of their property
paid out first. That sounds
pretty reasonable, but the way
the federal tax code works is
the federal government doesn't
care if you shift income between
US companies because they all
file a single consolidated
return.
So this provision that allows US
companies not to be part of the
New Mexico combined group.
That has the unfortunate
effectively of encouraging
companies to shift their income.
Into this company that is
neither a foreign company nor a
U. S company is defined by New
Mexico.
And what the bill seeks to do is
redefine it as a U. S company.
As the federal government does.
So because and again the federal
tax code doesn't care how much
And the idea here is to make
sure that
Taxpayers don't get to take
advantage of that. Like
A case going on right now in
Illinois involving Pepsico.
And Pepsico took its entire
domestic snack food business.
Shifted it to one of these so
called 8020 companies.
And said Illinois and 15 other
states.
So that's being litigated right
like this would eliminate that
particularly loopy main parts of
the bill here.
And just Mr Chair if I could, uh
Reiterate why this is so
important.
And again, it goes back to
New Mexico business. That's an
LLC. This is our if you're
competing at a big box store,
that's a retail next door.
Why in the world should there be
a different set of rules that
benefits
The multistate corporation. We
want to have the same makes
sense to close these two
loopholes and what everyone on
the same level playing field,
Thank you, Mr Chair, and I don't
know that I've ever remembered
Bill of Senator Worse not having
any
Comments. I mean, good or bad,
good or bad, But if you guys
would go back real real quick on
Page three, where you're where
we've stricken that language.
And we're you know, we're
talking about Subpart f income.
And would you just hit me with
that one more time? Because I
think you probably explained it.
But maybe shall I was digging
around and I may not have got it
correct.
So So, um, Tax cuts and jobs act
that President Trump signed into
law in 2017.
Eliminated tax on true foreign
dividends.
But it kept this anti tax haven
provisions so this would re
conform New Mexico.
Are are combined filing system.
It would re conform it to the
federal system and put that back
into day.
Taxable income.
And, uh and again, it's it's
passive investment income
insurance income and weirdly
enough bribes to foreign
officials, Um, that is held in a
foreign country.
And the U. S. Says No, that's
the and so this would reconsider
assert that as the income of the
U. S parents
So that's what that's what
Subpart F income is, and again.
It was a anti abuse provisions.
Just Mr Sheriff, I could Senator
Griggs. Remember that a parent
company income is ensure that
you know that portion
Okay. Thank thank you guys.
Thank you, Senator. Thank you,
Mr Chair.
Anyone else? Questions? We'll
move on to, uh
We'll hold this for those
audience. Uh,
We're not asking that bill out.
Consider as part of the tax
package so well.
I won't take any action so we'll
move on to the Senate Bill 232.
It's a representative Chandler.
So, Mr Chair if I could, she is
on the floor. They're having a
vote, So she texted me. She's
going to come as soon as she has
done. So let's just move that
one down the list, and I think
it's good to have her here for
that. Okay, that one on its
don't see Bobby, either. So
Senator Morris
Hmm. Hmm. Chairman thanks.
Members of the committee. Um,
today we have Senate Bill 25.
You might recall last year we
did a gross seats, deductibles
and were able to get into that
You're Michael on should be
better. Yeah, okay.
And rose and judiciary. We have
decided that we're going to
burn. Good afternoon, Mr
Chairman, members of the
committee. Um I'm Senator Mark
Moore's Senate Bill 25 Remember
recall Last year we did a
grocery seats reduction on
copays and deductibles have
truly helped with the medical
side of healthcare in New
Mexico, but taking a bite out of
the tax load that both patients
have to pay.
Where seats tax on healthcare.
Um, what we're trying to do now
is to expand health care is
deductible for gross receipts
tax that that exempt the
payments by patients that are
uninsured or lack medical care
coverage. This really is like I
said, it takes a bite out of
your healthcare spending dollar.
Um and what we do need where
we've found with last year is
that the deduction we did did
not really necessarily help
other health care providers such
as dentist, health care, mental
health care providers.
But I a trist that do not have
managed care. So what we'd like
to do is expand that growth
seats deductions to actually
help greater access to health
care around the state that we
did for medicine with that I got
Dr Tom Scripts Emma from the
dental Association, and, um, he
will be able to
Okay, I'll be very brief. Um
Uh, Tom Scripts. So from New
Mexico, Um
Yeah, There's a group of
patients who don't have any kind
of coverage where don't have
managed care coverage who are
Paying the grocery seats taxed
on their, um um, medical bills
and so on, which is really an in
an equitable because those who
have managed care plans are not
paying for that. So those who
have the least amount of
insurance are the ones who are
actually having to pay more for
their health care and so on. So,
um
New Mexico is one of the only
states that, um, charges of
grocery seats tax on health
care. Um and so the states
surrounding the surrounding us
do not, and therefore, the
dollar that's spent for
healthcare and those states goes
a lot further than what it goes
here. So
Um, my expertise is in
Dentistry, not in taxes, but you
know from a from a dental side.
Uh, at least 25% of the
population. Um, is not receiving
any benefit from the one and we
would just like to see that
apply to patients all the way
across the border. Okay, Before
we have a committee for
questions, go to the audience.
Anybody here and support of book
25.
Anybody opposed to center built
25.
We'll go to committee for
questions.
Senator Hearty meal. Mr.
Chairman, just comment. I just
wanted to tell you Thank you,
Senator Morgues on, including
mental health, a number of not
only constituents room, Senate
District Five have reached out
to me in regards to mental
health, but throughout the state
of New Mexico, so you're
covering this in your bill is
appreciated. Thank you, Senator.
Um, I have a question on just
clarification on the mental
health care provider.
Can you expand on that liberal?
What is that included counselors
or psychologist psychologist was
their definition within their
scope of practice, Okay?
Anybody else any other questions
from the committee members? If
not, we will be hearing I've
ever had onto this just came in.
So yeah, he lost out on
questions. I'm just kidding.
We'll hold this senator because
we would consider this as part
of the tax. Alright, Thank you.
Is Senator, Uh
Okay, So I think, Bobby, uh,
Bobby was up.
And then, uh, we'll go to
Rodriguez after
Go ahead, Senator. Explain your
Senate Bill 184.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr
Chairman and members with house
Bill 184.
This would make make changes to
the Senate bill. Senator, I'm
sorry,
You're a senator. Now, remember?
Okay. Yeah. If you try both
sometimes, okay?
And with that at all, Mr
Chairman is, um well, we have
this and if you go back to
Quite a few years.
Uh, this tax was within the
department of the D O T.
And then as time went, you know
when, uh
We hit some shortfalls. You
know, that's when he was
transferred to the General fund.
And, uh, what we would do here
is so we have
Current law, You know, you have
a
If 59.39
Going to the General fund. This
is now.
And to the state road fund
21.86.
And to the transportation
Project Fund 18.75.
So what this would do?
This would change zero to the
General fund, and then we would
have 75% go to the State Road
fund.
And then we have 25.
That will go to the
Transportation Project Fund.
So, um
Madam chair and members with
this, so I will yield to our
secretary from for monster.
Rick Serna, and he'll elaborate
a little bit.
Okay, Secretary. Thank you, Mr
Chairman. Members of the
committee Ricky, Suriname
Secretary. New Mexico Department
of Transportation. Wanna thank
Senator Gonzalez for introducing
this bill again. I know that,
Um we've discussed it at least
last year.
And so so currently, um
We're looking at the Department
of Transportation is really like
other agencies how to leverage.
the recent increase in revenues
for the state of New Mexico, But
we also need to think long term.
How is Mr Department of
transportation going to do a
couple things? One is keep up
with the road maintenance that
we know is in front of us.
But two is how in today's, um
way of doing business do we keep
up with the cost of
construction, the rising cost of
construction?
We've had discussions throughout
the interim, describing the
costs of doing business
increasing by upwards of 30% for
some projects, but we're using
average of 20% over the past
four years, and so when we when
we compare what it's costing to
do business today, relative to
2020 we use a conservative
estimate of 20% increase.
And so as we've seen our budget
increase over the last few
years, we recognize that one
that's been the Legislature's
commitment to road
infrastructure, but to is that
it's really addressing the cost
of doing business as we see
budget increases by four or five
or 6%.
It stands to reason that we
should be doing four or five or
6% more lane Miles relative to
what we can do before that.
But with the cost of inflation
we see actually our inability to
keep up with roadway
construction.
The transportation project
funding particular was
established to support local
governments right now, the tax
distributions for Transportation
Project Fund yield about $50
million
What we do every single year as
we put out a call for proposals
to all local and tribal
governments that allow for them
to appeal to the Transportation
Project fund, um, to do projects
on local owned infrastructure.
Um, What we're hoping to do with
this distribution is not only
increase the transportation
Project fund by about 7 million
But also increase the State road
fund, which is ultimately
becoming the fund that supports
the operations for the New
Mexico Department of
Transportation.
Our budget of about $1.2 billion
is comprised above half about
half federal distributions,
apportionment and half from the
State Road fund.
Because our federal funding is
used predominantly for
construction, the State road
fund, but half a billion dollars
is used for everything else.
What are some of those things
that are non road related were
one of them is the operations of
the agency. So all of our
personnel costs will come out of
the State Road fund the rising
costs of personnel costs like
legislative pay increases is
being covered by the State Road
Fund.
Other recently adopted measures.
for example, the transfer of the
public regulation Commission, um
Division is going to be paid for
by the State road fund as well.
And so as we continue to pick up
cost was the cost of just
running an agency increase over
time, the capacity of the State
Road Fund for direct road
project construction is
diminishing.
The other thing to note about
our federal funding is our
federal funding Doesn't allow
for us Today Road fund is
predominantly where we pay for
road maintenance.
And so when we don't see
revenues for the state healthy
like they have been in recent
years to receive non recurring
general fund, we need to plan
for an increase in recurring
revenues to absorb those
maintenance costs. So it's our
estimation that the increase of
about 146 in the immediate
future will support our
transportation districts for
doing that's it and nutshell, Mr
Chairman, but certainly stand
for any questions.
Okay. Thank you, Secretary. So
We move on to the committee for
questions will go to the
audience. Anybody here? Support
of, uh Centerville 184.
You can pick up the mic for
folks are listening.
Virtually thank you, Mr
Chairman, members of the
committee Gerard on behalf of
the New Mexico Municipal League.
Um, I think the secretary did a
great job explaining the bill.
We think the sponsor for
bringing this forward. He's been
a tireless advocate for this for
years. He's been bringing this
years and years and, uh and this
money can really be used to
support our local roads, which
are in really bad shape. So
Um, we we support this bill and
we ask your support. Thank you.
I'm Camilla FIBA Leman with the
real granddad chapter of the
Sierra Club. And this isn't a
bill that we have a practice of
speaking on or or you might even
expect us to speak about. But as
we look at the future of
transportation in New Mexico and
think about how to keep our
roads working, think about how
to integrate electric vehicles
into our systems to look really
at comprehensive.
Public transportation. We feel
like there needs to be a
sustainable way of doing the
type of work that the secretary
and senator have so well
described. And we support this
proposal. Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. I'm
Daniel Silva represent the
Associated contractors of New
Mexico who are the
Road builders and subcontractors
of New Mexico. Uh, thank you all
for your service to the state.
We appreciate that. And thank
you, representative Senator
Gonzalez and Mr Secretary for
doing this bill when this when
this tax was imposed many years
ago, it was in fact.
Um, going to, uh to the D, O T
and, um
Uh, later on it started
transferring to the General
fund, but I think it's very it
makes very good sense now that
you can afford to for it to go
to D O T. It's a It's a
transportation related tax. Most
citizens would agree with you
with us that this tax should go
to improve our roads in the
state.
And thank you, Mr Chairman for
years.
Hmm. Service. Thank you.
Good afternoon, Mr Chairman and
members of the committee. My
name is Marco Gonzalez. And I'm
the registered lobbyists for
McKinley County. I wanted to
thank the sponsor for bringing
this forward and for
concentrating on the local roads
and also for the secretary and
his dedication and his
department to help rural
communities, um, with their
serious needs. This is a
measured and it needed approach
for rural communities and
McKinley. Connie stands in
support and thanks to sponsor
Ah, and the committee. Thank
you.
Thank you, Mr Chair. And of
course I do. Stand in support of
your measure, Senator Gonzalez,
But I also wanted to say we have
an expert who just spoke
briefly. Representatives. Dan
Silver, who served as the
chairman in the House.
Um, of the transportation
committee. So he has good
history for us and very
knowledgeable. So if you
supports it, it's a good thing.
Thank you.
State representative to
Yeah.
Okay? I don't know about that
offshore account for that very
bad.
All right. Senator Gregg's
Thank you, Mr Chair and Senator.
Thank you for bringing this
bill. We've We've actually got
two of them. Now we've got two
competing bills of shorts, which
basically say the same saying
until they come to the split.
And Mr Chair and Senator. This
bill has 1/6 as a 7520 bucks.
Ah!
The bill that I introduced,
which was senator current bill
from last year, has a 6040
split.
And roughly roughly the
differences are for the for the
State Road fund. This bill
provides 100 and 48 million. Uh,
the bill that I have is 106
million.
For the Transportation Project
fund.
It goes 17 million.
Before the Transportation
Project Fund for this bill and
60 million for
My bill. Those those are the
differences and I just want
everybody did know, because
that's
I don't think we're actually
Fighting over the fact that we
wanted to be different because
we do We want the money to move
to the road.
That's just the distinction. So
Mr Chair is, however we move
these think it'd be great to to
move them forward together.
To to figure out how we want to
better address the issue, so
just wanted everybody to know.
There it is.
Senate Bill 65 is sitting in
this committee.
All right. Thank thank you,
Senator Gregg's is correct. We
did talk to chairman of the
Senate Finance Committee. So
we're gonna move both of these
bills out of here and then get
them over to his committee. I
have Senator Hart meal. Thank
you, Mr Chairman. I think every
single one of us in this
committee has reached out to the
Cabinet secretary about the
needs of roads, improvements and
every one of our districts.
And mostly in rural re Arriba
County, where I definitely need
the help.
And when you start looking at
Capitol outlay projects that we
try to fund and we've seen how
prices have increased post
pandemic, I can definitely see
this as common sense
legislation, Senator and I just
wanted to tell you thank you for
bringing this forward and I
think it makes total sense when
we see the cost of construction
increasing. So thank you so
much, Mr Chairman.
Thank you, Senator Wirth. Thank
you. Mr I do have a comment, but
someone just texted online
comments. I don't know. Did you
have
Terry Cole.
Yeah, she's there.
Yeah, we can go ahead and go
ahead. Terry, if you're
listening
Thank you very much, Mr Chairman
and members of the committee.
I'm Terry Cole, president and
CEO of the Greater Albuquerque
Chamber of Commerce. Mr Chairman
and senator word you'll
appreciate that The Chamber of
Commerce today is standing
within Municipal. New Mexico
Municipal Eve and the Sierra
Club on the same position in
support of this bill. We've
watched the legislative process
for many years and funding. Our
roads has always been a
challenge and let's call it a
gnarly issue.
Read friends had been diverted
for other purposes, and we
always seem to be struggling.
This is an excellent opportunity
to try to fix the problem. We
commend Senator Gonzalez and
urge your support. And Mr
Chairman, Thank you for letting
me say if you words I appreciate
it.
Thank you. Okay. Alright, well
back to committee Senator work,
just Mr Chair. I think it's
important for folks to
understand. You know what we're
trying to do here and we're
trying to put together
Omnibus tax package, and this
was part of the bill last year
that was vetoed.
The challenges were working with
a much smaller capacity number
this year, so the reason it's
going to Senate finances to see
if we can do both.
And I do think, certainly for
the state portion of this
There's a good argument that
it's a transfer. It's different.
You know, we could certainly
claw that back if we needed to.
At some point I do. Look at it a
little bit differently, but I
just thought it was helpful to
kind of put that into context of
where we are and why we're going
to move this forward and
ceremonials is trying to
Look at the capacity issue. This
bill is one of them. There's
another bill in the house that
also has a pretty significant
recurring impact. And so again,
we're all trying to put these
puzzle pieces in place.
But thank you, Senator worth
with further clarification.
Appreciate that.
Anybody else?
If not
Emotionally moving to pass
motion do pass, but it's worth
second by Senator Griggs.
Can you call the roll?
Senator Brandt excused
Senator Chrigz? Yes.
Senator. How do meal? Yes,
Senator Lopez? Yes, Senator
Sanchez.
Excuse. Senator Tollman.
Senator words. Yes, Hamblin.
Senator Shindo? Yes, we have
eight yeses, where do pass
Okay, Senator Gonzalez. You have
do pass eight in favor. No
opposition.
Mr. Thank you.
While we're on the distribution,
I want to go ahead and, uh
Also take a motion for Senate
Bill 65. Again. The only
difference is the percentage
split. This one was 7525.
Senator Griggs is 6040. So with
that I will entertain a motion
from the committee.
For Senate Bill 65.
So we'll, uh
Okay. All right. Okay. Good
motion. Yep. Center Bill 65. We
have a do pass motion by Senator
Griggs.
Second by Senator Sanchez.
Clerk called the road
Senator Brandt excused, Senator
Griggs.
Senator had a meal.
Yes, Senator Lopez? Yes.
Center Sanchez.
Seuss, Senator Tallman.
Senator. Word Yes, Senator
Handling Senator Shindo? Yes.
Eight yeses or do pets. Great
senator. Grades do pass.
8 to 0. Thank you for sure. That
may be the first time I ever got
a unanimous book,
Okay, we'll now move on to the
Senate. Bill 217, Senator
Rodriguez.
Yes, time.
Yeah. What's that?
Green. It was green before
closer. Thank you, Senator. Bad.
Thank you so much. All right.
Good afternoon, Mr Chairman,
Members of the committee. Um,
this bill is actually a pretty
significant bill that will
Put in a nutshell. $80 million
into 82 million actually into
the severance tax permanent fund
by merely saving the amount of
money that we would otherwise
pay for bonding if we issue
severance tax bonds
For capital outlay projects
instead, because we have this
year, an influx of money coming
into the state, we decided that
it would be in every capital
outlay projects and statewide
projects. Also, all instead of
severance text, so this saves us
quite a bit of money, and it
would be put permanent.
Or bond fund in 10 years, we
would be, um, generating quite a
bit of money because 82 million
is an annual savings and
transfer. So, um, after that,
and and actually, even during
that time, but mostly towards
the 10 years closely, quite a
bit into the General fund,
approximately $30
Um, just from the here. So, um,
that's what it does, Mr
Chairman and we did do this last
year also, And last year we put
in 92 million a year into the
severest tax perm and get our
returns back.
So instead of paying out in
bonding and borrowing money to
pay for interest, we are
actually bring. And this is
Callie. Thank you. Yes, Kelly is
works without make comments or
here for an answer Questions. No
comments. Okay. Okay. Great.
Alright. I just want to make
sure so we'll go to the audience
on Senate Bill 217.
Anybody. Support of Senate Bill
217.
Anybody in opposition of
217
Alrighty.
So we're going to committee for
questions.
Anybody. Questions for Senate
Bill 217.
Senator.
Just for clarification. So this
is the money? Uh, request. We're
asking that we not so so we're
restricting the cell to 757
million is that what's that? Can
you clarify on that particular?
Uh, section C on Page two. What
we're doing is what we did, like
approved the bill.
But last year's 2 million and
what it is is a savings. We're
going to save by not borrowing
money into the state coffers, so
we're going to do is invest
invested in because this is the
amount we would normally stead.
We're going to put it into the
severance technique. Uh, capital
outlay processed a very good
thing to do to save this and
continued difference instead of
paying out for no reason, So
that's really what it was gonna
be. This would be kind of the
savings on debt service.
Basically is what we're talking
about Mr Cherry endings on long
term debt you're asking about is
Um, essentially Cassidy for the
Public School Capital Outlay
Fund. It's directing the board
of Finance to issue the amount
of capacity that they were
expecting. Actually.
So that's specifically for the
public school.
Mr Chair. Yes. Okay. Sure.
Everyone understands that this
That provision. They're also
holds harmless, not only the
public schools, but it holds
harmless. The tribal
infrastructure fund the
colonias, any earmarks, trust
exactly the taken every year.
This doesn't balances. I
appreciate that. Thank you.
Thank you.
Alright any any other questions
from the committee?
You know what is your pleasure?
Senator Lopez motion for a Do
pass, Mr. Chair second. I hear
you can give it to Thomann.
Okay? Second by Senator Tommen.
Tom and you need to use your
cheerleading voice.
I can't hear the finger.
That's his spirit Senior right
there. Alright. Clerk called the
role
Hmm. Senator Brandt. Excuse
Senator Gregg's
Yes.
Senator had a meal. Yes, Senator
Lopez? Yes?
Senate.
Senator Schmid's is excused.
Senator Tollman.
Senator worth
Excused.
Senator Hamblin.
Senator Sando Yes.
We have seven yeses for do path.
Pass.
Close.
Okay, Senator. Go ahead,
Present. Your bill. Thank you
very much.
It's great to be here.
Substitute senators, your
Michael, is that green? Yes, it
is okay.
A problem.
I'll make that switch real
quick.
Yes. At radio voice. Cheers.
Thank you very much. Mr
Chairman, members of the
Committee and s the substitute
the ways the effective date of
the redirection of health
insurance premium tax revenues
to fiscal year 26 and
appropriates 25.
A few things about this
particular measure. Mr Chairman,
members of the committee
Currently 2.9 million in funding
has been mostly flattered,
declining over the past three
decades at the same time, cost
to be significantly.
Locally. M s services receive an
average of 8000 annually, which
represents costs.
Underfunding of VMS hinders
timely and effective care for
patients.
Especially in rural areas. MES
services critical for
communities across the state.
Providing life saving
interventions.
Ah overdoses.
2023, the Legislature passed
Senate Bill 491, which directed
10% health insurance premium tax
revenues to the Law Enforcement
protection fund, increasing
funds or funding for law
enforcement by approximately 22
million annually today where
you're asking for the same type
of support for emergency medical
services professionals
And if I may, Mr Chairman
members about this, and then I
defer to my expert who is here
with me today and that
This has been a long term issue
that we continue to deal with. I
know across the state, but more
importantly, as one of the most
devastating situations that I
continue to deal with happened
to be, Uh, as we were
encountering the calf canyon so
within the area that this all
encompasses from the motor area,
going down, going through Buena
Vista crossing over to Watros
going up to wagon mound as an
example.
And we have a need for these
services because of a tragic
accident.
In a lot of cases the response
time and it was no reflective on
the M s personnel. Uh, but the
distance to get to these
accidents and to do is to ensure
that we do the, uh, all the time
in order to do continually and
with this bill would do is this
would definitely help us to
support those efforts again to
save expert for some brief
comments.
Good afternoon. Excuse me. Good
afternoon, Mr Chair. I am I'm,
the regional director for global
medical response in my
professional capacity and my
volunteer capacity. I'm the
Chairman of Region Date Wide
Ambulance Advisory committee,
And it's through that that I
really here to talk to you today
about that, Uh, services across
New Mexico, Um, services across
New Mexico. Both fire department
and ambulance services apply for
what? It's called a number of
calls that they respond to her
year the number of personnel
that they have on their staff.
And how they plan better
accomplice explained that money
right now is a far cry from what
they actually need to cover.
even a small portion of their
their local municipalities.
Other services and so this
increase in funds Act money
would go a very long for
services, but also the equipment
you can imagine. Responding to
ambulance calls is rough on
equipment. It's rough on
vehicles rough on personnel.
And so under Act. M s Fund Act
is really awarded to services
and allows services to use it
for training or equipment
purchases or things that are
needed at their station for all
sort of things, And so we're
very much supportive of this,
and I hope to see this past as
you'll see. There are lots and
lots of fire chiefs behind me.
I think most of them if not all
of them. I just don't know that
they're all here, but I think
I'll go on a limb and say
they're all here in support of
this as well. So thank you, and
I stand for any questions,
Senator. And so before we go to
the committee for questions,
we'll go out to the audience.
Uh, anybody here and support of,
uh
Senate Bill 151.
Oh, picture that that is high
Hands high,
right? Mm. Perfect. Okay,
Alright. Maybe I'll just take a
three from here. Three from
here. Uh, so select anybody.
Hmm. Hmm.
Go ahead. Thank you, Mr
Chairman. I'm TJ Kathy. The fire
and E. M s Chief of Portals.
Fire Department. I'm also on the
fire cheese board of directors
for the Mexico Prior Chief
Association.
Um and I've also been authorized
by the volunteer departments in
our community to express our
support of this that as they
have so eloquently presented is
desperately needed.
Hello, Mr Chairman. Members of
the committee. Thank you for
having us today. My name is Gus
Pedro Idiom of firefighter
paramedic with Albuquerque Fire
rescue and we stand in support
of this bill. Not only is it
going to be a stopgap for
resources desperately needed
across the state, but I'm sure
it will also illuminate the
continuing need for these
resources and how we can best
tackle these issues. Thank you.
Hmm.
Hello, Mr Chair and respected
members of the committee. My
name's Mateo Garcia. I'm an
emergency medicine position and
the E. M s physician as well. I
specialize in
Rural and tribal M s medical
direction. I just wanted to
express my support for this
bill. It's much needed and
provide support for the troops
on the ground to provide the
level of care that our citizens
deserve.
Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you. Chair and
I, Denise Chanel and I work up
in Eagle Nest as the M s
director, and we are one of the
small girl E. M s agencies.
We've been struggling for a lot
of years to make ends meet. We
have good, dedicated people who
want to be there were moving out
of a time where volunteerism is
not as popular as it used to be.
And we are having a hard time
surviving to be in service. 24 7
as Senator Campbell's talked
about earlier, Um the transport
times The Times. Two calls are
definitely compromised when
agencies are not able to
function we have been teetering
on the edge of not surviving,
and we're struggling and trying
very hard, and we're all very
dedicated to keep in service.
This money could make a big
difference.
Friends, not just to our agency.
But many other rural agencies in
New Mexico. Thank you so much.
Chair members of the committee.
My name is Mark de Porto.
Hello. My name is Mark Porto,
Fire Chief of the city Hops Fire
department.
City House Fire department runs
just under 10,000 calls a year.
We're looking at a 15% increase
year over year in the CMS calls
in this increase of the 22
million in the fund would
greatly benefit agencies such as
the Habs Fire Department, So I
just like to thank you for your
consideration of this matter.
Good afternoon chair remembers.
My name is Greg Peters. I'm the
fire Chief for Burnley. Oh
County Fire and rescue also here
as the chair of the Metro Chiefs
Fire Department, which makes up
20 of the larger departments in
the state, as well as the
president of the Fire Council,
which represents some of the
smaller volunteered combination
departments, and this money is
desperately needed. And we thank
you for your support.
Mr Chair Committee members,
mayor of Coral City of Sakura.
I'm also a family physician
there.
We run four ambulances.
The last ambulance is going to
be $274,000.
We got maybe 8 to 10,000 are our
budget for the fire and e M T,
Which we run ourselves is 2
million.
It was very difficult for our
small cities that do transfers
to Albuquerque. More and more
medical care is being
centralized around Albuquerque
we do about 40 transfers a
month.
Rolling stock has 150 to 200,000
miles on it. We would hope that
you would increase this fun in
this bill 151.
Thank you.
Good afternoon, Mr Chair.
Members of the committee Randy
by the law, state Fire Marshal.
Well, Good afternoon, Mr Chair.
My name is Mike Miller. I'm the
mayor of the city of Port Alice.
I have been testifying and
asking for funding increased
funding for E. M. S Senator
Worth knows. Since 1987. This
fund has not even begin to keep
up with the cost that it's it's,
um
As as the cost of accelerated,
um
We? We really, really need some
help. You heard from my fire
chief. You heard from many of
these people. The fact that the
rule services are beginning to
dwindle because they don't have
enough funding. Then the burden
falls back on us burns out or
personnel. I strongly request
your consideration. Thank you.
Thank you. We have a couple
online, Chelsea White.
Good afternoon chairman Kendo
and respected senators. Thank
you all for your time and
consideration of this bill.
My name is Chelsea White. I'm an
emergency medicine doctor and
SMS medical director. Several
rural and tribal M s has
services here in New Mexico.
And I work alongside the M s
providers and first responders
in the CMS agencies daily and
daily see the need for the
critical funding that would
result from passage of this
bill.
I appreciate the work of the
sponsors of this much needed
bill and I really appreciate all
the folks who have already said
basically the same thing.
Here in support of this bill,
and so I urge each of you to
also support this bill, and in
doing so, you're going to be
providing support to all of our
E m s agencies are providers are
first responders who every day
and every night or selflessly
serving all the community
members, visitors and citizens
of our state, So thank you again
for your time and support.
Thank you.
Thank you, Uh,
Justin Drum.
Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Committee members. Uh, I am
sorry I couldn't be there this
year for you guys. I'm actually
pulling AMs shift. So this this
is something that's uh, backed
been the fire Chief PMS director
for 13 years literally started
today. February 1st my 24th
Year serving Fire and E M s in
New Mexico in my community with
the service that's covering 2270
square Miles.
Ah!
All right, Uh,
This is something that I'm glad
to see. And I thank everybody
for listening to this.
Yep.
Oh, good for you, okay?
Okay?
I have Mattel Garcia, but I
heard him a tale is it seemed
okay, alright.
I just want to make sure
Okay?
With that we'll go to committee.
I have senator had a meal.
Mr Chairman. I want to thank
senator Compost for bringing
this bill forward and I wanna
let the committee know the
reality of what's happening in
northern New Mexico.
With two examples. So if you
look at Taus County, which is my
neighboring county House, CMS
responds to an average of 5000
calls per year with an annual
budget of 15,000, and that
budget is also used for
maintenance training and the
coverage of the cost of
professional licenses Building
alone for these services does
not help them cover all of their
expenses.
House is doing is relying on
grants to keep them afloat.
Now this bill will help tells
provide more coverage. As of
right now, Mr Chairman, Taus
cannot provide services and the
southern end of their county.
Therefore they rely on my
hometown Espanola to cover the
whole Caliente area. Now, this
bill will help house fully
stuff. Another union, which will
help the pie, Corey's Pueblo and
Penasco areas. They're afraid
they can't reach without this
funding.
If you look at my hometown of
Espanola there, E. M s budget is
$10,000 a year and they get 80%
of their calls are related to E.
M s.
We don't build for service in
Espanola.
Is finding it hard to stock our
trucks. With the current
funding we have which we get
approximately 3000 calls a year.
So if you look at rural New
Mexico and most of the time EMS
responders are our lifeline. We
definitely need to support this
bill in order to ensure that
River Mexicanos in rural areas
in our pueblos in our hickory, a
nation
Are covered. And with that, Mr
Chairman, I stand in full
support of this bill.
Thank you, Senator Hamlin. Thank
you, Mr Chair, and thank you,
senator for bringing this
forward. My district and
district. 38 includes quite a
bit of rural communities. Some
problem. Mosquito, Vado
Chambery. No, and and I have to
commend our fire.
Officers because you are so
resourceful with the resources
that you have.
And I am so I have such mad
respect for all that you do
because you
Correct me if I'm wrong, But
you're calling and saying, Okay,
we're busy on a call, so just
keep a lookout for this area.
Just in case there's something
happening, and especially
echoing Senator had a meo in
rural areas. This is often life
or death.
Because there's no access to any
any health care facility in my
case for 20 minutes, and that
could mean somebody's life or
death. And so I'm very grateful
for this, and I'm very grateful
to be able to support this. Um,
because it seems like it's
overdue from the mayor of
Portela, who talked about that
This has been going on for a
very long time.
Um and I don't know the history
of that, but I'm glad that it's
here today. And so thank you,
Senator. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you, Um
I don't have a question, but I
just have a common or think that
the sponsor for bringing this I
know in my community.
We have been hammers. We have a
small population about 2000, but
the number of calls that we
serve
Up in the whole valley all the
way up to Vice Cordillera,
particularly in the summertime
when people are outdoors,
tremendous strain on our tribal
E. M s. But certainly I think
this will go a long way to
To help us and all the rural
areas. Pleasure of the
committee. Mr Chair. I do have a
question. Okay? We're
I just I just want to
understand. So this is coming
out of the premium tax.
But it does impact the General
fund is that it means we
basically is this coming out of
the distribution and otherwise
would go to the General fund.
So miss sharing. So it's a one
time general fund piece. Mr. I
kind of see this. Like the motor
vehicle excise bill, we should
send it to Senator Compost and
the finance folks, and they're
gonna have to figure out again
What we're trying to do. A
senator combos is make sure that
That
There's a limited capacity for a
tax package and just making sure
that if if there are general
fund impacts to this and motor
vehicle, transfer the road fund
that that you all are looking at
that. That is kind of an extra
on top of what we're doing in
the limited capacity that we
have, So I just want to flag
that, But I appreciate certainly
support the bill. Very much
motion here.
Yes.
Or do you have a question before
or
Okay?
Would you pass for do pass by
Senator Sanchez, second by
Senator Gregg's
Clerk called the room
Senator Grant excused, Senator
Griggs. Yes, Senator had a meal.
Yes, Senator Lopez? Yes, Senator
Sanchez.
Senator Schmid's
Senator Tallman. Yes, Senator
Worth compost? Yes, Senator
Hamblin.
Senator Sando. Yes, we have nine
yeses for do paths Do pass
Senator 9 to 0 for those that
are listening. Thank you very
much. Mr Chairman members, we
will know. Move to Centerville
to 32.
Worth and Chandler. You guys can
stick around.
Thank you all for being here.
Hmm.
Okay, Go ahead. Senator. Worse,
Senator, Representative
Chandler. Thank you, Mr Chair.
I'll just briefly introduced
where we are. Senate Bill 232
adds energy storage facilities
to the authority that's granted
to municipalities and counties.
Currently for negotiating and
industrial revenue Bond.
It parallels the authority
granted these jurisdictions and
negotiate RBS for solar and wind
production projects abilities
and also provides a gross
receipts tax deduction for the
sale of energy storage equipment
to governments. Mr Chairman
members, this was a bill again
that was in the package last
year got vetoed, and so we're
bringing it back, Mr Chair and
hello, Committee members Happy
to be, um
It will allow entitles, and
that's that's really, um why
we're doing it In a nutshell.
Go ahead.
I think
Mr Chair Senator's My name is
Pedro Burgas with Nextera
energy, and it's a pleasure to
be here with you today. Um, I'm
joined as well with it. By Eric
Erica Kenney, our senior
director for tax policy and
Xterra as well.
Okay, so at this time, we'll go
out to the audience. Uh,
Anybody here in support of
Senate Bill 232 up there, and,
uh,
You guys are
Good afternoon, Uh, chairperson
and and members of the
committee. My name is Rico
Gonzalez Network for El Paso
Electric.
Ah, we had some some issues with
the with the or concerns I
should say with the bill, and I
want to thank the chairwoman and
Pedro for for working with us to
to alleviate those pieces. It's
been something that has been
worked hand in hand. Uh, on for
two years like, uh, Senator
Wirth said, And so we stand in
support of the bill.
And then any time that I get a
chance to suck up to these two
legislators, I'm always here to
do that. So here I am
Moved to table.
Well, how do you follow that?
Good afternoon, Mr Chairman,
members of the committee
regularly Chavez on behalf of
Inner West energy lines. We
appreciate the sponsors working
with us. We appreciate the work
of our member company Nextera,
and we would appreciate your
support of this bill. Thank you.
Hi there, Mr Chair, members of
the committee and sponsors.
Thanks So much for the bill I'm
with this year club Camilla
Feeble men, and we would like to
see storage treated in the same
way as solar and other renewable
energy. Thank you so much. You
good afternoon, members of the
committee, Mr Chairman. Thank
you for allowing me to speak. My
name is Marco Gonzalez. I'm the
registered lobbyists for both
plus power.
And inventor. Gee, who are
supportive of this bill? This
bill is critically important
because it adds to grid
resiliency. Storage is an
important component of us being
able to keep our grid.
Um, safe and vibrant and both
standalone storage and the coast
cited storage, which this bill
covers are equally important.
And this bill covers that. So
we're really happy that the
sponsor has brought this
forward. We appreciate majority
Leader and chairman, Uh,
Chandler for bringing it forward
And we support the bill. Thank
you very much. Mr Chairman and
members of the
Good afternoon. Oh, sure. Okay.
Good afternoon, Um, Chairman
Shindo, members of the
committee Carlos Lucero with the
public service company, New
Mexico.
And we support Senate Bill 232.
We believe this would provide
Lower cost financing for energy
storage projects, which, um
Are part of the clean and energy
initiatives. So for these
reasons we end and what we've
heard before we support this,
bill. Thank you.
Thank you. Anybody in opposition
of this bill?
Have anybody else. Zoom on this
bill, okay?
Committee members. Any
questions? Uh,
Senator Smitty's
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair,
Senator, and this is another
moment. We've had some cool
discussions about this back to
my my high school days with my
US history teacher taught me
that the political spectrum is
not a line. It's a circle. And
sometimes that the further you
go to the right. You might
sometimes get around the corner
and there's a far left person
meeting you right there and
shaking your hand and
And I just a philosophical
comment on this one.
You know, I I look at at
creation. I'm a creationist and
I look at, uh, the sunlight and
the energy that that supplies
how God created that.
And
I don't believe God created the
energy from photons to be used
for highly dense energy like
Turning on our lights and
powering her age facts. You
know, I look out and what's
going on in the chloroplasts
inside the trees.
Is a low very, uh
Very calm, gradual energy.
That is stored inside the sugar.
Um, after photosynthesis. I just
don't think we're going to get
around physical. I don't think
we should be gathering up.
photons storing the energy in
whatever it is and using that
for really, really dense, highly
intense energy outbursts that
that people tend to use energy
for.
Um, I also think that investing
in energy storage is exporting
our energy industry to other
countries. Um, we have a lot of
energy dense substances here in
New Mexico.
You get oil and gas out of the
ground. It's already energy
dense. We don't have to collect
all of those energy sparse
photons and try to
You know, get them into an
energy dense usage pattern.
And so I, um, I think it's a bad
end Dangerous road to go on. I
think it's going to absolutely
destroy our planet, um, trying
to go backwards.
Back to windmills back to solar
and try to do the storage. I
think there's a great use for
wind and solar. There are good
applications, but not for not
for keeping this TV on and for
keeping this room cool.
Um, we're going to absolutely
destroy our planet. We're gonna
use too much water. We're gonna
start just having a lot of
problems.
Um
And so I That's why I don't
support this. I just don't
support the entire, uh, you
know, construct. I think we
should be shifting toward
energy, dense sources such as
still and gas, but keep going.
Keep going to nuclear, the
energy density of nuclear energy
is the most energy dense, you
know, substrate that we have to
use and it's going to be the
best for the environment
Overall.
And I think if we go there, I
mean, it's just a win win for
everybody. So that's what that's
what I would like to do if no
one has seen bright green lies,
Um, I'm not necessarily
endorsing that message in
general.
But just to get you thinking a
little bit differently, perhaps
so we can have more discussions
on this topic. Look at that
documentary, and just it kind of
gets to what I'm like. I said, I
don't really agree with the
conclusion, but it gets us into
a better
Conversation. So thank you very
much.
Thank you, Senator.
The other.
The question very none of the
committee.
Lopez.
Mr Chairman. I mean, would you
pass or do pass? 2nd 2nd 2nd
Base, Senator Karmiel. Oh, no,
I'm sorry. I'm sorry Package.
We're gonna hold this one. I'm
sorry again. We'll have the
discussion tomorrow in the joint
on that one. When we started, I
thought we were headed in a good
direction. I was waiting for
that Mr Chair Center while you
watched the documentary because
there's some far left folks and
I'm like, Wow, You're kind of
speaking my language and that
documentary, So it's pretty good
and Senator
She needs and I can happen.
Okay. Great. Thank you. Thank
you. All right, so we will hold
on to this. Thank you. All
right.
You.
Okay, Senator.
Thank you, 72 You have a
substitute or amend substitute.
And I'm
Trying to remember. I think we
have to have a recommendation to
not pass the original so I can
present the substitute right. So
if someone could make a motion
to not pass the original on
Senate Bill 72.
But I do pass.
Emotion. Yes. Go ahead, Go
ahead.
Those Senate bill 72 tobacco
products tax rate to pass
The, uh, awesome
No here. The committee
substitute before discussion
purposes.
Garlic, all right.
Okay, Mr Cherif seeing that
we're late in the day. I'm going
to try and make this happen to
any questions.
Uh, this is a replay of Senate
Bill 235 from last year that
applied attacks on basically
anything nicotine. The cigarette
tax was already there. But how
churches chewing vaping and and
really creative ways Now, magic
markers are
Fake Vaping cigarettes. You can
watch out for your kids. Um
But essentially would have put a
tax on those and that money
would have gone to the
Department of Health to work
share with the P E, D and H E D
to develop programs.
For nicotine prevention other
than cigarettes.
For young people. Um, it did,
uh,
It was heard where, and, um did
get to the tax package and did,
uh, at one time in the tax
package in conference was
approved. So I'm back this year
with this bill, which is almost
the same except for one very
significant exception.
Because of the massive growth
going on in Vaping in high
schools, now middle schools and
as you've heard me before
nicotine is the gateway drug,
um, and in Vaping, uh to to
other addictions, and I won't go
into the physiology of all that
did that last year. The craving
personal MRI's What? Lights up
And what have you
But it's so important in used
before the frontal lobe is able
to attach twenties women quite a
bit earlier, um, that
The irrationality gets built in
when you have stress.
Using nicotine to decrease that
stress, and then that has the
potential to charge up the
craving pathways and lead to
further concerns about this.
Um
So we're only doing Vaping this
year from a number of the
tobacco interest lobbyists and
so forth. So we're all coming
down to Vaping. I have been
working with three of the four
entities or tobacco, nicotine
entities very closely, along
with the advocates to come up
with this bill that only taxes
E cigarettes.
The liquid that goes into e
cigarettes at 44% and 50. Cents,
50 cents on the cartridges.
And, um
There again. There's no pouches
in this. There's no chewing
tobacco in this because this is
so critical. We want to get this
through and in place now, why do
we want to put a tax on it?
Well, two reasons, number one
multiple states have shown that
the higher you lower the uptake
by youth. I mean, this is
science. This is
Approved in multiple studies.
and so if we can get that 44% of
wholesale price and just the
Vaping products, um they're much
less likely to take it up. I
know this from a personal basis.
Uh um
My oldest daughter, Um, 30,
something finally figured out
that I mean a little bit later
than kids, but but that the
price So, um, the tax I think we
calculated is roughly around $8
million. That money would go to
the Department of Health is
described
In the bill again with the P E,
D and HD to develop programs and
education and prevention of
taking up Vaping, and they are
focused on aged 25 and less. And
so, um
The and why is that? Even more
important this year? Some of you
may have heard that the programs
the contracts that we had
through the D O h, with, uh
Folks who use programs others
against Vaping television ads
and so forth. Well, the
The fund that builds up the
tobacco fund.
Has, uh, can be variable in the
money that it puts in.
Because it's we're on 2004
through the negotiations now in
the money didn't come in as
strongly as so those programs
were stopped dead in their
tracks because there was no
money to pay for.
And so there was nothing as of
about April.
Um, it's just now beginning to
restart with the new year, but
this will provide a foundation
going forward. That's solid to
be sure that we don't have that
interruption particularly is
more and more high school
students. Middle school students
are taking this up. And then the
last piece is
This this Vaping tool I
mentioned really not
facetiously. We have seen that
magic markers or highlighters.
Are are disguised as E
cigarettes. It's pretty amazing
what the what the industry is
doing. But what goes in there
once you've got that cartridge
once you've got that Bentonville
And this and we are seeing more
and more fentanyl. So this is to
hopefully keep youth away from
even starting to experience it
or giving him something that can
lead on horribly to fentanyl.
And with that, I stand for
questions.
Okay. Thank you. Um
And I, there may be supporters
and the Gators right before we
go to committee for questions,
we will go out to the audience.
Anybody here in support of
Senate Bill 72.
You guys can come up and, uh
Mr Chair members of the
committee. My name is
with the American Heart
Association.
And you know, we stand in
support of this bill. I think in
the past several years, you
know, we cut down our funding
from almost 10 million to
current levels at 3.2 or 3.4.
And when I'm doing a lot of
education and all trees with the
kids, and we haven't increased e
cigarette taxes since we approve
this, and we have one of the low
e cigarette taxes in the country
and one of the highest rates of
e cigarette usage by our youth,
So we strongly support this
bill. I think this is the first
good step.
Towards addressing what's going
on in that, uh in our state,
especially the kids are using
wiping in there, you know,
bathrooms, basketball codes and
you know, and it's It's very
Uh, prevalent in every school in
New Mexico. So we ask you to
support this, bill. Thank you.
Hello, Mr Chairman. Members of
the committee. My name is
Andreas Archuletta I am here
with in, um, Act the New Mexico
Allied Council on Tobacco.
We're a group of local and
national partners coming
together over this issue.
We support this bill, Um vaping
has become, you know a massive
issue not only in the state but
across the country in the last
10 years.
I just spoke with a friend of
mine who's a teacher, and every
time she walks into the
bathroom, she sees those puffs
smoke coming up out of every
bathroom stall.
Um
Really, we gotta We gotta get
funding to programs that are
educating youth. We see the most
impact if we get people before
they start.
Right. Get that education. Ah!
A penny of prevention is worth a
pound of the cure. I really
believe that. Thank you very
much. Thank you.
Anybody in
Okay. We have two individuals,
Laurel.
Hmm. What? Klaus McCluskey?
Hello, Mr Cherry able to hear
me? Yes. Go ahead.
I'm speaking on behalf of J.
Blackwell today who had to get
off the zoom. My name is Lauren
McCluskey, Good afternoon chair
and members of the committee.
I'm with the New Mexico Ally
Counselor, Tobacco and I'm
saying saying the statement for
J. Blackwell, who's with the New
Mexico African American Tobacco
Prevention Network, he supports
SB 72 in the opportunity.
As it allows for a range of
consistently appropriate
prevention and outreach
activities that help to keep
African American communities
healthy and engage in new Mexico
activities and priorities.
Currently, funding supporting a
reduction of nicotine use and
black communities has been
inconsistent and forgotten. This
bill helps to correct this
funding oversight and supports
prevention activities in Mexico
to better define quote, healthy,
culturally appropriate
strategies.
For black communities and their
Children. Please support this,
bill. Thank you.
Thank you. We have Alex Ross
read.
Hello, Um, Committee.
Thank you for taking my call.
Can you hear me? Yes.
Okay, Great. Um, my name is Alex
Ross read and I am the executive
director of Heal, Plus an M.
And, um, I just want to say that
taxes on the cigarettes are a
win win win for everyone. They
reduced the usage by young
people, and they increased
revenue for prevention. And and
it's just a no brainer. Um
E cigarettes contain has
The medals and lead has been
found in the developed Isis once
they're heated and in the urine
or blood samples, saliva samples
of people who use um e
cigarettes, So if we regulate
lead in paint, we definitely
need to be doing a lot more to
regulate e cigarettes and
prevent any brain damage. Um,
and the negative health effects
that come with nicotine
addiction.
Um really, I'm very disappointed
in our state because for the
last eight months we've had zero
prevention for e cigarettes or
combustible cigarettes.
Cigarettes, So we are falling
way, way way behind in the
education. And just like my Hash
said we really need to, um not
be the worst category in the
state in terms of vaping use and
really invest big and invest now
invading prevention. That's
evidence based that youth led
And a lot of the programs that
we already have in the state,
but just aren't being funded.
Thank you so much.
Thank you so much appreciate
that any other comments online?
Anything from the committee.
I'm sorry. Oh, thank you very
much. Those in opposition of the
bill. Thank you.
Hmm.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair
Members Committee. My name is
try Strategies New Mexico
representing Philip Morris
International. Uh, we stand in
slight opposition to this bill.
There's a couple of technical
issues that we still like to
work out that we've talked to
the sponsor about and that he's
agreed to work with us on before
it hits the next committee.
So we're hoping that we can
resolve that. But right now we
have to stand in opposition.
Thank you so much. Anybody
enough? Is it
All right. Thank you. Thank you
for bringing that to attention.
Anybody from the committee?
Senator Smitty's Senator Lopez,
Senator Smith. He should go
Senator Smitty's Senator Lopez,
Senator Smith first. Thank you
very much, um
Madam Chair, Senator have a
loaded question for you. That's
okay.
Um
We're not supposed to
criminalize addiction. So why
are we taxing addiction?
Uh, this is not Madam Chair. Uh,
this is not itself a tax is a
tax that hopefully will deter
people.
Thank you, Ma'am Sheriff Center.
I think the people that are
already addicted to these
products, we're gonna raise the
tax on them, and they have no
choice to stop because they're
addicted.
We're gonna hit them when
they're down in this regressive
tax. That's my opinion.
I support a complete ban on
Vaping.
You all can do it.
I will join you. I will do
whatever I can to ban it this
session.
Drop a dummy bill on the floor
for all I care.
Ban it now.
Please.
Please. I don't know what else
to say.
I mean,
What are we doing? And you know
who else did it, Richie Soon AC
did it.
Like yesterday. You know who
that is?
Is the he's the UK prime
minister just banned all
disposable Vapes in the UK If he
can do it, Mexico can do it.
Let's do it now. Please.
Whoever's listening governor's
office somebody
Let's do it now.
It's pretty. It's It's a lot
simpler than trying to figure
out some equity in taxation and
whatever else let's just ban it
all. Thank you. That's all I
have.
Thank you, Senator Smitty's and
Mr Chair. We did discuss this.
Unfortunately, I'm learning that
sometimes you have to be good if
we were elected UK that way, But
that's not how New Mexico is.
Okay. Thank you Want to Senator
Lopez?
Thank you, Mr Chair. I serve of
course with Senator Hickey and a
few other members of the
Legislature.
On these interim committee that
Reviews Studies has taken
testimony over many years with
regards to tobacco use in New
Mexico.
And it's just disturbing to see
the numbers as they change and
rising.
Um, Mr Chair my soon to be 12
year old talks about what she
sees what she sees in the
classroom with her fellow 12
year olds in the class.
With, um, baby.
It's disturbing and of course,
somebody buys it for them at
that age, but
It's it's just
What do we do to deter?
And there is proven information,
Mr Chair that raising the price
does deter usage.
I would love to do what U K has
done. I saw it was like right
on.
Um, but you know that's a
different system than the one we
have here. Mr. Chair, Senator,
sh Metes and Senator Hickey.
We know that, um
Maybe at some point, we'll get
to that.
At some point, I hope, but, um
we'll take this at this point.
It's It's part of that
incremental step. Thank you, Mr
Chair.
Thank you. Senator Gregg's
Thank you, Mr Chair, and I was
as I was looking, you know, at
the at the bill and
And understanding. I believe
where you're where you're trying
to go. We have another bill.
On alcohol.
It's trying to do the same
thing.
Likely it's not going to be very
successful.
Good chances. This won't
Um, but you know where is right
now?
In the state of New Mexico.
Where's the community that is
making the most money off Canada
did do you guys know?
Shan Lyn card, Mexico
immediately adjacent to show
Even if you know Senator
Schmitt, he's probably already
always is probably correct.
But if Texas doesn't ban
We're going to be just like
Sunland Park is two taxes. Paso
will be I'm not
I'm I'm down there immediately
adjacent to help Paso, Texas.
There's other people who are
very close to Midland. Odessa,
Lubbock, Amarillo.
Ah!
The access to them material.
If it's banned.
Still gonna be there.
The
Will this will this slow anybody
down?
Mr Chair. And and Senator. I
hope you're right. But I don't
know that you what's he going to
cost them 44 cents more or
Actually, it's not. It's gonna
cost him 28 chains more so
whatever the number is 44 minus
12, So it's 32 Shanksville. No,
uh, with Mr Change, please,
please, Because I thought what
it is Mr Charity, raising it to
40.
44 Shan, Mr Chair and Senator
Gregg's. I'm sorry for the
confusion 40 me, but I'm sorry.
It's probably me that you
confused, please, where and and
maybe we
It's actually 44%. So if the
wholesale price is
$2 and it's $2.88.
And and miss chair in center.
Right now. It's 12.5.
Percent.
I believe I believe that
Mhm.
Believed tobacco is 12.5%.
Um and trying to filter back
through the bills from the past
that maybe
It may be and Vaping 12.5%. But
I think the Vaping one of the
reasons we did this was to get
this gets into what's an E
cigarette? What's a cartridge in
what's a liquid and this kind of
covers? All three of those were
as before. I think it was vague.
There is some. I believe there
is some type of tax and of
course, the, uh it's great to
see that the vendors of this
aren't here today.
Um, but, um, we were trying to
get the clarity and follow other
states where the where the
documentation is immense that
the higher the cost
The lower the uptake in unity.
And MS shares 95%.
Tax. Others are 5040. Mr. Chair,
Senator. Thank you. I was
I was reading this to be like
12.5 Shands moving to 44 cents,
but it's It's percentages. So,
uh,
I'm more clear with that. But I,
you know
They're gonna be able, and I
believe if it's kids were really
after
Uh,
They will be able They're
they're already illegal for
kids. So there
They're they're getting
something that's illegal. That
And I think he'll probably
continue to get it. I hope
you're I hope you're would would
be the case if this thing goes,
goes through because
We know what your problem we
know it's dangerous. We know
it's hurting people. Senator
Smitty's is correct and what we
ought to do.
But for where I am
The impact is not going to be
maybe what it will be somewhere
else. I appreciate you bringing
it forward. I'll figure it out.
I think that the fact that it's
an increase in taxes hurts.
Perhaps maybe some of the
poorest of the poor. They'll
keep doing it. But
At some point you got to take a
hoping to operate right? So
thank you, Mr Chair, and thank
you, Senator.
Thank you, Mr Chairman and
Senator. I have just a couple of
real quick questions. One is
that does this affect drop pods?
No.
Mr Center.
Uh, specifically.
The
Yeah. Um, Senator Brendan. Mr.
Cheers specifically what we're
worried about is the initial
Arab point. I mean, this goes to
the start of the nuclear the the
The Trigger is is vaping from
Vaping. They then moved to
pouches seeing a bigger uptake
and youth and pouches now.
So
In order to really put the focus
on the trigger.
We just stuck with this also.
Had had We gone to pouches we
would have had today.
Um, I think they recognize that.
You know when when people grow
up will be effective. But, uh, I
wanted to make this simple and
specifically for kids, and I
wanted to use the revenue as
stable source of revenue for D,
O H and two of them be able to
do preventive programs and
education.
Again at the trigger point. Mr
Chairman, Senator, Can you tell
me the difference between a Juul
pod and they
Uh, the jewel part is something
that you can
Uh, basically stick in between
tobacco
I think there's a difference
between us how China pod
I'm not an expert. I'm not an
expert, either. If you chew
Tell us the distinct
differences. I'm being told that
Joe part is baking.
Am I incorrect?
Mr Chairman, Senator Brandt. I
think the jewel partners is
away. It's a disposable.
And you know, the and and the
new parts are like you know the
pouches. I think you're
confusing with pouches like the
nicotine poachers you put
underneath your mouth.
I'm just trying to figure out
why they're not included in here
because I do believe that they
are
Part is different than the
pouch. I know what you're
talking about with the pouch. A
lot of people use that instead
of just opening
Chewing tobacco now, but I think
that the pods or a self
contained Vaping system, but
they are vaping system anyway.
I was just wondering why they
weren't involved Part of this.
Um and then the other thing is,
and I see cigarettes. Cigars
listed in here. Are we also
raising the taxes part of that
section? Thank you. Not that I
smoke cigars anymore. They hurt
my throat as a position. Stop
smoking cigars. Oral cancer is
one of the worst. This is the
the Year of health for me.
You know, just can the spitting
image can tell something Like
proud of you. I'm sorry.
I don't have anybody else on the
questions that look for the
committee questions so
We're gonna hold on to this, but
I appreciate it. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Okay, Now we have, uh
Senator.
What
Thanks very much. Mr Chairman,
members of the committee.
Uh, I'm here to present set of
Bill 148. You are all getting a
handout given to you that are
built 148.
He is.
Uh, a bill that actually the
essential part of 148 is that
it? Appeals
1997 law.
Which is 7-1 Dash, 6-6 0.41.
Everything else is clean up.
Um and, uh what
What? That section with the
repealed section of law does. Uh
what the 1977 law does.
7-1 dash 6.41 is that it imposes
an administrative fee on certain
local governments. But not all
of the government's for, uh, for
on their, um G r t taxes on
their distribution. And, uh and
so these taxes
Uh, the the, uh, hand out the
troll received us. Remember this
committee and the impact that it
has on every municipality and
your, uh, in your district.
Uh, that you guys would be
interested to know. I've got a,
uh
Read sheet that has every
City and county of the state and
the impact that it has
Uh, but
But basically it's a it's a 3%.
See
And so and so when there is a
property tax that is assessed by
a government that has Advil or,
um, Taxation authority.
The county treasurer.
Collect the funds.
And the county treasurer says,
Oh, this is my duty.
To collect these funds, and it's
my duty to distribute these
funds and they don't keep it to
the money.
Because that's their job. That's
what they're doing. They're
doing their job and they spend
the money to wherever it is.
They're supposed to send it.
But when the state collects G R
t
The state says. Oh, look, we've
got money here. Well, what are
we gonna do with this? Well, I
think we'll keep 3% of this
before we send it back.
That sounds like a good idea to
us.
And then they sent back 97%.
And, uh and so And so when, when
you have people who vote for an
airport locally.
And they say we vote to taxed
ourselves for an airport. The
state decides 3% of that should
go in and statement you have
people in the local government.
Local area. Let's say we decide
that we're going to vote for
public safety.
The state decides well, we're
going to put 3% of that instant
gentrified.
Which is not what the people
voted him.
And, uh, in this, 3% adds up
This, 3% adds up as as, uh
As you can see, in this list
here, Uh,
And I'll take the list here of
Senator Jaramillo, for example,
Um
Drama over five years. $74,000
travel small community. What
could they do with 74,898?
Dollars. They could do quite a
bit actually.
Ah Espanola.
Almost a million dollars in the
last five years.
Alamos.
Over $5 million
That was local taxation. Money
not returned, not return, and,
uh
And so if we were dealing
For dealing with the Mafia. We
would call this a big
Because we're dealing with the
state. We call it a fee. Uh And
so with that, Mr Chairman, uh, I
will. Semantics, right? Yeah,
exactly.
So with that, Mr Chairman, I do
have with me. Uh, Mr A. J.
Forte, who is the executive
director of the New Mexico
Municipal League and Miss joyous
person who is the executive
director of the of the New
Mexico Curries and I will be
happy to let either one of the
entertainment say a word or two.
Otherwise. Well, yes.
Mr Chair. I would like to add
something. It was interesting.
The first time I discovered in
this role this fee. Um we had
looked for funding amounts for
the hold harmless some food and
medical and we were trying to
assess what that impact was to
the counties. The only way to
get that fee is to go to
taxation and revenue and dig
through what's called the 500
monthly reports. They include
line items for the column for
all 106 municipalities and all
33 counties.
So you can imagine how extensive
this is, and we've had to
extract the data. That was the
first time that we really got
our arms around how significant
this fee was at the time it was
$11 million. We've continued to
track it at that level because
there's no other way for us to
pull the money out to show
exactly what that impact is. And
last time we looked, it was a
little over $26 million annually
to the counties.
It has grown significantly,
probably because of the changes
in tax policy, and we don't
think that that reasonably
reflects the service or the
accounting and distribution that
is likely required to provide
this tax back to the Mr
Chairman. Members of the
committee. Mr Chairman, I think
it's so appropriate that this
bill comes up.
Oh, yes, sir. Mr. Chair members
of the committee, A G 40 of the
municipal league. I do
appreciate that. This bill comes
up last. So much of what was on
the agenda today is shifting
General fund right whether it be
to the road fund or the
Transportation Project Fund or
the bill earlier with the M s
fund.
All of those presentations. You
heard the basics, whether it be
water roads or basic services
and what Joy had said This was
not an easy number to come to.
This was a very difficult number
to find. We actually had to rely
on new Mexico Tech data that
that we initiated along with
Alison digging through the RP
five hundreds of the day this is
this is real money to every
community.
And we're all government, right?
Whether it be state government
or local government. We're all
in the same boat. We just don't
local governments to receive
their grt Cassidy. We absolutely
understand that there's a cost
to this is just a policy
decision that we're asking at
this time. We'll go out to the
audience.
Anybody here in support of
Senate Bill 148.
Opposition.
You don't have anybody on zoom
as well, so we'll go to the
committee.
Questions Senator worth
somewhat, Madam, Mr Chair.
I think I am going to put the
secretary on the spot here. I
just would like to hear from the
department. If there's a
Kind of a response to. Obviously
this is a big number that
If we pass this I mean, you said
26 million for the county's. I
assume it's probably close to
that when you add it all up per
year.
For the For the
So $50 million for the $75
million in fees.
So just grab the mic. Yeah, I
think it would be helpful to
just get it.
Take on kind of what the what?
the what The department is if
this is correct as department
using this money houses, what's
what's happening here is the sun
It is, I think, um, So, Mr Chair
and Senator worth, um, you know,
just want to state that I'm not
in support or opposition, but we
tried to be insightful in R F I
R on this bill.
Um, we estimate that by FY 26
when this bill would take effect
that the amount of revenue is
about 64 million, That amount
has gone up pretty significantly
in the last couple of years
because of a number of factors
just general growth in the
economy. Growth in oil, um,
destination sourcing and a
couple of a couple other things
that are broaden the tax base.
Um
So, um
Yeah, but 26. We're looking
about 64 million. Um, we have a
table in our fire that I believe
that the LFC repeated that, you
know, give us the top about 17
local governments that would
receive 75% of this revenue and
all others splitting 25% of this
revenue. That's in the detail.
You've got.
Um, as far as the department. It
doesn't come to us so we don't
necessarily have a funding issue
with us. The revenue goes to the
General fund, not to text and
Rev. There was a period of about
maybe eight years in the last
administration when there was
not withstanding language that
Um, as far as the department. It
doesn't come to us so we don't
necessarily have a funding issue
with us. The revenue goes to the
General fund, not to text and
Rev. There was a period of about
maybe eight years in the last
administration when there was
not withstanding language, part
of tax and revenue operations
were supplant, supplemented with
this to rely less in general
fund. But that hasn't been the
case I have. I'm here if you
have another technical
questions.
No, Mr Chair that that is super
helpful to understand, And I
think again, this is going to be
one of those bills just
Center fielder. You've not been
in the room, but we're trying to
figure out how to put together.
A tax package and we have a
capacity window and some of
these bills that have general
fund hit. You know, we may send
it forward. I certainly support
this happening. What can't
happen, though, is to have $64
million come out of the tax
package capacity.
And so Senator Munoz is looking
at that motor vehicle excise tax
transfers one. The other bill s.
it was represented. That was a
one time hit. I'm told that's
get to the General fund, and so
He's going to the Senate Finance
Committee is gonna have to
figure out if there's additional
record. Do these types of things
on top of what's carved out of
the tax package just to clarify.
Certainly, Mr Herman, consider
worth you will note on Page
seven.
Line 18 that effectively 25.
Because it wouldn't be fair
given where the number is no
matter how wrong some of us feel
like this practices.
It's not fair to have this.
To say Oh, and we need to figure
out this has, uh, one year
delayed effective.
Date.
So that so that this does not
impact the budget the working on
right now and and it gives us
time to plan harder in in in in
terms of plugging that hole,
Absolutely miss Chair I smile a
little bit because remembering
with Senator Smith, the many
attempts that I tried to, uh,
let's just delay it by a year
and then you don't have to worry
about it. And
Don't worry about it. Worry
about it next year. Uh, and
again. I appreciate that. You're
right. You're absolutely right.
It's just it's going to be
Hit the next year. I mean, when
you look at the number
Ah!
Again. It's it. I guess I'm even
more concerned because the
secretary is basically saying
This fee is not going to her
agency.
Administer this, So really, it's
not even being It's just this is
a general fund.
Contribution by the counties in
the cities, and that does seem
completely completely unfair. So
again. I appreciate it. I do
think we should. We should move
this on and let's center Munoz
and the Finance Committee work
on this issue. I have a Senator
Tollman
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you
for this Chairman and Senator
Tallman. My understanding is
that this was imposed around
1977.
Ah, which means it may have been
part of the Big Mac tax cut.
So that this was actually when
the state decided to tuck cut
taxes. The state decided that
local governments should have to
subsidize the state.
For the tax cuts of the state.
Mr Chairman and Senator Tollman.
Ah, you know, I've been I've
been working my way through
different things that I finally
got around to this, and I
figured it's time to write the
bill.
Well again. Thank you for
bringing us against Senator.
Thank you, Senator Griggs.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr Sharon.
Thank you guys for being here,
You know, it's it's gonna be
kind of hard for me not to, you
know, uh, the impact on
communities real.
And and you just as a as a
community you used to judge
Is what you do you just a judge.
Being able to have this
available to you. There's
another thing.
There's another thing that we
kind of do and it's it's kind of
an interesting thing is if you
go out and you
But you bond or you borrowed
money to do a project.
Road Project Construction
project.
You charge grocery seats tax on
it. You charge grocery seats tax
on the money you borrowing or
you're being granted from the
state to do the project. Then
you turn around pay grocery
seats tax.
Back to the city or the state.
Would you just a convoluted way
of doing stuff?
And
We can save the state money we
could. You know, we shave
Read. Save money if we didn't
tax ourselves when we would do a
darn we do so, um
Senator. I appreciate you guys
finding this. I appreciate you
guys bringing it up and and
hopefully right, Okay. I don't
have anybody else on the list.
Mr. Chairman, just comment.
Brings back some memories of the
food tax.
And all of the others that we
have
You know, past and then and
then, of course, the other
trials and tribulations of you
know the hold harmless in the
bill.
What we did for local
government. I mean, it's just
this brings back many different
memories of what we've done here
at the Legislature.
And I tend to agree with Senator
Worth. We should just send us
over to finance and
Let them let's see what they do.
Just
Comments.
You know, Senator Brent. Thank
you, Mr Chairman, and this is
worse than the extortion with
the charter schools.
Really take 2% for them, right?
Extort 3% never should have been
done This way. I will say it
wasn't me.
I did not do this, but you know,
we need to, uh, that this money.
Um not your fault, You just
falling.
Unless we're going to start
charging 3% for the taxes we
collect for the state at the
local. We could do that, But I'm
quite young.
But I am a grandfather. So thank
you, Mr Chairman. I would agree
with forward and it's not a long
in the tax package, so let's
ball wax.
Will challenge the chair again.
All right.
Motion for a new path for do
Pass. Second by motion by
Senator Artemida second by
Senator Brandt.
It's called the role
Senator Brandt? Yes.
Senator grips? Yes, Senator had
a meal. Yes.
Senator Lopez.
Senator Sanchez CDs excused.
Senator Tollman.
Senator Worth? Yes, Senator
Hamlin.
Senator Sando Yes.
We have eight. Yeah. Do pass 8
to 0.
Thank you, Chairman. Members of
the Committee. Thank you very
much. I also do very much want
appreciate the position of tax
and revenue, given that it does
go to the General fund that they
were here to provide technical
assistance and answer much for
being here.
Alright. Next step. We have the
Senate Bill 100.
Hmm. Party Guy party Boy Bill.
Hmm. Hmm.
Hmm.
All right, Senator.
Mr Chair. Members of the
committee. Um
Moved to table.
I just wanted to it is on that
better. Yes, Mr Chair members of
the committee. I did want to
Caption this with if
The quality of the party
upcoming is directly
So, Yeah, we just We just do
pass. Get out of here. Everybody
wants to go home anyway.
Wings and this one to center
Munoz and hanging hash it out as
well. So
Uh, Mr Members of the committee
on the eve of Groundhog Day.
This was somewhat reminiscent
and of an exact bill that
Passed both the house and
sending me unanimously last
year, and it is a straight
appropriation to the city of
Hobbs to make up for
Some lost grt due to destination
base.
Sourcing.
The city of Hobbs is is is much
different than the other
communities around the city and
that all of the all of the
companies are located within the
city. But when destination
source was enacted
All of that revenue, then went
to the counties. So the city of
Hobbs has had an 8 to $10
million deficit.
Um, in those in those subsequent
years after the enactment of HB
six
If we look there you have, um,
presentation before you and you
go to the second to last sheet
Looks like this. It's about the
clearest
We can look out there and then
highlighted in Amber on line
two.
Oil and gas extraction.
You can see in fiscal year 2018
the city Hobbs collected $12
million fiscal year 2019 17
million
Fiscal year 20 12.5 million and
then fiscal year 20 to 6.5
million.
In the end fiscal year, 2323
just to take under 7 million
there so you can see the
tremendous hit that the city of
Hobbs took at the enactment, and
when the governor vetoed this
one of her executive notes on
there was that we weren't sure
we couldn't. We couldn't replace
this revenue.
As quickly as we had hoped to
last year.
With this because we weren't
sure of the impact that it was
going to have and weeks or a
little shorter than they should
be. But, um, you can see there
the first three months. Looks
like the trend is going to be
roughly the same, um in a tick
under $2 million for the first
quarter of the year.
So with that, you know, and I
know you guys know, tax and and
how difficult things are and
there's been several bills
submitted to try to help.
The city of Hobbs. Recuperate,
Uh
Some of the money that they have
lost due to the enactment of HB
six, which has been a boon for
the state, but a detriment to
the city of haves and the city
of Hobbs are still has to
provide all the utilities they
still have to. You know, for
example, they
An extra portion of West County
Road had sewer infrastructure
and everything like that, and
now they have no way to recoup
that investment. So there
They are really struggling. This
seems like a simple fix. This is
not an end all be all. It is a
one time appropriation. Um, and
a chance for the state to feed
the horse that's pulling the
with that one.
Thank you. Thank you, Senator.
We'll go out to the audience.
Anybody here in support of
Senate Bill 100.
Anybody in the opposition.
I know what you have.
Uh, Sam, Mayor of Hops Are you
on?
Senator. Mr. Chairman? Yes. Go
ahead.
Ah, thank you very much, Um
For the opportunity of you know
Toby Spears, our finance
director. Now I have had the
privilege to testify to this
committee and also taxation and
revenue about this unique
situation that HB six put all of
the communities in southeastern
New Mexico into and, uh I think,
uh, What are the things is Mr
Senator McCutcheon referred to
was the impacted? We really
know. And I, you know, we
testified to taxation revenue
stabilization.
As late as November of this
year, 23 about the fact that the
trend is not reversing. We are
still seeing a decline, in fact,
our local community businesses
that are domiciled in Hobbs. A
lot of them were slow to change
their reporting.
And as it became public
knowledge in the all in all and
gas industry, Uh there was a lot
of pressure put on them to make
changes in their reporting and
make changes in their invoicing.
And so we're still seeing a
decline, and we, in fact, are
concerned about clawbacks as a
result of that as well. So as
Senator McCutchen referred to a
unanimous passed bill
In both houses. The governor
used some provincial message to
say We don't know what the
implication really is, but I
think at this stage of the game
We do know, And although it's
unintended consequences, we
still have to deal with it in
terms of providing the
appropriate public safety
infrastructure, all those types
of things and on behalf of the
city Hobbs I can tell you that
we would insincerely appreciate
This coming back in front of the
Legislature, and I would
encourage everyone to encourage
the governor not to veto it this
time. If it passes the house and
the Senate. Thank you very much.
Thank thank you, Mr Mayor. Now
we'll go to the committee.
Any questions of the committee
members Senator Worth
Thank you, Mr Chair, and thank
you, Senator McCutcheon. And if
senator former Senator Cornyn is
listening
She was a champion and fighting
for this and and I just want to
appreciate also Mayor Cobb
again. He has been
Kind of a straight shooting
advocate for trying to fix this
issue. What's what's
interesting is that
Now that the changes happened.
If I remember correctly, his
testimony their interim during
the interim committee is that
He's not anymore advocating to
go back to where we were before,
because all the companies that
have moved into
The county and the way they're
taxed, actually, perhaps are
getting a better tax rate. I
mean, this is the interesting
about destination based
sourcing, so those they benefit
by where they're located, so
it's no longer
Kind of adjusting.
Or going backwards in terms of
the formula, because that would
cause a whole bunch of other
Unintended consequences. And so
again, I think that
It's a It's an appropriation
bill and we should send they can
find the one time money to make
it happen again. I just wanted
to make those comments and
appreciate you continuing to
have the discussion. I was one
of the sponsors with represented
Harper of the destination based
sourcing, and I think that it
has been a good thing for our
state and the reason you heard,
the secretary of state say.
The tax base is broadening is
because we're now capturing a
bunch of revenue. We previously
didn't capture. But anytime you
make a tax change of that
magnitude, there are different.
Consequences depending on where
you are and so
Um, you know, I do feel that the
case has been made.
That that
The city of Hobbs did get hit by
this and so again. I think this
is worth
Passing on to our friends and
finding again looking for the
money, So I appreciate it very
much. Thank you, Senator.
Anyone else?
Senator Tallman question.
What
Senator. You respond to that?
That is correct. The problem
doesn't know the complications
with tax code change everything
and there always is a little
structure.
And it just so happens that the
communities in southeast New
Mexico were that collateral
damage. This is kind of a band
aid provided this is a This is a
one time one time deal there is,
you know, maybe something a
little bit positive for the
state that came out of HB six
and that is now a lot of the
contractors, Same playing field.
So that New Mexico has actually
increased and the new Mexico
contractors so it has put
something in Mexico contractors
on a more level playing field,
But the city of Hobbs again is
still the collateral damage
there.
Just the collider come down
through the text, so we're just
trying to make a simple fix. Say
Mr Chair, Senator.
Who question um
The city of Hobbs is is
comparable in that a lot of the
service in the city limits there
in Hobbs proper in Carlsbad
proper, but
95% of the witches opposite of
almost every in that people
commute to,
Okay. We have a motion but
motion for the past with Senator
Gregg's second by Senator Hamlin
take roll.
Senator Brandt. Yes, ma'am.
Senator Griggs. Yes.
Senator had a meal.
Senator Lopez Senator San
Senator Tallman.
Senator Smitty's is excused.
Senator Worth? Yes, Senator
Hamblin? Yes, Senator Sando?
Yes.
We have seven yeses, where do
pass?
You have a new pass, Senator. We
look forward to that party and,
uh
Congratulations. Mr Chair is
that his first Do pass first to
pass.
Yeah.
before. Yeah, we heard you say
that Mr Jared Committee. Thank
you so much. Mr Chairman, if I
may, though, but
For the floor with that not
depend on how the party goes
tomorrow. I think so. I think
there's a condition to hold.
hold judgment. So hang on Mr
Chair members, not
Good answer. Alright Committee
members before we leave. I just
wanna let you know that we've
been working with the house, Uh,
Tax Revenue Committee. And so
what we've decided to do was
have a joint meeting tomorrow.
Monday Wednesday. Fridays is
when the attacks in
How's tackling red meats?
Typically 830, But we're gonna
have a joint hearing tomorrow to
go over those things that were
considered as part of the task
package on the Senate side, as
well as the House side, so that
hearing will be tomorrow morning
at eight AM on the House floor.
So please be there.
8 A.m., Senator Brent, I will
wake you up. Go and pick you up,
Waking up. 6 A.m.. Okay. All
right. We will have something.
Eight AM Senator Gregg's, so but
anyway, so I know what I know
There's rules. Also so Senator
Lopez and hearty meal
Will be coming back and forth,
but
I already have a good night's
rest.
Senators, and we'll see you all
tomorrow bright and early eight
o'clock.
House floor. Thank you.
