So we are expecting our
Republican colleagues to show up
as soon as their caucus ends,
but uh they are uh informed that
we're starting on this, um, on
this bill, they, they are, uh,
supportive of this first bill,
um, of course, their votes will
confirm that, but go ahead.
Senator Figueroa.
Here
And that you had a meal.
Senator O'Malley.
Senator Paul.
Senator Ramos is excused Senator
Sanchez is excused Senator share
is excused Senator work.
Senator Bergman's.
Senator Hamblin, we have 6
present for a quorum.
Em, thank you very much.
All right. So we uh have a
committee sub on this.
Vice chair, I'm gonna depend on
you, uh, if you will, am I
correct, Senator Steinborn? You
have committee subs. So, um,
Senator Bergman's, if you will
please.
I'll move the committee sub for
discussion. We have the
committee sub move for
discussion.
So no opposition senator.
You just start talking. You can
do your thing. Let me tell you
about the bill and the.
So, Madam Chair, colleagues,
great to be with you. Sent bill
295 is uh
I think an exciting bill,
because it, it, it provides us
the opportunity to help make a
big dent in the issue of
recruiting and keeping medical
providers in the state of New
Mexico.
It would end, it would remove
basically all GRT on provider.
Um, GRT not hospitals, not
nursing homes, independent
practitioners, essentially.
Um, but it would remove all GRT
with one exception, which is
Medicaid payments. And the
reason we wouldn't remove GRT on
Medicaid payments, Madam Chair
and colleagues, is because the
um that that GRT is already
included in their provider rates
from MCOs, Medicaid, chosen MCOs
for the state and uh we, of
course, get a federal match on
those payments. So if we were to
do away with it, we would lose
the federal match, which would
cost us multiples of the GRT
itself.
So, the way we handle that for
providers is we just give them
that GRT on top of their
provider rate.
But it removes all others and um
And that would include new areas
that they still pay GRT that
this would deal with. Some
examples would include self-pay,
patients who don't have
insurance or don't use it. I'm
out of network payments to some
of these providers, equipment
and supplies, medical supplies,
they have to pay GRT on it. This
would do away with it.
Um, co-payments on Medicare,
believe it or not, they have to
pay GRT when someone, they call
it co-insurance is a technical
term, but they have to pay GRT
on that. The net effect of this,
Madam Chair, colleagues, is that
they have an absolute.
Maze of different things,
independent practitioners have
to track over what they pay GRT
on, what they don't, and then
they have to pay thousands every
month to accountants to figure
it all out, and it is an
absolute nightmare where one of
only two states charged GRT on
these expenses, and it's again a
drag on our health providers to
do this. It's a disincentive.
It's one of the things that's
making us less competitive than
other states, uh, by us still
doing this. So this is our
opportunity, this session.
Under the fortunate times we're
living in to do away with this
once and for all, and that
really make New Mexico a more
provider friendly state.
That being said, ma'am I'm chair
what the sub does is just clean
up a few drafting issues, um,
related to the language on
Medicaid GRT.
Um, primarily, that's the main
change. And then there was
another change related to hold
harmless distributions that also
got fixed from the intention of
the drafting.
And
That's what the bill does, and
I'm happy to stand for
questions, ma'am chair, and I, I
want to thank all the providers
in the medical society from
Donana County, who we've just
put in countless hours trying to
unpack this because it's very
complex and it was even complex
for LFC and tax and Rev to sort
through all this, but we put in
the time and we think we've
we've figured it out.
That's what Senate Bill 295.
Thank you.
All right, great. Thank you,
Senator and as a co-sponsor of
this bill, thank you very much
uh for, for doing this. Um, so
at this point, uh, what I would
like to do is see about in the
audience, how many in the
audience are in support of this
committee sub by show of hands.
7
Is Dara also in support? There's
no nothing marked here.
So Derek Ray is in opposition.
All right, um, so if we can,
let's get 4 people up here, uh,
since we don't have our
colleagues here, let's go ahead
and get 4 people up. We're gonna
give you one minute a piece,
please, if you will stick to
that time limit. Uh, we'll have
4 folks speaking in support of
this bill, um, in the audience
just by show of hands, is there
anybody in opposition?
OK, we'll have you speak as
well.
Right, go ahead. Hello, madam,
Carrie Robin Bruder with the New
Mexico Medical Society, we
cannot thank the sponsor enough
for bringing this legislation
forward. If I say this has been
a 20 year long conversation in
the healthcare community. I
don't think I'm exaggerating.
Uh, we would probably have well
over 100 physicians online if
they were not still in clinic
seeing patients right now to
support this legislation, the
very high priority for us, and
we appreciate it being brought
forward by all of the
co-sponsors and by Senator
Steinborn.
Chair members of the committee.
My name is Tom Scripsma. I'm the
executive director of the New
Mexico Dental Association and a
part-time dentist in
Albuquerque. Um, we are very
much in favor of the bill and
thank the sponsors for um the
work done on it. Um,
Dental is one of the areas that
particularly um it is paid for
by out of pocket dollars by
patients, as well as by plans
that do not qualify for the uh
managed care deduction and so
this would make a huge
difference for Dennis, uh,
dentists are leaving the state
right now and alarming amount.
And so, um, you know, making
this kind of change would be a,
would be a huge thing, we think
for this. This has been an issue
since I started practice, which
is now 43 years ago, and um at
that time, Dennis were flocking
to the state, but it's
definitely something different
now and we need this.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, Christina
Fisher, Associate director of
Think New Mexico. We
enthusiastically support this
bill. I want to thank Senator
Steinborn and all of the 17
bipartisan Senate co-sponsors,
many of whom are on this
committee, um, according to a
recent national study, New
Mexico is one, is the only state
in the nation that has lost
doctors between 2019 and 2024.
And our GRT is one of the three
main factors that causes doctors
to leave the state or retire
early, along with our
malpractice laws and our low
Medicaid reimbursement rates and
high Medicaid population.
As the senator said, New Mexico
is one of just two states with a
GRT. The other is Hawaii, and
they cap it at 4.7%. Ours
average is 7%, and in many
communities it's over 8%. Unlike
most businesses, healthcare
providers cannot pass this along
to insurance companies, um, or
Medicare. And so they end up
eating that whole cost and it
does make it a much less
competitive, uh, state in which
to provide care and practice
medicine. This legislature has
been chipping away at this tax
for the last 20 years, and this
would finally do away with it
entirely. We encourage you to
support it. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, Jason Weeks,
registered lobbyist for the
Hospital Association. We want to
thank the sponsors for bringing
this forward, particularly
Senator Steinbor. We think this
is a really important piece of
legislation because it will help
improve the health of our
healthcare community in general,
will help us uh attract
physicians to the state and
hopefully retain those
positions. Um, the reality is a
huge percentage of physicians in
the state are employed by
hospitals. That's not
necessarily a good thing. A lot
of states have lower percentages
of, uh, physicians employed.
hospitals, we think that this
actually could help improve that
differential by making it easier
for independent physicians to
operate their practices, um, and
so we stand in strong support of
this. We think it's an important
piece of policy for our
healthcare system. Thank you.
Thank you so much and thank you,
Senator Brandt, who's also one
of the co-sponsors on this. Um,
so we're gonna go to opposition
in-house and then we're gonna go
online. So if you will go ahead
and, and stand up and you've got
a minute as well.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. I'm Alison
Nichols with the New Mexico
Municipal League, and we have
some concerns about SB 295,
given the significant hit to
local governments that's
identified in in the FIR for the
original bill, um, as you
probably know, municipalities
are heavily reliant on grocery
receipts, tax revenue with about
2/3 of all revenue coming from
GRT and many cities are almost
entirely reliant on GRT to fund
basic services. So when we see
tax-based aversion like this, we
also see cuts in public safety
and other essential services.
And while the States General
Fund has other revenue, oil and
gas revenue, other tax streams
to absorb these revenue hits,
municipalities do not. So we
urge you to please consider the
impact on, uh, local
governments. Thank you.
Thank you so much. And just to
remind the sponsors that once
we're done with public comment,
you'll have 5 minutes to respond
to anything in there. Let's go
ahead and go online. We've got
Barbara who is in support.
Barbara, if you will, uh, unmute
yourself. You do have one
minute. You will see at the 32nd
mark our Zoom master will go
ahead and type the you have 30
seconds left. If you do go over
the total one minute, we will
cut your mic. So Barbara, if you
will go ahead and unmute
yourself.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. I
would like to thank Senator
Steinborn and all of those
sponsors of this bill to
understand that we live in a
national marketplace for
recruiting physicians, and this
helps to get rid of the
disadvantage that we have had in
New Mexico. I run New Mexico
Cancer Center in Albuquerque and
Gallup, and this will allow us
to do a better job of recruiting
physicians from out of state. I
would also remind the committee
that
We are small businesses. We live
in local communities. We pay
taxes. We hire people locally
who pay their taxes. We develop
infrastructure for local
businesses to be able to come
and locate in small communities,
so on total as small business
practices, we contribute
significantly to the economics
of that town, and we are part of
the infrastructure for greater
independence economic
economic development, so I
appreciate this bill and all of
its sponsors and urge you to
move it forward with a due pass.
Thank you.
Thank you so much. And um it's
either Dana or Dara.
Uh, you have registered that you
are in support, so you do have
one minute if you will, please,
um, I do see some other folks
that I have a feeling are
probably in support of this as
well.
Um, Rebecca Bergson, I believe.
Let's go ahead, Dara, you've got
one minute. Uh, you will get a
thirty-second warning in the
chat. So get Dara, go ahead.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, my name is Dana Gray,
executive director of Desert
states Physical Therapy Network,
representing 30 independent
private practices throughout the
state. Network clinics are
appreciative of all efforts made
to increase gross gross receipt
tax deductions to assist with
rising costs of providing
quality care to New Mexico
communities. We echo the other
voices of support for House Bill
295 and thank the sponsors for
their work on this legislation.
Thank you so much. We have
anybody else online who is in
support? Yeah, I figured as
much. Go ahead, Rebecca.
You've got one minute, you're
welcome to unmute yourself and
you'll see a 32nd warning in the
chat when you've got 30 seconds
left. Go ahead, Rebecca.
OK, thank you so much. Um, yes,
I wanna thank you all. Um, I've
had a clinic here with my
husband for 15 years and
actually it's been here since
the 80s when my in-laws started
it, and this would be such a big
difference. It's, I can't tell
you how many times I've told my
husband, you know, we really
should just sell because it's
just so hard running a small
business as it is, but, you
know, um, this GRT would make a
huge difference. We would love
to expand, and I know we've had
some
Um, town hall meetings and other
doctors have said how when they
are in El Paso, they have grown
into other clinics. They have 5
clinics there and 1 clinic here.
I do think that there is some
economic benefit, um, in the
long run if we could expand, I
would love that. Um, we wanna
hire another doctor, but we
can't seem to get one, so, uh,
we would love to recruit more
doctors here and, and honestly
we could afford to pay uh
Higher salaries and um afford to
have another doctor, uh, in a
better way if we didn't have to
pay this 8% that over 8% that we
pay in gros receipts tax each
month.
Thank you so much.
Thank you, Rebecca. Anybody else
in the room either in support or
in opposition.
Right, uh, sponsors, you do have
5 minutes to respond to anything
that you've heard, uh, you're
welcome to do so.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Colleagues, thank you again and
thank you.
Time to come and make a public
comment and
You know, I, I think we can all
feel how big this would be for
our state and for small towns in
that spirit, I, I want to
acknowledge that when we removed
the GRT, part of what we're
removing is the local portion of
the GRT as well. And so part of
the design of this to make it
affordable and spread around
basically the um investment is,
is asking local communities to
also
Absorb part of this in losing
part of that local GRT as
opposed to the state having to
write a second check to the
local governments when in fact
we're doing this for our
communities. We're doing this so
local government communities
like Gallup. We heard from the
Gallup Cancer Center, so they
can have a physician there, an
oncologist there helping the
people of Gallup or Las Cruces
where Rebecca just called in so
that we can keep Dr. Bergson in
practice and keep him from
moving to El Paso or some or
something else. So we are asking
for that shared.
Investment and, uh, you know,
that is part of the strategy of
this bill and certainly, you
know, as we consider this and
perhaps a larger legislative tax
package, something we should all
talk about, but I'm certainly
going to be reaching out to
mayors and other communities,
and I believe we'll see support
around the state for for sharing
in that, but, um, that, that is
one thing to keep talking about,
certainly, I'm sure.
OK, Senator Brandt, would you
like to say a few words? Thank
you, Madam Chair, and you know
this is one of those areas that
I actually thought we had dealt
with a couple of years ago in
our tax package and it was one
of those things that, that we
thought was in there that was
best. And so in in some ways,
this is really a clean up to try
to make sure we're, we're
getting all the medical to not
have GRT charged on it.
Yeah, no one's going out and,
and getting this equipment or
buying their medication or these
things that are being charged
gross receipts tax on just
because they want them.
You know, this isn't a nicety.
This is something that is
needed. I mean, I remember, was
it last year or the year before
Mountain Chair, you were here in
a leg brace.
You know, and, and that wasn't
something you wanted.
You know, and, and the medical
equipment that I've had to get
for for some of my medical
issues. You know, it's not
something I really want to get.
Um, it, it's something we have
to have and.
Um
It's something that we really
shouldn't have to pay tax to the
government on top of having to
take care of our medical needs.
Thank you.
Great. Thank you so much. And
Senator Brandt, you are doing
the bill next, uh, right after
this. And so it'll be
interesting to hear, um, the
difference on that. So at this
point, um, I now go to the
committee. Thank you,
colleagues, for being able to
join. I know your caucus went a
little bit long, so I'm glad
you're here. Um, so if I can now
go to the committee, uh, if
there are any questions or
comments that they'd like to
make about this bill?
Senator O'Malley.
Thank you, ma'am Chair.
Um, Senator Steinberg, you
mentioned that the committee's
report.
Um, there, there were changes
and having to do with a hold
harmless.
Um,
so this bill does not
Um
The cities, they don't hold
apart, this does not hold them
harmless.
What you're saying, the local
governments.
And chair Senator, no, it
doesn't, it doesn't, and it was
written in a way so that it
didn't cause I do believe that
we're all in this together and
And it would have made it so
that we couldn't have done it at
all. And I think the only way we
can get this done is if we share
it gets done.
Um, thank you, Senator. Of
course, I represent most of my
district is in the city of
Albuquerque, of course, which is
realized very heavily on
Our grocery seats tax and the
county obviously on property
tax, um, and you said that you
had reached out to, say, the
mayor of the city of Albuquerque
or not yet? No, chair senator,
but I intend to reach out to a
number of
Liters around the state.
OK. And, and I just wanna
mention that, you know, the city
and the county, uh, having the,
you know,
Most populist,
uh,
uh, I hope I'm saying that
right, um, Vero County and of
course the city of Albuquerque
being the largest city. Uh, we
do provide a lot of services,
um, to the, to the state and,
uh, you know, there's not that
there's not a contribution from
others.
Local, uh, or smaller towns and
cities, uh, and, uh, I mean,
I'm, and I personally don't have
an issue with that. I think that
that's important that we do
that.
But I'll be honest, I'm a little
concerned about uh what that
means to the city of Albuquerque
in terms of lost revenue.
Thank you, Senator.
I'm sorry, Senator Malley, my
apologies for multitasking cause
we want to make sure this. So,
so you're done. Is there anybody
else?
Senator Worth, thank you, Madam
Chair, and Senator Brandt, uh,
the only reason we had the bill
passed 2 years ago was doing in
large part to your work on the
Conference committee and one of
the most interesting conference
committees, I think either of us
have ever been involved with,
uh, but it was one of the few
pieces that survived the veto of
the billion dollar tax package
that year.
And
Uh, I certainly think this is a
good direction to go, but I will
say I, I worried, Senator
O'Malley.
I think it's touched on the
impact of this. I'm surprised
municipal league is not here
they are here. OK, good, good,
good, good. Uh, counties,
association of counties, are
they here?
I'm just surprised by that. Um,
Again, this whole issue of hold
harmless has been a disaster,
you know, and Santa Fe did not
put on the 3 8s that were given
and so we've really, as a result
of that, we were able to be part
of a
Different phased in process, um,
But I just would be, uh, you
know, I'm curious to see what
the, what's the impact on, on
the city. I just, we need to
know that, uh, because it's a
big ask.
Uh, and again,
When folks came in here and told
us to take the tax off of food,
uh, they said it was revenue
neutral and Senator Smith was
smart enough to say, boy, I'm
worried about that. So we're
gonna put in place
You know, this hold harmless,
and that's been another
disaster. I mean, again, the
amount of money the states had
to pay it because that wasn't
revenue neutral. So that's the
piece of this that I think
causes me some to pause, I mean,
I certainly think.
This is something we need to
figure out how to do, but I
worry about, especially for
cities, because cities, the GRT
is, that's their revenue source.
And so what kind of, I, I, I was
looking in the FIR to see if
there was a breakdown that would
show us what the difference.
Cities, what it would cost, uh,
cause again, I, I just would
want to know that, uh, before
just automatically saying yes,
because we like it so much at
the state level.
Uh, we should do this. So I just
wanted to flag that, that issue.
And, and I just, I guess one
question for Senator Brandt, do
you remember two years ago how
we dealt with the local
government impact of the GRT
that I was saying it was Senator
Moore's.
Bill, I'm just curious, how did,
do you remember how we did that,
Mr. President, I don't believe
we did a whole harmless. I think
we pretty much stopped doing
those, um, in our tax packages.
Um, you know, one thing we could
look at in the future, maybe not
in this bill, but maybe some of
the future ones or maybe this
bill is is just doing the
state's portion of GRT.
Um, where the local would still
be charged at the local
community, but the state
wouldn't charge there, that way
the local community would still
get their portion much smaller
portion would be charged and
passed on to the local.
Yeah, I'm Madam Chair, and I
think the other thing that we
need to just be aware as as we.
Narrow the GRT tax base, the
rates go up and we're going in a
direction where
I actually think one of the
things that was in the 2023 bill
was a GRT reduction across the
board, which also helps everyone
by broadening.
You know, the base and lowering
the rates. And so I just uh.
We tried and it got vetoed.
Remember that was part of that
was because the problem is it's
so expensive. We've we've
narrowed the base so much, the
rate's gotten so high and to
bring it down, it costs so much
money that it just gets really
tough to do, and I just think.
At some point, with all the
revenues that we have, we need
to look at lowering the GRT.
Just because I do think.
Again, if we could get that to
come down, that helps everyone.
Provided that the locals just
don't go and increase the make
up the difference that we lower
it at this end, that's the other
challenge to this, but I think
it's a good discussion to have,
and I mean again, I certainly, I
signed on to the bill. I think
it makes sense.
I'm hoping we can find some
capacity to be able to.
Factor this in, but I do, I
would ask that, and maybe
municipal League folks are here
just to get a breakdown so that
Senator O'Malley and for those
of us that, yeah, I mean,
Senator Harmi, all of us I think
have.
Different impacts, but what,
what's it gonna cost our local
folks. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator Wortham.
Before I go to Senator
Jaramillo, I do want to remind
the committee because this is uh
a tax bill, as also with Senator
Brands, who will be coming up
next. These are bills that we
are not going to vote on. We are
going to hold. Um, we are moving
forward with discussions on, uh,
whether or not we have capacity,
um, because the Senator Wirth
talked about, it's if we're
cutting taxes someplace, we have
to raise taxes somewhere else,
and so that is the challenge
that we have before us.
Um, but I do want to ensure that
there is a commitment to try and
find solutions to this and so uh
appreciate those conversations,
but for the committee's purpose,
this and Senator Brandt's bill
that will be next are bills that
we will hold. So Senator
Jaramillo, you're next in line
for questions. Thank you, Madam
Chair and thank you, senators. I
can see the intent of the bill,
but I also have a concern as
The Espanola senator, and I'm
going to tell you why, so that's
but you know that sits and
what's a checkerboard city and
what I mean by that is we sit in
two counties, Espanilla resides
in Rio Riba and Santa Fe
Counties, and when you then take
into account that we also have
Okeawinge and Santa Clara Pueblo
is that checkerboard the city.
What's happening, Madam Chair
and senators, is the pueblo is
then purchasing properties in
Espanilla proper, and they
become absorbed as part of the
sovereign nation. So we don't
generate GRT from those
properties absorbed by the.
The two pueblos. So by
Getting the GRT.
From this bill, I worry about
espanola not generating GRT from
the pueblos that are purchasing
the property, and then what this
bill would do. Now I understand
the intent, but that's just my
major concern. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Senator. Questions
from anybody else.
All right, see none. Thank you,
senators, uh, Senator Steinborn,
you're free to go. Senator
Brandt, we want you to stick
around.
And thank you everybody for your
comments and feedback. We
appreciate that in your public
testimony.
So Senate Bill 249 is the
healthcare provider gross
receipts tax.
Uh thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman,
Senator, so this bill is
actually not a tax bill.
I know it, it looks like it is,
it's one of those situations
where it looks like a duck and
smells like a duck, but this one
actually isn't a duck.
Um, it's a goose.
So, um, but, you know, this bill
is actually not a tax bill. It
has no physical impact at all
because we are actually already
paying this.
It's just not getting to the
doctors.
In the reimbursement rate.
So the state is already giving
this money to the MCOs.
The MCOs are not giving this
money to the doctors.
So
It doesn't change the budget at
all, the fur is wrong.
Um
If you look at the healthcare,
uh,
Departments for, it shows that
there's no impact.
And Senator Brandt, you are
correct and just heard from,
from, uh, Izzy that, um, this is
a bill that we can vote on, um,
and I'm quoting, not a revenue
impact, it's a budget issue. So
thank you very much for that
clarification, Izzy. Thank you
very much for that so
subcommittee, we will be voting
on this bill if you'd like. So,
so just, you know.
You know, this, this bill is
about transparency.
It, uh, makes sure that all
healthcare providers who receive
payment from Medicaid are
required unless they're a
nonprofit to pay the gross
receipts tax on Medicaid
reimbursements received for
services. The gross receipts tax
paid on medical services is used
to leverage additional federal
matching dollars for the
Medicaid program. This bill does
not provide any kind of tax
relief for the GRT that is
required to be paid on the
Medicaid services because
providers do not need relief
from those taxes. They just
need to be sure they're
adequately reimbursed for those
taxes. Um, so if you look at the
health care authorities'
analysis where it explains that
there's no physical impact, the
Medicaid program currently
factors in the gross receipts
tax when calculating the
Capitation rates for MCOs and
pace providers GRT for fee for
service claims.
Um, this means according to the
HCA, the MCOs are receiving
appropriate funding to pay the
providers the appropriate GRT,
but the problem is that the MCOs
do not show the GRT as a
standalone item in the billing
and payments, so there's no way
for the providers to know if
they're actually being paid for
the GRT.
So when they negotiate these
rates.
You're supposed to pay them that
rate plus the GRT they're just
paying them that rate.
They're not giving them the GRT,
so the providers are now having
to take that out of their
pockets.
And pay it to the state.
We're just, this bill makes sure
that the MCOs.
are actually giving
The GRT
In addition to the rate to the
providers because we as a state
are giving it to them.
And I have as my expert witness
here who understands this way
better than I do, uh, Cary
Brewer. Uh, hello, Madam Chair
and members of the committee,
Carrie Robin Bruder representing
the medical society. So I'm
gonna take one step back real
fast just to explain how
everything works. So we as a
state legislature, you all as a
legislature appropriate money to
the Medicaid program. The
Medicaid office then works with
an actuary and they create a per
member per month capitated rate.
That goes to all of the MCOs for
all of the lives that they
cover. When they do that
analysis, they build in the
gross receipts tax rate, so that
there is enough money coming
from the legislature through the
Medicaid office to the MCOs to
actually pay the providers, the
GRT. So that's already in our
appropriation, that's already
the system that the Medicaid
office uses, which they explain
in their FIR. They also have
in the new turquoise care MCO
contracts that say when you
negotiate reimbursement rates
with the providers, you need to
account for the GRT because
you're receiving enough money
for the GRT. So the whole idea
is we appropriate that money,
then it is basically given to
the NCOs to be a pass-through,
so that then the providers can
pay that GRT back to the state
of New Mexico, and we leverage
that money.
Again from Medicaid for the
federal match. So, the problem
is, when we enter into a
negotiation as a provider with
the MCO, they say, here will be
your rate for a baby well check.
But when we build for that baby
well check, we are not receiving
a reimbursement that says it's
$100 for the baby well check,
plus.
$7 for gross receipts tax.
So when our providers are having
to actually report their gross
receipts to the state, they are
having to report $100 is the
gross receipt because there's
not that standal line, a
standalone item for the GRT and
when they pay the GRT to the
state, it actually becomes $93
for the baby well check, not
$100 for the baby well check.
So all this bill does is says.
NCOs, you get the money.
Itemize it on the reimbursement
so that the providers see I got
my $100 from my baby well check.
I got my $7 for my GRT. I'm
reporting my gross receipts
taxed to the state as the 100.
And now I have my $7 to pay my
gross receipts tax, and then
that goes back into the system
for matching. That's all this
bill does.
OK. Thank you very much. Uh, so,
now going to the audience. How
many in the audience by show of
hands are in support of this
bill?
12345. I see you, John. Over
here on the left hand side,
there was an arm up.
6. There we go. Keep your arm
up. I feel like a teacher.
Right, we have 6, and we have 2
online that are in support and
one that is in opposition, who
in the audience is in opposition
of this bill.
See none. OK. All right. We're
just gonna do, let's, let's do
3.
Uh, public testimonies, just
because the, the, the committee
does want to be uh kind of
expeditious today in terms of
what we're doing if I use that
word right. Um, so let's get 3
people, uh, don't all run at
once. 3 people, you got 1 minute
in support.
Going once.
Get up there.
Trying to make it.
Charlie trying to make his way
up here.
Charlie, are you gonna speak as
well? You rolling on up.
All right.
Oh,
OK.
I know I can say that to
Charlie. All right, so we have
3, you have 1 minute a piece.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Emily
Pepin, registered lobbyist with
the state of New Mexico, here
representing the New Mexico
Behavioral Health Providers
Association. I'm also a licensed
clinical social worker and
endorse infant mental health
professional. We stand in strong
support of Senate Bill 249, as
it would make life more tenable
for providers throughout NM
anything we can do as a state to
address the behavioral health
care crisis must first address
the constraints providers are
under, and this bill would
provide some much needed
support. Thank you.
you.
Thank you very much.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee.
Charlie Marcus registered
lobbyist for desert states
physical therapy network, which
represents 30, approximately 30,
uh, privately owned facilities
throughout the state.
Uh, this, we support this bill
because
This becomes an additional
expense.
It's not done correctly.
And so, um, for the for the
reason uh we appreciate all the
efforts of
Senator, and I'm bringing this
forward.
Charlie, you don't have a little
beeper on there?
Mhm
There we go. There we go. Way to
go, man. All right, one more. Go
ahead, Madam Chair, members of
the committee, my name is Kim
Laant. I'm a registered lobbyist
for Good Samaritan Personal Care
and EMR Ambulance. Uh, we stand
in support of this bill as it
offers transparency between the
negotiated MCO rate and the
actual GRT rate. Thanks so much.
Thank you. All right, we have 2
online. We have Katie and Dana
again, Katie, uh, if you will,
we'll go ahead and give you one
minute.
If you will please unmute
yourself.
And you will see a 32nd warning
in the chat. Um, go ahead,
Katie. You have one minute.
Hi, um, I own an interventional
pain clinic in Albuquerque. Um,
we've been open for 5 years
since 2020. I am definitely in
support of this bill. Um,
currently we've seen Medicare
reimbursement, um,
cuts for the past 5 years and
having been in business for 5
years, we're still barely able
to make ends meet. Um, there are
so many various fees, um, at the
end of the day, whether it's
charges coming from banks for
EFTs, um, and, and just
additional costs that come in
and having to provide care to
people who are on MCOs, the
administrative support costs to
be able to uh support prior
author
conversations, um, to have the
assistance available to do so,
um, there's just so many
different costs that come in um
at us, so any, any
cuts that we can get that go
towards um the actual net profit
so that we can sustain keeping
our practice open, I think would
be beneficial for all of New
Mexico because there is a
significant healthcare shortage.
Thank you.
Thank you so much, and Dana will
go to you and then Mike, uh, we
have you registered as an
opposition, so we will have you,
uh, finish off today, but Dana,
go ahead. You have one minute.
Madam Chan members of the
committee, again, my name is
Dana Gray, Executive director of
Desert states Physical therapy
Network, and Charlie spoke on my
behalf, so thank you, Charlie.
Thank you, Senator Brandt for
introducing this legislation and
carry for all of your
assistance. We stand in full
support.
Thank you so much. And now
again, once more, uh, in the
room, anybody in opposition of
this bill.
See none. Let's go ahead and go
online. Mike, if you will, uh,
go ahead and unmute yourself.
You have one minute.
Well, Madam Chair, members of
the committee, I am in complete
support of this bill, um, I
apologize if I raised my hand at
the wrong time, but I thank the
sponsor for bringing this
forward, um, from Silver City,
work at an orthopedic practice
southwest bone and joint, and we
are in full support of this
bill, um, the NCOs currently do
not negotiate, um, the GRT with
us and they're paying less than
what we have to pay.
Uh, GRT, so having this bill
move forward would help that
greatly and in full support.
Thank you.
Great, thank you. So sponsor,
uh, as we do in this committee,
you have 5 minutes to respond if
you'd like to any of that or if
you want to just go to the
committee, we can do that. I'm
just happy everyone's in
support.
Kumbaya.
All right, now let's go to the
committee.
Senator O'Malley.
Thank you, ma'am. Sure.
So, um,
Senator, this is a transparency
bill. It has no fiscal
Implications whatsoever.
It doesn't
change anything.
So
OK, what does it change?
Mount Senator O'Malley, uh, I
think it changes by making sure
that the doctors are receiving
that gross receipts tax.
From the MCOs that we as a state
have paid them through Medicaid.
Our contract with them, we give
them the money to pay that
grocer seats tax to the doctors,
and they're not, at least
they're not showing that they're
paying it.
Does that make sense? So if they
are paying it, the doctors
aren't seeing it they're being,
that it's being paid.
So if they're paying it, they
need to show it on the bill that
they're paying it or the receipt
that they're paying it.
If they aren't paying it, they
need to be paying it.
Because we've actually given
them the money to send to the
doctor.
OK.
has no physical implications to
the state budget, it may have a
small physical implication to
the MCOs.
How does this help doctors?
It, it helps them by as the
example that uh Perry gave.
If, if right now they're getting
$100 and that's their fee that
they negotiated, and they're
reporting that $100 to the state
as that's what we were paying.
Then they're having to take $7
out of that.
But now they're only actually
making $93. They're supposed to
be making the $100 and the $7 is
supposed to be, is what's given
to them is supposed to be $107
so that they're being paid,
they're able to pay the gross
receipts tax. That gross recets
tax basically funnels through
back to the state so that we can
use it to match the federal
government.
OK. It's, it's, it's convoluted,
but that's what we've done up
here last, so what you're saying
is the MCOs is that
They, they say they negotiate
that amount.
When they, you know, cut this
deal, whatever it is, that it's
the GRT is included in that.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee sometimes. Um, we do
have examples of Medicaid MCOs
who are now saying we will not
include GRT and it's not even
part of your reimbursement rate,
but those MCOs are receiving all
of the funding from the state.
To pay that GRT. So it very much
depends on the individual
negotiations. Some of the
negotiations just say you're tes
included, but it's not line
items, so we can't see where
it's included and some of them
say we're not including GRT at
all. So this law would make it a
prerogative that the NCOs would
be required to line item out at
GRT so that we can see it and
then we can pay it back to the
state. Um, I liken it to like my
consulting contracts, right? So
if, if I charge a monthly
retainer fee, right? I'll have
my, you know, $500 for my
monthly retainer fee and then on
my invoice I put
Plus 7.5% GRT, right? And my
client is paying me that 7.5%
that I then remit to the state
as gross receipts tax, exact
same concept, but just in the
medical field with Medicaid
reimbursements.
Just so that we can see that 7%
or whatever the GRT rate is.
And then that value is then
remitted to the providers who
accept Medicaid payments so that
they can pay it back to the
state.
So Senator, Madam Chair, this is
about capturing that GRT.
Yes, Madam Chair, um, and
senator, that's another way to,
to another word to use, yes. OK.
Thank you, ma'am. Sure.
Thank you, Senator O'Malley.
Senator Jaramillo is next. Thank
you, Madam Chair and thank you,
Senator, Senator, I'm looking at
the analysis report and the
Department of Health, if you can
help me with this, is concerned
that this bill attempts to
broaden the number of healthcare
providers serving Medicaid
patients who constitute 1/3 of
New Mexico's population.
Can you speak to that.
Uh-huh, I'll, I'll read that one
more time, Senator, Madam
Chariot reads the Department of
Health again, that this bill
attempts to broaden the number
of healthcare providers serving
Medicaid patients who constitute
1/3 of the state's population. I
think there is an issue right
now with a lot of medical
providers just aren't taking
Medicaid patients.
Hopefully by having this line
itemed out and it not costing
those medical providers so
they're not getting $93 instead
of $100.
More providers will step up and
take Medicaid patients. Um, I
think, you know,
There, there are a lot of
doctors that I talked to that
they're like, yeah, by the time
you do the paperwork and then
you're having to pay the GRT out
of your own pocket, it's not
worth it.
And so they're just not doing
it. So hopefully, that is one of
the byproducts of this, is that
more doctors would be willing to
take Medicaid patients. Very
good. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator.
Thank you, Senator Romo. Madam
Chair, thank you, Senator. Thank
you for bringing this bill to
us. Um, so, MCO and MCOs uh
sometimes don't pay their full
GRT. I'm getting that part
there. But sometimes they only
pay a portion. How is this going
to fix if someone's paying 8
8.112% and they on to pay you
6%. How's it's going to fix that
problem. Um, Mount you senator,
by, by having it, uh, be
Transparent, now the doctor can
go back in the negotiations and
say the negotiation was that you
were going to pay us $100 plus
the GRT, which is what the state
requires, and you're not paying
that, you're only paying us $100
even. So they'll be able to go
back into that contract right
now, it's kind of getting buried
so they can't see that it's not
being paid.
Um
And a lot of those negotiations
are really weird. I'm, I'm not,
we're trying to, you know, we
still need to leave the
negotiations between the doctor
and the MCO.
But
Sometimes it's more of a
dictate, not a negotiation, and
hopefully by taking, making this
more transparent, the doctors
will have more ability to
negotiate those rates. We pay
those rates.
You know, we, in fact, we keep
increasing the rates, and
sometimes the MCOs are not
increasing the rates when it
gets down to the doctors. It
doesn't help, that's not why
we're increasing the rates.
We're increasing the rates, so
the doctors make enough money to
stay in the state, not so the
MCOs can make more money.
That's all I got, man.
Thank you, Senator Paul.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator. I just wanted to
let's make a statement of
support, uh, I was talking with
my dad last night. He's a
retired physician here in the
state, and about 5-6 years ago
and he said, man, if something
like this came about, it might
have led me to actually stay in
practice and continue to, and so
especially in rural areas, you
know, I live in Almogordo,
southern part of the state.
He said the majority of his
practice was Medicaid patients,
95 to 99% of them. And this was
a constant battle on his end,
because, you know, they would
try and negotiate those rates
and they would say, we'll pay
you $10 for this, and then
you're having to pay GRT out of
it and I think it really
discourages, you know,
Medical professionals to come
and practice in this state. And
so if I did have a question, I
guess it would just be as, do
you guys see this having any
benefit and specifically for
rural areas to helping maybe.
be another added feature to
attract doctors to the state,
um.
Mr. Chairman, Senator, yes, and
I, I wanna, if you look on the
first page on number one, we're
requiring in this that
reimbursed for all applicable
gro gross receipts taxes that
the healthcare providers
required to pay. So we are
requiring that the MCO's
reimburse the doctors for that.
That's that's flat out a
requirement.
Um, and we want them to have
that. We want them to be able to
do that because we need medical
providers.
Um, you know, I'm trying to do
everything I can without getting
into the lawyer's way on the on
the medal, we'll let someone
else deal with that. I'm not
looking at the lawyer right now,
um, but we'll let everyone else
deal with that portion of it.
I'm trying to do everything we
that I can do.
To get more doctors in Mexico. I
think it's, it's one of the
things that we've got to do to
survive as a state, not even to
grow, but to survive, and we
have to make it where doctors
can actually make a living.
Living in the
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator, again, I
appreciate you bringing this
bill because I think it's
another step in the right
direction to help address that
issue that we've got. Thank you.
Thank you so much. Any other
questions or comments from the
committee?
Madam. We have a due pass from
Senator Ramos.
We have a second from Senator
Figueroa, if you will.
Take the boat.
Any opposition to this?
See no opposition. Let's just
be.
Expeditious.
Uh, 90. Thank you. We certainly
miss you here on this committee,
but we've got a good committee
going. I'm sorry, Senator
Brandt.
I do have a good committee.
Thank you. All right, so we're
gonna go to Senator Padilla
next, and then we'll follow that
with Senator Scherer. So we are
on the carryover from last week,
uh, Senate bill 206. It does
have an amendment.
Uh, that you all have been
given, and so,
If you would like to talk about
the bill and then the amendment,
Senator, and then we'll, we'll,
uh, move the amendment. We move
the amendment first. Thank you,
Madam Chair and Madam Vice Chair
and Mr. Ranking member, uh,
Senator Michael Padilla, and I'm
here with our, uh, secretary
designate Anna Silva for the
General Services Department.
And a really fun and sexy topic
is what we're coming to you
today with, OK? So, uh, the,
the, the, the, the earth
shattering um procurement code
for the state of New Mexico. Uh,
we have had to do some clean up
on this thing for approximately
23 years, and here we are.
Right in front of your manager.
All right. Man, what a great day
to be in New Mexican when we're
talking about sexy procurement
changes where you have fun
tonight? Please make that the
quote of the week, you're gonna
be asleep. No gummies needed.
OK, so thank you, Madam Chair
and members of the committee
this this Senate Bill 206
essentially we'll come to the
amendment here in just a moment
because I want the secretary to
um you know, to, to describe it.
But essentially, we propose
several amendments to the
state's procurement code with
the legislation which governs
the procurement and ethical
standards of government
procurement of goods, services
and.
construction projects, the bill
aims to streamline procurement
processes and introduce new
exemptions that are needed based
on what has happened in state
government. I created the early
childhood education and care
department. They don't need, you
know, we're going to exempt them
out of this thing. So the
exemptions that we're proposing
here are for the early childhood
education and care department
contracts within the childcare
businesses for childcare
assistance slots would be exempt
because of where the money comes
from, uh, Department of
Information Technology contracts
for acquiring and replacing
capital licenses used to provide
IT enterprise.
services would be exempt.
Uh, digitization projects,
contracts for digitizing state
or federal records would be
exempt. And then real property
transactions, these are
contracts for appraisals or
surveys related to the sale or
purchase of real property would
be exempt.
Uh, some of the adjustments that
we are making, and we'll get
into the amendment here in just
a moment, but we do have for
public works the cost threshold
requiring competitive sealed
qualification, qualifications
based proposals would increase
from 50,000 to 100,000.
And uh if there's any changes
there, I'm gonna ask the
secretary to talk about that in
the amendment for professional
services, the maximum duration
would extend from 4 to 8 years
with public-private partnership
agreements exempt from this
limit.
Small purchases, the exemption
threshold for requiring
competitive seal bids would rise
from $60,000 to $100,000 and
then on direct purchases
agencies would, uh, or could,
uh, procure goods or services up
to $60,000 without gathering
quotes, uh, an increase from the
previous $20,000 limit, and then
on procurement officer review
the cap for small purchases not
subject to review would increase
from 1500 to $10,000. There's
very good reasons for all of
these. And it's primarily around
the cost escalation.
and inflation that we've seen in
so many different areas, I think
that's why we're going to be
lined up appropriately to get
even more interest in doing
business with the state and
things of that nature. Uh,
modifications to the procurement
procedure is, um, we'll talk a
little bit about invitation to
bid posting, sole source
contracts.
And that essentially is, is the
major stuff that we're doing
here. We've had to clean this
procurement code up for quite
some time, we thought, why don't
we just bring it all at one time
and I will say that if you look
at the amendment that we have
before you, um, Madam Chair and
and Madam Vice Chair and Mr.
ranking member on the bottom, it
says um 230407.5.
Wow, was there a lot of work to
get this thing together, and I
will say that almost several of
the members on this committee
actually provided some amazing
feedback, including Senator
Figueroa who, who I just love
dearly, and she, she gave me
some really good info, info, and
then we had a lot, once we
posted the bill, wow, we had a
lot of people come out of the
woodwork and that's essentially
what's going on with the
amendment. I'm going to ask the
secretary to talk a little bit
about why this is important and
what we're doing here, and then
specifically on the amendment.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair and
Senator Padilla. So, um, as a
senator described, this has been
um decades in the making, um,
what has happened over the years
as the legislature meets, then
there are new adoptions and
introductions and modifications
to the code and all things are
paved with great intentions and
the procurement code is one of
those. Um, however, what's
happened, um, once we implement
a program, for example, the
chief procurement Officer
program, um, when I first
started in state government, I
as a buyer in state purchasing.
One of my first projects was the
chief procurement Officer
program. The idea at that time
was to ensure that every single
entity had some oversight,
whether it was a local public
body, um, or a state entity had
oversight of procurements
because I wasn't one
centralization in the entity for
procurements. Well, through the
years we have found that as
great as the chief procurement
officer program is um when the
cheap procurement officer is um
out of the office.
There's nobody there to do the
procurements and, um, whether
they're on maternity leave or
whether they're um out of the
office for an extended period of
time, so this is uh one of the
items in the amendments is to
address that. So working through
the amendments, um, as we start
on the first one. So, um, these
are to um exempt 11 of the
things that um senator
identified was the thresholds to
keep, um, the costs um in line
with today's market.
So the idea was to increase the
threshold from $60,000 to
$100,000. Well, one thing that
we identified was the state
public works project, that is a
threshold that the state public
works project identifies
anything over $55,000 is then
required to have prevailing
wage, so we don't want to stop
that, so we identified that that
was an issue, so we're going
back to the $55,000. So we, um,
identified that the other um uh
amendment.
Um, item that we're looking at
is um.
One of the items that we had is
it just didn't read right so
after um on on number 5 on page
4 line 25 after officers were
striking the rest of the
sentence just because it just
didn't read, um, correctly, um,
one of the other items is online
6 and basically what this is
doing, it's allowing for CEUs
for CPOs for chief procurement
officers, because right now they
are required to take a class,
and we are saying that one of
the items that we have.
identified in state government
is there are just not enough
people that know how to do
procurements, whether it's an
RFP or if it's an ITB, people in
general just um.
They, they come to us and
they're asking for help with
doing procurements so we thought
instead of requiring just the
class that we would actually do
hands-on training with our RFPs
and procurements, um.
One of the items as senator uh
Padilla mentioned that we had
input from this, uh, committee
was um an item from Senator
Figueroa and frankly, I don't
see how we didn't catch this
before. So right now in the
procurement code, there are
several exemptions. Well, the
exemptions are exempting anybody
who's doing a procurement who is
exempt from this procurement,
it's exempting him from the
anti-bribery, the kickbacks, the
bribery, um, uh, statutes. So
what we're saying is
want to bring those back in. So
if you're exempt from the
procurement code for an
emergency or any other reason.
We're saying that these still
apply. So that was something
that we think as far as cleanup
is extremely important because
we want people to be accountable
when they're doing procurements
for the state. So thank you,
Senator, uh, for bringing that
up.
You
OK, well, I think that gives us
some runway on the amendment. I
don't know if you wanna.
I'll move the amendment for
discussion.
Thank you. Now on that, we go to
the public, just uh.
Is there a debate on the
amendment?
So no opposition to the
amendment?
All right, so motion to accept
the amendment, or we just flying
by the seat of our pants.
I am.
OK.
That's a good phrase. Can I take
that, please? All right, so, uh,
we have, uh, a unanimous for,
uh, your amended bill. And so
now at this point, if you'd like
to make any other comments
before we go to public
testimony, you're welcome to do
so.
Madam Chair, it's just how
fortunate we are to have such
really good and studious members
of this committee because we did
get a lot of really good
feedback, and I want to thank
you again, Senator Figueroa for
her contributions to the
legislation. Thank you.
Great, thank you. Now we go to
the community, to the public,
um, at this point, just by a
show of hands, how many in this
room are in support of this
bill?
Little John there in the back.
OK, you appear in front, OK. Uh,
anybody in opposition?
See none? Anybody online?
Neither for neither. All right,
so we're just gonna go ahead and
record your support of this
bill. I do want to go ahead and
go to the committee now and see
if there are any comments or
questions from the committee.
I do pass we have a do pass from
Senator Jaillo. I have a second
from Senator Ramos.
Anybody opposed to the Du pass
than for efficiency, let's go
ahead and show that all in
attendance are in support.
Try to make it quicker for my,
my friends.
All right, you have a 90 to
pass. Congratulations, Senator.
Thank you.
Uh.
All right, now we've got
Yes, thank you for coming in on
such short notice. So now we
have uh Senate Bill 7, Senator
Sheer.
No
bizarre.
Right, so Senator Sher, we were
made aware of your bill because
this is the 2nd stop in your
Bill's journeys.
It took so long
I know.
I'm glad you brought it to our
attention so that we could move
that in. So we are at Senate
Bill 7,
this is stormwater service as
municipal utility Senator share,
I know, you know, the, the, the
rules and regs of this committee
and we are.
At your service. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Very quickly, this
bill has everything to do with
storm water that's running
through a city, so that the
city's municipalities can have
uh turn it into a utility, uh,
so they can treat it the way it
should be treated. I have two
experts with me today, Cassandra
Malone, who's actually from the
city of Farmington.
And her toe.
Sarah Herto, I knew that. I knew
that just like 5 minutes ago. So
they'll be my expert witness,
but the bottom line is, it's
simply uh creates another
utility within the municipal
code.
Great. And if you're experts
would like to say a few words
to, to be brief.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, senators for this
opportunity.
Um, my name is Sarah Herto. I'm
a wildlife biologist and I have
a master's degree in
environmental science and
policy, and over the course of
my 20 years working in
conservation, I've had the
opportunity to work with many
scientists and experts across
multiple disciplines, um,
Through that, through that
career path, um, I've had the
opportunity to speak with many
people working in municipalities
and that the issue that has come
up over and over and over again
is, uh, the need for dedicated
funding for stormwater
management. Um, we have been
working on this issue, uh, for
many years and trying lots of
pathways to figure out how to
get this done. And this bill is
the key to the success of that
efficient, uh, management of
stormwater. Cities across New
Mexic
Mexico and towns, especially in
rural communities are struggling
to reduce localized flooding to
homes and businesses, comply
with water quality regulations
and extend the life of roadways
and other infrastructure that
are frequently inundated.
And so after many years of
working on this, this bill is
really important because it only
does two things. It allows
municipalities to create a
stormwater utility and charge a
just and reasonable fee. It lays
the hands of those decisions in
the hands of the municipality,
so they can decide if and when
they want to create a
municipality through ordinance.
It doesn't mandate anybody do
anything, um, but it does, um,
supplied the dedicated funding
for efficient stormwater.
management that is greatly
needed throughout the state.
Um, this enabling legislation
also allows communities,
particularly rural communities
to be able to access state and
federal funding that's specific
to, um,
Uh, stormwater management that
would allow them to pay back,
uh, loans and things like that
through the state revolving fund
and other federal programs.
And so, uh, this is really
important to the work that we're
doing in stormwater management,
um, across the state. I know
that at first I was thinking
this was only a big city issue,
but my work has recently taken
me to small towns in rural
communities across New Mexico
like Silver City and um, and the
work in Farmington that's
happening, um, Las Cruces, and
many other, uh, places across
the state where stormwater is
literally running through the
streets, and
flooding homes and businesses on
a daily and weekly basis, and
they need this dedicated funding
so that it's not putting that
mandate out of the general fund.
Great, thank you. Do you wanna
go ahead and be brief? Thank you
briefly. Um good afternoon,
madam. You can go ahead and sit
down. I would probably tweak
your back if you stayed like
that.
They do work really well. You
should be OK. Thank you. And um
I won't, I won't repeat what's
been said. Um, my name is
Cassandra Malone, and I am here
to speak on behalf of the City
of Farmington, the city of
Farmington, um, requested Senate
Bill 7 be passed, um, because it
would add storm monitor
facilities to the definition of
municipalicipal utilities within
the municipal code and by doing
that, that allows municipalities
like the city.
Farmington to properly address
stormwater and um discharge um
for gluten monitoring. And so
for these reasons, the city of
Farmington, um, requested this.
Great. Thank you. Thank you. I
appreciate that. Uh, so at this
point, um, what I would like to
do is go to the audience to see
just by a show of hands how many
are in support of this
legislation.
2345. Anybody on the side?
5. OK. Anybody in the audience
in opposition?
See none? What about online?
Oh, just the one in support,
Aiden? OK. All right, Senator,
this is really up to you if you
want to go ahead and have public
testimony or we can go straight
to the committee because we have
we have recognized that we have
all these folks here.
You don't want to hear from him?
We'll just go straight to
questions. All right, so just
know that usually when that
happens, that's because the
committee would really like to
ask questions, but know that
you're public support has been
recorded and, and we know that
so at this point, I would like
to go ahead and go to the
committee.
See if there are any questions.
Senator Worth, thank, thank you,
Madam Chair. I do see in my uh
in our Senate, Senate committee
analysis that this does relate
to Senate Bill 21 and 22, which,
so I'm just
Curious, do I need to work on 20
floor amendments to this bill
too.
We're gonna limit it to 12.
Well, OK, that's a deal. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
All right, there was a whole lot
that just happened right in that
very moment.
Uh, any other comments or
questions from the committee,
Senator Bergmans. I say that
this seems like a really good
bill and thank you for bringing
it.
Thank you, Senator Bergman,
Senator Figueroa. I'm just going
to ask right now, uh, Madam
chair, voters, um, voters
approve a property tax increase
to deal with these kinds of
problems. That's kind of clunky,
that's kind of slow, but it does
give the voters a chance to
approve these projects. Why is
this a better system?
Thank you, Madam Chair, Senator,
um, this would allow the
municipality to pass by
ordinance, whether or not they
create the utility and through
that they could create the fee
structure that's most
appropriate for their community
to meet their structural needs,
their infrastructure needs, um,
and whatever the tax base is for
that community, so, um, it can
be right size rather than being,
um,
Delegated through the
legislation that's being passed
today.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you so much.
Anybody else from the committee?
I do have a comment, so before
we go to uh a motion if I can,
in Las Cruces, my street floods.
Those of you from Las Cruces
know also we have Alameda, um,
at Maine, which becomes just
dangerous. Uh, my wife actually
killed her car by starting,
trying to start her car in our
flooded street.
So just rule of thumb if your
car dies in a flood, don't ever
try and start it cause it sucks
the water up. So I'm wondering,
you said, you know, charge a
fee, so like in, in the case of
my street, which we have
drainage on there, it just takes
forever, um, because of just
most cities don't plan for
flooding like that until they
experience it and then they have
to redo it. So when you say
charge, adjust fee, would, in
the case of my street with the
flooding, if we were to go this
route, how, how would that work?
Yeah, thank you, Madam Chair,
for that question. Um, how it
would work is once, uh, Las
Cruces passed the ordinance to
include the fee, and they
created a fee structure. There
are, there are over 2000
stormwater utilities across the
US in 41 different states. So
there's lots of examples of how
to create this utility and fee
structure, um, one option would
be that it would be based on
the.
Uh, impervious surface of your
area, so it's calculating the
amount of runoff that's coming
from your home or your business
that's contributing to that, um,
infrastructure problem, right?
Because our infrastructure is
undersized for the size of the
storms that we have given the
increasing development that's
happening in urban communities.
And so, once that happens, we
need that stormwater fee to be
able to pay for.
Increased infrastructure,
increasing the sizes of the
pipes, green stormwater
infrastructure, a whole lot of
other uh tools that we have in
the toolbox to manage stormwater
to alleviate localized flooding
like you're talking about. And
this bee would be able to fund
projects and maintenance because
maintenance is never paid for in
capital projects, and that is
the, that is the pinch point
that's happening in a lot of
communities is being able to
fund the maintenance, so for the
proper.
function of these stormwater
facilities.
OK, thank you for that. I'm also
thinking in, especially in the
rural parts, um, in southern New
Mexico in District 38, uh, we
had, uh, two communities that
roads got washed away because of
storm water, how would this
apply to that? Does it apply to
something like that?
It allows um each um
specific community, municipality
to address its specific need, so
if um a community is having
issues like that, it would be
able to enact ordinances to
address um stormwater and um.
Adress appropriate ways to um
handle that.
OK, so if I'm clear on that,
it's just so like if Donana
County, we have a road that
washes out because of storm
water. I mean, I don't know if
there's, there's a technological
or, or, or technical term that
is different for the water that
is washing down my street to the
water that will wash out a road
in a rural part of the state. Is
that are those differences or
how would that, that's really
where I'm trying to go with to
see if, if we have a street
flood out because of storm
water. Are there opportunities
for them to repair that.
chair, good question. I think,
um, this.
It would depend on how the
ordinance is written as to how
the money would be spent this
particular belt is specific to,
um, city municipal code, so it
wouldn't apply to the county.
They have their own county code,
um, and so this is specific to
municipal code. I'm changing the
language in that municipal code.
So depending on how um how the
ordinance is written in the
municipality would would
determine whether or not
that sort of street
redevelopment or road
redevelopment would uh be
covered under an infrastructure
project. Usually though, it only
covers things like storm drains
and these storm basins and
brainstormwater infrastructure
and, you know, street side
bioswales and things like that,
right? So someplace where
there's already kind of an
infrastructure, whereas out in
the rural parts, you've got a
road and you may have drainage
dishes on the side or, or
irrigation ditches. OK.
But it could help to pay for the
enhancement of that stormwater
infrastructure on roads to
prevent the kind of flooding
that you're talking about.
Great, thank you. Any other
questions from the committee?
Thank you for entertaining my
questions.
What is the will of the
committee?
We have a pass from Senator
Bergmans. Do you have a second?
Second from Senator Jaramillo.
Anybody in opposition of the
DuPass.
Sanchez is scratching his
eyebrow there. Yeah. So seeing
no opposition, we're going to go
ahead and assume all in uh
attendance are in favor and he's
here. He's just sitting right
there.
So, 10 to 0, you have to do
pass. Congratulations, Senator.
Thank you.
Now we have uh Senator Bergman,
you do have an amendment. We're
doing your look twice for
motorcycle license plate.
Yeah
Is that your expert is on Zoom
or?
OK.
For some reason, I have the
Kermit the Frog moving right
along and just as
this committee is moving ready.
But I'm sure we had to play
musical chairs cause it's bad
luck when I sit on that side.
Oh, we didn't know that. We're
gonna have to make sure that's a
committee rule. All right,
Senator Bergmans, please go
ahead and start. And you have an
amendment on the bill and I'll
introduce the first and then
I'll ask you to move the
amendment. Sure, I can do that.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. This is a
super simple bill. It is a
license plate bill, and I know
how the legislature feels about
license plate bills.
However, this is an exception I
feel. In 2023.
A license plate bill passed that
created the look twice for
motorcycle safety license plate.
But what that bill did not do
was allow for a motorcycle sized
plate.
To be put on a motorcycle.
So the motorcycle community
really wants to put this plate
on their bikes.
But as of right now, the way the
statute is written, they cannot.
So we are simply allowing
motorcyclists the ability to put
this
Motorcycle targeted license
plate on their bikes.
And I'm not sure if Senator Har
me wants that.
That and there's an amendment
that addresses some of the
issues that were brought up in
the FIR. It fixes some of the
years that were mentioned in the
existing statue.
So that when MVD is calculating
how many people are asking for
this plate.
They have their correct years to
base that on.
And it also increases the fee
that MB keeps from $7 to $8.
That's the amendment. Can I have
a motion for the amendment?
We move the amendment.
Anybody in the post?
All right, see you on a post.
All right. Would you like to
have any other further
discussion? That's all.
OK, at this point, I would like
to see just uh in the audience
by how many people by show of
hands are in support of this,
this bill.
Yeah, I know you are center.
Anybody in opposition?
See that. Anybody online?
Nobody online for this?
OK.
All right. So, at this point,
let's go to the committee,
Senator Ramos, Madam Chair, uh,
senator, to avoid you having to
come back next year, is does
this cover the trikes?
Great question, Madam chair.
I, I would assume that they have
a similar size. So yes.
But we'll get back to you if
not.
Senator Ramos, you're talking
about the motorcycles with 3
wheels, right? So if they're
designated a motorcycle, they
should
and senator does.
OK.
ventured no further questions.
Today
What is the will of the
committee?
We have a pass from Senator
Sanchez, the 2nd as amended.
Thank you.
second from Senator Figueroa.
Anybody in opposition?
Of the Du pass of this bill as
amended.
March
It is landmark legislation. We
get that stuff done. Can I vote
no? Yeah, sure.
Just in time I was asking for
opposition.
So, uh, seeing no, uh,
opposition, uh, all those in in
uh in attendance, showing in
favor, so you have a 100 do
pass.
Thank you, madam. You'd be
amazed how many people are
already wanting to stand in line
to get that license plate, and I
think the entire summer, Senator
Bergmans and I heard from the
community who were excited about
this. So thank you so much.
Thank you so much. And so next
we have
That was probably one of the
easier bills that we've ever
had. Uh, next we have Senate
Bill 284 and that is Senator
Bergman's and Senator Do Hicks.
Senator Doig, I believe you're
presenting the bill here today.
By the way, before you start,
um, also, uh, so Senator
Maestas, you may have noticed,
uh, we did skip over 233 and
Senate Bill 239, we have been
asked by the sponsors to go
ahead and roll those two bills,
and they will be heard on
Thursday first thing.
Sure, I'll repeat that again.
Senate Bill 233 from Senator
Maestas.
And Senate Bill 239 from Senator
Stewart.
Those two will be held and heard
on Thursday.
All right, so we're on Senate
Bill 284, Senator Doheck, you're
welcome to go ahead and start.
Uh, you've been through this
committee before, so we do have
a time limit. We are going to
start shrinking that time limit.
It is originally 20 minutes. So
if you want to set the trend and
go to 10 to 15, that'd be
fabulous.
Madam Chair, I think I'll
probably be about 3.
So Madam Chair, um.
And this is a bill that will
make it so that if a foster
child, uh, would otherwise is
harmed, uh, in the home where
they have been placed, um, that
they would be able to make a
claim under the, the homeowner's
insurance policy that covers
that home.
Uh, right now there is ever
since 2003, there was a, uh,
Court of Appeals case that set
where a child drowned in a, a
foster child drowned in a hot
tub.
And they made, there was a claim
made under the homeowner's
policy, the insurance company
said nope, they're a resident,
so the resident exclusion
applies. Uh, you can't get any
coverage. Uh, this went to the
Court of Appeals, the Court of
Appeals said,
Well, we're gonna look at
people's intentions. We're gonna
Look, look at all this different
stuff to, to, to figure it out
what the, the practical effect
of it has been that when foster
children, uh, get hurt or harmed
in the houses where they've been
placed. Uh, there's often no way
for them to, no way to get
compensation.
For those harms. And so this
would say that for the purposes
of a essentially a homeowner's
insurance policy says premises
liability insurance policy,
homeowners. Um, foster child is
not ah can can't be excluded.
From coverage just by virtue of
having been placed in this, this
home.
OK, Senator Bergmans, do you
want to make any statement? Do
you have any expert witnesses or
anything on that Senator Doha?
No.
OK.
At this point, um, let's go
ahead and go to the uh audiences
or anybody here who is in
support of this bill.
See none. Is there anybody in
opposition of this bill. Seeing
that online? No. OK. So let's go
ahead and go to the committee.
Um, if there's anybody on the
committee who would like to ask
questions or make comments, um,
more than welcome to, Senator
Ramos, I saw you twitching
earlier, so I want to make sure.
I just
I, I, Madam Chair, um, senator.
So, so are you changing the
definition of resident
definition of resident.
We're just saying that for the
purposes of homeowners policies,
a foster child can't be
disqualified from coverage as a
result of their placement, their
placement. Madam Chair, that's
why I was asking because if
they're a foster child in that
home, they're considered a
resident of the home, right?
And Madam Chair senator, so
that's, that's the what we're
running into. And that's why
they're being excluded now, so
we didn't want to change the
definition of resident for
everyone. We just wanted to make
sure that for foster kids who
are in this position, that they
aren't denied the ability to, to
get compensation because they
have been placed in a home
through no fault of their own.
And Madam Chair, I, I totally
understand and I mean, God bless
the people that foster these
kids.
But I think we keep adding
things to.
to the insurance, uh, policies,
it's just going to drive more
cost.
And I think right now our
insurance industry is going
through a lot of changes with
all the fires and.
And uh uh all the different
types of claims that we've had,
Madam Chair, that, uh, you know,
this is doing, this is just
going to uh the raise of cost,
raise the cost of insurance for
Or residents and uh
Have you done any type of
analysis of how this is gonna
affect your insurance.
So Madam Chair, Senator, I
haven't done that analysis, but
this would, this only says that.
So I've paid my homeowner's
insurance every month.
And this only says you can't
deny a claim involving.
Involving a foster child, so it
would only apply in those homes
that have have homeowner's
insurance and have a foster
child in them and something
happens to that child that would
otherwise be compensable under
the policy. It's not going to be
a huge universe of and Madam
Chair, I mean, it, it could be
huge. And the reason I say it
could be huge, Madam chairs,
because if there's a major claim
and someone gets killed and it's
a, a kid that's a foster kid,
then that million dollar claim
could cause uh uh
A lot of uh debt for the
insurance company, which will
drive up costs, because everyone
knows the cost is usually passed
on to the consumer.
And uh
Um
I, I, I just have a lot of
trouble with this bill, but
thank you very much for bringing
it to us. I, I know the concept
is good. I, I really feel that,
you know, again, God bless the
people that are fostering our
children and uh but I think this
is just going to convolute our
insurance policies. Thank you so
much, ma'am.
I'll right now, if the neighbor
kid came over.
And had that same thing happen,
and there was that million
dollar, uh, award, then that
would be paid under the the
policy. These kids are only
being excluded, uh, they're
they're being excluded because
they have been placed in these
homes that's a great comment,
but
If, uh, the foster child has a
foster brother.
That is the natural child of the
couple that lived there.
Then this child wouldn't be
covered if he got hurt under
that same policy, correct?
So if I, I am not OK. I'm sorry,
I should rephrase that. I did,
it did sound kind of, I'm just
trying to think about in my head
wrap around this thing. But if,
if I had a foster child, then I
had my blood child.
Together in the same home, the
blood child, if he gets hurt or
drowns in a.
Oh
Then wouldn't be covered, but
the foster child would. So where
are we going to put an end of
who's going to be covered? I
mean, it's
It's uh
I mean, what are we gonna
Where where are we gonna end
this? Where are we gonna figure
out who's gonna be covered
sooner or later. We're gonna
have someone say, well, um,
should we just start covering
all, all children of that are in
the home and make sure that the
liability coverage would, would
follow them.
Um, I, I, I'm just, I, I just
don't think this is a good deal.
Madam Cheryl, no, I think foster
children are uniquely
vulnerable, um, and have been
there.
These are not the
To call them residents of this
home the same way, uh, you're a
biological child who has grown
up in that home is, I, I think.
Does it ignores the unique
circumstances that they are, are
coming with, um, and some of the
unique challenges that that
they.
It's something that Senator Doig
is that it's not the choice of
the child of the foster child on
which home they end up in.
So
Just keep that in mind as well.
Thank you. Anything else,
Senator Ramos?
No further questions. OK,
Senator Sanchez.
Thank you, madam. I had a
question, so right now the, the
children are from CYFDN and
placed in a home.
And who's covering?
Who's covering it now, the state
cover picks us up if something
happens or?
And you're, and your, and your
bill is bringing it where it
would be the insurance company
picking it up.
No, ma'am, so this doesn't
change any of that. So if I am a
foster parent, and I already
have homeowners insurance on my
home.
It just means that if the foster
child who was placed in my home,
uh, is harmed in a way that that
where it wasn't the neighbor
kid.
Would it be compensable under
that insurance policy that they
can't be excluded from coverage.
Uh, as a resident.
Essentially.
OK.
So, and then Madam Chair,
Senator, when the, when the
child is in CYFD custody, I
guess in the state's custody.
They are covered under a state
policy until they are placed in
a residence until a home.
Man, I have no idea. I don't
know the answer to that.
And all those kids who were
staying in offices. I don't
know. I assume there's insurance
coverage on those offices that
would cover them if I came to
them there. But I don't know.
that since this bill is only
about homeowners insurance.
That's why we don't have the
answer to that. So, madam, and
then I'm just seeing from one
place to the next who's who's
covered, you know, they're
covered here.
But when they're moved to a
residence, then we're wanting to
the entrance to pick them up. I
was just trying to make that
connection, Madam Chair center.
Um
I think that's
OK. Thank you, Senator Sanchez.
Senator Jaramillo and then
Senator O'Malley. Madam Chair,
no questions, this just makes
complete sense, it's a
vulnerable population, but a
foster kid is being moved into a
home that they're finally
calling a home that you would
just assume I would have assumed
they would have just been
covered already, Madam Chair,
that this roof over their head
is their home at the current
time. And so this bill makes
sense to me that this vulnerable
population should be covered
because this is their home.
And this might be their home for
years to come until they're 18,
so this bill makes sense to me,
Senator. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh, hold on, I'm gonna come back
to you for a second. Um, uh,
Senator O'Malley and then
Senator Ramos.
Thank you, ma'am, Chair. um
So, of course, most of us have,
you know, if you own a home, you
have homeowner's insurance and
I have um another policy that
covers the personal liability
but um
The question I have is, what is,
what does this cover? It is it
You know, a cover or a claim of
abuse, what does it cover?
Madam Chair, that's going to
depend on the terms of the
policy.
So whenever the policy covers,
uh, and this is just saying you
can't exclude them from
coverage. Uh, and then to
address, and I think there might
be a little, a little confusion
about, so, so right, right now
most policies.
It covers
Generally visitors to your home.
If you are a resident if it is
your home, surely not going to
cover you.
Um, it'll cover damages that
happen to people who come.
to your home. And so we are
saying these foster children
should be treated as those
visitors and, and, and able to,
to make claims under that policy
if harm comes to them in that
home.
I'm sure. So that means if let's
say they trip or they hurt
themselves on the premises that
uh they, they have the ability
to.
Submit a claim for
Madam Cha Sander only if they
would have that ability to spit
the claim under the terms of the
policy. So the, the terms of the
policy still control.
Like that, the, the policy is
ensuring whatever the policy is
insured.
But we're just saying you can't
exclude if, if, if, if they
would otherwise, if it was if
they were the neighbor kid and
they could make a claim under
the policy.
Then as a foster kid, they
should be able to as well.
OK, so I, OK, so then you're,
you're not, you don't want them
to be classified as a resident.
Even though they're residing
there. Mountain Chair, Senator,
yes, because it might be staying
there temporarily.
But they're not a resident, I
think in the same way that, that
the people who live there
permanently are, and they are
uniquely vulnerable population
are frankly, I'm sure bad things
happen to some of these kids in
these houses in these homes, um,
it should be compensated. And
right now that the ability for
that compensation is, is cut
off.
With how how the law currently
stands. OK, so there, so that
would depend on the policy.
Of the homeowner's insurance as
to what it covers.
Of course, there's other
liability issues, no matter
what, but, you know, basically.
OK, so,
So, I guess I kind of understand
that.
I'm trying to do. OK. Thank you.
Be sure.
OK, going back to Senator Ramos
for a second time, Senator.
Um,
uh, senator, and that was my
point since the very beginning.
They're not.
They're they're considered
residents of the home as soon as
they're brought into the home.
With the foster parent.
So the nice foster parents that
are volunteering to take them
in, have a policy.
So if they get hurt, they trip
in the holes, break their knee.
And Sue, their foster parent who
was diligently doing.
A great thing to take him over
and help him out.
are going to get sued.
And not only will they get sued,
they're gonna get surcharged
afterwards.
Or taking care of
This child.
So it's, it's uh
Catch 22 on this um.
Thank you Madam, I'd like to
push back a bit on the idea that
this means they're suing their
foster parents. This is a claim
being made under an insurance
policy that covers the, the
residents, uh.
Now, now, maybe if the there the
insurance company is maybe in
bad faith denying it, they might
have a bad faith claim against
the insurance company, but you
would not have to sue your
foster parents.
Simply to make a claim under
this where this bill to pass.
Madam chair, the claim is
against the policy which is
owned by the foster parent.
So in essence, they're being,
they're, they bought that policy
to cover their liabilities.
So it is, they would be suing.
The company
Through that foster parents
policy.
Yeah, I would like to remind
that this bill does go to Senate
Judiciary afterwards, so we are
not the last stop for you.
Um, so, um, Senator Ramos,
anything else?
OK, Senator Sanchez.
uh, senator almost cleared it.
Great. Any other questions or
comments from the committee?
What is the will of the
committee?
Senator Bergmann's moves to
dope.
I'm Sorry?
Mover do pass with no wreck.
If that is the will of the
committee, OK?
All right, so we have a motion
for uh to pass with no wreck.
Let's go ahead and take the
vote.
Senator Fierro.
Do you need a
second, that'd be good
and then I'll vote yes. Thank
you.
Senator Hail.
Yes.
Senator O'Malley.
Senator Paul
Senator Ramos.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator share
use.
were
Us, Senator Bergman.
Senator Hamblin. Yes, and
Senator Jaramillo, you wanted to
explain your vote. Madam Chair,
at first I had just thought it
was taking them in as the
resident on the coverage, so I'm
thankful for the discussion with
Senator Ramos and with uh
Senator O'Malley, and so I can
see this, and so thanks for your
comment that it wouldn't be a
lawsuit, it's a claim for an
injury, and I can see that,
which is why that then changed
me to a yes vote. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you, Senator
Duhe. We are, Senator Stephanics
is standing in the back. So what
we're going to do is have
Stephanics go, then we'll have
you do your other bill and since
Senator Figueroa, since you're
here because you're on
committee, we'll have you and
then Senator Tobias finish this
off. So.
Yes, so your vote with the no
wreck is 6 to 2.
All right, Senator Stephanics,
you are welcome to go. We are on
Senate Bill 376. You have an
amendment? Yes, I do, uh, Madam
Chair, I have an amendment to
introduce this amendment
includes an additional piece of
eligibility criteria to ensure
certain state employees making
less than 50,000 will benefit
from this bill.
You will see that we are
proposing a program that
provides additional premium
assistance to state employees
under 250% of the federal
poverty level through the
Healthcare Affordability Fund.
Our union partners have
helpfully flagged that there is
a small subset of single member
households who would potentially
not meet this income.
Income criteria or benefit from
the other state contribution
changes in this bill. This
amendment allows state employees
to make 500,000 or less to get
employee-only coverage with the
added premium assistance, just
as the spirit of the bill
intended all along with me
today, I have the deputy
secretary of the Healthcare
Authority, Alex Castillo Smith
am I right? and Colin Bao Bao,
uh, healthcare coverage
innovation.
director for the healthcare
Authority, but, uh, I'm happy.
To see if you will pass the
amendment.
motion.
I move the amendment. 231256.1
for discussion.
It is in your book.
Look it up, look up, look it up,
Senator had a meal, but
Senator Bergman's seconds, and
in opposition of moving the
amendment.
For discussion purposes. So
you're welcome now to go over
the amendment. I have Heather
who's standing on my shoulder,
who's whispering gently in my
ear about what I need to do with
this. So, OK, so, Madam Chair, I
could reintroduce the amendment.
Um, this amendment includes an
additional piece of eligibility
criteria.
To ensure certain state
employees making less than
50,000 will benefit from this
bill.
You will see that we are
proposing a program. This is a
state agency bill.
We are proposing a program that
provides additional premium
assistance to state employees
under 250% of the federal
poverty level through the
Healthcare Affordability Fund.
Our union partners have
helpfully flagged that there is
a small subset of single-member
households.
It would potentially not meet
this income criteria or benefit
from the other state
contribution changes in this
bill.
This amendment allows state
employees who make 50,000 or
less to get employee-only
coverage with the added premium
assistance, meaning a subsidy,
just as the spirit of the bill
intended all along.
So it might not make a lot of
sense without the bill, but
there it is. OK.
Is there any opposition to the
amendment?
See none? OK, please continue,
Senator Stephanics. Thank you,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee on the bill, as you
may know, the state health
benefits plan, which offers
coverage to state employees has
faced a deficit for years.
At the same time, New Mexico
contributes to 65% of the cost
of insurance, the lowest level
of any state in the nation. The
healthcare authority has been
working on this data-driven
proposal for months, identifying
ways to set the state's health
plan on a fiscally responsible
path while making health
coverage more affordable for our
employees.
Senate bills 376 is a critical
first step to achieve those
goals. This bill saves taxpayers
money and paves the way for
other state public insurance
partners to adopt similar
reforms next year.
The changes in this bill reduce
employee costs by more than 40%
on average.
Eliminate the state health
benefits budget shortfall
decreased the uninsured rate
among members of the National
Guard, give local public bodies
more certainty around their
costs and saved the state
general fund $155 million over
the next 5 years.
And I will now turn to my expert
witnesses for a comet.
So on top first.
Sanchez members of the
committee. My name is Alex
Castillo Smith, and I'm one of
the deputy secretaries for the
healthcare authority. Um, it's a
pleasure to be here. I also have
the pleasure to oversee the
state health benefits portfolio
at the department. I also want
to give, um,
Uh, shout out to Secretary Kerry
Omijo and my colleagues Colin
Bao and Joe Lurujil Oino, who
oversees the state health
benefits program.
Um,
in launching the new healthcare
authority last July, Governor
Michelle Lujan Grisham, uh,
charged secretary Armijo, the
HCA leadership team and myself
to fix the state of New Mexico
health insurance that more than
60,000 New Mexicans depend on, I
believe So Bill 376 does just
that.
As the largest pair of
healthcare in New Mexico, the
healthcare authority has
responsibility to the market,
providers, and New Mexicans to
leverage our expertise,
partnerships, and purchasing
power, uh, to make the state of
New Mexico health insurance more
accessible and affordable, um,
Colin has just a few comments.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, um, at its
core, this bill really does you
go ahead and identifying
yourself just for the record,
the healthcare coverage
innovations director for the
healthcare authority. Um, so at
its core, 5 main things that
this bill does. One, it requires
the secretary to submit
actuarially sound budget
requests.
It replaces the outdated salary
brackets for insurance
contributions within an 80/20
split for all employees on the
state health benefits plan.
It provides a program to pay
down a portion or all of the
premiums for lower income
employees through the healthcare
affordability fund.
It creates uh patient
protections for initiatives
related to the establishment of
fair hospital pricing. And
finally, it creates a program to
lower premiums for members of
the National Guard, who, uh,
qualify for the Tricare select
reserve policy, and as senator
Stephanic noted, this bill is
going to have a lot of positive
impacts directly for state
employees and local public
bodies who rely on this health
plan and also set us on a
fiscally sustainable path, so,
um we thank you and I don't know
if.
And um,
uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh Secretary Carrie
Armijo is also here in support
of this bill and conversations
have been occurring with a set
of finance to um make sure costs
will be covered.
Thank you. Great. Thank you so
much. And so I'm going to the
audience just by a show of
hands, how many in the audience
are in support of this bill?
Well, can I take a picture of
that?
That's I'm serious. That's
amazing. Yeah, no, you got, you
got a lot, Senator Stephanics.
16. Thank you very much. Anybody
in this audience in opposition?
See none, what about online?
That's free.
online. All right, just, um, in
terms of looking at the time, so
given the overwhelming support,
we're going to go ahead and
record uh that support but not
take public testimony. We're
going to go ahead and go
straight to the committee, um,
and so at this point, I go ahead
and open it up to the committee
if there are any questions on
Senate bill, uh, 2, 376 as
amended.
Senator Jarami motioned for a
due pass. We have a due pass. Do
we have a second. 2nd from
Senator O'Malley, as amended.
Yes
Oh yeah, sure. I guess so. Thank
you, Senator Figueroa, and then
we'll go ahead and we'll go back
to the motion.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you sponsor for all the
work you've done to pull this
together, all of you, it's
clearly been working on it a
long time. Um, my question has
to do with the fact that we dug
ourselves a hole.
Madam Chair, by not being
willing to increase premiums.
The employee portion for years
in a row. So can you explain to
me how this fixed. I understand
that we're dividing it
differently, the 80/20. I think
it's excellent and long overdue,
but are we
Going to ever raise premiums and
make sure we don't dig ourselves
that same hole, Madam Chair.
Uh, Madam Chair and Senator
Figueroa, that's a great
question and it's actually right
at the core of what this bill
does. So we are setting a higher
standard for ourselves as a
department and putting into this
bill that when we submit budget
requests to the legislature
every year has to be based on
actuar really sound rates, which
means that the premiums have to
be sufficient to cover the
costs. So we're holding
ourselves to account in this
bill and making sure that we're
providing that information to
appropriators and the
legislature as a whole, so that
we don't get that.
Thank you, Madam Chair and Mr.
Mayo. That's exactly what we
needed to hear.
Thank you. Any other questions?
If there are no other questions,
we do have a motion for a DuP
pass 376 as amended from Senator
Jaramillo, a second from Senator
O'Malley. Uh, are, is there any
opposition to this bill?
See none, if you will, just go
ahead and record all of those in
attendance in support of that
unless you're OK with that? OK.
Right? So that means you have a
7 to 0 do pass as amended. Thank
you, Char Hamblin. I neglected
to acknowledge Senator Stephanic
and George Munoz who are
sponsoring this bill and just
want to acknowledge their
support.
Oh, I don't, I don't think that
was a good idea is it 7 or 8?
It's 8.8, thank you. My math is
really it's.
I just didn't know if there was
a secret no.
that members of the committee.
Yes, thank you very much.
Yeah, yeah, you have to watch
out when you mention Senator
Munoz's name, you know, it,
yeah.
All right, so now we are going
to Senator, we're gonna go ahead
and go to 259 with Senator Doig
now that we're losing most of
the people here.
Senator Doha and then we'll go
to Senator Figueroa and if
Senator Tobiasson is here, we'll
get her up here.
And then we'll be wrapped. She
is not here in the audience.
I'll have Susan go track her
down, uh, after Senator
Tobiasson.
All right, Senator Duig, we have
Senate Bill 259, if you will, go
ahead and start.
Yes, thank
you. And if I can, I'm gonna go
ahead and note the time of
night, so
all right. This committee
appreciates that. So, Madam
Chair, uh, 259 is designed to
modernize and strengthen New
Mexico's charitable
solicitations Act by enhancing
transparency, accountability,
and enforcement mechanisms and
charitable fundraising
activities. Uh, this bill
addresses existing gaps in the
law by ensuring.
have accurate information about
how their contributions are used
and holding fundraisers to
higher ethical and legal
standards by aligning New
Mexico's policies with best
practices from other states, SB
259 protects the integrity of
charitable giving in our state.
I have here with me, Nina Chavez
from Goodwill Industries, and
she might want to say a little
bit more.
Madam Chairwoman, members of the
committee, thank you so much for
this opportunity, um, to present
to you. Um, I'm the director of
government relations with
Goodwill Industries of New
Mexico, um, this bill, um, just
as Senator Duha said, is a
consumer protection and
transparency bill, strengthening
the state, the state's
charitable solicitations Act,
and what that does is provides
clarity for donors and fairness
for nonprofits.
In fact, this bill is protecting
trusted nonprofit organizations
across the state that, um, by
ensuring that charitable giving
remains transparent and
accountable. So this bill is
ensuring that when New Mexicans
donate nonperishable goods, such
as clothing, furniture,
electronics, and household
items, they clearly understand
whether their contributions are
benefiting a nonprofit charity
or a for-profit re resale
operation and the proportion of
that benefit. Uh, right now,
certain for-profit thrift stores
and third-party solicitors, um,
mislead.
donors into believing their
contributions support charitable
causes. In reality, while some
nonprofits may receive a small
portion as a beneficiary through
those partnerships, the vast
majority of the revenue from
resold goods in this context
goes to private for profit
entities.
So transparency benefits
everyone, consumers, ethical
businesses, New Mexico's
nonprofit sectors, and
ultimately those New Mexicans
that are receiving those
services from the nonprofits. So
organizations such as Goodwill
Industries of New Mexico, a
local statewide nonprofit,
Habitat for Humanity, Saint
Vincent de Paul and others rely
on public trust to fund services
such as workforce training,
housing support, assistance for
low income and low income
families and other service uh
priorities. When donors know
exactly where their
contributions are going, they
are more likely to
continue supporting charitable
causes. Um, I, I believe that
you all received 2 items, um,
for this briefing and
presentation, so one item looks
like this, it's the path in
which nonprofits who manage
those um donation operations,
supply chain, if you will, is on
the top and how that works
because they're controlling 100%
of that process. So that means
that upwards of 70 to 100% of
all of that revenue generated in
those uh retail stores managed
by those nonprofits are going
right back into their mission
services.
In fact, at Goodwill, we've been
averaging 88 cents on the
dollar, going right back into
services for unhoused veterans
and their families, workforce
development programs for uh
Title One youth, um, seniors,
general population prison
reentry, and so forth.
Thank you, and we're ready for
questions.
All right. Thank you so much.
Um, you know, somebody who has a
background in nonprofit work, a
lot of this is something that's
very familiar to me, so, uh, if
I can just buy a very large
audience we have 3 new guests.
Thank you for showing up. Uh, is
there anybody in the audience
who is in support of this bill?
None recorded. Anybody in
opposition?
Anybody online?
That
One supporter
Let's go ahead and give him a
minute. Who, who is that that we
haven't support?
Uh
All right, Shawna.
Uh, if you will, we're gonna go
ahead and give you one minute,
uh, to go ahead and state your
support for this bill. Uh, you
will get a 32nd warning in the
chat, so go ahead, Shawna and
unmute yourself and uh you've
got one minute.
Thank you. Uh, my name is Shawna
Castle. I'm the president and
CEO of Goodwill Industries of
New Mexico, and I respect your
guys' time, so I just wanted to
say that I also support this
bill as the CEO. I appreciate
your guys's consideration of the
bill, and it would have a huge
impact as far as our donors and
the transparency, so they know
where they're donating and where
they're how their donation is
affecting the community. So
again, I thank you guys for the
consideration of this bill.
Thank you so much. And um you
have an opportunity to say
anything else, otherwise we're
gonna go ahead and go to the
committee.
And I had a meal. All right,
great. Thank you, Madam Chair,
historically since I've been
here, Senator, bills, we take
out the purpose, and I'm
wondering if you would find this
as a friendly amendment if we
struck out section one, which is
on page one starting on line 16
and strike it out where it ends
on 22, and then we renumber your
bill by section accordingly.
Madam Jason, yes, as a member of
the Senate Judiciary Committee.
I should probably be taken to
the woodshed for allowing Phil
with my name on it to even get
out the purpose section. Senator
Jaramillo, if you will please
repeat that so that, uh, Rebecca
can get that. So, madam, what we
would be doing is striking
section one, so on page one
starting on line 16.
You would strike line 16 all the
way through the end of 22.
And then we would renumber the
bill accordingly, so Section 2
would then become Section 1, and
so forth.
Senator, Duheck that is
considered a friendly amendment.
Absolutely. OK. Anybody in
Go ahead center brokers.
I'm on the right track. Thank
you. Anybody in opposition of
this amendment?
seen then, OK, so now we are on
Senate bill 259 as amended.
Any other conversations or
questions. I see Senator
Figueroa, are you reaching for
your microphone?
Go for it. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Um, my question is on
page 6, line 6 to 7 to 25,000
surety bond.
Um, that seems like an awful lot
of money. Can you explain why
it's so high?
Committee Senator Figueroa,
Sirty Bonds, um, in this bill
serve as a safeguard to ensure
compliance and accountability,
so under Senate Bill 259, 3rd
party solicitors, businesses or
individuals who collect non of
these items are required to
obtain surety bonds, this is
something that many other states
with similar laws have in place
as a consumer protection
measure, ensuring, you know,
just.
Consumer protection and so
ethical businesses and
legitimate nonprofit
partnerships will have no issue
meeting that requirement because
they file things such as 990s
and reinforce trust and
accountability in other ways.
Madam chair and sponsor my
question I don't think was why a
bond, but why that particularly
and high amount, what are the
fines and penalties that someone
would pay if the AEG found them,
um, non compliant with this
bill.
Madam chair on it all, I'll let
Miss Chavez, uh, answer your
question about the uh, the
fines, but I'll know, so I'm,
I'm a notary public. I'm pretty
sure I have.
$1000 bond just for be for just
for that.
So
Did that answer your question,
Senator Figueroa? Yeah, that
did, thank you. I'm never gonna
be a notary, um.
Or I think Senor Ramos was
shaking his head too, probably
an insurance agent too, um, the
page 4, there's a definition of
solicit.
And I think I'm just confused
that solicit is being defined as
a donation, and can you explain
how solicit.
A verb becomes a noun. So, uh,
Madam Chair, senator, you're
absolutely right, I was sitting
back there reading this, and
went and grabbed Ms. Chavez and
said, we, we gotta fix this, um,
I don't have the fix right now.
Uh, but my intention is to go
into Senate Judiciary, uh, with
a sub that where that will be
fixed, because, yes, that, that
is an oversight on my part. OK,
thanks, Madam Chair. That's it
for me.
Just in front of us and I guess
you are human, so thank you for
uh.
For bringing this to us. um, and
the reason I say that is because
you're saying that you should
have caught that.
At the very beginning of the
bill, but, um, the way I read
this is that this is to make
sure we take care of these bad
actors and make sure they're.
Acting in good faith, correct?
That's basically it. Um, I, I
like the bill like thank you for
bringing it. I know we have.
Some bad actors where I'm from,
so that are doing exactly what
we're trying to fight here. So I
thank you for bringing it and uh
I moved to Du pass.
All right, before we go to the
DuPass, thank you, Senator
Ramos. I just want to make some
really brief comments, um, you
know, 88 cents on the dollar
just for those who aren't
working in nonprofits. That's a
really extraordinary rate, um,
because what that says is that
that this nonprofit and there
are nonprofits in Las Cruces
that serve the unhoused who are
90 cents on the dollar, meaning
that so much money is going
towards programs. Many auditors
will tell you you're not paying
your staff enough because of
that high, but what that does is
that shows the dedication of
those nonprofits to make sure
that the services
They're providing reach as many
people as possible. So it is
incredibly admirable, uh, on
that, and just an understanding
like the fair market value on
donations and all of that that
this is gonna benefit so many
nonprofits, um, we have a thrift
store social enterprises for
nonprofits, so those business
ventures for nonprofits that do
very much similar to what
Goodwill Industries does, uh,
and, and, uh, you know, a lot of
people are recycling, reusing
and repurposing, so, um, so I
thank you. I just wanted, so I
wanted to thank you for bringing
this forward. And so, um, on
that note, if there are no other
questions, we do have a due pass
from Senator Ramos. We have a
second from Senator Sanchez. Is
there anybody in opposition of
this do pass?
On that note, if you will show
that everybody in attendance is
in support, so that means you
have an 8.
Pardon?
On 80 on SB 259 as amended with
the commitment that the sponsor
will amend out that other part
uh before you bring it into
judiciary, so thank you very
much.
Thank you, thank you, members.
Appreciate it. Senator Figueroa,
you're next.
We do have word that Senator
Tobiasson is on her way, so
hopefully she'll get here before
if Senator Figueroa is really
super fast.
I
I super fast.
Senator Figueroa, that that
eases my apprehensions cause,
uh, you're, you're ready to go.
Thank you so much. OK, Madam
Chair and committee Senate Bill
252, uh, comes from a problem
that was brought to me by a
constituent.
Beginning of the summer in the
spring, um, a new reading of
current law, and I'm gonna draw
your attention to page 2. OK, if
I can before you go on, we do
have an amendment, right? and I
need to discuss the bill first.
All right, that sounds great. I
do want to go ahead and note to
the committee that this is one
of those, uh, no, I'm sorry. No,
this one's a good one, never
mind. Um, I'm just looking ahead
thinking that we needed to hold
this, so you need to do your
thing, just do your thing, OK?
This is essentially an
its core social work bill, a
telehealth social work bill, um,
a new reading of current law on
page 2, where you see line 17,
item 20.
Current law reads a licensed in
independent social worker is on
this list of the definition of a
health care. Well, um, new
sudden interpretation of that
line, put out the word that our
current social workers who are
licensed master social workers
suddenly could no longer do
telehealth.
So they had been doing
telehealth across the state, and
they got word that they could no
longer do that.
Um, because New Mexico has 3
different levels of licensed
social workers. We have licensed
bachelors, licensed masters, and
then licensed clinical social
workers who are called under our
regulatory statutes, licensed
independents. So someone read
this and said, oh, only that 3rd
group.
Can do telehealth when actually
our licensed masters, social
workers had been doing
telehealth for years.
Um, and it was just a different
reading of the law.
Of the AG ruled that they had
temporary permission to
continue, and the legislature
would figure it out during our
next session. So this bill is an
attempt to fix that problem and
allow those social workers, the
LMSWs to go back to work,
providing telehealth.
Um, up at the top further up
that bill on the same page line
too is a correction to the
proper term for a podiatrist.
And he's 21 and 22 are an
attempt to future proof the
bill.
Um, as we license and name
different kinds of medical
providers that item 25 says any
healthcare professional who's
received a Medicaid provider
identification.
So if it's a licensed provider,
according to Medicaid.
Then it's a licensed medical
provider in New Mexico and Madam
Chair, that is the core of the
bill and if it's OK, I'll go
ahead and move the amendment
since I'm a member of the
committee, 0231348.1.
We have a 2nd in in opposition
for the for the amendment, not
even from the hot mess corner
over here. You guys sound awful.
Please stay over there.
Yeah. And can I stay here? Yes,
you can. Thank you. Yes, you
might want to stay there. No,
the, um,
Some discussion came up if you
will, please explain your
amendments to explain the
amendment after the bill was
posted, someone pointed out that
our licensed bachelor social
workers would also be included
if we strike the word
independent and licensed
bachelors, social workers can do
different kinds of counseling
and provide services, but they
have to do it under supervision,
so there was a concern that,
well, if we allow them to do
this, we have to preserve the
fact that they need to be
supervised.
So that is the intent of the
amendment.
I see there, nothing in the New
Mexico Telehealth Act shall be
construed to alter supervision
requirements set forth by the
health care provider's
applicable licensing board. In
this case, that is the social
worker licensing board.
A healthcare provider shall
provide telehealth services
under the same level of
supervision required for in, so
there's much debate about
whether this is really
necessary.
Because one section of law
doesn't supersede the other, and
if the Social Work Act.
Licensing Act says they need
supervision, the telehealth Act
doesn't undo that, but we
thought it better to be safe
than sorry and include that in
here.
That is the intent of the
amendment, Madam Chair, and with
that we'll stand for questions.
That is the royal we will stand
for questions.
Any questions on the amendment.
Can we move the adopted.
Is there any opposition?
I'm just gonna get a little
heather, a little, little
character that's gonna stand
right here.
Uh, any opposition to the
amendment?
See none
So the amendment has been
adopted. If there's anything
else you'd like to say,
otherwise, we'll probably go on
for.
Audience participation.
I'm sure Mickey in the back
might want to make a comment,
um, no, and so, um, any comments
or any questions from the
committee.
Anybody online?
OK.
What is uh since there's no
I was just gonna say this is a
smart change. Thank you for
bringing this bill.
Right? So we have a due pass as
amended.
From Senator O'Malley, do we
have a second?
2nd from Senator Bergmans. Is
there anybody?
In opposition of this bill as
amended.
All right.
seen none, and we'll go ahead
and show that all those in
attendance.
So we haven't.
Including Senator Figueroa. So
that means we have an 8 to 0.
Do pass as amended.
Thank you. Do you all have an
ETA on Tobison?
All right. So she's gonna come
blowing in. I'm sure like a
Beyonce video, we should just
have wind blowing as she comes
on in. So if you're, if you're
actually watching online, there
is somebody, oh wait, no, that's
a men raised their hand, so
that's you.
Some
Somebody named Edmin. They're
clever. During the pandemic, you
would see, see kids that named
themselves, uh, no connection.
Sneaky little buggers in
classes.
And then they would just be
blanking their screen and.
Clever. So we're just in, uh, on
hold until Senator Tobiasson
comes in. The next two bills
hers, um, our tax bills, so
those will behold, so we'll just
hear them.
Um, and then.
And then her first one, her
physician's income tax does have
an amendment to it.
Are you feeling all right over
there?
You
Do you want to try and
She can probably
And they're holding it.
Yeah, we are holding it.
All right, Senator Jaramillo,
um, she'll probably kind of
breeze right in as you're, as
you're talking, but let's go
ahead and start this cause I
know the committee with.
That would be hilarious if we
got both of her bills. Is she
right there?
Oh, come on down I was just
I was I was.
we are pretty happy bunch.
We were watching, we were doing
a little soundtrack to you
jogging through the hallway.
Yes
so much.
All right, so we are on um
Senate Bill 296. We know that
you have an amendment.
But you'll explain the bill
first, and then you'll explain
the amendment. Just also note
that these two bills are tax
bills, so we will hold them.
OK, you can go ahead and do that
if you.
You're, yeah, sure.
Senator Bergman's pointed out
she's focusing. Do you need a
breath?
All right, so just for your
purposes and for the committee,
these two her next two bills are
going to be held for
consideration in a tax package.
Uh, we will hopefully know by
the beginning of next week
whether or not there is
capacity. We're already having
those conversations. So, um,
you'll want to present your bill
first and then present your
amendment.
Um, we have one, they'll get you
one, Senator Figueroa is getting
one.
And, and by the way, I, I know
that there was a little bit of
confusion about whether or not
your bill would be held. I do
have to say I'm very proud of
this committee because we go
through the entire agenda. OK.
Of
Fastest
Yes. Make sure your mic is on,
Senator Tobiasson. You can say
that again for the recorded
with all of you senators,
because I have not seen another
committee go through bills like
this, so.
We have incredible commitment
and collaboration.
So you, you're ready to go? I am
ready. Go for it. Thank you. Um,
As many of you might know, I am
a business coach by profession,
and I have coached doctors
around the state for decades,
and this is something near and
dear to my heart and to theirs
because as you also know, we
have a real outcry for help or
access to medical care, and
especially access to doctors of
all kinds, so this bill in
particular is about attracting
and retaining doctors.
There are
There are hospitals around the
state that can help repay their
medical school loans, but
there's also facilities around
the state that can't offer full
packages, and there are
definitely private practices
that just they can't.
Play in in the same ballpark as
the bigger facilities or
hospitals. So this is to give
new doctors or doctors who have
a medical school loans to give
them the tax rebate up to
$50,000 or 5 years, 5
consecutive years to help them
pay for that, um, so that we can
not only attract doctors but
hopefully keep them here. Um, so
that's the bill itself.
The amendment
Madam Chair.
I proposed to the Senate Tax
Business and Transportation
Committee, the following
amendment to Senate Bill 296,
um, on page 3 line 7 after act,
insert.
a podiatric.
Podiatric podia.
Just doesn't seem right, but I
position, license pursuant to
the podiatry Act.
And that's, that's the that's
the amendment, wow, that's so
difficult. I know, right? Yes.
So can, uh, we get a um motion
on the amendment. I move the
amendment. We have a second.
Anybody in opposition?
Showing no opposition. All
right, any other comments you
want to make before we go ahead
and go to public testimony or
committee. Uh, no, go ahead. OK.
Thank you, ma'am. Thank you for
reading the room, by the way,
there's nobody in the room
except staff. Um, all right, so
at this point, remember that we
will be holding this bill. Are
there any questions or comments
from the committee?
Thank you for letting me help,
uh, letting me co-sponsor this.
I appreciate that, um, and, uh,
we.
So
On the amendment or the bill as
the bill as amended.
OK, go for it. Yeah, Madam Chair
and sponsor, we've talked about
this before. This bill doesn't
target the small players who
can't match the big packages,
nor does it target the
geographic areas where shortages
are the tightest.
Um
Is that the intent of the bill
to get doctors in our most
underserved areas, or is it just
to get doctors in the state, we
don't care where.
Madam Chair, I'm Senator
Figueroa, thank you for the
question. And actually, this is
to attract and retain doctors in
all towns throughout New Mexico,
and I believe it really does
target the, the small facilities
and in the small practices
because this isn't dependent
upon size of the institution,
right? It, it's about the actual
doctor and those, those small
practices cannot afford carte
blanche to repay.
Middle school school loans. Um,
so this is where it's not coming
out of the, really out of the
pocket of the practice, which a
lot of these small practices are
barely surviving. So this
actually I would argue, is
helping those smaller practices
around the state. Madam Chaoner
clarify if I were a doctor
coming to New Mexico. Why
wouldn't I go to a big
institution in Albuquerque
where.
I don't know, I like the city
life, and I can get this tax
benefit and I can get loan
repayment and I can get the
fancy package from a bigger
institution what in this bill
would incentivize me to go to a
small place.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Good
question, Senator. Um, I know
that personally that we have
doctors around the state that
actually love our rural
communities. Many of them grew
up in our rural communities, and
they desperately desperately
would like to go back to
where they grew up, back to
their families, their
communities, and this actually
gives them the ability to do
that because they know that,
hey, I want to go, I can stay. I
know I want to stay more than 5
years, and this is gonna help
pay off my my debt.
The man who turns sponsor, thank
you, that clarifies it doesn't
incentivize them to go to rural
areas, but it allows them to do
it financially where otherwise
they might not be able to. Thank
you for the clarification.
Thank you, Senator Figueroa. Any
other?
Questions.
Senator Berkins, thank you,
Madam Chair. I was just
wondering when you were drafting
it, if you had considered
putting a sunset in or.
What are your thoughts on that?
Madam chair, Senator, um,
because it's a 5 year period,
uh.
I didn't think that it was
necessary in this case, um,
unless you have
A reason or a really good idea
why to do that. I don't know
that it's, you know, necessary.
No, that's all. Thank you. Thank
you. 5 years is a sunset, um,
any other comments or questions
from the committee.
Senator O'Malley, did you,
sorry, yeah, sure. Uh, I said
Berg, when we were talking about
a sunset on the um
The bill, it's, I mean, the
program or a program.
Just make sure you go through
the chair, yeah, you've got the
5 year, it's OK. You've got the
5-year term limit on that. So
that's in essence, an implied
sunset. Am I correct?
Well, sorry,
it, it really isn't cause you're
talking about, you know, if you
wanted to, in other words, uh,
next year, somebody could start
another 5 year period and that
sort of thing. So, um,
It, it might be something where
you just would have well later
fix this, just have a review
period that it has to be re
reconsidered and re-upped or
whatever after a couple years to
see how it does, you know, that
kind of stuff.
Thank you very much.
Yes, thank you, thank you.
Anything else, and I think those
are certainly something to have
in the back of the mind. Um,
You know, at this point, if
there are no others that, that
we're gonna move on from this
cause this is gonna be put into
the little basket of all the
bills that are going to be
considered, uh, as I've
mentioned throughout the day
today, we'll find a little out a
little bit more after this
weekend about capacity for a tax
bill, um, and I'm also working
with the uh the entire committee
once we get those solid answers
on that.
So, uh, we have 296 as amended,
that's gonna be held. Uh, your
last bill of the night is 298.
This is also a hold, but you are
welcome, uh, to talk about that
one. That one does not have an
amendment to it.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
Senate Bill 298 is really born
from the same idea, and this is
about doctors keeping doctors
really long term and looking at
actually more established
doctors, doctors that are maybe
here that are on the fence of
leaving. Again, um, I have
worked with and helped doctors
in all different sizes of
practices, even in our large
hospitals for years, and many of
them right now are considering
whether or not they stay or.
for a multitude of reasons that
I know many of you are super
familiar with, so I won't repeat
those unless you ask specific
questions, but, um, this is my
big bold idea of saying.
At some point as a state.
With the money and sitting on
Senate finance, I'm seeing where
tens of millions of dollars are
going where we're not moving the
needle. I really believe that
this 10 year tax rebate or tax
moratorium on state income tax
for doctors, only on their
healthcare services income is
New Mexico's way of saying we
are invested in you while we fix
many of the challenges that
you're facing in your
profession. Many of the
challenges that
All of our families are facing
in the state of New Mexico right
now. This is a way without us
pulling money out of a fund or
whatever. This is a way for us
to tell them, we are investing
in you because our communities
believe in you and they need you
desperately, and
Again, it's a 10 year moratorium
on state income tax only for the
healthcare services that that
doctor provides. No other income
on their tax return.
OK. Thank you on that. I do
wanna uh recognize that we had
Mike, um, and Carrie on in
support of 296. Are they still
on?
I
Uh yes.
OK, I figured as much, and I
have a feeling they're in
support of this as well.
Uh
And will. All right, so we've
got them for both bills, so
that's your record right there.
We're, we're not gonna hear from
them but we're, we're gonna go
ahead and note their their
support. Um, and so at this
point, given that this is also a
hold now we go to the committee
for any questions or comments,
Senator Jaramilo, Madam Chair,
mine's just a comment there was
a technical issue in our
committee analysis report, just
for you to have with you because
it might come up if this becomes
part of the package that
psychiatrists are not listed in
the healthcare practitioner
definition.
Uh, though they have a medical
degree, they're not considered a
physician, so just to have that
in your pocket. Thank you for
that if this bill does make it
into the tax package, just that
you have that knowledge with
you. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, thank you, Senator.
Um, I will make note of that and
it's interesting because I've
had so many different people in
the medical field reach out to
me as they've seen these bills,
and I've tried to keep it
relatively focused for now,
because I think if we just
opened it up to everyone in the
world, then uh.
I think it would be an immediate
no, and I don't want that. I
would rather us at least serve
the general population of
medical doctors. Thank you for
that.
Senator O'Malley.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Senator,
what made you come up with 10
years?
I don't, madam chair, senator,
really know other than I started
talking to doctors and um even
people at different hospitals,
and they'll offer to repay loans
for, if a doctor comes for 2
years, 3 years, and even
Presbyterian is saying, yeah, we
might get some of those doctors
here, but as soon as that clock
has run out, they're gone.
And so I started thinking about,
well, what's the time? What's
that sweet spot of a time period
or a doctor, no matter what age.
Well, to me, I picked the decade
because in a decade, you put
down roots. You meet lifelong
friends. You get married, you
have kids, you find a place of
worship, you find outside
interest. You're serving the
community in different ways.
A decade might sound long, but
it's really not. I mean, we can
all properly attest to that in
this room. So I felt like a
decade, at least it puts that
person in a time frame where
this, this feels like home, 2 to
3 years, it may not feel like
home for them yet. Um, they
haven't had the time yet. And in
that 10-year period, I'm really
hopeful that as a state and as a
body, we are able to really make
some massive change in the state
for the good of everyone. And
So I felt like that time period
kind of matched with what it
might take for us to That's
sure, I asked that because for
example, like my, uh, if you
want, for example, doctors who
may
You know, consider.
The continuing and not retiring,
um, it, you know, it doesn't
need to be 10 years, um.
And they might, you know, find
this attractive, uh, I think
it's just, it's really about how
the program would be laid out, I
mean, that's the devil's in the
details, as they say. I think
that's one of those things, but
um,
And I know that uh well, my, my
primary care was retired. He
came back, and it's been great
cause he's really good, he's a
got a great bedside manner, um,
and, um.
So he works with Medicare
patients, but, um, you know, I
mean, he's retired, so maybe
this would make a difference to
him, I mean in terms of
retirement income and that sort
of thing, so.
Just consider those kinds of
things, um, we're not talking
necessarily about.
Young doctors, you know, we're
looking at,
who have a lot of experience
too.
Good point. Madam Chair,
Senator, I'll add that I think
the vast majority of doctors
that are in our state today,
they're here because they really
truly have a passion to serve.
Um, you could probably pull
almost any type of doctor that
any of you have met or you see
yourself, and they'll tell you
that they know that, um, there's
less risk for them in other
states that maybe they're not
working this as hard and
definitely that they would make
more money, um, and more money
towards their
overall cost of being a doctor.
Um, so they really do have a
servant's heart, and I will say
I'm hopeful if, if this is put
in the tax package in 2017, my
husband almost died. He has a
rare autoimmune disease, and
Because we knew all the right
people at that moment in time,
we were able to get him on a
medical learjet to Cleveland
Clinic where they were able to
save his life, like within hours
of him passing away.
And today he's healthy, but he
has a minor issue, and we've
been waiting over a year.
To find someone who can help and
give us the answers. So we're
about to send him out of state
again.
And ours is just one of many
stories. Thankfully, he's alive
and he's healthy, but
Think about, especially all the
rural communities. Think about
just here. I mean, this is in
the metro, and, and we have
contacts with doctors. How many
people in New Mexico are every
day going out without care, and
timely care, and putting it off.
And I've talked to a lot of
doctors who are telling me, you
know what, a lot of times now,
we're seeing patients when it's
too late. We can't help them
anymore.
Or as doctors, they're actually
flying out of state, calling
their friends that are doctors
in other states around the
country just to get a, a general
practitioner to see them.
Just to get a normal, I know a
doctor who has waited over 2
years, and she goes, I feel so
bad taking that time off to fly
out of state to see a doctor
cause I can't get a primary
here, and I'm a doctor.
Like that should not be
happening. And that's really why
I'm so passionate about when do
we as a body just stand up and
say, you know, this is America,
but when it comes to access to
medicine, it's, it's very
quickly not feeling like we're
in an actual state in America.
So that, that would be the end
of that. Thank you, ma'am.
Thank you.
Anything else?
I would point out if the bill
goes forward.
However,
it does that, Madam chairs being
held to be considered for it.
Some point if changes need to be
made as it goes into the
package. The Department of
Health indicated that it needs
definitions of practice and full
time practice, what that exactly
means, so that has to go in the
record as something that has to
be considered, and I would throw
out the concern again that it
doesn't incentivize rural
healthcare underserved
healthcare, and I think.
We need to target those
especially.
Um, with our policy, wherever we
can to make sure those folks who
are driving 3 hours to get
services, um, get a little more
attention. That's all, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Senator
Figueroa, before, uh, Senator
Bergman's, um.
Izzy, so one of the things that
we're talking about is some some
I I think agreed upon
definitions need to be kind of
clarified in here.
Should that be something that is
amended prior to being
considered into the tax package?
OK. That's good to know. OK. And
so that I would recommend and
maybe Senator Tobiasson, you
might want to get with Senator
Figueroa just to kind of write
down those things and take note
and I don't know if Senator
Bergman has the same thing, but
that would be helpful, um,
because right now as it stands,
it may be so vague that it, it's
like it's not even gonna be
considered, and I want you to
have that chance. Um, and so we
can do that. So I would, I would
recommend those, just a couple
of those conversations cause the
whole point of the committee is
to make Bill stronger and
To, to, you know, and it, it may
be anxiety inducing. But the
point is, is like there have
been several bills that have
come in here that come out
better bills because of the
discussions that's happening. So
Senator Bergman, I'm gonna go
ahead and let you answer if
there are no others, then we're,
we're almost finished.
We've got the sick corner over
there center Figueroa, we're
gonna spray you,
Madam Chair, Senator, I know how
you feel.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, my
questions are along the same
line as Senator Figueroa's, and
I do love this idea and I like
that it doesn't seem like
astronomically expensive.
Including two municipalities,
um, but the FIR does also
mention besides the fact of
defining practice that maybe we
would also want to consider
other doctoral levels such as
the doctor of pharmacy or
nurses.
And I think those might be too
if, if it doesn't.
If you have a response, that's
also actually in Madam Chair,
Senator, now that you've
mentioned that, we did amend
this to include pharmacists.
I don't know if that's
Maybe not showing or there's
maybe not an amendment for you
all.
So I'll, I will write that on my
notes because I know that was
supposed to be um in there.
And there was an amendment. So
I've got that noted. Um, but I
really appreciate the ideas and
feedback because if we can
collaborate to make it really
strong, I think that's
phenomenal and it's the best
thing for New Mexico, so I, I'll
get with both of you actually
tomorrow, if you don't mind.
Yeah, and I think it'd be, we
should keep nurses in mind as
well, as much as we can.
So Madam Chair, Senator,
originally that was the idea.
But I was pulled back. Uh, it
was suggested that I pull back
because something that vast.
May not be considered at all.
And so are you nodding your head
in agreement?
Yes, OK, so maybe what we do,
madam chair, senators, as we
look at the doctors first and
perhaps next year we revisit
based on
What it's doing and if we can
expand it.
Or write a different bill and
expand it. I don't know how that
works. Yeah, yeah, maybe
there's.
I know there are different
levels of nursing also, so maybe
there's a category that makes
sense, but we can explore that
later. Thank you. Thank you.
And, and if I may, um, Izzy is
really good, uh, resource for
that information and so, uh, and
I don't know if we, we benefit
from his knowledge enough, so,
um, I'm grateful for that. Any
other questions or comments from
the committee?
Yeah, you feel so sick. We, we
need you to go. So, uh, on this
point, by the way, uh, you know,
off of what you said, Senator
Tobiasson about how efficient
this committee is. Um, I
couldn't, we couldn't do this
without, uh, Monica and Kathleen
and John and Lisa, who were all
being very responsive to this
onslaught of bills, so thank you
all very much for that. Always,
uh, thank you for the staff and
for making things, uh, work. So
on that note, we are adjourned
until Thursday. You will be
again on Thursday, as will
Senator Paul. So we'll see that.
