If you're here for those bills.
They, um, we know that Senator
Brant's hoping to get this in
next Tuesday. Uh, we don't have
a date yet for Senate Bill 62.
So if you're here for those
testimonies, um, those are not
gonna be on the agenda today,
uh, and so as we continue to get
on with our business. Rebecca,
if you will take the role.
Senator Figueroa, here, Senator
had a meal.
Senator O'Malley.
Senator Paul, Senator Ramos,
Senator Sanchez,
Senator Shar, Senator Wirth.
Yeah.
Senator Bergmann's.
Senator Hamlin, here.
We have a court.
Thank you. We have a quorum. All
right, so we have
9 bills to go through today and
I appreciate the committee um
always being committed for doing
that. So we're gonna start off
with that we are gonna go in
order. We have Senate Bill 59.
The public works minimum wage
definitions from Senator
Padilla. Um, you're up first,
sir.
OK, thank you, uh, Madam Chair
and Madam Vice Chair and members
ranking member and members of
the committee. I'm Senator
Michael Padilla, and I'm here
with Isaiah Zeke. He's my expert
witness, uh, if you've had any
sheet metal work done on your
house, he probably did it at
some point, um, or folks that he
has helped bring to the
profession. So today with Senate
Bill 59, uh, Madam Chair and and
vice chair and ranking member,
we aim to amend the Public Works
Minimum Wage Act by including
off-site fabricators for this
purpose and into the scope of
the
of the act, this inclusion
mandates that individuals who
fabricate components of offsite
uh for offsite for public works
projects, and I want to
underscore that, Madam Chair,
that these are public works
projects with public dollars
being utilized for these
projects that they receive a
prevailing wage rate and fringe
benefits that align with the
compensation for others that do
the same work. The key
provisions of the legislation
are that we're going to add a
definition which introduces
off-site fabricator as a person
earning a wage to fabricate
systems or components.
off site for use in public works
projects, uh, wage and benefit
requirements are another key
provision here which mandates
that contracts exceeding $60,000
for public works must stipulate
minimum wages and fringe
benefits for off-site
fabricators based on prevailing
rates determined by the labor
relations division. OK, Senator,
before we move, um, I've been
informed we have a committee
sub. Are you aware of that
committee sub?
All right, so, uh, before you
continue to go on, um, if we
have a move for a committee sub
for discussion.
I move the committee substitute
0230020.1 for discussion. Thank
you. So all of that I just said
is true. Even about the sub
manager, OK. All right, so I'm
just gonna keep rolling so I
respect your time but
essentially on the key
provisions, again, I talked
about the additional uh
definition on off-site
fabricator, wage and benefit
requirements, and then of
course, compliance and
enforcement. We've been working
with the department on exactly
how this will work. Uh, there's
approximation of about 7000 or
so $1000 to get this.
implemented and to manage it,
and they believe they can absorb
that with their current budget,
um, and then the pros of doing
this are that we wind up with an
equitable compensation
structure, labor market
stability and then of course,
the quality that comes out of
the employee that's able to be
compensated that way. I do have
my expert Isaiah Zeke, as I
mentioned earlier, he is the
business agent for Smart here in
New Mexico and I'm gonna ask him
to say a couple of introductory
words, and then we'll go to
however you'd like. Sounds
great.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Isaiah Zeke and for
the record, um business manager
financial secretary treasurer of
the sheet metal workers local
Unit 49, um, everything that,
uh, sponsored Padilla has
already said has covered
everything we need to talk and
discuss about the.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. All
right, thank you very much. So
we're going to go to uh the
audience first and foremost by a
show of hands. How many are in
support of Senate Bill 59 by a
raise of hands.
With the, the committee
substitute, thank you for the
clarification, Senator Sheriff.
So this is on the committee
substitutes. We have keep your
hands up 12345678.
1011, 12, so we have 12. Um,
anybody, roughly 12. Anybody in
opposition by a show of hands.
1234.
These are 4 as well.
All right, so what we're gonna
do is we're going to have those
4 of you who are in opposition,
you're gonna get 2 minutes
apiece.
And then we'll have 4 from the
support, 2 minutes apiece, and
then we will
Go online and we'll hear those
too.
So if you will, so these are
folks who are in opposition
right now, and you'll need to
use that handheld mic.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Vanessa
Alari, and I'm not officially in
opposition of this piece of
legislation, we're still going
to take a position of
neutrality. We've talked with
Senator Padilla. Thank you very
much for taking the time to meet
with us this afternoon. I'm the
registered lobbyist for
Builtwise, which is a modular
home facility in Roswell, New
Mexico. There are some concerns
that we still have.
Listen to the discussion, and we
look forward to continued um
negotiations with you, Senator.
Thank you very much, and I speak
for all of us.
I
That was easy.
All right. So let's, uh, we
have, we Senator Padilla, did
you say you had one person
speaking for all of your support
as well? Oh, it was the
opposition that are neutral, I
want to say that, Madam Chair,
that they were all one group and
Vanessa spoke for them. OK,
great. Thank you very much. All
right, so let's get uh 4 folks
uh in support. Uh, come on up
and line up behind the senator.
But we have registered the
amount of hands that have shown
support of this.
Just for.
Good afternoon, madam, uh, chair
and members of the committee. My
name is James McGoffey.
I'm a director of safety and
manpower for Europe mechanical,
a large contractor in
Albuquerque. I've served in that
position for the last 25 years,
and I can tell you that safety
is a priority of not only
everybody in this room, but
you're a mechanical.
Off-site custom sheet metal
fabrication, um, has definitely
improved.
Uh, safety significantly.
Um, by reducing congestion and
minimizing potential hazards on
construction job sites.
By moving this work off site and
into our shops, it allows crews
to focus on primary construction
activities.
However, this doesn't mean that
those off-site workers could be
forgotten when it comes to fair
compensation.
SB 59 ensures that these sheet
metal workers
Who work in controlled
environments to produce specific
Uh, components for these job
sites.
Receive the same prevailing wage
protections as their
counterparts.
SB 59, the port safety,
fairness, and the workforce.
Equity, and I strongly urge you
to pass this bill to promote
both fairness and safety in the
construction.
Thank you for your time. Thank
you so much.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Jason Espinoza, a
registered lobbyist with the
mechanical Contractors
Association in Mexico and the
sheet metal Contractors
Association in New Mexico, but
we do stand in strong support of
the legislation. Do you believe
this bill promotes an equal
clean field on off-site
fabrication, allowing
consistency and equity in the
construction process, and we
stand in support. Thank you.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Cesar Uriarte. I am the
area field superintendent for JB
Henderson in Albuquerque, New
Mexico as a sheet metal field
and superintendent, I understand
the importance of seamless
coordination between off-site
sheet metal ductwork and field
installation, the custom
ductwork produced offsite is
critical to the success of
public works projects and its
quality directly impacts project
timelines and system
performance. SB 59 closes the
loophole that currently leaves
off-site workers without
prevailing wage protections by
passing this bill, we ensure
that every worker.
contributing to a project,
whether in the field or in the
shop, receives fair
compensation, and it's a step
towards strengthening our
industry and supporting local
workers. I strongly urge you to
pass this to ensure every worker
contributing to a project,
whether in the field or shop
receives fair compensation.
Thank you for your time.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name.
My name is Roland Harris, I'm a
licensed and certified tab
supervisor. I have served as
supervisor for EB and I for 9
years, overseeing the testing
and balancing, also known as tab
of a track systems.
My work ensures that a track
systems perform as designed, and
I see firsthand how the quality
of fabrication directly impacts
system performance.
Um, off-site custom sheet metal
has revolutionized how we build
and install ductwork, improving
job safety and productivity.
However, without prevailing wage
protections, we undervalue this
critical role fabricators play
in delivering high quality.
Project specific components.
Senate Bill 59 ensures that
offsite fabricators receive
these same fair wages, just like
the workers installing their
projects on site.
As someone who supervised tab
efforts, I can tell that the
quality of fabrication is not
just a concept.
It's quantifiable. The data we
collect in our work directly
reflects the precision and skill
of those who fabricate these
systems.
compensation attracts and
retains the skilled workforce
necessary to maintain industry
standards.
I strongly urge you to support
Senate Bill 59, fair wages and
uphold the integrity of our
industry. Thank you.
Thank you so much. Before we go
to the two on Zoom, just another
opportunity for anybody in
opposition to speak.
At this moment, OK, if we will,
so we've got Brian Condon and
Nick Madison on So Brian, if
you'll unmute yourself and Nick
if you'll get ready. Brian,
you've got 2 minutes.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, Brian Condit,
executive director of the New
Mexico Building and Construction
Trades Council with stand fully
in support of this legislation
for the reasons and rationale
that's been previously provided.
Thank you.
Thank you, and it seems that
Nick is actually here for
another bill, so he's a super
punctual and early, um, so we
appreciate that. All right, at
this point, you as a sponsor
have an opportunity, have 5
minutes to respond to any of the
public testimony, and then we
will go to committee. Thank you,
Madam Chair. All very good
comments on the comment related
to neutrality on the bill, uh,
the discussion I had with the
the advocates that were neutral
that you heard from Vanessa Oer
representing that one company,
uh, there was a discussion on is
the wage where the work is
The offsite work is being done
or where the project actually
exists and I just want to
clarify that is where the work
is being done, not, not where
the where the project exists. So
I think that's was another
reason why in our conversation,
they elected to be neutral, but
they still want to do some, some
research and some analysis, and
I'm happy to meet with them
again. Thank you.
Great. Thank you so much,
Senator Padilla.
Now, this goes to the committee.
Are there any questions or
comments from the committee?
Right, Senator Sheriff.
Um
Madam Chair.
How does this affect
Somebody that's off-site in El
Paso, but the work's being done
in Las Cruces.
We're gonna tell the El Paso
people what they have to do.
I'm gonna ask our expert to
build that one. Madam Chair, uh.
Senator Sheriff, so the
requirements in the public work
minimum Wage Act, if you're a
licensed contractor under
regulation license apartment is
to follow those provisions
within the public servicesinum
Wage Act, meaning if this, if
this provision is approved and
chaptered into law, and that
would require that contractor
out of El Paso to follow that
same process of providing
certified payrolls to the
general contractor that they've
been awarded work under the wage
decision uh for that particular
project in New Mexico.
So, Madam Chair, Senator.
What does that do to the price
of construction.
Let's say, let's say that the El
Paso company.
Everything above board, doing
everything right, professionals,
union members.
But they're 10% less.
So, Madam Chair, uh, Senator
Sheer, uh, this particular bill
actually um provides a safeguard
and a loophole that's been um.
Existing under Article 13-4-5
use of New Mexico materials.
What this does is gives a
preference uh to produce grown,
processed and manufactured
products in New Mexico by
citizens and residents of New
Mexico.
Uh, so as far as the project
cost, there's already
contractors that are paying
prevailing wages in the shop in
New Mexico, so this would not
increase cost.
Or the particular projects that
are being
Um, set forth.
And, and in addition, uh, Madam
Chair, Senator Sheer, so the
typical portion of a project
where this would relate to about
15% of the whole project, 2 to
3% of the project would be
affected by what we're proposing
here, all the other vendors, all
the other contractors, and stop
me if I'm wrong. All the other
vendors and contractors working
on the project would be meeting
those same wages. So there would
be no anti-competitiveness that
would the, the cost change would
be pretty minimal.
Madam Chair and Senator
I very much appreciate the idea
that we want to hire New
Mexicans.
But as a taxpayer who's paying
for the building, they very much
and appreciate the fact that I
want a good building.
At the lowest cost.
And so that's part of what we do
when we put out the RFPs who can
do this at the lowest cost.
And if the lowest cost means
that
These parts are going to be
fabricated in
In El Paso, instead of Las
Cruces.
OK.
But they could be, they could be
fabricated anywhere, could be
fabricated in Mexico, China.
As long as they meet the
standard.
Why would we not want to do that
and save the taxpayers.
Money.
I think what you'll wind up with
much like my own business, you
want the highest quality
workforce producing the highest
quality product. And if you're
paying the prevailing wages,
you're gonna get the highest
quality person to apply and get
the job and therefore the
quality of the project will
Madam Chair, this doesn't talk
about.
Quality, I agree, I want quality
stuff.
But hey, this doesn't say that.
It just talks about prevailing
wage.
duct work
Specifically.
So
I know we've had this argument
over a lot of other things.
Taxpayers ultimately gonna pay
foot the bill for this.
If the taxpayer is going to pay
10% more than the taxpayers
paying 10% more, which is 10%
fewer eggs in their house or 10%
fewer whatever.
In their house.
So
That's always been my concern.
I do want New Mexicans employed.
I do want New Mexicans paid
well.
I'm just afraid that
In this case
If it can be done just as well.
2 miles away in El Paso.
The quality of the project's not
changed.
But the price might.
So, thank you, ma'am.
Thank you, Senator. Thank you,
Senator Sheriff.
Senator Sanchez. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Senator, thanks for
bringing the bill. A question to
go with Senator Sherri.
Is Workforce solutions gonna be
able to track this if it's a
Houston-based company, a
Mexico-based company, a
China-based company.
To track the prevailing wage.
Um, Madam Chair and Senator
Sanchez says these are public
projects with public RFPs,
public responses, public
documents, certified payrolls,
yes, they'll have to turn that
in or they would that
information in or they may
likely never be contracted to do
work in New Mexico again, so,
uh, yes, they would be able to
do that.
Thank you, Senator. Uh, Madam
Chair, Senator, uh, one more
question. So,
Right now, if you're on site,
you're paid a prevailing wage,
no matter what, in any public
works, right?
Uh, man, yes. OK.
And we want to take this to any
fabricating places off site.
is what your bill is proposing.
That is correct, madam.
OK.
So
What places now, Madam Chair,
Senator, what places now are
not, are any of them not playing
prevailing wage to their people
for fabrication.
I'm gonna have to ask my expert
here to respond to that one. I
don't have personal information
to that.
Madam Chason or Sanchez, uh,
union contractors pay prevailing
wages in the shop. However,
non-union contractors are not
signatory to a union with us.
Aren't required to pay
prevailing wages in the shop.
This measure would include them.
that wage in the shop to those
workers of manufacturing
ductwork for public works
projects.
Thank you for that. Uh, Madam
Chair, Senator, how many?
fabrication shops do we have in
New Mexico.
That are not aim for vain
weight.
Madam Chair, uh, right now there
is 15.
I'm aware of, there's some other
small mom and pop shops that I
may not be aware of that we.
Haven't uh
had any dealings with, but
there's a 15 large shops in the
state.
Cover most of the manufacturing
for the non-union sector of
manufacturing for duct work. And
Madam Chair, Senator, of those
15 shops, how many are
participating in public works.
Madam Chair, I'm not sure of the
question are you're referring to
the on site.
Installation or the fabrication.
So, Madam Scherer, you're saying
that these fabrication shops are
somebody's buying the material
from the ductwork.
How many of them are
participating in public works.
They're selling there to, we had
some companies speak here you're
out or somebody's buying it
from, how many of them are
participating in public work
jobs.
Of the 15 that are not that you.
think are not paying rating
wage. Adam Chair.
So, Madam Chair, all these
contractors uh.
In different projects, whether
private or public.
At any given time, depending on
industry needs.
Um
I don't know if that answers the
question, but Madam Chaser, but
of the 15, not all 15 or are.
participating in public works or
all of them are participating in
or they would be affected by
this.
Legislation that you're bringing
forward, Madam Chair and uh
Senator Sanchez, based on what
Mr. Xenke said a little while
ago, we're aware of 15.
And that'd be the answer to your
question. We don't know, but
there may be others that were,
they're just simply not aware of
it this time. Thank you, Madam
Chair and Senator, but you don't
know if those 15 are
participating in public works
right now that would be affected
by this and we are aware that
those 15 are, so they are
participating in public, OK.
Um, no further questions.
Thank you, Senator Sanchez.
Senator Worth.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. So I
just wanna, we're kind of
similar discussion than last
time, I think you were in the
committee on a different bill.
Nothing would prevent.
A non-union shop if we pass this
bill.
They don't have to participate
in a public works project, do
they? I'm sharing the Majority
Leader, that's correct.
here. I mean, again, I think
These are public projects and we
as the
Public representatives of our
various districts need to make a
policy choice. We've made a
choice to require prevailing
wage and a whole string of
areas, but this is one.
Little carve out.
But if we make this change,
we're not forcing anyone to pay
the prevailing wage. I mean,
they can just decide.
Work on non.
Non-state projects, uh, is that,
am I getting that right? I chair
the majority leader, that is
correct and again of those 15
that we spoke up with Senator
Sanchez that they would have to
make that decision if they want
to continue to participate in
public works projects.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Any other questions
or comments from the committee?
See then, we have a motion on
the committee substitute.
Move a do not pass on Ciniel 59
and a due passed on the
committee substitute from tax
business and what committee are
we? Transportation.
But by the end of the session,
you will be saying that in your
sleep, just to let you know. All
right, so we have a motion. Do I
have a second?
Have a second,
you will take the role.
Senator Figueroa.
Senator had a meal, yes, Senator
O'Malley. Yes, Senator Paul.
Senator Ramos.
Senator Sanchez.
Senatorshar.
Senator Wirth,
Senator Bergmans, Senator
Hamlin. Yes.
We have 6 yeses and 4 nos 6 to 4
vote, your bill passes the
committee. Congratulations.
Thank you members of the
committee.
Never get
All right. Next up is Senate
Bill 65 with Senator DuHH.
OK.
We are,
I love it.
Right, Senator Duheck, we give
you 20 minutes for your
presentation and then what will
happen is then we will do public
testimony, and then after public
testimony, you have 5 minutes to
respond to public testimony, and
then we will go to the
committee.
It's all yours. Thank you very
much, Madam Chair, members of
the committee.
So Madam Chair, uh, there are.
A lot of really good local
rooftop solar companies here in
New Mexico.
Unfortunately, there are also a
lot of really shady uh out of
state companies who come in and
take advantage of New Mexicans.
And so this is a consumer
protection bill that's really
focused at looking at some of
the worst practices that we're
seeing happening here. And
addressing those specifically. I
have here with me Rob Trian, who
is a consumer protection
attorney in New Mex in
Albuquerque, uh, Helen Wilinsky
is one of his clients or or her
father was one of his client.
She's going to tell you a little
about, about what their family
experienced, but I'd like to
kick it to Mr. Trian to just
briefly describe the bill. Uh,
we also have Nick Madison
online, he is another expert who
I think will chime in as needed.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mm
Oh, thank you, Madam Chair.
So
As the senator said, this is
really, this bill is really a
result of looking at the worst
abuses that we saw out there.
And seeing if something can be
done about that legislatively,
um.
The bill is pretty short and
simple.
Hopefully, that's appreciated.
Uh, but I'll just go through
some of the.
The major things quickly. So the
bill would simply
Forbid certain actions.
For example,
It would, it would require
people to have all the required
permits. They wouldn't be able
to do the installations if they
were not permitted. We've seen a
lot of, especially down south in
the state, Texas companies being
used that don't know what
they're doing, don't get
permits and uh the homeowner
ends up with a system that
doesn't work.
Um
There's another common issue is
fraud that's perpetrated through
the tablets.
So the way um this often works
is the door to door salesman
shows up with a tablet like an
iPad.
And they ask the person to sign
on the iPad, and now they have
that electronic signature, and
that electronic signature can be
added to basically whatever
document, uh, it, it, it, the
salesperson might want it to be
added to, um, the check on that
is supposed to be that there's
an email that they get from the
consumer, so the consumer sees
what's happening, sees what
contracts are out there and has
some control over the process.
And what they're agreeing to.
Oftentimes unscrupulous
companies will create an email
account.
So to uh as a way around that
check system and that email will
actually go to them.
Not the consumer, and that is
one of the methods that the
fraud is perpetrated, so.
One of the things that Spill
would do was make that pro uh
prohibited, prohibited action.
You can't create an email for
someone as a way to get around
the checks and balances.
Some other very simple things.
Don't say the system is offered
as part of a government program,
don't say it's offered by PNM,
for example, by the utility
company. Don't say it's free.
Um
Don't say that it it that the
customer, the consumer is
entitled.
Entitled
To
federal or state tax credits,
unless that's true.
So of course we want.
People to take advantage of
these tax credits to the extent
they apply to that person.
That's a good thing. Solar is a
good thing. But what happens is
people are being sold this that
have no ability to uh benefit
from those tax credits because
it's, it's just a credit, you
have to have a taxable income
for it to have any effect. But
they're being sold systems where
they actually the
Purchase price is just being
reduced by the amount of the tax
credits that they're saying that
this person gets.
And oftentimes they're they're
elderly people on fixed incomes
or veterans, there's no way
there it's clear they have no
tax liability, but there, this
is being misrepresented. So it's
just, if, if you're going to say
the person is entitled to the
tax credits, you have to be
qualified to give that advice.
You have to actually have done
the evaluation to make sure it's
true, and you have to provide
documents that show that.
Um, if the person asks for a
paper copy of the, of the
documents we've gone, we've
talked about how it's done
electronically, they need to get
it.
If, uh,
Where this would forbid the use
of power of attorneys from the
consumer just to sign all the
documents, we're also seeing
that.
Um, and then, then one of the
other big things is systems are
not being, systems are being
installed, the company is
getting paid, and they don't
care.
At that point, and one of the uh
slogans we've heard from the bad
companies that set it and forget
it.
And what happens is there's a
system that doesn't doesn't
work.
It doesn't operate at all,
there's no savings being
obtained. And um unfortunately,
the finance companies have a, a,
a business model of nevertheless
insisting that the person has to
pay. Even had cases where
people, the system was an
operational for 2 years, and
they were uh bullied into paying
though, they reported on your
credit, they ruin your credit.
There's all kinds and usually
payments are by auto withdrawal.
So this would simply adopt what
the industry standard already is
in those finance contracts.
Which is, if this, from the date
of install.
They have 90 days to get the
system operational.
If that doesn't happen, then
they can't charge for the system
until it becomes operational. So
if there is a legitimate delay,
and they, it becomes operational
later, they certainly can get
paid.
But if they're not, if it's a
system that is not operational
and looks like it's never gonna
be operational at 90 days, they
shouldn't have to pay anymore,
and this sets up a uh
protections for that.
Um
And then the, the, the last bit
would be there is a right of
action here. There has been some
efforts to address some of these
abuses in the past. There, there
was a bill passed.
Several years ago, uh, you may
have also seen some stuff in the
media about Vivi, the Attorney
General, now the Department of
Justice sued them several years
ago. There's been news stories.
But the problem is those have
proven to be completely
ineffective.
Because they're just disclosure
statutes. They just say, give
this person a piece of paper
that says this.
And from the model and the
actions that you've heard, that
doesn't get followed at all. In
fact, we haven't seen any
compliance with it or any
enforcement by the Department of
Justice on that disclosure
statute. So that's why we're
asking for something that's
actually effective at this
point, so we can protect New
Mexico consumers.
Thank you chair and Miss
Wilensky can tell us a little
bit about her family's
experience.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Helen
Minsky. I'm here to support the
passage of Senate Bill 65
introduced by Katie and Dohek,
my elderly parents were
customers of the solar sales
company in New Mexico in 2021.
The solar sales company obtained
my father's signature for the
sales contract on an electronic
tablet and then continuously
failed to provide a hard copy of
that contract to my parents
after many requests.
They later used my father's
e-signature on a new contract,
which indicated that my parents
agreed to pay the same amount
for a lesser quality system with
less output.
During the setup of the solar
equipment, my father, who was a
lifelong mechanic was looking
over their schematics, and he
caught that it was the wrong
system.
And halted the installation.
And they were gonna continue and
put in the wrong system.
But
He told them to leave and they
did.
The solar company never did
finish that installation.
They refused to honor the
original contract or remove the
partially installed equipment
and then remediate the home as
we requested.
Solar financing company began
deducting payments, even though
it was only half there. None of
the wiring was even there.
Without the installation being
complete or even producing any
electricity or being capable of
producing anything.
The finance company refused to
stop the payments.
Being deducted from my parents
fixed income account.
And the non-functional system
was never repaired or even
offered to be repaired at that
point. I became aware of this
situation when my mother had a
heart attack.
I was no longer able to take
care of their finances, and I
was stepping in to help them.
The solar company then
Aggressively. I can't state that
enough aggressively communicated
towards my parents and even
myself.
That we were stuck with that
wrong system, and there was
nothing we could do about it.
They even laughed at me on the
phone.
We were forced to then hire an
attorney and pursue these
matters in court, which was very
debilitating to my now deceased
mother and my father.
And it's very time consuming for
me as well.
This bill would prevent
purveyors of solar systems in
New Mexico from continuing to
engage in misrepresentation of
services.
An aggressive financial
practices against solar
customers like my elderly
parents, residents here in Santa
Fe.
Thank you for your time.
Thank you, Madam.
All right. Thank you very much.
We're going to go to uh public
testimony, so just by a show of
hands, how many in the audience
are in support of this
legislation and if you will keep
your hands up.
So we've got one.
How many online?
Uh,
one.
241. All right. Uh, by show of
hands, how many in the audience
are against this legislation?
1234.
5
All right. So what we're going
to do is we're going to hear and
I think you're gonna go ahead
and
Sorry.
I,
You are against that, OK, so,
again, by a show of hands, those
in this room who are in support
of this bill.
OK
They do not see any. Again,
those in opposition of this
bill, 1234.
All right. All right. So we're
gonna go ahead and 5.
One right behind our security,
OK. Oh, that's right.
You're blocking Camilla. Um, all
right, so what we're going to do
is we're going to hear from all
5 of you here in the room. We
will give you 2 minutes apiece.
You will be timed if you will
line up behind the sponsor.
Medicare members of the
committee. My name is Randy
Savi. I'm the president of
Positive Energy.
So our business for 25 years.
Leave me, uh, consumer
protection is very, very
important to us because we have
had to pick up the pieces for a
lot of customers and generally
we uh give them a break, um,
because they've had suffered
some hardship.
Um, and we do support the two
bills that are in this
legislation now, Bill 3233 and
188.
Uh, because those, uh, we feel
are appropriate ways of
addressing important action.
We, I oppose this bill as
written, some parts are good,
the action and some of the, the
features, but overall, um, it
adds a layer of confusion to
this, uh, existing system.
And uh it needs uh more work
before uh we could approve.
Thank you for your time.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Jim
Desjardin. I'm the executive
director of the renewable Energy
Industries Association of New
Mexico, known as RIA NM. We have
over 60 members and we've been
around since 2004, and we were
founded to bring professionalism
and integrity to a young
industry at that time. In 2017,
Rhea NM worked with a number of
stakeholders, including PNM and
the Attorney General's office to
pass the distributed generation
Disclosure Act to deal with this
issue. We acknowledge that.
Pass it to that legislation has
not ended the, the deceptive
marketing practices, and I reach
out and I'm really sorry to hear
of your situation. Um, however,
We have, I would like to point
out that these issues are not
unique to our industry. And also
we have over the years, worked
with many people on this issue,
including municipalities, M
nerd, the Attorney General's
office, P&M and others. We've
also met with the bill sponsor
exchange emails, and
unfortunately have not come up
with an acceptable legislation.
While there's many, there may be
some well-intended, while this
pill may be well intended, has
some serious flaws, including
its severely restricts how we
can discuss.
It's the tax credits with our
potential customers, and we
believe this is a violation of
commercial free speech and may
be unconstitutional. It also
puts in place harsh financial
penalties if the solar system is
not operational in 90 days, even
if it's not to the fault of the
solar company. And by the way,
it also draws in third party
lenders which could be Visa,
Mastercard, a local credit
union.
Ria NM is very concerned and
focused on the health of our
solar industry. We do support
two other bills already
mentioned, Senate Bill 10,
Senate Bill 188, rooftop solar
panel installations sent a bill
to 33 distributed generation
written statements. We look
forward to working with
stakeholders on a robust and
safe solar industry that New
Mexico can be proud of. Thank
you very much. Thank you, Madam
Chair, members of the.
and I'm the director of the
Sierra Club's Rio Grande chapter
and like others who have spoken,
we understand that there can be
an issue with bad actors. We
instruct our members to always
get 3 quotes, compare them, look
on the Attorney General's
website to see if there's been
complaints, um, on a particular
vendor, uh, as Jim mentioned
several years ago, um, all
stakeholders were included in a
process around the distributed
generation.
Act to look at a disclosure
sheet. We had a chance to give
feedback. We were asked about
what, uh, this process of
purchasing looks like, it makes
little sense to me to have two
different pieces of statute
dealing with the same issue. We
have now spent the last several
years, um, working with members
of the public and our members to
make sure that they know and
understand about all of the
benefits available to them from
the federal government, state
government,
Um, the utilities and more, so
we need to take great care in
how people talk about these
benefits. Um, you know, there
are people in the room even
whose family members have had to
come back to get their credit
when the money ran out. You guys
authorized another $30 million
towards the this the the solar
tax credits. So I think our
opposition here has more to do
with process and place than the
other underlying issue, and
frankly just a lack of
opportunity, um, to, to.
participate in the discussion.
Thank you.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
committee. My name is Daniel
Pritchard. I live in Taos. I am
on the board of renewable tows.
We are a nonprofit education and
economic development, advocacy
organization across northern New
Mexico.
We also work closely with kit
cars and electric cooperative on
their renewable energy and
energy efficiency endeavors.
I generally support this bill
with its consumer protections.
But one major except with one,
with one major exception, and
that being
The 90 day deadline to become
operational.
This is, this seems overly
restrictive because of the
ongoing supply chain issues.
For critical components like
Transformers.
That are needed to connect a
residents.
Or building to the electric
utility.
Monthly reporting by Kit Carson
confirms the supply chain
problem. Utilities are also kind
of shorthanded, especially rural
electric cooperatives and may
not have the ability to respond
in 90 days. Some sort of
consideration for supply chain
issues seems to be needed. Thank
you.
Thank you. All right, so we do
have uh Glen Felty, who was
against, and then Glenn after
you speak online, then we'll
have Donna, um, who is in
support of this bill. So Glenn,
if you will go ahead and unmute
yourself, Donna, if you'll get
ready to. Glenn, go ahead.
You've got 2 minutes.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, can you hear me OK?
Yes, we can. OK, awesome. Uh,
uh, thank you for having me,
Glenn Felty, uh, CEO and founder
of Sunate Solar here in
Albuquerque. The first thing I
want to express is my, my heart,
uh, uh, just sinks when I hear
Rob lay out those details, which
are absolutely true, and we
battle this day in and day out.
Uh, I always say the good actors
in town, uh, you know, have to
put up with the stuff that, that
happens, uh that they mentioned.
And, um, you know, having said
that, while the consumer
protection is a priority for all
of us in the renewable sector,
this bill presents some
unnecessary and harmful
regulations that could disrupt
the industry it claims to
protect. As a small business
owner, this, you know, it's,
it's close to home, right? There
is, uh, we need more positivity
uh out there in the media and
press about a, a beloved
industry that's important to all
of us going forward, um, and,
you know, uh, we've got to find
a way to get there. But anyway,
New Mexico
already has robust consumer
safeguards in place with the uh
distributed Generation Act, uh,
that Jim and Randy mentioned,
um, which was, you know,
supported by the solar industry,
the Attorney general's office,
utilities like PNM, uh, we feel
like instead of creating a
redundant and conflicting
regulation, we believe the most
effective path forward is to
update and improve the existing
statue.
As the owner of Sunate Solar, a
small business I founded 7 years
ago here in New Mexico. I've
dedicated my career to making
clean uh clean energy accessible
and beneficial for New Mexicans.
Uh, our company has installed
solar for hundreds of
homeowners, small businesses,
and we take, uh, you know, the,
the responsibility very
seriously of how we communicate,
and I know everybody else in
that room that spoke, uh, Randy
from positive, uh, everybody at
Affordable, they're in the same
boat. They feel the same way
they conduct themselves the same
way. Um, beyond my business, I
need to wrap up, please.
OK, I, I, I, the, the two major
concerns here are the
restrictions on communication.
And unrealistic, uh, timelines
because the utility and the AHJs
frequently cause delays in that
area. So, I, I feel like rather
than introducing conflict
conflicting laws, let's work
with what we have and let's
enhance it, and that's
Thank you for your time. All
right, thank you very much. Um,
so we have Donna who is in
support and then uh Nick, we
were informed that Nick is also
in support. So Donna, if you
will, then Nick, if you'll get
ready, uh, after that. Donna,
you have 2 minutes, please.
Thank you, Madam Chair. My name
is Donna Venable. I'm with
Continental Divide Electric
Cooperative, where a rally
cooperative that serves
approximately 24,000 customers
west of Albuquerque.
Well, there are a lot of very
good companies that offer solar
positive energy being one of
them, there are still a lot of
bad actors in this industry.
We see it at the
End of the process rather than
at the beginning, um, this year
Club has done quite a bit of
outreach, but unfortunately
they're not reaching everyone.
I do agree that the 90 day time
frame is probably a little
tight. Uh, we do have
transformer issues, uh, western
New Mexico is also suffering
from a lack of state inspectors.
We have one inspector doing
approximately 8 counties. He is
in our county one day a week.
And is probably a little
overwhelmed.
Um
I do we do support this bill.
Because it puts
The communication back on the
solar company rather than on the
utility after the system is
installed and functioning. We
are not responsible for filing
for tax credits, we're not
responsible for educating
customers on what the entire
system will do.
That concludes my testimony.
Thank you very much, Nick, you
have 2 minutes.
Nick, are you there?
Is he still?
I muted.
All right, we're gonna go ahead
and move ahead.
Alright, at this point, uh,
Senator Dohe, you have 5 minutes
to respond to the comments that
you've heard.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So,
Madam Chair, the, the efforts
that have come before to try to
address these kinds of consumer
abuses are, are admirable.
Unfortunately, they're just
haven't been effective.
Um, they deal
Only with disclosure. They
offered no remedy. They, they do
not address the specific abusive
practices that we're seeing.
Um, and so.
They are, they are not
redundant, so this bill is not
redundant to to what we already
have in place, nor nor does it
conflict with it, um, instead
offers uh an additional approach
that we hope will actually solve
the problem in a way that we're
seeing disclosure just simply
isn't. Uh, the two bills that
are pending 233 and 188, those
both also only deal with
disclosure, um.
But, um,
There was a, you know, there's
concern about how, how folks can
talk about tax credits.
We want people to be able to
talk about tax credits. We just
don't want them to say, you're
definitely getting this tax
credit if they don't know that
to be true.
So they can say you are probably
eligible for this tax credit.
Here are all these tax credits
that are available that you
could apply for.
They just can't say you get
this, unless they are qualified.
To say to, unless they know that
to be true and are qualified to
say so.
Um,
I was, I, we've heard some
concerns about the the 90 days
as Mr. Trian mentioned that is
as the the industry standard
under these, these financing
contracts. So I don't think that
is a
An amount of time that that
anyone working in this industry
should be shocked by. Um, but we
are certainly uh looking forward
to the discussion with the
committee. Mr. Trian, did I,
anything else I did that?
the only thing I
The um.
Madam Chair, the only thing I
would add is that.
If it's not operational, 90 days
after install.
It doesn't mean that there's
there's no possibility of
rectifying that. It just means
the payments have to stop until
it's rectified. That's all.
All right. Thank you very much.
Uh, now, I go to the committee.
Ramos, Madam Chair, San Duhek,
thank you so much for bringing
this bill to us. I think there's
bad actors and just about any
business that's out there and uh
but we also need to credit the
ones that are doing a great job.
I also want to.
Let you know I I've got, I have
a constituent.
She purchased this solar system
very low income, but she wanted
to do best for herself because
they promised her tax credits.
OK.
While they're installing the
solar systems.
They did about half.
Halfway through the job, they.
contact her and let her go and
let her know that she was that
the company was going to file
bankruptcy.
OK.
So she already filed all her
documents.
They still want their money,
their, as far as I'm concerned,
harassing her for that money.
Um, chances are her credit's
gonna be pretty, pretty bad.
What does this bill do for a
person like that? Madam Chair, I
will let the lawyer that she
would probably be likely to
hire.
Apologize for that, Madam Chair,
um.
A madam chair, senator, what,
what this bill would do for that
person is not allow the payments
to continue. The system is.
The system has been installed.
It's not working. It sounds like
there's no possibility it's
going to be working and so that
that that they would be relieved
from that obligation to keep
paying for something that
doesn't work, that they're
getting no benefit for. As far
as the tax benefits, if she was,
if the tax benefits were
misrepresented to your
constituent, this bill would
offer a remedy for that as well.
OK, Madam Chair, um, senator. So
what happens currently if this
bill doesn't pass?
I'm sure.
If, if, if this bill doesn't
pass, we don't have those
specific protections in place.
There is no protection under the
existing law that the payments
would have to stop after that 90
day period.
this would add that, um, and
also would provide a direct
avenue for the uh for the tax
issue that you brought up, uh,
Madam Chair, senator.
Senator, thank you, ma'am. Sure,
thank you.
Thank you, Senator Ramos.
Senator Jaramillo, and if
there's anybody else, just catch
mine. Thank you so much. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Senator, in
reading your bill and then
hearing your testimony. Am I
right in saying that what I
heard is bad actors should be
worried about this piece of
legislation and those doing
things right don't have to worry
about anything.
Madam Chair, senator, yes,
absolutely.
A lot of our local companies,
they aren't doing this stuff.
This is not gonna come down on
them. It is the bad actors who
this is targeted at and who it
will impact, um, but as long as
you're not out trying to, uh,
you abuse consumers, you have
nothing to worry about. That's
exactly what I thought when
reading this, if you're doing
things right, this piece of
legislation is just gonna
strengthen, but every company is
gonna do it's right. I just have
one quick question, another
question is I'm always amazed to
find out that people can create
an email.
address for someone. And so you
talked about email fraud, how
would we then monitor to see if
these companies were then
grading emails, let's just say
for an elderly population like
my mom doesn't have an email
address. How then could we find
out that an email address was
created for them and how do we
monitor that?
Madam Chair, uh, uh, senator, so
the, the, it's, it's pretty easy
actually. They they can there is
systems in place to monitor that
by the good people in the
industry.
The salespeople are are supposed
to list the email on the
contracts.
The contract is then supposed to
go to the consumer, so they can
see what they're getting into.
What uh what happens is when a
fake email is used, that email
is listed on the contract. The
consumer never knows that at the
time, at least until it's too
late until after installation,
because they don't see it
because the email goes to the
fake email, which the
salesperson is controlling. So
once you get the contracts, you
can establish that that's what's
happened.
Thank you for that one last
comment. Thank you for telling
the story of your family and
your parents, and I'm sorry you
had to go through that. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you,
Senator Jail. Senator Sher and
then Senator O'Malley.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Is fraud illegal?
Madam Chairunder, absolutely,
uh, and in fact, we were just
having a conversation about that
before coming in here, because
fraud is absolutely illegal,
forging someone's, um, signature
is illegal. But we're
We're focusing on here is the
behavior that gets to that
fraud. If we can make the
behavior that is leading up to
it unlawful.
We're hoping the fraud doesn't
actually occur.
But Madam Chair, I think that's
my point. Fraud is illegal.
And it doesn't matter if it's by
a solar company.
For a gas station.
Or an airplane manufacturer,
fraud is illegal.
And so the people that are doing
this,
are already committing a crime.
Is that true?
Madam Chair, Senator, um, I
don't, I'm hesitant to make
criminal proclamations, uh,
about an area that I, I do not
practice in, um, but.
While, while the end result of
fraud is certainly illegal.
People are committing fraud or
are already doing something that
is unlawful.
As the law is now, they can
still do things like create this
email address and you never get
to see the contracts they get.
That's not fraud.
Uh, they can say you get these
tax credits, and they don't know
that to be true. That's not
necessarily fraud.
So that
What this is going for is the
very specific behavior.
That we are seeing lead to
fraud.
Uh, addressing that.
Oh, Madam Chair, I guess the
next part of this is I'm
stunned, frankly, to learn that
all of the New Mexico companies
that stood up and opposed this
were.
are bad actors.
Because obviously they're
concerned about it.
Which means they're bad actors.
And do we really mean to call
all of those folks that own
businesses in New Mexico, bad
actors because they are opposed
to.
Provisions anyway of this.
Bill?
Madam Chair Senator, you know,
I'll tell you, I have been kind
of stopped.
At the opposition, because I
don't think the folks who stood
up today stood up here today are
bad actors. I think they are the
good ones, which is why I am, I
am confused about their concern.
Because
Because again, I don't think
they're doing.
This stuff. So I'm not sure why,
why they have those concerns.
But no, I don't, I don't think
everyone who stood up in here
today is a bad actor they're,
they're the folks who we want to
have succeed. And frankly, we
want to, I think that if this
bill passes, it helps them it
helps them succeed by getting
rid of shady, their shady
competition.
So
Madam Chair, uh, senator.
Have you worked with them? Did
you sit in the room and say,
hey, what's the problem?
Madam Chair, Senator, yes, we've
had numerous discussions with uh
Mr. Desjardin.
And, uh, at least one of his
members of his group, who I
believe.
Spoke on on Zoom.
So, Madam Cha actually came into
this room, thinking I was gonna
vote for this. I'm just reading
it, OK, this is good.
Until all of the bad actors
behind you said this is bad.
And then it stunned me on how
many New Mexico companies were
bad actors because.
They're worried about it.
Only bad actors are worried
about it.
I know that there are
There are cons all over the
place, you know. So, hey, sign
up for this and do that and
whatever, you know, somehow get
uh oh, you better pay this bill
right now, what they, and
they're all cars.
This is just one more in a
litany of every industry on
earth over the entire history of
humanity.
I don't know that you're ever
going to stop them.
Because unfortunately, that is
part of human nature, at least
some human's nature.
It doesn't matter what you do.
I think that, uh, you know,
Senator Cervantes, you've
probably heard him say this
often, it's not the amount of
time you go to jail, it's the
certainty of punishment.
So not going to jail for 10
years or not going to jail for 5
makes no difference. If you know
you're going to be punished.
That makes a difference.
I don't see anything here that
will actually make a difference
to the people that intend to con
grandma or dad or whoever, they
are going to come.
Grandma or dad and this bill
doesn't stop that.
And that's what changed my mind.
Because I really did come in
here intending to vote for this.
Oh
Thank you, man.
Thank you, Senator Sheriff.
Senator O'Malley.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'd like
to revisit the 90 day um
provision in the bill.
Um,
where is the, uh, the assurance.
You mentioned that, OK, there
were circumstances where
You know, beyond the control of
the um
Company, uh, we're in the, we're
in the bill does it say that,
you know, that there's some
flexibility there.
my expert.
Because, um, uh, I'm sorry,
Madam Chair.
Uh, senator, because the
payments are only forbidden if
90 days after install the
system's operational. So this
doesn't go into effect if the
system's operational. So after,
if it becomes operational at
some point, this, uh this is not
true but I think the concern was
that the system could not be
operational if there were there
was a situation beyond their
control.
supply chain issue or connection
to utility.
So, I mean, there's some things
that might not be, you know, in
their control. So I, I, that's
what I'm saying is what
You know, what remedy is, I
mean, what kind of, you know,
Flexibilities is there for that.
That seemed to be the one thing
that kept coming up as a
concern.
And Madam Chair, senator, I
think so that, that's why we
have that 90 day grace period.
It is, it is for the assumption
that it, it should not take more
than if there are issues that
are holding things up. It should
not take more than 90 days to
resolve it. And we're gonna
hold, hold them harmless for,
for those 1st 90 days. Um,
Now, if it is the will of the
committee, that that time period
be adjusted. Um, I think that is
definitely something we are open
to, uh, but the, what we don't
want to have happen is that, is
exactly what happened to Senator
Ramos' constituent and you
Molinsky's parents, which is
where it's never operational,
and you're on the hook, no
matter what. Right, and I
understand that, and I certainly
support
The reasons behind this bill,
which is taking advantage of
people, right? Especially, I
mean, disclosure is not enough,
and I agree with that,
especially when it comes to
elderly people who are not
informed and, you know, that
happens all the time,
unfortunately.
Uh, but, OK, so let's just, if I
could just walk through this
again.
Um, you have your, you start to
install a system.
OK, and, and the idea is that it
takes
90 days to install this system?
No, it shouldn't take.
OK. How many days, so, let me
understand where that 90 days
comes into play. I'm sorry.
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator, so
that the the, it shouldn't take
anywhere near 90 days. 90 days
is is there to give a a very
generous grace period as it is.
And the, the reason the 90 days
was landed on as a number was
because in the finance contracts
with the solar installers.
So they, they install the, the
system, they get paid at the
point of installation.
That's where they set it and
forget it. The phrase comes
from, and then, um, they have 90
days from the date of install,
but by the finance company to
get that system operational. And
if that doesn't happen, then the
finance company does what's
called a repurchase and the
solar company has to return the
money that they received, but
what we've seen often is the
finance companies, even after a
repurchase, even after them
essentially saying it's taken.
too long.
are continuing to harass people
um like happened to your
constituent, uh, senator. So the
90 days is what seems to be the
industry standard, and that's
why we thought it was a good
number.
OK, and madam chair, I'm sorry
that.
I don't want to appear too
dense, but I'm trying to get a
handle on this. So a company
installs the system, right? And
so they start after
installation, when do they start
collecting payment?
Is it right away before they
install a system at the point of
installation manager. OK the
important installation when the
installation is complete.
Yeah, they have to certify to
the finance company that
installation is complete to get
paid. OK, so you're saying after
that there's a 90 day grace
period to get it connected. Yes,
OK, that, that's what I wanted
to understand.
OK. And you're, you're feeling
is, even though there's folks
here who say that that's not
enough time or whatever, you
feel like that is enough time.
Uh, madam chair, Senator, it's
the industry standard, we know
that's what the finance
companies give them, so it
certainly seems to be sufficient
time and I, I think my
experience, what I've seen, it's
usually done within 30 minutes.
OK. Madam Chair, thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator O'Malley.
Uh, Senator Ramos, hold on, I'll
go back to you after I go to
Senate. Just one follow up
question I want to make sure I
understand.
Just
Continuing with Senator
O'Malley's question, and it's
not dense at all, because I
think there's
Again, let me, let me first
disclose. I've got a fantastic
solar system, positive energy
installed. They've done a ton of
work and, I think you got a
bunch of really good actors in
here. This is an industry I
fully support.
But I also have seen the other
side of this, and I think you're
putting some remedies in here,
which are.
Private rights of action,
penalties.
Things that we're gonna
certainly discuss if it moves
forward in Senate Judiciary, but
I just want the 90 days, it's
after the first date of
installation, so that's not.
The hookup, and I'm thinking
here in Santa Fe, someone puts
the system in.
And then we're waiting around to
get the city to come hook the
system up.
So I, if I wait for 100 days
under this.
That's gonna trigger a whole
bunch of
Possible remedies, and my
understanding that correctly,
Madam Chair Senator, if you
wait, if it's 100 days under
this, then after those for those
10 days, you don't have to pay
for your non-operational.
System during that time. Then if
on the 105th day, they come hook
it up and it's operational.
You're, you're on the hook to
pay again.
So and that, and that's
important. I mean, I do think
the question, the 90 days is
hard to know, and I just, I
paused because I'm sitting here
in Santa Fe thinking,
Challenge getting the folks out
or the electricians are having
trouble getting someone to work
for him and all of a sudden
doesn't happen.
You know, it is putting a burden
on the business that's done it
right on the front end and
they're sitting there waiting
too. I mean, they're waiting for
the city to do this and they're
not getting paid.
And so again, I think you, you
could inadvertently pull some
good actors into this, which is
I think why Senator shares.
Trying to figure out why people
are testifying the way they are.
I, I think the good actors.
don't wanna ever, but, but there
could be a scenario where
something comes up with
something that's completely out
of their control and all of a
sudden they're not getting paid.
And so I do think, I mean,
again, we'll see what, what
direction the bill goes, but I
do think trying to figure out
the right time frame and maybe
it's a little longer to address
some of those concerns. I, I did
hear violation of free speech,
the penalties are too large.
You know, I know there's a
private right of action in
there.
And we could do all that here,
but I am a believer and we've
had this conversation.
When I've been sitting in the
chair in Senate conservation of
You know, if this moves forward,
those are certainly the things
that shaping the remedies to
make sure they work, uh, that
we'll look at in Senate
Judiciary.
That's what I have here.
Thank you, Senator Worth,
Senator Ramos, for a second
time. Uh, no more further
comments. Thank you.
Um, so I, I do have a, a, a
couple of comments and, and uh
maybe a question or two in
there, um, in my day job that I
get paid to do, I run the Green
Chamber of Las Cruces and so,
uh, we have a lot of solar
companies that are members of
the green chamber and we often
get asked about what solar
company do you recommend?
And there was a point where
there was a company that is no
longer in existence, uh, but
Solar City.
That was coming in and we're in
Las Cruces, and so there are
businesses that are coming up
from El Paso, walking around
with a tablet and, um, and
trying to sell solar systems to
people who uh don't have the
tools or the technical
capabilities to do research. Uh,
we have solar also composite of
energy solar before you moved
out of Las Cruces?
And thank you to our friends at
Oregon Mountain Solar and
Electric who follow up with
that. Um, and one of the things
that we did is we did research,
we looked at the output of the
panels. We looked at the
warranty of the panels. We
looked at what we would have to
pay if the panels were broken,
so on and so forth and did all
of that research because as the
head of the green chamber, there
were multiple groups that wanted
to get their panels on our
house.
And that's what I always
encourage people to do is to
become informed. Uh, when it
comes to making an investment
like that in your home.
And yet we know that there are
also in we're talking about bad
actors, um, the folks from Solar
City, uh, will put loopholes in,
and they did this to where you
actually didn't own the system.
And you wouldn't get the um the
what was it, is the wreck from
the like 6 cents on every
kilowatt that you would generate
was what we got at the time, but
if you signed up with SolarCity,
you don't get that money as the
person who made into that
agreement with SolarCity.
Solar City got that money.
And if you sold that house, the
new buyer would not be
guaranteed to be able to use
that solar system.
And so I get the bad actors. I
don't like the bad actors. I
always tell people to go to
locally owned businesses, and we
have good locally owned
businesses. We also have bad
actors. And so the challenge
here is making sure that as
consumers who are in a position
to afford this, because I've
seen those ads on social media
that Michelle Lujan Grisham's
gonna pay for your solar panels.
And I know for a fact that's not
the case
I don't think she's pardon?
Do you? OK, then we'll work on
that. Maybe we can, we can get a
little Tesla or something like
that, right?
But
This is the thing, and there,
there are some things, you know,
that I know in Las Cruces that I
hear from providers that are
challenged with not only the
utility companies either not
getting on it like they're
supposed to in the amount of
time they are legally required
to do so.
But also,
That we don't have enough
inspectors either.
In Las Cruces. And so there is
that delay. So I think for me,
the thing is, is that it is also
the 90 day period because I know
that our solar companies have
those issues with supplies being
provided with um inspectors
getting their stuff together and
actually going to a house, uh,
and making sure that they pull
the tag off the meter so that it
can start running and you can
throw the power on.
And so
I, I think the intent of the
bill is here and I think there's
an agreement that there is
certainly, especially given what
you've had, and I, you know,
with, with my parents, I had a
plumber come in and say that he
was going to charge my mom $800
to replace a garbage disposal
that I fixed in 30 seconds by
actually doing what I was.
taught to do. And so I get
really, really upset when people
try to take care of my, my, take
advantage of my mother as well.
And I know that there are
predatory companies. So I do
feel that there, there's good
intent in this bill. I feel that
I hear the 90 day thing is
really a challenge for a lot of
people. And so, um, and so I
wanted to make those comments
and I feel that there are
opportunities for conversation,
um, but I, I, I think we need to
drive home the intent of the
bill, um, and
Remove the things that our solar
companies are locally owned,
good actors are really trying to
navigate because sometimes it it
is really a minefield for them.
And so, um, those, those are my
comments, um, at that point, if
there's no other comments from
the committee, um, yes, sir. I'd
like to make an amendment page
4, line 11, delete 90 and
replace it with 120.
And that just gives another.
Flight 30 day window, so I don't
know whether that's friendly or
not.
Madam chair, yes, that's
friendly. That would give us 6
month grace period to to get
something operational. OK, so
Senator Worth, if you'll repeat
that again. So on page 4, line
11, delete 90 and place it with
120, it's a 4 month, 4-month
extension.
Madam Chair, I, I, I went to law
school and medical school cause
I can't do math.
Madam Chair, sick that.
over
All right. At that point, since
the sponsors accepted that as a
friendly amendment.
Uh, what is the wish of the
committee to um on Senate Bill
65 as amended.
So I, I think we need to take a
vote on it. Thank you very much.
I appreciate that. So vote on
the amendment first.
That
Senator had a meal.
Senator O'Malley, yes, Senator
Paul.
Senator Ramos.
Senator Sanchez, Senator Shar.
Senator Wirth, yes.
Senator Bergman, yes, Senator
Hamblin, yes.
We have 10 yeses. So support of
that amendment, um.
The other question I have is, if
you can explain a little bit
more on the tax issues because I
know that I go to, um, there was
an opportunity for us to expand
our solar, uh, on our, our roof
and what tax breaks we would get
and I counted on my solar
provider because they knew what
was going on at the state level
at the time in terms of the tax.
And so, um, can you kind of
elaborate a little bit more on
that.
Absolutely, madam chair. So, so
we definitely want people to be
able to talk about what tax, tax
benefits are available.
To to those consumers. Um,
you're right, they are up to
date on them. They know what
there is. We just don't want
them to say.
And you definitely qualify.
For these tax benefits that are.
If they don't know that to be
the case, um, my understanding
is there's often consumers who,
if they don't have.
A taxable income, against which
that tax credit would be used.
They get no tax benefit.
So if they are being told,
you're definitely gonna get all
these benefits, but in fact,
their income is such that they
will never realize that benefit.
And that is, that is very
misleading.
Um, they're not gonna get any
benefit from it. So we just want
people to
fully inform people about what
tax benefits are available. And
if they are someone who is
qualified to say, and I know for
sure you're gonna get those,
then they can do so.
If they don't know for sure
you're gonna get those, they
shouldn't be telling people
that. And, and Senator, do you,
can you show me where that is in
the bill because I do know that,
you know, when, when solar
companies go into your home,
they do an analysis of your 12
months of your electric bill,
and they can tell you this is
what the systems are, this tree
is blocking your way, but, you
know, we can go ahead and do all
of these things. They've got all
the fancy cool tools to be able
to do that, um, and so I'm
wondering where, where does that
assure that because
I honestly would, would be much
more inclined to believe my
solar provider on the tax
benefits that I get, then the
person who's actually providing
my tax who's doing my tax
returns
and then if you go to page 3.
And starting at that line 12.
And it says that you under this,
you would not be able to
represent to the consumer that
the system entitles.
The consumer to federal or
state tax credits unless all the
stuff you've, because the thing
is, Madam Chair,
Yes, they are looking at your
electric bill. They're looking
at a lot of stuff. They're not
looking at your income, though.
Well if they're going for
financing through a solar
company, they're looking at
income.
Yeah.
Yes, madam chair, sometimes they
do know, and that's the problem,
and especially what we see is
the bad actors have often
targeted elderly folks that have
a fixed income and have no tax
liability, and that is known
from the fact that they've done
an application for the
financing, so certainly if they
don't, if they know it's a lie,
they shouldn't be saying it, but
this is just basically to
prevent willful blindness.
It's, it's you, you, if you're
certainly should tell people
about their tax benefits. You
should give them all that
information and, and frankly, I,
I agree with you, Madam Chair,
that's often gonna be the best
place to get it is from solar
companies. But if you're saying
you're going to get this, you're
entitled to it, that's the word
that's used, then you really
have to know that's true, that's
all it's saying.
Thank you very much.
Senator Ramos, Madam Chair, I
still don't like that 120 days.
And I, I'd like to make the
motion I moved to uh
To amend the amendment from 120
to 180 days.
I'm sure that's friendly.
Right.
Do we have a second on that
amendment?
All right. So we'll take a, uh,
so I have here rather than amend
the amendment, I suggest you
strike.
You move to strike amendment
number one and replace it and
then make your, I just think
it's cleaner do we make a motion
on that motion as part of his
amendment strike what we just
adopt as Amendment one. I would
like to, I would move that we
strike 120 days and replace it
with 180.
Do I have a second on that?
Senator
I'm sure.
That's another 2 months, isn't
it? It's a total of 6 months.
Yeah, that's.
I, you know, consider a friendly
amendment that seems a little
too long, but so I, I think that
120 is fair.
We have a chance to vote on
that. Yes, thank you. So
Rebecca, if you will go ahead
and take the vote on the updated
revised amendment from Senator
Ramos.
Senator Figueroa.
Yes. Senator had a meal as a
friendly amendment, yes.
Senator O'Malley, no.
Senator Palm.
Senator Ramos.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator Shar.
Senator Wirth? No.
Tenant Bergmann's.
Yes.
Senator Hamlin.
We have 8 yeses and 2 nos.
The
The modified revised amendment,
uh, has passed.
And so at this point, uh, any
other comments from the
committee on the amended bill.
At this point, what is the wish
of the committee?
I move a to pass as amended.
Second from Senator Jaramillo.
Rebecca, if you will please take
the boat.
Senator Figueroa.
Senator had a meal. Senator
O'Malley, Senator Paul.
Senator Rums. Yes.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator Sharrr.
Senator Wirth, yes.
Senator Berkins? Yes.
Senator Hamlin, yes.
We have 7 yeses and 3 nos. So on
a vote of 7 to 3 on the amended
version, this bill now goes to
the judiciary. Best of luck to
you.
Almost.
Oh
Got real scary for you, didn't
it,
Senator share.
All right, so now we have Senate
Bill 72 and then uh from Senator
Wirth, and then that will be
followed by Senate Bill 81.
as
All right, um, we are setting up
if we can, if you all in the
back can make sure that you keep
the noise level down. We do have
Senate Bill 72, the nonprofit
condo association remote
Business from Senator Wirth.
And what you, you got.
Thank you Madam Chair and thank
you members. Uh, Senate Bill 72,
uh, came to me from Mr. Colin
Cameron, who's a fellow Santa Fe
lawyer sitting at the table, uh,
and this bill addresses
The reality we live in today,
which is meetings are being
conducted remotely via Zoom, and
yet we have statues on the books
for condominium associations,
nonprofit associations that
require in-person attendance,
and that creates a whole range
of problems. The biggest one is
that many of these associations
are simply ignoring the statute.
And having
Wearing my mediator hat, having
seen the fights that can arise.
This was presented to me as an
option to just clean this up,
modernize the statute. I think
it makes a ton of sense for a
lot of reasons. I'm gonna let
Mr. Cameron address the
specifics.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
committee members, um.
This is a very straightforward
modernization of, of
requirements for members of
nonprofit corporations
functioning as owner
associations. Um, they conduct
their business with members
having to meet.
In person or by proxy to do
things like appoint the board of
directors or approved budgets
and generally manage their
homes, as Senator Worth
mentioned.
This is also just gra uh
naturally turned into uh
operating remotely and by remote
attendance. And, and I think
really what has occurred to me
is, as this bill has come to
pass, is it, it provides another
option. People can still attend
in person and get to know their
neighbors, people who may not
physically be able to make it to
the meeting for whatever reason,
can dial in over the internet.
And people who happen to be hard
of hearing, uh,
And do something like look at a
screen where there is an
automatic transcription being
generated as people speak.
So, uh, we appreciate your
consideration. Thank you so
much. Uh, in the audience, uh,
by show of hands, so is there
anybody here in support of this
legislation?
Anybody in opposition of this
legislation, none?
Online
none for either. All right. Why
don't you go ahead and come on
up, Madam Chair, just cause I
don't want to hear from him. Can
I move a due pass? Absolutely,
no offense.
But this, this is, I think
Senator Sheer would actually, we
would actually agree on
something like this. This is
ridiculous that you can't make
those decisions to make your
organizations run better.
Don't get it. Senator Sheriff,
please do.
We have a due pass from Senator
Sher. Do we have a 2nd, 2nd from
all of them, so we're gonna
fight for it.
Uh, if there is no opposition,
Let us record that this bill
passed unanimously.
Thank you very much. Thank you.
All right.
Easy peasy.
Yeah, we're just gearing you up
for the next one.
All right, Senator Wirth, you
have uh Senate Bill 81.
Senator for a moment.
OK, and, um, I do believe that
um there was an amendment to
this.
And I think this amendment is
from Senator Ramos.
Yes. Yes.
All right, so
Before, and I think that's also
been a conversation that you've
had with the bill sponsors,
Senator Ramos.
Yes, um, I, I
I'm not a main sponsor, but yes,
I, I did sign to sponsor this
bill. And uh yes, I, I, we do
have amendment, uh.
If you will explain the
amendment and then we'll um make
a motion to vote on the
amendment.
or do you want to do the
amendment right up front. Yes,
let's go ahead and do that, even
though it's not like a real
It's a one liner for the
audience, by the way, so it's.
So this.
ranking member, do you want a
copy of the amendment? You got
it right there. OK. Be like, get
on it, man.
Uh.
a motion to accept that.
On page 7, line 25.
Oh
And
Have you seen it?
Yes, we all have it.
I mean, I'm sure this is a
friendly amendment.
Yeah, I move with do pass on.
I mean
Amendment number one.
Senate Bill 81.
We have a second
OK.
All right. And it is considered
a friendly amendment.
Mhm.
No opposition?
All right. Thank you very much.
Let's go ahead and discuss the
bill as amended. Thank you,
Madam Chair. I am here this
afternoon.
With Representative Harlan
Vincent, uh, also representative
Anita Gonzalez was here earlier,
but we're at that time when
she's probably in committee or
juggling around, uh, also, we
have the superintendent of
insurance, uh Alice Cain here,
and we have our actuary whose
name I don't know. Christian
Christian Meyers, so we've got
the
In the weeds numbers guy to make
sure that we can explain what
we're doing here. Uh, Senate
Bill 81 involves the fair Plan
Act. This is an existing statute
in New Mexico. It's been on the
books since 1969.
That provides default insurance
in a situation where insurance
companies, uh, have made the
decision not to provide
coverage. So you live in an area
where you can't get insurance.
Well, in the state of New
Mexico, as in other states, uh,
we're seeing certainly a lot of
hearing about this plan in
California, there's a default
plan and currently the default
plan in New Mexico uh exists but
provides a limit of $350,000 for
residential and a million
dollars for
commercial.
So one of the first things this
bill does, and this is a
compromise number. I just want
to state right up front, uh, I
very much appreciate, uh,
Representative Vincent, um, and
working with him on coming up
with a number. This bill raises
the, the maximum that the fair
plan board which we're creating
in the statute and set the
residential insurance rate is up
to a million dollars, so it's a
million dollars for residential,
$5 million for a commercial. So
why is this?
important? Well, I think my two
co-sponsors here have lived it
and are in their constituents
have lived it and, and the
horrific results of fire. We've
obviously seen what's happened
in California.
Here in my district in Santa Fe.
It's a very scary.
Deal. I think it's just, uh,
again, with climate change, with
what's happening to our forests
and Senator Sheer and I probably
can have some discussions about
the need to thin our forests and
we all need to harden our homes,
and we need to be very, very
proactive and we can talk a
little bit about how this bill
does some of that as well. Uh,
but the reality is when I was
talking about the changes to the
Fair plan bill at the chamber
event in in Santa Fe, uh, our
farmer's agent came up to me and
said he's losing $20 million.
the business at the end of this
year.
Basically, those are all current
clients that he's had for many,
many years, gone, um, and so,
I think this really becomes an
important thing to offer and we
can get into the specifics of
the bill. It also has a $50
million appropriation on the
back end and we can talk about
how that works. Um, but again, I
think this is part of a package
of bills dealing with the
consequences of what we're
seeing and the changes we're
seeing. And as I mentioned, and
I know, I'm having a, a moment
remembering back to chairing the
Senate Conservation Committee
back in 2013.
and there was a breakthrough
moment when
You know, we had folks that
wouldn't talk to each other when
it came to forest thinning and
the need to be proactive and
finally, that's happened. I give
our, our state forest, or Laura
McCarthy, huge credit before she
was working for the state she
was able to bring folks
together. So we can get into
more specifics I would like, uh,
Representative Vincent since
he's
Obviously representing a
district that's experienced a
horrific loss, uh, to be able to
comment about why he's on, on
board with this, and then we can
certainly get into specifics.
Thank you, Senator Werth and.
Thank you, Madam Chair, uh,
members of the committee.
Lincoln County's been through a
lot over the over the past 5 or
6 months and what we've
experienced is some of our
people that did lose houses to
wildfire.
Um, and they were evacuated,
they have nothing to come back
to because they can't get along.
They can't get insurance and
they can't, a realtors can't go
to work and it just compounds
this problem. Now one thing that
I wanna
Keep reiterating is.
This plan
In no way, shape, or form.
takes precedence over
traditional insurance.
That's what we want, traditional
insurance. I don't want to stay
in the insurance business. I
really don't. I've got friends
back home that are agents. This
is what they do for a living.
The thing that this bill does is
it's giving our residents an
option.
To come home.
And I know that you will hear.
There will be some opposition.
From some insurance type folks.
And I, I can, I feel that a
little bit, however.
What they, what, what they've
done is they have not given us
an option. They haven't given
our folks an option.
And we can oppose this all we
want, and you know, if the bill
didn't pass, which I feel
confident it's going to, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee.
I'm gonna give you kind of a
rundown.
What happened during the fire
whenever our people.
Left, they evacuated our whole
town, the whole town left.
And as they called back home,
there was no real reason to come
home because there was nothing
to come home to.
So they are still misplaced.
And
Madam Chair
I hope I don't ever have to live
with my children.
For a very long period of time,
but if it does happen, I guess
that's just the cards that I was
dealt.
But Madam Chair.
These folks are ready to come
home.
And the only thing that we're
doing is giving them an option.
It's just an option. As soon,
and you'll read in this bill as
soon.
As we start writing policy, that
means people are not even
eligible for this plan any
longer.
If they
If they can get a policy
written.
That means that they cannot be
on the fair plan, period. So
this is gonna buy us some time.
Do I worry about the the.
The account being insolvent, I
do worry about it. I worry about
it all the time because we only
have half of Ridoso left.
But like my coach, like my
sponsor just mentioned, I don't
know if I've ever had.
And seeing the kind of
bipartisan support to encourage
our Forest Service to step up
and start managing these forests
because if you live in a
populated area.
What the, what, what the
insurance companies are gonna
start telling you is they're
taking satellite images of your
house. And if it looks like you
have a big fuel loading around
your house, the chance of you
getting insurance are probably
not gonna happen. And you might
be one of the ones getting on
the fair plan until you can get
a policy written.
But a lot of the legislation
that we're writing this year,
it, it comes around full circle
to where we are gonna to harden
houses. We are going to help
these insurance companies feel
good to come in and write
policies again. We are gonna
start putting in buffer zones to
where, you know, fire is not
gonna be going from house to
house, and then.
We're gonna start standing up
some sawmills, and we're gonna
start building houses back with
our own timber, it's gonna make
a whole lot of sense, but Madam
Chair, thank you for that.
And ma'am here we have our other
uh house sponsorresentative
Gonzalez who is experienced and
still is dealing with the
recovery. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you,
representatives, um, you know,
as mentioned, um, I am a
representative for Sei County,
um, which in 2022, um, we were
right in the heart of the
Hermit's Peak and Caf Canyon
fire, um, to date, the state's
largest wildfire, and so to put
some things in perspective, um,
since 2022, that fire affected
341,0471 acres, 903 structures
destroyed over 600 homes and
over 25,000 people were under an
evacuation order, um, so besides
being the representative for
that area, I am also one of
those insurance impacted
individuals. So a common thread
to talk to any one of those
25,000 people, while their
stories are all different, while
their impacts are all different.
The common thread is that they
all have insurance issues. So
since being elected,
um, been trying to work on this,
and I think my fellow colleagues
here were trying to tackle this,
this concern, whether that is an
increase in premiums where that
is a loss of coverage, whatever
that may be, and I think this is
a good attempt to offer basic
coverage to afford our residents
the opportunity.
To be able to exist within their
home communities.
Right now, if you're living in a
flood plain, you're living in a
wild prone area, which is a lot
of our state at this moment,
risk is variable. Um, there's a
lot of efforts to mitigate that
risk, so we would hope that at
one point in time, this plan or
this bill would not be needed,
but right now it is.
It is really needed for those
that have had no other options.
For insurance and that have
exercised all the other options
before getting to this point.
Um, I also want to come as a
community, um, that in my home
there in my community there is
not multi-million dollar homes,
um, in my community it is two
extremes, um, yes, there were
communities that were destroyed
that were insured, and they are
up and they are operable, and
yes, they have higher premium
costs, but they are operable,
that being the keyword. There
are others in my community that
were.
entirely destroyed that are 3
years later still waiting on
FEMA money that still have zero
chance to rebuild or to rebuy
because of this insurance
dilemma. Either they were not
insured prior to the fire, so
now the chance of them getting
insured after.
It's just not available, um,
they are at a point where to
start on a building structure to
relocate to a structure. They
just do not have that option,
um, so again, this bill, if you
were to ask many, may not be the
best option overall. There is
caps to coverage, um, there's
limitations to the coverage, um,
but this is all what we're
starting in this process of
trying to mitigate risk, um, so
I come to you saying that this
bill is an attempt that we need
to
Support those New Mexicans that
are choosing to remain in our
state. We need to support those
New Mexicans that are choosing
to remain in their home
communities, um, in my case, um,
we are supporting those New
Mexicans that are wanting to
rebuild on the lands that have
been passed down for generations
and generations to come. Um, I
know in the, the statement, I
apologize. I stepped out for a
minute. It was just the wrong
minute, but, um, you know, in
some of the statements I'm
coming to you all, um, as a
co-sponsor on this bill with
testimonial from my
District, but I'm also here
because I am the first of
hopefully not many, um, this was
a cascading incident that since
then there have been multiple
incidents in other regions
across the state just like mine,
um, hopefully we can put some
stopgaps into place that this
doesn't happen to any other
communities, but if you look at
the risk areas, um, some of your
counties are all affected as
well, so this does not just
affect semiel or Lincoln County
or, um, you know, these areas,
um, this is trying to
plan and trying to plan for um
what happens when there are no
other options to support New
Mexicans. Thank you.
And I'm sure if I could just
have the superintendent just say
a few words and then they're
here for questions and we'll
waive our 5 minutes rebuttals. I
want to make sure she gets a
chance if you. Just let me
quickly say they call this the
insurance plan of last resort,
you have to be uh rejected by 3
other companies in order to get
into it. The plan is to be a
sort of a bridge till the
insurance market reopens, uh,
this plan is good for obtaining
or keeping a mortgage as well,
which people have always
questioned.
Thank you, Madam Chair. All
right, thank you very much. Uh,
by show of hands, we're going to
audience testimony by a show of
hands, uh, who in the room is in
support of this legislation.
12345.
Um
But.
And then we have one online. How
many in this room are in
opposition of this legislation,
um, to.
All right, so we're gonna, and
we have two online that are
against. We're gonna go ahead
and start with the folks, um, in
opposition. So if you will come
up.
Uh, we're gonna have the 2 in
the room and then we'll go to
the 2 online, so Carol and Ward,
if you can, uh, be listening
and, uh, unmute when I call your
name, but we'll start in the
room first. Go ahead. Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
you have 2 minutes. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Uh, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, my
name is Brent Moore. I'm a
registered lobbyist for the
American Property Casualty
Insurance Association, and
Allstate Insurance Company. We
stand in opposition to Senate
Bill 81, and I would start with
saying, uh, property and
insurers are sympathetic to the
plights of the folks in Riodoso
and in Las Vegas, but we have to
focus on the issue at hand, and
that is wildfire risk and that
the state has wildfire risk and
it's happening across uh the
Western United States. Uh, the
fundamental proposal that you
have before you is a proposal to
change an existing functioning,
fair plan board that provides
coverage to folks at the lower
end of the socioeconomic
spectrum and
expand that, and that expanded
risk comes along with a change
in the board. It is a private
underwriting association at this
point, it would be shifted into
uh appointments by political uh
persons and if you look in the
FIR it references a potential
amendment to address the
funding, to change it into a
public entity. That is a huge
shift. It is a big shift in the
coverage that's provided and the
concern by our members is that
this puts you on a path
towards potential insolvency.
That potential insolvency would
come if there's a lot of uptake,
and if there's a catastrophic
fire, California is a cautionary
tale. California had a fair plan
that addressed wildfire risk,
and then the palisades fire
happened. Uh, the last estimate
I saw was a $20 billion loss
there, and that fair plan is
insolvent. Those insolvency are
a huge concern for APCI members,
and I would point you to page 5
of your FIR.
It gives you some estimates of
what the wildfire losses would
be by county. When you look to
the page 5, you see Santa Fe is
there, and there's a, a number,
hold on.
You'll see the number is 37
million, uh, for Lincoln County,
it's 39 but we get, we got you
got about 30 seconds. I will, I
will wrap up. You see the
numbers there that are for those
losses. The fair plan paid out 8
million on the last Riodoso
fire. These numbers are not
adequate. The fair plan is
currently running numbers on the
proposal that the superintendent
gave them in late November to
determine what is needed to run
a program at various coverage
levels, I would urge caution.
in moving forward with the
proposal. Thank you very much,
Madam Chair.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair. My
name is Sarah Barnes. I am a
board member of the New Mexico
Fair plan. Uh, this is the board
that has been successfully
managing this very plan since
the 1960s. I myself wasn't on
the board at that time, but
others before me, um, obviously
have, um, I stand in opposition
as a board member.
Um, but I do want to reference
uh Senator Wurst, Representative
Vincent, and Representative uh
Gonzalez, I do understand the
concerns and needs of their
constituents. We want to find a
solution for them, but there's
some information that I want to
make sure that the committee is
aware of, um, because this
became this was brought to our
attention, um, I believe in
August of last year,
Representative Harlan sent a
letter. Um, we did seek some
additional information. We had
our first meeting with the super
intended in September. At that
point, we requested a written
proposal, so we could know what
we were wanting, what we were
being asked to support, we
received that uh written
proposal in the form of an email
with 5 bullet points at the end
of November.
That was a non-starter for us,
primarily because it was a very
exclusive bill that would only
protect the folks in Lincoln
County and certainly they
require protection, but I asked,
uh, and raised this issue. What
about the folks in Mora? What
about the folks in the rest of
Of the state. And so, it was, we
wanted it to be a more a
statewide approach, um, at that
point, um, we wanted to do our
due diligence. We hired and paid
for a um a study that uh we will
be getting the results of next
uh Thursday. Um, I think that
this bill is premature, um, at
this present time, it was
something that the board never
had the opportunity to vet, but
like I said, we've successfully
managed this plan since the
1960s, and I feel that we should
have had an opportunity to
provide some input. We feel
that there are solutions, but we
feel that if the bill is passed
in its present form, that will
have some severe consequences we
could see lenders, or excuse me,
insurance companies, um, pull
out of the state. It's gonna
affect everyday New Mexicans
cause policies are going to be
increased and uh we certainly
don't want to be California 2.0
and uh see that catastrophic
thing happened, uh, that
happened with theirfa plan
happened here.
Thank you.
Right. Hold on. I wanna give one
more opportunity just in case my
microphone wasn't on for Carol
or Ward.
We're not hearing that.
So we do, we, yes, Madam Chair.
Carol, all right, if you will,
you've got 2 minutes. If you go
beyond 2 minutes, we will cut
your mic. So if you will go
ahead and speak.
Thank you. Uh, good afternoon,
Madam Chair and members of the
committee. I'm Carol Walker.
I've served for 26 years as the
director of the Rocky Mountain
Insurance Association, a
regional association
representing property and
casualty insurers in New Mexico
that make up 85% of the
homeowner's market. Our
association is respectfully
opposing Senate Bill 81 as our
members support the current fair
plan is successfully served New
Mexico property owners as an
insurer of last resort for many
decades. They play a critical
role in stabilizing and
maintaining
a competitive private insurance
market. We urge you to consider
the potential consequences and
high stakes and completely
dismantling the current fare
plan and replacing it with a
high limits ensure that competes
with the private market by
taking on large wildfire
exposure and high risk pockets
of the state at the expense of
other fairine policyholders.
We're seeing the insurance
crisis as others have said,
playing out in California as a
cautionary tale with thousands
of homeowners lost their homes.
A plan there doesn't have enough
money to pay out the clients.
Private insurers will be
expected to bail out the fair
plan with large assessment
checks. We don't want that to
happen in New Mexico. Remilia
does have a long history of
working cooperation with the OSI
on insurance issues. We share
the superintendent's concerns
about a fragile property
insurance market, increased
wildfire risk, but we really
just want to work together with
the current fair plan board and
the OSI to help stabilize the
New Mexico insurance market and
keep our insurance.
Uh, our insurers here. Thank
you, Madam Chair and members of
the committee for your
consideration of our opposed
position.
Thank you, Carol. I'm gonna give
Ward one more chance.
Where are you there?
All
right, now we're going for
Madam, can you hear me? I'm
sorry you're quick. All right.
OK. You've got 2 minutes, Ward.
Yes, yes, ma'am. Uh, Madam
Chair, committee members, my
name is Ward Tisdale with the
National Association of Mutual
Insurance Companies or national
trade association that works.
With more than 30 residual
market plans around the country,
including care plans. I'm
speaking today in opposition to
SB 81 is currently written.
I won't repeat what Brent and
Carol already said, but our, I'm
gonna focus on the proposed
governance structure and how
this would significantly deviate
from the fairpla's current
setup.
The current fair plan has a well
designed governance structure
with a broad cross section of
qualified board members.
Including representation from
the OSI. It works closely with
the OSI and yet is able to
operate at an arm's length as an
independent insurance company to
meet the needs of New Mexicans
who are unable to obtain
insurance from the admitted
market.
SB 81 would significantly change
that governance structure,
giving appointment authority to
various elected officials and 3
to the insurance regulator, the
superintendent, who would also
assume the board, the position
of board chair.
This is not considered the best
practice as we're not aware of
another state where this type of
authority is bestowed upon the
insurance regulator. So for
these reasons and others, we are
opposed to esP 81 and look
forward to working with the
committee. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Ward. Um,
we're going to go ahead and go
into the room since she's been
standing there patiently, and
then Joy, when I call your name,
if you will, unmute yourself. So
go ahead in the room, uh, in
support of this bill.
Um, Madam Chair, committee, my
name is Eloisa Macias. I am the
consumer assistance civil
investigation bureau chief at
OSI.
I was boots on the ground for
both Hermit's Peak and Riodoso
South Forkhi. We stayed there 5
months. We saw the devastation
from the beginning, still see
it, still working it now.
Um
The constituents.
have gone through so much
already, and at this point, the
insurance of unavailability and
not being able to help them.
Obtain a new residence.
I
An additional devastation.
Uh, upon them.
And this
A plan bill will bridge that gap
until the open.
Available and give these uh
constituents.
Some relief and some.
Light on the future.
That there is hope out there,
and they can.
Move forward.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
All right, Joy online, if you
will, unmute yourself.
And then we also have Ava. I'm
sorry, Joe, we also have Ava,
she's still on. So Eva, you will
go after Joyce. So go ahead,
Joy.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Joya Sparson. I'm the executive
director for New Mexico
counties. This has been a
growing issue for us as we
received a number of calls and
concerns from our county elected
officials who have heard over
this past year about a number of
individuals either having
outrageously increased insurance
premiums for their home are
being canceled altogether. We
need this type of a program to
ensure that we've got coverage
for those who otherwise couldn't
get it. And for those reasons,
Our board has decided to stay in
support of this initiative and
thank the sponsors for bringing
this forward.
Thank you so much, Joy. Ava, if
you will unmute your mic, you
have 2 minutes. Hi, my name is
Ava Salmon. Thank you for um
having this hearing. I
appreciate being here. I own a
uh a small property in the uh
Cat Canyon fire area.
And, um, not only have I seen,
you know, huge increases in my
insurance. I'm also very, very
worried about having my
insurance canceled, but I wanna
share my experience in that, um,
I had an offer to sell my place.
I'm recently widowed and can't
really keep it up anymore. And
the deal fell through because
there was no insurance for the
property. So if you want a
mortgage, um, no, no, no private
insurance would insure it.
So, um, I just wanted to share
that not only, you know, is it
about insurance rates and losing
insurance, but the real estate
association realtors need to
understand that we can't even
sell our properties unless
insurance can be, can be found
and it, and companies are not
insuring in the canyon Hermit's
Peak area. So, um, I'm, I'm for
this bill. We need to have
something more than 350,000 as a
backup, um, or we won't be able
to sell our properties. So, uh
thank you for, for hearing me.
Thank you very much. Uh, that
concludes public testimony.
Senator Wirth.
Still have that opportunity if
you'd like to respond. You have
5 minutes to do so. Otherwise,
we'll go to the committee
for the superintendent.
Question I think
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh, we have tried to
work with the current board. We
did meet with them in September
and again, I think another
meeting and we introduced them
to the experts that they're
using, um, and, uh, it's been.
Months and we had hoped that
they would move quickly, we
wanted the the amount to be
increased from 350 to 750, and
we had hoped if they had moved
quickly we would have been able
to issue policies starting late
November. Uh, they're still
having problems with it, uh, the
way this works, just, I'm sure
people know that if there's, uh,
we had, they had one assessment
and since 19, a big assessment
this year, first time in 20
years, 10 million total, uh, the
way that's reimbursed is that
the uh the companies and
initially put out the money, but
then they go and issue
surcharges around the state to
get recovery, and this bill
we've given them 3 years to do
that and to help if there is a
new incident, that's why we've
asked for the 50 million as a
backstop, so that they would
understand that we are uh hoping
we don't have an incident, but
there'll be some money there to
provide them some relief and
assessments.
Thank you very much. Now I go to
the committee, Senator Ramos,
Madam Chair, um, Senator Wirth,
thank you for bringing this
bill. You know, I know we've
discussed a few of the questions
I had earlier. Um,
This is really a tough bill.
It's, but also as an insurance
agent, it's really, really hard.
I've been there where a
constituents of ours and
customers of mine, um, had a
house burned to the ground.
And the worst feeling is when
you take him out there and you
and you visit him walking
through the area and you're
seeing tears coming out of
their, their eyes.
But it is fortunate that they
had insurance.
But now we come to a place where
we have a lot of constituents
that can't get insured.
And those are the people that I
promised to help.
And it's, it's, it's my duty to
help these people.
And, um, a lot of these people
have invested their life savings
in the home that they have in
the mountains.
And had that dream to live out
in the mountains and have that
view.
And deported every penny that
they've earned into these homes.
And now that they can't get
insurance.
There's a couple ways they can
lose their home, of course by
fire.
Or if they don't have insurance
to present their bank and break
their contract.
And that is a scary situation.
I myself, my insurance rates
went up from 3 years ago at
$1300 a year to $4800 a year
now, as we speak.
But there are questions I do
have on this bill, and I, I do
have multiple questions. I also
do have a 2nd Amendment.
Amendment to the, for the 2nd of
Senator, do your questions have
to do with the amendment or
should the questions go first
and then the amendment, I guess
I, I can do that, Madam Chair,
thank you. Um,
Can you please tell me what the
current board.
How the current board has been
filled, and what's the criteria
to be in that board?
My,
my recollection I can't recall
how was filmed, but, but
currently the board is made up
of a number of uh.
Of appointees by the insurance
companies and then uh consumer
advocate and uh we'll see you
know and a member of my staff.
And uh
That I appoint.
Yes. OK.
In, in the, uh,
Bill on
Page 10, number 11.
It says the
The consumer will need 3
declination.
Of coverage
Before they qualify for the fair
plan, correct?
What is going to be considered
an actual declination? Is it
going to be someone they call on
the phone, they get declined.
There's gonna be a list or is it
gonna be in the actual
declination they get from the
From the insurance company,
because a lot of insurance
companies take forever to get
you that declination.
At this point, it's the actual
declination from the insurance
company.
OK. And, and that's, sometimes
it's really tough to get a
declination. I just want to put
that forward, OK? That's
something we might need to, need
to try and fix.
Um
The 3% surcharge charged on
every policy.
That is purchased out from the
private business.
Is, is there a chance that
that'll go up?
And how would that be considered
in the future, because right
now, everyone that has a
homeowner's policy here pays uh
a 3% surcharge on the policy
that they've got that goes into
this fair plan, correct?
And
What is the plan for the future?
And, and I mean, is there gonna
be a cap on that because it, it
might, we might need a lot of
funds going to this fair plan to
cover another natural disaster.
The, the intent is not to put
surcharges on the
Current policyholders, it's to
do the assessments into the
industry and then
When if there's a large
incident, then we spread those
as the assessments over 3 years
that would be spread across the
state.
And
I think this might be a good
opportunity for Mr. Myers, who's
the actuary, because the key
section and I had a conversation
with Senator Harvio earlier. The
key section, one of the things
that really jumped out for me is
section 5 on page 6. So what,
how do the premiums get set.
Because obviously if someone's
getting a million dollars
premium, they're gonna be paying
a much higher price, but let me
just walk through it. It's
section B on on line 16, the
premium rates for the fair plan
shall, number one, not be
excessive, inadequate, or
unfairly discriminatory, 2, the
actuary sound so that revenue
generated from the premiums is
adding to pay for expected
losses, expenses, and taxes. 3,
the investment income of the
plan and number 4.
the cause of reinsurance or
other capital risk transfer
markets. I think it would be
helpful to have Mr. Myers just
praying for us how this will
work because
When this is set up and
expanded, it's got to be
actuarly sound based on this
language and the statute.
Uh, Madam Chairman, that's
correct, so the idea here is
that we would hold the fair
plan,
uh, pricing accountable similar
to the rest of the industry. So
today I'm the chief actuary. I
review the rate filings, uh,
that all companies make. Um, we
hold them to being their rates
can't be excessive, inadequate,
unfairly discriminatory, um, so
they would submit all their
historical data, essentially
project that into the future to
come up with a price. Um, for
the fair plan today, uh,
It, it's, it's just been
historically underpriced.
Um, we did some analysis, uh,
suggesting that the rates are
about 20% too low. Um, so, you
know, if we let rates be 20% too
low, uh, I think we can expect
more of these uh large
catastrophic events to um tear
through the premiums that we're,
that we're earning, um, and we'd
have to assess the industry. So
one thing we want to make sure
that we're doing is that we're
charging the appropriate rate.
Now, obviously, if you have a
$250,000 home.
Uh, in Lincoln County and next
door you have a $500,000 home.
Uh, we want to make sure that
you're charging, um, it's not
exactly double, but, you know,
significantly more, there's like
a rate per $1000 of coverage.
Uh, and we want to make sure
that that is actuarially
appropriate so that if there is
an event, uh, those two homes,
even though they are different
values, we expect them to have
different losses. Obviously, if
they burn down, uh, that they're
paying the appropriate rate.
And, and, and that is, that's a
good answer. Oh, Madam Chair,
I'm sorry, uh, Madam Chair, uh,
Senator Worth.
Also, well, in the same
conversation.
What's to guarantee that during
actuary, you're not gonna have
to raise the 3% surcharge to a
12% surcharge and everyone's
gonna be affected with this,
with this new bill.
Madam Chairman, uh, that is a
fair question. Certainly we do
not know, um, when the next
wildfire is going to occur or
where it will occur or what
damage it will cause, um, I
think there would have to be a
uh
An incredibly devastating
wildfire to surcharge the, uh, I
haven't done the math on, on
what that would be, um, but to
surcharge something like 12%, I
think I just
I apologize, I'm going slightly
off of memory, but like if there
was a, you know, a $15 million
fire, um, and we had to
surcharge the industry for that.
That would be like less than a
1% surcharge, um.
For for each home in New Mexico,
and I clearly, you know, if
there is a ton of growth after
this in somewhere like Santa Fe,
we could have a fire that's much
more destructive than that. So
I'm not saying that is the cap
on the amount, we could have a
larger surcharge, but our goal
is to charge the actuarially
appropriate price, it's gonna
vary by the amount of your home.
Where is that home? How old is
the home? Do you have mitigation
or not, um, and the hope is that
we can collect enough premium in
those rates, so that if
There is an event, then we don't
have to surcharge the industry.
Uh, and if there is an event
that's more than the premium
that we've collected in the
short term we have this backstop
so we can kind of cause a buffer
in the short term, say in the
next 3 years, there's, you know,
heaven forbid there's another
fire, um, then we can kind of
ease into it, uh, before we've
collected enough premiums to
fully pay for that next event.
And Madam Chair, um, senator,
and I think that's what concerns
me. The actuary now for the
million dollars versus the
356,000, is there going to be
effect to the actual
surcharge at that point.
As we first start this program,
this new program.
Madam Chairman, the premium that
the policyholder would charge if
they have a million dollars in
coverage is going to be
significantly higher than the
premium that we would charge
someone with a, with $350,000 in
coverage. Yes, you pay more if
you, uh, have more coverage.
OK.
Um
What's gonna happen with the
current board? Would they just
be automatically dropped? Are
they going to continue to work
together with the new board,
Madam Chair, um, senator, what,
how's, what's gonna be the
process?
The process is there, Madam
Chair, uh, senator, the
apologies, uh, the processes
that we would have a totally new
board. Uh, we want industry
representation, but we're
looking for uh a new.
A level of expertise that we
don't have right now. We're
we're looking for people with
the climate shift background and
we're looking for uh actuaries
we're looking for financial
analysts, we're looking for
reinsurance experts. We're
looking for cat modeling experts
so we really understand what we
should be doing and understand
what the industry is doing, uh,
which right now the, the members
have been incredibly dedicated.
They're absolutely correct.
They've run this for 30 years,
but, but the love.
that the number of incidents the
severity of the incidents, I
believe we need more expertise.
The other situation on the
board, it's weighted voting, so
the largest carrier has more
votes than other carriers, and
that creates a distortion, in my
opinion and and some of the
responses.
Madam Chair, uh,
Superintendent and senator, I,
I, uh,
You know, the industry experts
we have right now know what
they're doing. I mean, I, I kind
of take offense to, to that
comments because, I mean, being
in the industry myself, I think
I know a lot more than most
people when it comes to
insurance. But anyways, um,
What, uh, what data was used to
determine or will be used to
determine.
Um, the rates.
And the processes that are gonna
go forward, I, I guess the main
question is what is going to be
the process for because if this
passes now, there's gonna be
significant differences in the
in in the fair plan.
Madam Chairman, uh, I could talk
about that for a long, long
time.
Um, the general process is we
would look at the historical.
Losses that have occurred in the
fair plan.
And we would look at the trend
in those losses over time, and
we would project them into the
future.
Uh, we would remove all the
wildfire losses.
And we would work with cat
modelers.
Essentially run the risks
through a cat model and that cat
model would look at the age of
the home, what type of roof does
it have? Is it frame or masonry?
How old is the home I'm sorry if
I already said that, uh, what's
the zip code? Um, and it runs
millions of simulations. I'm not
not exaggerating, uh, and then
it would come up with the like
of those millions in any given
year, what is the expected loss
on that given house. So we take
the
Actual losses that we've seen,
we projected forward, we take
out all the wildfires, and then
we add in this like average
wildfire loss over the million
years.
Um, and that's kind of how we
would, we call, we come up with
a non-cat loss, just like.
kitchen fire or theft or, you
know, those average type of
things and then we add in the
catastrophic loss based on the
models, um, and then on top of
that, because we don't have
experience in the fair plan
today with policies that have a
million dollars in coverage, uh,
I would need to review some
competitor rate filings and
essentially look at like, well,
what does Allstate charge a
million dollar in coverage
compared to $350,000 in
coverage, you know, I probably
pull that for 5 different
carriers and then use that ratio
to do the pricing, uh, but then
the fair plan.
would make a rate filing with
the OSI, um, and I would work
with the actuary that makes that
filing to approve those rates
every year.
Um, Madam Chair, Senator, also,
you know, currently we have a
big.
Um
book of business throughout the
state of New Mexico. I
personally have, I don't know,
I, I insure quite a few people
in southwest New Mexico. And
unfortunately, we, our main
concerns when we, when we insure
them is
Dilapidated homes and them not
being able to get insurance
anywhere else because of the
dilapidated home.
What is going to happen to these
customers? What is going to
happen to their rates, as you
stated before, there's that
we're already at 20, 20% below
what you think should be
charged. How is this gonna
affect our current customers
that we have in New Mexico Fair.
We're not, excuse me, Madam
Chair, we're, and uh senator,
we're not going to uh
re-underwrite the current
customers that we have in the
fair plan, but we are pushing
for mitigation, which I think
you've seen in here, uh, and,
uh, we think, and uh we're using
the uh I IBHS standards which
are, is a research group created
by the industry and the the
research basically says you put
this mitigation in place for
home but it has to be
community-wide and we're working
with.
The forestry, uh, group, Laura
McCarthy as well on, she's doing
community, we're doing home
harding. It lowers the chance
of, of a fire of your home being
destroyed in the fire by 45%. No
guarantee, but, but a much
better shot. I think you've seen
a few homes that survived in in
uh the Maui fire and a few in
the in the Los Angeles fire
where there was this type of
mitigation, and we're striving
to get this much broader and
we're
or you, we were gonna, we were
using the fair plant to be the
first.
Company that would require broad
mitigation. We're also have
money here and I know uh Laura
McCarthy and some of the money
she's been asked to get grants,
she's been asking for is to give
grants to people who can't
afford to do the mitigation. Uh,
so we're, that's how we're
approaching this. And Madam
Chair, um, Senator, I, I, I
guess what I should be asking,
what's going to happen to our
current customers at renewal.
Are their rates going to stay
the same? Um, are we going to
add the 20% plus whatever it's
gonna cost the whole.
What, what are we looking at?
Um, Madam Chairman, at renewal,
the intent is to bring uh the
rates to actu sound rates, uh.
might not be the exact number,
but the idea would be to charge
the appropriate rates so they
would, uh, likely see a rate
increase at renewal. Um, I don't
think we're planning on.
Uh, non-renewing everyone when
they come up with this bill, but
we do have standards around
mitigation.
Um, but yes, the idea would be
to get everyone both new and new
to actuarly sound rates.
It, Madam Chair, um, senator,
has there been any data shown or
Uh, any data to show the finance
capital needed for the plan to
accommodate for these changes,
besides the 50 million that
we're putting aside for these
type of claims.
Madam Chairman, um,
So we have not done, we have not
completed a formal analysis of
the required capital, um, it's
difficult to come up with that
number without knowing how many
homes.
We are going to add to the plan.
I did my best to estimate that
based on the growth that we've
seen in the California Fair plan
over the last 3 years, and the
current fair plan policy count
in 12 wildfire exposed counties
throughout New Mexico.
Um, and that's essentially I
took the
Uh, the 2024 Rio Dosto fire and
overlaid it into different
counties, um, and just said, OK,
if we had that same fire, but we
have all this new coverage and
these 12 different counties.
What, what is that loss gonna
be? And that's uh how I came up
with that rough 40 million, but
I would, I would.
I don't wanna
Say that that's like a a solid
actuarial analysis and
calculating the actual required
capital because we honestly
don't know exactly how many
policies we're going to pick up.
That was my best guess, uh,
given we know what we know.
And Madam Chair, uh, senator,
you know, it's, it's
I know we have this huge need,
but it seems like we've got so
much information that still
needs to be calculated and uh I,
I know the need and uh.
It, it just could be, this is a
really tough bill for me because
I, I could see the, the, I could
see both sides of this equation
here, and it's, it's gonna be
tough, but um, that chair, I
would like to go ahead and make
my amendment now for the 2nd
time.
And Madam Chair, what I would
like to do.
is on the last page.
On section 12.
since or or line 4.
Uh, chains 2026 to 2026 and
2027.
And also on line 6.
Uh, to change 2026.
2027.
So out here, that's a friendly
amendment, and I very much
appreciate Senator Ross running
that by me in advance, same
thing we did the other day on
one of these fonts, just gives a
little more flexibility.
The 2nd
Any other questions on the bill,
um, so.
But yes, this is on the bill
itself. Yes, so first I want to
start with the board. OK, hold
on just a second, Senator
Scherer. I do have Senator
O'Malley and Jaramillo before
you, so I'll let you like
Like, bring it home, OK?
Mhm.
OK, so O'Malley isn't here. Um,
so Senator Jaramillo, when
O'Malley comes back, we'll go
ahead and send her to O'Malley,
but Senator Jaraillo, thank you,
Madam Chair. And so I did have
calls from Los Alamos County
residents who are no strangers
to wildfire. We looked at the
bill and appreciated the bill,
but then I also had calls from
Rio Riba County, which are a
little bit different to the
makeup of constituents are at
who's there. Now the concern
was, is if the bill passes,
which I have the conversation
with Senator Wirth is that they
would no longer be able to
afford
the fair plan. Can you speak to
that for those who might be
watching?
So here, I think part of it is
the section 5.
factors that I went through.
And I'll just reiterate, the
premium rates for the plan shall
not be excessive.
Inadequate or unfairly
discriminatory.
So I think and it, and then if
they've got to be actuarly sound
and I think the point was made,
uh, which was spot on by Mr.
Myers, you know, if you've got a
higher limit, you're gonna be
paying.
Proportionally much larger share
of that.
And
I just think I just want to say
one thing because I think it,
it's important for everyone to
understand the world has
changed.
Senator Ramos, you, you hit it.
Your insurance has increased
double.
We all need to be proactive. We
all need to do the hardening. We
need to thin our forests. And
the fact of the matter is I know
this is a little bit scary. I
mean, it's scary for everyone
who's in this situation, uh, not
only from a bottom line
standpoint, but obviously just
the, the horrors that you've
seen in your district and your
respective districts and, and so
I just, I just, I get those
concerns anytime you make
changes, it's hard, but I think
what we're trying to do is
provide a
Solid default plan with an
understanding that
You know, I think the reality is
the state may well be in a
position where we're gonna have
to come in and help out here.
We're already proposing a $50
million appropriation, uh, and I
know there is money in the
budget we're going to have the
discussion if the bill moves
forward, but
Again, I just
Couple of comments there about
the situation. I appreciate very
much both because I think that
is the reality we have folks in
different places.
Thank you for that answer,
Senator and Madam Chair, so the
woman who spoke on the board set
the board's been managing this
planet sounds like for 60 years.
Did they by chance help with the
bill draft?
So,
yeah,
uh, Madam Chair, uh, senator,
no.
OK. And with that, Madam Chair,
I think in the bill, it does say
the whole board would be, it'd
be a whole brand new board with
this one. Is that correct?
OK.
Uh no further questions. Thank
you, Senator O'Malley and then
Senator Scherer.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I, I was
concerned with, you know, the
solvency of this fund.
It's good to hear from the
actuary that you're looking at a
competitive.
Um, what is it, uh, premiums?
Which, you know, should, you
know, hopefully, I I assume that
you looked at this, you did the
calculations and um so that was,
that was basically my concern
and so I think I feel pretty
good about it now. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator O'Malley,
Senator Sheriff.
Um,
thank you, Madam Chair. I, I do
want to start with the board
here.
Um
So if I understood right, what
we're
We're replacing the people that
actually are in the business and
do the business with.
bureaucrats that have different
kinds of thoughts.
Climate bureaucrats and
I don't know.
What other kind of bureaucrats
we're putting in there. Senator,
I, I think
The people that are doing
business are, are, uh, uh, uh.
Insurance, you know, insurance
providers who I do think know
their customers extremely well.
I was with two insurance
companies and I actually was
the, uh, the lawyer for the uh
distribution group and I respect
them incredibly well. What, what
we're trying to do though but is
to bring insurance company, not
bureaucrats, experts, which I
think we need as we're talking
about times have changed and
some of the kind of things we
need to understand. We don't
have cat modeling expertise.
We don't have actuarial
expertise, and we don't have
financial expertise and climate
expertise, and that's what we're
being faced with, uh, when we
deal with these residual markets
and these high risk areas. So
that's what we're trying to
bring to the board. So when we
have these conversations at the
you know in the meetings, we get
this expertise so we understand
what the cat models are telling
us and why we have to uh at
times increase premiums or, or
work on.
hardening with the climate
experts. We want the experts
there so we make the right
decisions, um, and it's not that
the, the, the producers aren't
experts. It's a different kind
of expertise that we're being
faced with as in these changing
times and we don't wanna wait
months to get a a report. We
want people there to answer the
questions right away and we want
the industry to give us their
best minds. That's where we're
asking the industry to name
these people with this
expertise. So, Madam Chair, who,
who
and picks these experts.
So our page 3 of the bill we can
just go through it.
Uh
And I'll just go down a list
again, I think.
One of them is, uh,
Minority leader of the Senate
pick, uh, let me just read them.
I think the best it's helpful
for people to hear. Uh, number
11 member with experience in
actuarial science appointed by
the superintendenting property
and casualty insurers right
property insurance in the state.
21 member appointed by the
superintendent representing a
reinsurance company with
exposure to property and
casualty risk and estate. 31 by
the governor.
Number 41 member appointed by
the governor representing the
interests of consumers
practicable representing
consumer advocacy organizations
and diverse geographic areas of
the state. Number 51 member with
experience in finance appointed
by the president pro tem of the
Senate
representing property and
casualty insurers, property
insurance in the state.
Number 61 member with experience
and product management appointed
by the minority floor leader of
the Senate representing property
and casualty insurers, writing
property insurance in the
states.
71 member with experience in
catastrophic risk management
appointed by the Speaker of the
House of Representatives
in the states, uh, number 81
member appointed by a minority
floor leader of the House of
Representatives, representing
New Mexico-based property and
casualty insurance trade
association
that represents agents and the
insurance in the states, and
number 9 superintendent or the
So that's, that's the actual
form. I think it's good for the
so, Madam Chair and Senator, as
I go through these, uh, other
than, other than the two
appointed by OSI.
Unless Senator Ramos becomes the
majority floor leader like soon.
There will be no no no guarantee
of any insurance expertise.
Um
And it, and it seems to me like
it could be very political, as
opposed to experts. And so when
I use the term bureaucrat,
that's kind of what I mean. It's
now it's, it's
Protem and I pick somebody
politically.
Which will happen
There's no way to stop that.
Human nature.
Um
And so I'm not sure you get the
expert.
You get the politically
Motivated
person that lobbies me and I
pick them and lobbies you and
you pick girl present Potem
picks them.
So
So I'm not sure that that board.
Gets us where we want to go,
because we can say that they're
supposed to be experts in
something sometimes.
But that's not the makeup of, of
how the board happens.
Um
We talk
Everybody says all this cause of
climate change.
OK.
But you and I, uh, Madam Chair,
uh,
Have talked about forests for at
least a decade.
Maybe longer.
I believe that it is poor forest
management.
I believe that is we simply
refuse as a nation.
Because these are all, these are
all federal fighters that are
out there.
As a nation, we have decided
what we would rather do.
I pretend like we're protecting
an owl.
By not taking care of the forest
at all.
Then burning down 50 or 300,000
acres of land.
Where the owl isn't or the
lizard or the mouse or whatever
out there we're protecting.
Because they live on the other
side of the road where the
Mescaleros are taking care of
the land.
That's where the owl lives. The
owl doesn't live in Lincoln
National Forest. Ol lives in
Mescalero because they can hunt
in Mescalero because the
Mescaleros take care of the
land.
And the federal government does
not.
And then you have these massive
fires.
It then can go to private
property, but they start these
massive fires on federal land.
Famous, same with Calf Canyon.
In that case, not only did they
prepare the place for fire, they
actually started the fire.
Federal government. And so now
we have this, this.
Insurance problem.
Because the federal government's
burning down our forests.
It then spread.
And I'm just terribly concerned
that what we're doing is, again,
not really addressing the
problem.
I think that maybe what we could
do is use this same $50 million.
To fortify the the homes, OK,
let's use that money and, and
move the brush back away from
the
The dwellings.
Let's use the money to fortify
those homes.
That makes sense to me.
It makes sense to me that we
want to protect these homes. It
makes sense to me that we have a
serious problem right now
because the home's already
burned and they can't get back.
I mean, that's, and I know
that's what this is addressing,
but I'm just not sure that we're
that we're getting there.
At all
And what we've not done
As a state or anywhere else is
we have not sued the federal
government to replace all the
houses they burned down.
They burned them down.
It wasn't lack of fire insurance
that destroyed the house.
It wasn't neglect from the
agents that destroyed the house.
It's the federal government.
They destroyed the house. They
destroyed the businesses.
They destroyed the Swiss chalet
that once upon a time, my wife's
family owned.
They destroyed it.
I'm also concerned that, so we
build this.
It used to be, I, maybe I should
ask this as a question because
did not the fair plan used to be
for the lower income.
Community
Certainly not a million dollar
houses. Madam Chair, Senator,
uh, the, uh, fair plan up until
I think about 3 years ago was
for 250,000 and it was raised I
before I came, I think the year
that.
Right before I came to 350,000,
but, but, and that was the
limit. I don't think it was ever
described as for low income, but
that that is what occurred.
OK.
OK.
So we're, we're, we're now,
Madam Chair, moving it from 350
to a million and 5 million for a
business.
Then your senator, but when the,
the numbers were put in place,
250,000 in 1969 was a pretty
expensive home.
Yeah, that's probably right. I
think my father said he paid
$6000 for his first house.
May be wrong, it might have been
9, but.
Um
We also talked about this, the
solvency of this.
And what happened in California
and their fair plan and things
like that. And then we talk
about, oh no.
We're going to have this money
now, so it won't happen.
When
When Pacific Palisades burns.
No matter why it burned.
That's a, that's a lots and lots
of money.
And
Well, the homes in Riodoso
mostly are nice homes.
If the fire were to to run
through Santa Fe, would be
dramatically more money.
Might not be $20 billion but it
would be well over a billion
dollars.
If it hit the outskirt, just the
outskirts of Santa Fe.
It hit that billion dollar mark
pretty well. And so again, I
just don't think that we're,
we're looking at this, and so
then when, when we have this.
Catastrophic catastrophic
California event.
The state will pay for that,
we'll have to pay for that
because of what we're doing
here.
And man, oil and gas better be
in a good position that day.
Because in the cycle, if oil and
gas prices are low that day.
As you know, you and I were
here, uh.
Senator
When we almost literally turned
over the governor's couch
cushions, looking for quarters
so we could pay the bills.
Because oil and gas prices were
nowhere.
And so 40 million, 50 million,
whatever. I'm just not sure
that.
If you have something that
dramatic.
The state is on the hook for
something dramatic. So Madam
President, I think we need to
clarify how this works, the
state, and I think he the
superintendent. Yes, madam,
senators, uh, this is a, is not
a traditional insurance company.
It's, it doesn't have the
reserves in the capital that you
had in a normal insurance
company. What you do have is if
there's if, if there isn't
enough in reserve because of the
premiums that have been
collected. What happens is
as it happened, uh, this year,
you go out to the industry and
ask for assessments and as a
matter of fact, the industry had
to come in and I think we were,
they were out of money to pay
claims, uh, and I think State
Farm wrote a check and uh we
were able to continue to pay
claims after for the Riodoso
fire.
What, after the assessments, the
industry puts up the money and
then they're able to go out in
the in the next year and spread
what they assessed uh around the
state. So there's a surcharge
put on all policyholders,
probably proportionately, uh, to
reimburse the industry for those
assessments. The way we're
trying to do this and you're
right at this point, uh, there's
no guarantee.
The, I mean, we're we're dealing
in catastrophic issues where
wherever we turn, so we can, you
know, uh, uh, Christian is a
great actuary, but, uh, the
predictions are just predictions
and the models have been right
and the models have been wrong.
And right now, the past used to
be predictive of the future and
it's not anymore. The models are
saying, let's look at the, at
the worst case scenario and then
project forward, so we are in a
in a very fragile time, but we
think the mechanism.
That we have
Can't guarantee, but should
work. The other piece, and again
we are not California, but the
Riodoso fire in in in in that
area was as devastating,
probably proportionately as it
was in the palisades, um, we're,
we're trying to, uh, with the 50
million, which is what we try to
put in place and ask the state
to put in place was to give the
industry some assurances that we
understood that if we made this.
Jump to the million and there
was a catastrophe, there would
be some backstop until all the
premium had been accrued over a
number of years, so it's not
perfect, but what we're trying
to do is get something out there
as quickly as we can to as many
people as we can, um.
And it's, it's not a perfect
solution. We totally acknowledge
that.
And and look at the language in
the, in the fun because it's
important.
To administer the fair plan and
fire mitigation programs.
Well, I think it is this money
can certainly be used in this
two-year period to help everyone
with these changes that we all
need to be making.
You know, around our house and
the harden properties and so
this is a great example of being
proactive versus just status quo
and then we wait and we see an
absolute catastrophe, so, and I
just think.
It also ties in and represented
Vincent, I know you're carrying
a number of other bills. There's
a whole package of bills that
relate to.
Hardening and thinning and all
the things that
You and I agree. I kind of like
the owls and lizards, but I
think the house lizard should be
in a forest that's healthy.
Like Mescalero. Well, fair
enough, but I also think that
the reality is that the forests
are in bad shape and you mix
that with climate change and
it's a double disaster. So it's
a combination of all.
Well, I, I'm not really trying
to filibuster here. I am, I am
concerned here because clearly
there are New Mexicans that are
They're in bad shape, they're in
trouble, they're devastated.
I don't know that this fixes it.
I'm afraid that it makes it
worse. That's what I'm truly
afraid of.
So how do we, how do we help?
The
The constituents of these two
representatives who are
Clearly some of the most
devastated people in New Mexico.
But I'm not sure changing the
board.
did anything except make it more
political and less of a doer
board.
Mm
I'm not sure that the money
To, to help pay for fire
insurance is is.
is wise instead of doing the
hardening of the the homes,
which I think would be a go a
lot further.
I know that we have to have
insurance or you can't rebuild,
I guess you could rebuild if you
paid cash, but you can't get a
mortgage unless you have
insurance. I understand that.
But with the insurance
companies.
Want to come back.
If the homes were hardened and
the forest was thin. I think
they would come back. I think
you have to do anything to force
them to come back.
I mean, they want customers.
Oh, here we go. What they don't
want to do is lose money on
their customers.
Just like any business.
And that's why I'm concerned
here because.
My heart
Go out. I, I.
I want to do something.
I don't think it does it. I
think it adds bureaucracy. I
think it drives other people out
of the out of the business. I
think it makes things worse, and
that's my concern. This just
doesn't do what we all know
needs to be done.
And
It makes me sad cause I want,
I'm not sure I want to support
you, but I certainly want to
support.
Representative Vincent
man I maybe Representative
Vincent should respond to you
because I think he's probably
got a good response that you
might listen to more than the
one that comes from me. But
anyway, that, that, that's,
that's my position here. I'm,
I'm very concerned that this
doesn't do.
what we want it to do.
Thank you. Madam Chair, if I may
respond.
I agree.
However, we're, we're to the
point.
Where
The only path forward.
is our people are not coming
home.
If we don't do something
aggressive.
Now
I'm not getting onto the
insurance. I, I like the
insurance agents and I really
like uh Senator Ramos, I mean,
I'm glad he does good, I'm glad
the industry does good.
But where's the urgency?
How come they haven't stepped
up?
They take on all the risk. How
come they're not going after the
Forest Service.
And now
You know, for, for decades in
Lincoln County, and I'm not
gonna talk about all the
counties, but in Lincoln County.
The insurance companies have
been profitable for a very long
time.
things are bad.
And I'm telling you about this
compounding problem we have.
Realtors can't sell nothing
cause you can't get insurance.
Financial institutions can't
loan money because they can't
get insurance.
And, and all I'm saying is, um.
I think it's probably a matter
of opinion that this board might
not work, and I had that same
talk this morning with with
Senator Ramos.
I don't know if the board's
gonna work or not.
I, I don't really, I personally
don't have a problem with the
current board that we have now.
Except for in New Mexico, I
would love to sprinkle a little
bit of on delay on people, so my
folks can come home.
They want to come home.
And, and as, and I want you to,
I want to give you some
homework.
I want you to get online.
And you picked the insurance
company of your choice and
figure out what their CEO makes
a year. And while they're
sitting in their house.
Pondering what we're gonna do.
With our folks
They don't have a home to go to.
Where's the urgency?
What do we do?
Do we just say, you know, let's
scrap this bill, we'll, we'll,
we'll get it figured out later.
We're already 8 months deep.
How much longer when whenever we
talked about inflating things
with bureaucracy.
How much longer is it gonna
take? Is it gonna, I, I look at
uh Mora.
You're in 3 or 4 years now.
We don't have that kind of time.
And if somebody was working for
me.
And I'm representing my
district. If somebody was
working with me and it took you
4 years to get something done,
I'm probably gonna let you go.
And find somebody a little bit
more aggressive.
I'm not for sure if this is the
right fix.
It this bill's kept me up at
night because.
It's still dangerous in Ridoso.
However
The amount of legislation that
I'm running this year.
If we can all get on board with
it.
And we start holding the Forest
Service accountable for managing
the forest.
And we quit putting mice.
And prairie chickens.
And all these different
environment or these uh ESA
species in front of people.
We will get it fixed. The
insurance companies will come
back.
They will profit again and
everybody will be happy and
maybe even insurance premiums
would be right.
But in the village of Ridoso.
Back in, whenever I was the fire
chief there, this was a long
time ago back in '93.
We had become a firewise
community.
And we made an ordinance.
That you had to get a
certificate of completion.
And you had to turn, you had to
get it from the village and turn
that into your insurance
company.
And then your insurance company
would.
They would write a policy on
you, but if you didn't have that
that uh certificate of
completion.
You probably weren't gonna get
underwritten.
Or get a policy.
With the amount of money, and I
mean $20 million for hardening a
bunch of houses in New Mexico,
that's a drop in the bucket, I
get it, but we have to get this.
We have to turn the ship.
This ship has to be turned. We
have to get smarter.
And we know that these fires are
devastating.
In their devastating to people,
they can't come home. I know
that we sit here and we're we're
asking these questions, but
every one of us is going home
tonight.
These people are in in not
really a joking matter, they're
living with their children and
family members. They have
nothing left.
Some of their houses were
reduced to ash that they had
lived there for 50, 60 years,
they don't even, they don't even
have nothing to store.
All they're asking is to come
back. I'm not even gonna tell
you how bad the problem gets
when you talk about GRTs, when
you talk about property taxes.
It just keeps compounding, we
can't put out any, we can't put
out any um.
Building permits.
Because we can't get insurance
written on them.
And I hear the insurance
companies, I hear it, but what's
the solution?
I hear that they they oppose it.
I haven't heard a solution yet,
and I've talked with several,
several of them.
I'm just saying, ladies and
gentlemen, Madam Chair, we have
to have a solution.
Right now
Needs to happen today.
Needs to happen this week, needs
to happen in the next couple of
months, I don't know what it is.
But I think if we collectively
get together.
And I've already seen two
friendly amendments happen.
It's this is not a, this is not
a notoriety bill for me at all.
This is about doing what's right
and what's wrong.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
So.
Madam Chair
If I'm sitting here looking at
amendments like the board. I
really don't.
I like that.
And this goes to finance next.
That'll be a fun committee for
you.
Um
I do
Thinking about this.
Brings me to tears, literal.
The only solution though, is if
we took $100 million and sued
the government for billions to
fix the problem.
That fixes the problem.
In the long run, it doesn't fix
the problem tonight.
And it
I'm not sure, has the
As the board, the insurance
industry, whoever had real
Conversations about a solution.
I don't, I don't know if you
have or not.
Would they be open to real
conversations about solutions,
solutions.
For today, today's solutions,
and
And what I would like to see,
cause I don't know.
I'm probably gonna vote no
today.
Because I'm concerned that this
doesn't do what it's done. It's
gonna go to the judiciary, cause
I'm sure that it's gonna be at
least 6 to 4, maybe 8 to 19 to
1, I don't know.
But if between here,
And finance.
If the, if the insurance
companies can't come to the
Table and really look for the
the now solution.
And it's gonna be a
It's gonna turn into a
bureaucratic nightmare and it's
not gonna solve the problem. I'm
convinced of that. If the two of
us, senator.
And figure out how to make the
federal government stop burning
New Mexico.
It doesn't fix the problem at
all, ever. OK, I'm gonna cry.
I'm done.
Thank you, Senator Sheriff.
Senator Ramos, you wanted to
make a, a brief comment or
question. Yes, madam Chair,
thank you so much, and I, I'm
not gonna be the filibustering,
I promise that's always going to
be en shares.
Uh, crown right there. Um.
I, I just want to make it clear.
The reason I like this bill is
because there's no other option.
And
Industry should have stepped up
and we won't be here right now.
I'm probably gonna get a bunch
of calls because I made that
comment, but that's OK.
Because I stand for what's
right.
Another thing is we keep blaming
the federal government.
It's not the federal
government's fault, and I'll
tell you why.
I have lots of friends.
I worked for the Forer. And when
they start off thinning project,
they're excited. They're cutting
wood, they're selling, they're
making money for the government
so they can keep running their
forest.
But you know what happens?
They get sued by forest
guardians and other kinds of
groups and what happens is they
sue him on 10 different issues.
And they might not be correct on
9 of them, but if they find 1,
they get reimbursed all the
funds they use to sue the
federal government. So what
happens?
Once the federal government is
sued, they stop the thinning
project. That's what happens.
I've dealt with it in Grant
County for many years as a
county commissioner.
And we fought and we fought for
thinning, and we fought and we
fought for sinning. We get
excited because the project
would start, then we get upset
because it would stop.
That's the real reason.
It's time both sides start
working together.
And stop trying to appease those
groups that are trying to
influence you every single day.
And do what's right for the
people.
Thank you.
Thank you, senators. Any other
comments from the committee?
What is the wish of the
committee?
Oh
chair like to move a do pass.
Yes, I amended bill.
Right, we have.
Just a second.
I think Senator Wirth, 2nd. All
right, will you take the, take
the boat back up.
Senator Figueroa.
Senator had a meal.
Senator O'Malley, yes.
Senator Paul
Yes
Senator Ramos. Senator Sanchez.
Senator Shaw
No
Senator Wirth, yes.
Senator Bergmann's, yes.
Senator Hamblin, yes.
O
Yeah.
Senator
I've known it to explain my
vote.
So the only concern I have, we
do need, oh sorry.
It
Senator Sanchez.
So
The center ahead of me. So Madam
Chair, and I see that this is a
fix. And so, but when I think
about those people who call to
live.
A below the poverty line that
we're concerned about the bill,
that's the reason, and I may
change my vote if it heads to
the floor, but I'm gonna ask the
woman, I don't know what your
name was that talked about a
study that's coming, if you can
share with me what's in that
study. I appreciate that Senator
Wirt spoke with me on the bill
on how it the impact isn't the
way people in Ri Riba County
thought the impact was taking
what Senator Wirth gave me and
looking at what you get from
that study will determine who I
vote on the floor, so it's not a
definite no, but for the
it will be, you know, thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator Jamio. So
Senator Worth and uh
representatives, you have a vote
of 7 to 3, so your motion
carries, uh, and it now heads to
finance and um I do want to use,
if I may representative,
sprinkle a little onola.
Um, I think that is a new state
logo, uh state motto, and we
might get questions, you and I
both about what product we use
in our hair and respectively our
beard because they might get
confused.
Thank you. All right, thank you
very much, um, for the
committee, I do want to remind
you that we will be going
through the entire agenda
tonight. Uh, we, um, so that we
don't have to meet on weekends.
So I appreciate that commitment.
We have Senator Souls and Senate
Bill 79 up next and then
following that will be Senator.
Lopez on SB 73 and SB 36, and
then we'll finish off tonight
with Senator Pope.
It's an appropriation, it goes
to finance. All right, Senator
Souls.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, this
bill relates to aviation,
probably no surprise many of
you, I talk and uh do lots of
things around aviation. Let me
give you a little bit of
background so you help you
understand what this bill does.
I do want to warn you that
Senator
Already like like um entertain
the idea of a due pass?
So if you want to keep it short.
I will keep it very short then
is, uh, in the past, I carried a
bill that would ban the use of
leaded aviation fuel in 2030 as
the national programs are
talking about doing that, we
will have a solution to the fact
that there is lead in aviation
fuel currently. Um,
I had had a bill that put that
in. People got very upset,
you're gonna hurt my business.
This is a very positive
mechanism. There are unleaded
fuels currently available for
aviation, some called MOGGAS,
which is auto gas without lead
and no alcohol that are used is
available or is appropriate for
about 75% of the piston fleet.
This is all his in aviation, not
turbines that use jet fuel, um,
that is currently available.
There are also several that are
available for any airplanes, but
it
It's expensive to put in another
pump at an airport. This
provides for $5 million for up
to $200,000 for any airport in
New Mexico essentially that
wants to put in an unleaded
aviation option. So it's
proactive to help people in
making that transition. So if
the transition and the mandates
come in 2030, they're ahead of
the game and don't have to
scramble at the last minute when
there may not be funds, and I'll
be quiet. Thanks so much souls.
uh, just for the audi
quickly. Anybody here in support
of this bill? Yeah, see not
anybody in opposition.
Online
For
You're serious about it do pass.
All right, so we're gonna go
ahead and thank that person. Uh,
we have a due pass from Senator
Sheer. Do we have a second?
second from Senator O'Malley, if
you will, please take the vote.
Senator Figuero.
Senator had a meal. Senator
O'Malley.
Senator Paul, Senator Ramos,
Senator Sanchez.
Senator Sharr.
Senator Wirth.
stepped out.
Senator Bergman's.
Senator Hamblin.
We have
8 to 1, right.
Senator on H1, you have a due
pass that committee. I, I think
I now have about half an hour
banked with your committee,
you're keeping tabs.
Right, we have Senator Cil Lopez
with the um SB 73 required
bicycle stops for safety.
Hm
Senator Sidil Lopez, go ahead.
Thank you Madam Chair. I'm here
with a bill that's about
enhancing safety for all
bicyclists. I know this is a
little counterintuitive for
non-bicyclists, but when you're
riding a bike and you come to a
stop sign.
You yield
Um, under this bill, and if no
cars, no bikes, uh, you, you
know, you slow down, no
pedestrians around, you keep
going without a full stop,
called the Idaho Stop.
If you um come to a red light,
you stop, and of course you
yield to any traffic, but if
there's no traffic, you keep
going.
And what this, what's important
about that is it takes you out
of the blind spot of the cars
who have stopped.
I am a bicycle rider, um, I'm
not.
To this level, not to the level
of people here. I like to ride
along the bosque, um, on
weekends, but I get there on the
streets of Albuquerque and to be
honest, um, I hope police
officers don't follow me. This
is how I ride. It is the safest
way to ride, um, except for the
street lights or the stop
lights, uh, um, if that, I, I
don't go that far yet, but with
this bill, we will enhance
safety, and I have here an
expert, Eric Beiderman, who
is all about this bill will
answer any questions and really
knows a lot, and I'll just turn
to him for a very brief opening
statement.
OK. Thank you, Senator, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Eric
Beiderman. I'm here representing
an alliance of bike advocacy
groups from New Mexico,
including Bike Santa Fe, Vella
Cruces, IABQ, uh, I ride a
bicycle as my primary
transportation and also for
recreation. And at the same
time, I own and drive a car, so
I approached this from a
technical perspective, from both
the uh saddle of a bicycle as
well behind the windshield of a
car. So I'm here to address the
technical aspects of the bill,
primarily the safety.
aspects of the bill. This bill
has demonstrated improvements in
the number of collisions between
drivers and cyclists in every
state it's been implemented in,
as well as reduce the number of
injuries and fatalities of
cyclists from these collisions.
So this bill has had a real
positive impact wherever it's
been implemented and I'm here to
answer questions. Thank you.
Great. Thank you very much.
We're going to go to the
audience first, uh, by a show of
hands, how many people in the
room are in support of this
bill?
234
5. OK. Thank you. Anybody in the
audience in opposition of this
bill? See none? What about
online? How?
One in favor? OK, so we're gonna
go ahead and do 3 in here, uh,
that are in the room. So I'll
let you all rock paper scissors.
Uh, we'll have 3 folks come up
in uh testimony and support.
We'll go ahead and we'll go to
that person online and then, um,
uh, Senator Siddy Lopez, you
have 5 minutes if you want to
respond to that, um, but given
that you've got just support
that's probably they're gonna do
the speaking for you. So if you
will, please come up and uh I'd
say your name and uh stand
behind the senator.
OK, let's move on. We got, here
we go. Madam chair and members
of the committee. My name is
Lynn Pickard. I am a retired
judge from the Court of Appeals,
and also a New Mexico resident
for going on 53 years now, all
of that time I have been
bicycling, I've lived in Tasuki,
and during my career, I bicycled
into town as a bicycle commuter.
I also bicycle for recreation. I
represent the Santa Fe seniors
on bikes, which is a group of re
Recreational writers here in
Santa Fe about 150 to 200
riders, and we stand in support
of this bill. Um,
Just to make it very concrete. I
wanna say when I ride into Santa
Fe, I am going on a 5 mile ride,
I would estimate that the amount
of time I spend in an
intersection or the amount of
mileage is maybe
500 ft, yet intersections are
where 25% of accidents happen.
So it's really important for
bicyclists.
to be able to get in and out of
the intersection quickly. I have
also had the unfortunate
experience of being hit by a car
when I made a full stop at a
stop sign up around the plaza.
So I think that
People feel that bicyclists are
not going to stop, and therefore
they hit us. So what we would
like to do
Just as you did earlier with the
Condo Act is conform the law to
people's behavior. Thank you
very much.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Tony
Gurlich. Uh, I am a board member
of Bike Santa Fe, and I also sit
on Santa Fe, City of Santa Fe's
bicycle and pedestrian advisory
Committee. Both of these
organizations are in favor of
this bill and primarily because
our intention is to increase
ridership in Santa Fe. We know
that more people on more bikes
more often, increases health, is
good for the environment and it
overall increases the quality.
of life in the community.
Um, interestingly enough, there
are 12 states that have this
sort of legislation in place,
and there have been studies in
the in the state of Delaware in
Oregon that concretely show that
this kind of a bill that makes a
stop sign, a yield sign for
bicyclists, reduces traffic
accidents, and that's the best
evidence that we can have. Thank
you.
Ma, Madam Chair and committee
members, my name is Alex
Applegate. I'm a bicycle
commuter with over 30 years of
experience and hundreds of
thousands of miles on the
streets of Dallas, Texas, Rio
Rancho, and Albuquerque, where I
live now.
I do not own an automobile.
In my 30, 30 years of riding on
the streets, I had been hit
twice at intersections and have
had too many close calls to
count. I considered myself a
law-abiding citizen, but after
one particularly frightening
event, I began to break our
rules to embrace the additional
safety that this bill would
allow. I have had far fewer
negative interactions as a
result, leaving me to safely
return to my 90 year old
parents, who are dependent upon
my care. Please pass this bill
so I can once again be labeled a
law-abiding citizen. Thank you.
Thank you so much. And we have
Don online. Don, if you'll
unmute yourself, please, you
have 2 minutes.
Yes, good afternoon, Madam
Chairman and committee. I
appreciate the time to address
this issue today as well. Um, I
don't, I am a citizen here in
Las Cruces, New Mexico, which
has a very vibrant biking
community.
Um,
and I don't have anything new to
add with the previous speakers
have already addressed, but I
hope that you will consider
passing this, uh,
Passing this bill for us for our
safety, uh, and increasing
ridership of bicycles in New
Mexico.
Thank you.
Thank you so much.
So at this point, um, do you,
you wanna go ahead and go
straight to the committee? I'm
happy to go straight to the
committee. All right, Senator
Ramos, Madam Chair, Senator
Silvia Lopez, thank you for
bringing this bill. I, I do have
a big question because we have
the tour of the hea big plugin
for a tour of the Gila. Um, in
Silver City and Grant County,
how is this going to affect our
races?
I was just gonna say I think
racists have their own rules,
but I, I will defer to my
expert.
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator Ramos,
uh, yeah, organized races like
the Hilo, which I also highly
recommend. I love riding in the
he myself, uh.
supported with law enforcement
control over intersections, so,
uh, racers are typically
protected and allowed to proceed
right straight to the
racecourse. The citizen writers
of your area when this law is
enacted at times outside of the
races will benefit from the
safety improvements that this
law will yield.
Only question I have. Thank you.
I'm true. Thank you. I know
Senator Sher wants to move this
along quickly if there's anybody
else, I would like to make just
a brief comment before I yield
to Senator Sheer. We have
vulnerable uh road users in Las
Cruces and Bella Las Cruces, I'm
very excited for that, and
they've talked to me about this,
you know, and I think of my, my
wife is a, a, a bike rider, and
I am terrified every day uh when
she rides her bike and I make
sure I got her a new lit vest
that like you can see her from a
mile away, um, because I still
feel that us as vehicle riders
are not
not used to sharing that road.
Um, the thing that I think is,
is a, is a kind of a challenge
for you is the, the name of the
bill because it's kind of
confusing. Uh, but once you see
the graphic, then you make it,
it makes sense, but required
bicycle stops for safety, and
yet this is an Idaho stop and so
um I'm really grateful because
I, I know people, there are
people in my life and, and, you
know, Don is part of that
community who spoke uh of people
who are still trying to recover
from a bicycle accidents because
they weren't seen on the road,
so I'm really grateful for this
bill and I'm glad.
that you brought it forward and
so at that point I'd like to
yield to Senator share.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair. I
too want to be considered a
law-abiding citizen since I've
always done this my entire life,
so I moved to pass.
We have a due pass from Senator
Scher.
got people fighting for a
second, so let's, uh, let's see.
Who hasn't had a second recorded
yet. Senator Bergmans. Let's go
ahead and put Bergmans on there.
Want to have everybody fair
access. So if you will.
Senator Figueroa, Senator
Jaramillo, Senator O'Malley,
Senator Paul, Senator Ramos,
Senator Sanchez.
As
Senator Shar.
Senator Wirth, Senator Bergman's
Senator Hamblin. Yes. We have 10
yeses. You have a unanimous
pass. Congratulations, you're on
to your next committee with
this.
Thank you for coming in.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you.
All right, we have um Senate
Bill 36, which is the sensitive
personal information. Um, just a
reminder, we have a lot of
people who have come up, uh, to
see this and to testify for this
bill, um, we do have Spanish
translation that is provided, so
I do ask that you speak slowly
and clearly into the handheld
mic when you are speaking, um,
and there will be translation
from Spanish to English, um,
when the two minute testimony is
done. So what will happen is,
uh, our public will testify and
then
the interpreter. Am I right on
that? The interpreter will then
go ahead and translate that
testimony up here, um, on the,
on the podium here. So, um, I
was like
she'll translate from back
there. She had the microphone
back there. We'll give her the
microphone back there. Does that
work for you? Well, because
they're gonna be they're gonna
be speaking up here.
Or
I can go out there right now.
I
OK, I see. OK, we'll, we'll work
it out just to make sure we want
everybody's voices to be heard.
All right.
Senator Sadil Lopez, um,
We do have an amendment on that.
Do you want to, is this an
amendment that you're aware of
yet or no? Um, I was gonna
introduce the amendment at the
end of my little uh
introduction. That's OK. All
right, when we go ahead and do
that and then we'll, we'll move
on the amendment.
I
Thank you, Madam Chair.
This bill does two things. It
amends the governmental Conduct
Act to create a uniform policy
of how state employees must
handle our personal and
sensitive information. The
legislature appro approved this
first piece of the bill in 2021.
It was pocket vetoed.
Um, but we've since worked with
the governor's staff to address
those concerns and the
conversations continue, but I
believe that we've addressed,
um, the, the issue.
The second part of the bill
amends the motor Vehicle Code to
add safeguards when it comes to
information with the MVD
database and enforcing federal
immigration law.
The reason this second part
become become necessary is
because after we got the first
bill through, um, of course, I
was still interested in the
issue, and we learned.
That
The motor vehicle department MVD
was selling our information.
Um, our personal information.
And that concerned me.
This new section of the bill, as
I said, amends the motor vehicle
code.
It prevents the use of
information from the MVD
database to be used for civil
federal immigration enforcement,
whether it's by local law
enforcement or third party data
brokers.
Private data brokers would have
to certify when they bought the
information from the state that
they will not not sell driver's
information for immigration and
enforcement purposes in order to
access MBD's records.
I am proposing these amendments
because when New Mexicans,
immigrants and non-immigrant
alike share their personal
information with agencies.
We have all of us have a
reasonable expectation of
privacy that our own information
not be used against us.
We never expect our information
to be shared with outside
entities for profit or
otherwise.
If this continues to be the
case, vulnerable New Mexicans
will stop interacting with the
state agencies and immigrant New
Mexicans will stop getting their
state driver's license.
Because we know our information
is being shared with ICE.
If we continue to be complicit
in this way, it will hurt public
safety.
We will have fewer people
showing that they are insured
when they get their their
driver's license. It will hurt
our education system. It will
hurt our health care system and
it will hurt our economy. Thank
you, Madam Chair, and with that,
I would like us to move our
amendment, which um was
requested by MVD. We've been
working with MVD on this bill.
And um they asked for this
amendment and we agreed. Can you
explain the amendment, please?
The amendment
On line 3.
Um
I'm sorry, on page 3.
You strike lines 1 into and
insert in lieu thereof he made
to or by a court or
administrative tribunal in the
course of a judicial or
administrative proceeding, or
made in a court or
administrative tribunal record.
All right, and this is a
friendly amendment that you've
been approached by the MBD to
include in this bill.
I'll move the amended amendment
for discussion. We have the
amendment moved for discussion.
We have a motion. Do we have a
second?
2nd from Senator Figueroa on the
right.
No, we don't.
Is there any opposition to this
amendment? No. All right, then
we will.
Move on that. All right, at this
point, um, we are, is there any
other, did you want to have your
experts have any comments before
we go to the public? My experts
would prefer to be here
available to me to help me. They
have been working on this for
quite some time, and I don't
know anybody who knows more
about this topic, then these two
women right here, um, Gabriela,
um, Guzman, and Marcela Diaz.
OK.
Thank you very much.
Alright, at this point, um,
let's go to the public.
So by a show of hands,
How many are here in support of
this legislation.
Keep your hands up, please.
A lot.
Yeah.
OK.
We've got a good chunk. That's
going to be the official. It's
OK, we just got. How many, how
many in the room are in
opposition of this bill by a
show of hands.
seen none.
All right, we have one person
online who is in support.
All right. So what we're gonna
do is we're going to give 8
people a chance to testify.
Given the overwhelming support
in this room, so if we can have
8 people come up and speak.
And if we may 1 minute apiece,
please.
So, a reminder, one minute
apiece.
You will get a thirty-second
Warning to wrap it up.
Yes
Thank you very much. Go ahead.
Madam Chair, my name is Shanaa
Triana, and I work for the New
Mexico Center on Law and
Poverty. We thank the sponsor
for this bill and the groups
supporting this legislation. We
stand in support because
everyone should be able to
safely utilize state programs
and access state agencies
without compromising their
privacy and the safety of their
personal information.
This law will help safeguard New
Mexicans information from
disclosure that is not
authorized by law and that could
not otherwise occur without
their consent.
This is especially important for
third parties and entities that
have contracts with state
agencies to ensure that they do
not share private and sensitive
information.
This ensures families feel safe
accessing government services
when they need them.
While protecting families from
privacy breaches, this fosters a
safer, more secure environment
for all. For these reasons, we
stand in support of this bill.
Chair members of the committee,
thank you. My name is Lena
Weber, policy director with the
ACLU of New Mexico. We're here
in strong support of SB 36. This
bill helps clarify agency
responsibilities and protects
privacy while ensuring
compliance with existing legal
frameworks. We wanted to call
attention that concerns about
federal preemption should not be
a barrier. Courts have
recognized that states have the
authority to regulate how their
own agencies handle personal
data, as long as they do not
interfere with federal
operations. In 2022.
the 7th Circuit upheld a state
law limiting local participation
in immigration enforcement,
reinforcing that states can set
their own policies on data
disclosure, similarly in 2018,
the US Supreme Court reaffirmed
that the federal government
cannot compel states to enforce
federal priorities. SB 36 aligns
with these principles by
ensuring that state employees
have guidance on data privacy
obligations, helping to maintain
public trust and compliance with
existing legal standards. Thank
you so much. We appreciate that.
Thank you so much. And if I
can't remind, we are having
simultaneous translation. Um, I
would ask our translator when
somebody testifies in Spanish.
If you will be able to come up.
So for us, you know, with us.
Grade
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, my name is Marshall
Martinez. I'm the executive
director of Equality New Mexico.
We are a statewide LGBTQ
advocacy organization.
The reality of today's world is
that between private entities
and government data and
information about each and every
one of us is collected, used,
and traded at all times.
Information that is critical to
our well-being and to our lives.
LGBTQ people and all people
deserve to know at the very
least that when state agencies
are collecting our data, they
will protect and safeguard it,
and that there will be a
consistency of process for when,
where and how it is shared.
Queer and trans people are
afraid every single day, often
living in closets because of
this fear. We deserve to know
that our government will at
least have our backs by
protecting private information
about us at all times. Thank
you.
When I start this hombres
Alejandra Villa.
Um,
buses presidenta committees
Alejandra villas in Mexicana
derecho tengoire de
de comunidad invite tranquila.
progresses organization the
direct immigrants.
The civil travajadores.
My
Mesillas.
On the MBD Pamelamitravajo.
Pores.
But saying for my
personal and ninguna academos
ste.
It
it nosaria tranquiliadis
Guiliamos a portando estadole
coloia
los Emos satiable tenga
confidential
gracias. Thank you.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Alejandra Villa. I am
Mexican and I am a member of El
Centro de Guala derechos. I have
been living in this country for
30 years. I have a daughter and
3 grandchildren. I am proud of
my family and being part of this
community who fight for the
well-being of its people and for
peace and progress. I E Centro
is an organization of immigrant
rights, civil rights, and
justice for workers located in
Albuquerque with more than 5500
members. Today I want to share
with you that I felt the need
to.
maintain my driver's license,
uh, so I had to go to the MBD so
that I could, I could feel safe
when I drove my daughter to
school and to be able to go to
work. That's why today we are
asking that our information is
not that our personal
information is not passed on to
any agency. We want the law to
protect us, that would give us
peace and it would allow us to
continue contributing
economically to the state, like
we have been doing through many
generations.
Uh, New Mexicans have the
reasonable expectation that our
that our information will be
maintained confidential.
Thank you, Denise. Uh, I'm
wondering if it might be easier
for you to try to simultaneously
translate. What's, what's the
easiest for you? Is it to go
ahead and
OK, then let's go ahead and
continue. Thank you very much.
I
when I start this er estim
president brotherlito Maria de
Jesus Gallardomiro delcentro.
Yeah, yeah.
OK,
so miro del Centro, so Santa Fe.
Or Tanter is a nego senor
Richardson.
The.
The
siloso cuenta.
Imagine momentos migrante.
See
masos is masses cortito
porquelospiomigra.
Gracias. Good afternoon. It is
esteemed Madame President and
members of the committee. My
name is Maddy Chuy. I'm a member
of El Centro de Gualal derechos.
I am a business owner here in
Santa Fe, and I contribute with
employees or employee positions.
I have a business because I was
able to get a license, uh,
thanks to Mr. Richardson, uh,
that made me feel more sure
about myself. I'm able to drive
around with my family and I, I
feel safe in all senses.
When I, however, when I found
out that my information was
being shared, um, I realized
that it made all my community
vulnerable, especially with this
new man that we have in power.
This has made the situation much
worse. That's why I'm asking for
my community, um, for you to
help my community to, right now
we are more more vulnerable than
we have ever been, and we are
afraid. Thank you.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Jessica Inez Martinez
and I'm the director of policy
and coalition building and then
immigration attorney at New
Mexico Immigrant Law Center as
one of New Mexico's only
organizations providing legal
services to immigrant
communities, we want to stand
and support of SB 36.
The immigration statuses of
immigrants in New Mexico. Many,
many of whom have lived here for
decades and have citizen
children should remain
confidential. Many families
qualify for forms of relief that
lead to legal status and may be
at risk of separation before
getting these legal services
they need if the data gets into
the wrong hands. New Mexico has
a long tradition of welcoming
immigrants, and we know they are
essential to our communities,
neighborhoods, and economies and
knowing their immigration status
could be shared with
ices could further instill fear
in our communities, which makes
all of us unsafe and puts
families at risk of separation.
We support safeguards to protect
sensitive information, including
immigration status from being
sold and disclosed to ICE. Thank
you for your time.
When I started this er
presidente committee
solos viviendo and Santa Fe. No
Mexicovate.
Then go those niasmi cargo
iso is unique
me deporting.
Coroados.
Uh, tengo licencia de
quero portarra laidad public
estancio proteos
so part ciento immigrante Santa
Fe
Uh, tengo licencia de quero
portarra laidad public estancio
proteos
so part ciento immigrante Santa
Fei.
Good afternoon, Madame Chair and
committee members. My name is
Gretel Barrita. I work as a chef
at a restaurant. I started as a
cook, but I worked hard and have
worked my way up. I have two
girls in my care and I am their
sole caregiver. Right now I am
very worried that they are going
to be left without care because
I may be deported or detained. I
am in danger because my
information, which I have shared
with the state, is not being
protected. I have a driver's
license. I want to contribute to
to public safety, but I need to
know that my data is being
protected.
ed I am part of the 11% of
immigrants that make up the
workforce in Santa Fe. I want to
continue contributing to my
state's economy. I am worried
about leaving my two girls
without care, so I am asking you
to please vote yes on SB 36.
When I started
Manuel
Lunaro pueblovio in San Juan.
the tepequeno pote.
Amity and a video of
personalista persona incuo una
travajadoraguna.
Estamos
Estamos mosa.
Canno proteri
and
MBD compar allies port.
Yeah.
era del Condado
norta familia serrata.
pole.
The
priva guarantees.
Good afternoon, Madam President
and committee members. My name
is Manuel Luna. I am a member of
Somosum Pueblo Nido, and I've
been living in San Juan County
for 10 years. Our county was
really affected in the past by
rates and other abuses by ICE
agents, such as waiting outside
the courthouse, not giving you
an interpreter or translator and
to make you sign paperwork that
you did not know if it would be
damaging for you. And we are now
in the same situation. Last week
we had an ICE agent come to the
Aztec.
MVD he asking for our personal
data for a list of people in a,
in some documents that he had
and the worker gave them to him
without any restrictions. We
understand the need for giving
our personal information to MBD
to obtain a driver's license and
contribute to public security,
but we need a law that will
protect our personal
information. I, I feel very much
afraid that NBD will share my
personal information with ICE
and that I could be deported
because my, um, because
My wife is sick, she only has
vision in one eye, and I'm the
only person who lives with her
and who takes her to her medical
appointments within and outside
of the county. Our family would
be seriously affected if I were
to be deported. I ask that you
please vote yes for SB 36, since
this is a privacy law that will
guarantee that our information
will not be sold or shared.
Thank you and may God bless you.
Thank you so much. For those of
us who are lingually challenged,
let's please give it up for
Denise. Thank you.
Mhm
OK. All right. Um, at this
point, you can either respond to
the public testimony or let it
go ahead and go to committee. I
think the testimony stood for
itself. I'm ready to go to. OK,
my apologies though, I do have
Felix Rodriguez who is online
and I wanted to make sure since
they've been waiting, so that's
our last bit of testimony.
Felix, go ahead and unmute
yourself, please.
Yes, ma'am. Um, I appreciate it.
I actually have um Rosie Olivas
here. She will be speaking in
Spanish, um, so if Denise can go
back up there again, I
apologize.
OK, hold on just a second.
Yes, ma'am.
You go.
So fancy. All right, I think
we're ready.
Let's check it out.
Uh,
Mona Tartes
afternoon,
Madam Chair and committee. My
name is Rosi Olivas and I've
been living in Artesia, New
Mexico for 15 years. I am a
member of Somos and Pueblo
Unido. I am a wife and mother of
oil and gas workers. It's a
high-risk job and I never know
if my husband or son will return
home safely. We as oil families
make up 35
of the state budget.
Comore as a resident of this
state, I am proud to contribute
to our economy and security.
Is that most We are willing to
work with the state
and we see the importance of
sharing our data with state
agencies.
Lespe We ask that you help us
protect our data
from ICE agents. Right now,
there are not many protections
for selling our data, so many
workers are vulnerable
to deportation and detention
Immigrant workers make up 13% of
the state workforce. In a state
where there are not enough
workers.
I
you to vote yes on SB 36 so that
we can continue working for the
state and contributing to our
economy. Thank you very much.
Thank you so much and thanks for
the, the technology tip. I
appreciate that greatly. Um, at
this time, I'm going to the
committee and I have Senator
Jaramillo.
Starting off first.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Senator for bringing this
bill forward. Imi Muchisimas
gracias todos caviar.
so
thank you to every single one of
you who came to meet with us
this evening, um, there's just
one comment I want to make, and
it's no one should have to think
twice before accessing health,
uh, public safety, or other
government services such as
applying for a driver's license.
And I think every one of us on
this committee and everyone in
New Mexico should be concerned
that our information was being
sold.
And so that's quite concerning
to me, shouldn't just be a
concern of the immigrant
community, but a concern for
every New Mexican. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you, Senator
Jaramillo. Senator Sheriff.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I think
first.
Who is selling the information
and to whom?
Um.
Thank you, Madam Chair, for that
question. MVD is selling the
information and I would like to
defer to my expert on, on to
whom?
Thank you, Madam Chair, um, to
answer your question, Senator,
uh, MVD TRD has a contract with
a third party named New Mexico
Interactive.
New Mexico Interactive's parent
company is also owned by Tyler
Technologies, who is the
database for all of our court
filings here in New Mexico as
well. So there's some
familiarity and so that.
Uh, third party in Mexico
Interactive has a contract, and
they're the ones who have.
Hundreds of contracts with
some of that, um,
I can creates convenience for
New Mexicans when we go and buy
a car at the dealership, they're
able to quickly determine our
credit value worthiness, for
example, but they also have a
contract with um.
other data brokers including
Lexis Nexus, Thomson Reuters,
Experian.
etc.
Who have contracts with ICE.
So I'm
I'm trying to wrap my mind
around this. I am familiar with
credit reports and what's on
credit reports and how things
get on credit reports.
How things get off credit
reports.
But the things that are on a
credit report are.
Your name and address, your
social security number.
But then did you borrow money or
not? And did you repay it or
not?
Nothing else matters. Does color
your skin, immigration, sex,
none, none of that's on a credit
report.
report doesn't care about any of
that. Did you borrow money or
not? Did you pay it back or not?
But I'm also familiar with
LexisNexis.
But I don't think that I have
never seen the LexisNexis that
said, this person is an
immigrant, or this person is
gay, or this person is even a
female. What it gives you is
Name and address
uh, so you know whether they
live in New Mexico or live in
California.
Um
I'm just trying to
Figure out how, I mean, I, I
agree.
Um
That our our data ought to be.
A little bit more, but this
right here, every app on
everybody's phone.
Every ha on your computer is
tracking you.
It knows exact
I'm afraid to talk to my, I'm
afraid to talk around my phone.
You don't want people to know
that you need a one.
I know there are times when,
when, you know, uh, we'll talk
about a bicycle, and all of a
sudden I get bicycle ads for
months afterwards.
They don't need our data. We're
good and every time you say I
agree to the terms and
conditions which are written in
micro fonts that you can't read
anyway, and there's pages of it,
that's what it is. You've agreed
for them to take everything
about you that they can find.
And on your phone, it's
everything about you.
There are things on my phone. My
phone knows more about me than I
know about me.
And so all of the concerns are
already out there.
If ICE wants to know something
about Scher, I can know
something about Cher and doesn't
have to come from MVD.
That bothered that by the way,
bothers me a lot more than MVD.
So
So I, I give it. I, I don't want
a lot of my stuff out there, but
it is.
And in fact, the state of New
Mexico regulation and licensing,
I think 5 years ago, 6 years
ago, they were hacked.
And everybody that is licensed
by regulation and licensing, all
of that data was stolen and sold
out there in the dark web.
So my name, my address.
My Social Security number, my
birthday.
Everything that the state of New
Mexico knew about me is now out
there in a dark web because the
state of New Mexico got hacked.
There's so many ways that that
this stuff goes out here, which
leads us to what I think this is
really about, this is about
Trump proofing the state.
But that concerns me
considerably, not because of the
folks in this room.
But
New Mexico is now the most
violent state in the union, and
Albuquerque is one of the most
dangerous cities in the world.
It's not those folks, it's the
cartels.
The cartels have turned
Albuquerque into a war zone, a
place that's worse than some of
the worst cities in the world.
And I do want Trump to go in
there and get the cartels.
If we're talking about public
safety, it's not driver's
licenses.
It's cartels that are causing
the public safety problem.
And so how do we deal with that?
How do we say yes, go get the
violent murderers off our
street, but leave my business
alone.
is there a solution to that?
Madam Chair, um, I would like
to, um, defer to my expert on
that. I except to say, I agree,
there has to be a balance
between trans about since we
should as a legislature, try to
deal with privacy issues. And
this is a small attempt, but for
your specific question, I'd like
to defer to my expert.
Madam Chair, Senator, members of
the committee, this.
Particular bill, uh, isn't meant
to catch all of that, uh, and to
completely turn off the spigot.
In fact, it's very narrow,
especially the MVD portion. And
what it is intending to do is to
narrow the spigot, narrow the
information that would get into
IC's hands solely for the
purposes of enforcing
non-criminal immigration laws or
the civil immigration law. And
so that is what this is
intending to do. It is narrowing
of it. It is
important also to uh recognize
that, uh, we are not as uh MBD
customers given even the small
print
to opt out of this data sharing.
And on the, in fact, when we go
in, uh, follow the rules so that
we can be licensed, registered,
insured. We are going in and
providing a lot of information
that in an unfettered way does
get into ISIS hands through the,
um,
To the data brokers that we sell
the information to and then
resells the information to their
through their multi-million
dollar contracts with ICE. There
is nothing in those contracts
that ensures that I will not use
it for civil immigration
enforcement to pick up people.
That you just heard testify.
And so the intent here is not to
in any way hamstring the ability
of law enforcement or federal
law enforcement agencies in
going after the folks that you
just mentioned.
But
But Madam Chair, I don't see
that. It says that you can't,
you can't share information. It
says you can't share information
with federal.
Uh, a federal, state, local,
federal.
That means anything. It means
the FBI, that means.
I don't know.
The health department.
It's federal. It doesn't say
ice, it says federal.
Let me go here page 6.
Um, find the word again, so.
Uh, line 16. OK, let me just
start on line 14. It's unlawful
for a department or bureau
employee or contractor or a
former department or bureau and
contractor to disclose to a
federal, state, or local
governmental agency.
Or non-government, OK, so you
can't disclose to a federal.
State or local governmental
agency, so you can't even tell
the state police. You can't even
tell the local.
Sheriff
Anything, anything.
Madam Chair,
um, that is, is not the intent
of the bill. The reason it's, it
talks, it's for the purpose.
That's what you need to focus on
for the purpose of immigration
enforcement. So any other
purpose, it can be used.
For all
Um, all issues regarding
criminal, uh, you know, like
when you're talking about the
cartels being so dangerous.
Law enforcement would not be
using this data to um for
federal immigration purpose
would be using it to for uh what
do you call it, investigatory
purposes for violations of
criminal law.
That is how this bill is, is
intended, and how we tried to
get it written, um,
And so that, that is definitely
not the intent of the bill.
Well, Madam Chair and Senator,
I, I believe you. That's not the
intent of the bill.
But every once in a while I have
to channel Senator Cervantes,
and it hurts when that happens.
It is not the intent that
matters, it's the words on the
page that matter.
And um,
Anyway, so I just look at the,
the things that you're not
allowed to share and, and
frankly,
OK
Um
But I think that it
It, it, it gets a.
If this bill said yes, go take
out the cartels and leave
everybody else alone.
I think I could support that.
But it doesn't.
It says, protect the cartels.
From the federal government.
And everybody else.
So it's protect everybody and
the cartels.
And I wanted to protect
everybody except the cartels,
and I don't know how to write
that.
But that's what that's what I
see is now we've really
seriously ensured that
Albuquerque stays one of the
most dangerous cities in the
world.
Madam Chair, that definitely was
not the intent. We worked very,
very hard to try to write it so
that it would be clear that the
only purpose that would be
excluded from the use of this
data is for the enforcement of
civil immigration laws.
So, cartels will be deported.
You know
In the court, in due course.
But certainly this data could be
used by law enforcement for
non-immigration purposes. And
that's why it's written this
way. Um,
It has to go to the judiciary,
so it may be that um uh the
people on Judiciary will figure
out a better way to write that,
to make that clear, but this is
the best we could do. Um, and we
have talked to agency after
agency, we've talked to DPS,
we've, we've worked hard, um, on
this bill to try to make that
clear because we understand that
point. And so we, um, it doesn't
say.
Any federal agency for any
reason, it says any federal, you
know, the agencies for the
purpose of immigration
enforcement.
Madam chaired the
The cartels
Certainly the cartel leaders,
this is a big business, cartels
are big business.
Cartel budget, it's operating in
in New Mexico is about $10
billion a month. Ours is $10
billion a year. They're big
business.
And without the federal
government, there's not our
state police can't do anything
about it. Certainly the
Albuquerque Police Department
can. In fact, the Albuquerque
Police Department backs off.
They don't want to be anywhere
near it. They're outguned,
they're outmanned, they're out
everything.
And I don't blame him, and
people complain about the
Albuquerque police, but damn,
what?
They're not
Oh
And that's, that is really my
whole hang up here because this.
This protects the cartel members
too, because.
Most of them
Or here it is.
As immigrants
Can I say I'm gonna illegal
immigrants. That's what most of
them are.
Most of them
are here because they want to
live in a better world.
That's why they're here.
I'm not opposed to that.
I am opposed to the people that
have.
$10 billion a month income.
Versus the state with a $10
billion a year income, and they,
they have far more capability in
everything.
In fact, I was, I, I was at a
briefing where the best drug
dogs in the world are purchased
by the cartels, and they use
those drug dogs to sniff their
own stuff before it comes in if
one of their dogs hits it, then
they retry.
If their dogs don't hit it.
Border patrol dogs aren't,
because they're not the best
dogs in the world, they're not
the best trained, they're not
the best funded on.
I, when I, when I saw these
numbers.
It just absolutely boggled my
mind, absolutely boggled my
mind.
When I see on TV.
The Chinese soldier, a Chinese
guy.
Standing there talking about
he's coming here for a better
life.
And he looks like an infantry
battalion commander with 1000
men standing behind him.
I know what an infantry company
battalion commander looks like.
I know what 1000 infantrymen
look like, and that's what I saw
on TV, and that scared the hell
out of me.
I was a soul. I do not want to
fight.
The Chinese army.
I am an airborne ranger. I'm
trained to fight a Chinese army.
I do not want to fight a Chinese
army because that was a long
time ago.
That I jumped out of airplanes.
With armor.
If I am forced to fight a
Chinese army again, I'm gonna,
I'm gonna be so pissed.
At us
It scares me.
How do we protect
The people that
They are here because they no
longer want to live in a nasty
place.
Versus the cartels and that, and
I don't see that. I don't see
that at all.
That scares me, the cartels are
bad. The Chinese are worse.
Sorry
So that clarification, Senator
Sanchez and Senator Ramos. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Senator.
I know I've talked with you on
this bill and I, I appreciate
you bringing it, and it's just
You know, something's got to be
done. I think everybody on this
committee and everybody in this
room.
Um
So talking about MVD, so.
MVD, our state agency is selling
our information.
How much is MVD profiting off
our information.
Madam chair, $7 million a year.
Madam Cha center, so MVD makes
$7 million a year off our
information.
Wow
Madam Cha center, where does
that go? What to their fund, the
general fund. It goes back into
the MVD budget.
Madam Chair, Senator, thank you
for that.
Do they
Madam Chair, Senator.
After they sell that to this
other these the third party that
collects and pays for it.
Are they selling it to these
State police, ice.
Or how, how does it work? Or
just real quick, you don't have
to go into whole depth amount
chair center just real quick,
how does that happen?
Well, I'll be real quick and say
yes, but I'll, I'll defer to my
expert because she's worked out
the details.
Madam Chair and uh Senator
Sanchez, thank you for that
question, members of the
committee.
I'm sorry.
Yeah, very low.
Uh,
yes, so.
The there are other states that
given sell information directly
because they have bigger
budgets, because they have more
capacity than the MVD here in
New Mexico. Here, the MVD
information is sold to a private
company, New Mexico Interactive,
part of Taylor Tyler
Technologies that then
did I say that.
The packages the information and
provides that information to
state agencies to in a way that
they can
access it through their portals
and also to private data
companies. And so it, they are
selling the information to New
Mexico Interactive. Um,
If they didn't sell the
information to New Mexico
Interactive to repackage that
information for both, for many.
Situations, good reasons, uh,
then they would have to
distribute that information
directly. So it is a third party
through which they give that
information. Now, that third
party, uh, which is New Mexico
Interactive, then redistributes
it and has contracts with public
entities as well as private
entities. And it's through the
private entities that they
really are, um, selling and then
reselling and then reselling the
information.
Selling it multiple times.
Uh yes, Senator Sanchez, that is
correct. And that funding goes,
that money goes directly to New
Mexico Interactive, which is a
for-profit company, not MVD and
not the state.
Madam Chair, thank you,
madam.
Thank you, Senator Ramos.
Sorry, FBI gets them their
they're captured.
And they fight by hiring an
attorney and says, well,
according to New Mexico's law,
they cannot use DMV records and
that's what they used to get me.
Can they utilize that to be
free? Can they utilize that in
their case?
Madam Chair, no, they could,
they could, um, Senator, Senator
Ramos, um, no, they could not
utilize that in their case, um,
in any way, shape or form,
because what we're trying to do
is prevent the data in the first
place from being used by
For that reason. So if the FBI
start, let's just say
like.
Oops. A cartel member, um, and
they, they stopped them. They
should have had, of course,
probable cause for the stop, and
then they have databases.
That they can look at. Now, one
of the things that they would
find in the database is, this is
a cartel member, this is the
evidence we have, um, they might
find out that this is a a person
who's undocumented.
But the information wasn't
gathered for the purpose of
deportation or detention.
And that's what we're trying to
Stop
We want to stop that spigot.
And, and that's all we can do
with this is stop that spigot.
So, Madam Chair, so they can go
ahead and purchase or utilize
this information.
For anything but immigration, so
if it's because we're searching
for someone because they.
We think we know they raped a
child back in 2021.
Um, it's OK to utilize this
information whether it be
whether it be a local police,
state police, FBI, ICE agent, it
doesn't matter. They can still
utilize it to capture criminals.
Madam Chair, that's why we wrote
it that way.
Thank you very much, ma'am.
Thank you, Senator O'Malley.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I move
it to pass.
We have a new past, we have a
second.
Second from Senator Berkins.
If you will, please.
Take a look.
Senator Figueroa.
Senator had a meal.
Yes. Senator O'Malley. Yes,
Senator Paul.
Senator Ramos.
Senator Sanchez. Yes.
Senator Shar.
OK.
Senator Wirth.
Yes.
From the other gringo.
Senator Bergman, yes, Senator
Hamblin. Yes.
have 8 yeses knows,
uh,
you have a good luck in your
next committee and Senator
Sheriff for the remainder of the
session, I'm gonna run by your
phone every time and say adult
onesie, and we're gonna see if
that ad comes up. That is my
goal and I want to see it if it,
if it does, I will buy it for
you
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you members of the committee. I
know I'm buzzing right now.
Thank you, thank you for
everybody who came.
We're finishing off with Senator
Pope.
OK.
Well, we have, so two of, so one
of Senator Pope's bills, the,
the Senate Bill 76, they changed
back to school GRT weekend that
is a bill that will be held, so
we will hear it. We can
certainly talk about it, but
that is not a bill that we will
vote on that will be considered
for a tax package should we have
that capacity. So Senator Pope,
you have your choice if you
wanna get that one out of the
way and then we'll go to the
right to repair is your last
bill. It's entirely up to you.
That'll work,
I'm sure that'll work 76. Thank
you.
OK, that sounds fine.
Right, Madam Chair, uh,
committee members, uh, Senate
Bill 76 is really just an
adjustment on the tax-free
school holiday that weekend and
so what this what this bill
would do is it would move it to
the last weekend of July instead
of the first weekend of August,
and that's because school is
starting earlier, just so
families can benefit from that.
There's also increases on the
tax exemption, clothing and
footwear would be increased from
$100 to $150 per item. Computers
are increased from 1000 to
$1500 per device, accessories
like keyboards, printers, and
monitors would move up from 500
to 70 $750
everything else maintains the
same as far as the exempted
items and you still cannot
purchase office equipment,
furniture, sporting goods, and
other types of electronics,
radios and telephones would
still not qualify for this, uh,
with that, Madam Chair, um,
that's all I have in the
presentation. I'm ready for
public comment or questions from
the committee. All right. Thank
you.
So with the huge crowd that is
still left in this room.
Is there anybody here in support
of this, this bill?
Anybody here in opposition?
Anybody online.
Yeah, 11 person in favor or
opposition.
All right. Let's go ahead and
have them speak. If the
The person who is online, if you
don't mind unmuting yourself and
speaking, we're gonna give you 2
minutes if you need it. One is
even better.
You can go ahead and start
speaking. Please say your name.
They're for the uh.
Oh, for the different bill. OK,
so the right to repair. All
right, so we'll hold on to that,
uh, committee, any, um, remember
we're not voting on this bill.
It's just for discussion, um,
because it can be considered for
a tax package.
See no discussion.
I think we're good on that one.
So we will move that one, we
will hold that bill uh for
consideration for a tax package.
So thank you very much. That was
uh, that was quick and dirty, so
we appreciate that.
Now we're gonna move on to
Senate Bill 69.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and uh I
might have an expert online, uh,
a Gay Gordon Burns,
um, if you elevate and I don't
need her.
Um, actually, I'll have her
available as uh as well. I'm
gonna get and start off and give
her an opportunity to say a few
words and then be able to answer
some questions if that's OK.
Uh, Senate Bill 69 is a right to
right to repair consumer
electronics Act. Um, we've all
experienced this issues of
trying to fix some of our
consumer electronics, whether it
be a phone.
Maybe some type of tablet.
And uh what this bill does is it
mandates manufacturers to
provide necessary tools,
documentation, and parts to
consumers and independent repair
providers for a fair a fair and
reasonable terms.
Uh, the obligations of the
manufacturers, they must provide
repair documentation tools and
parts to independent repair
providers and consumers, and in
some cases, this is already
happening to their uh their
independent, uh, uh, repair
shops. Um, they're prohibited
from using parts pairing to
restrict functionality or
performance of repaired uh
repaired devices.
Parts pairing, uh, to give you
an example, uh, some of the
parts are just only for use with
that cell phone or that
electronic item. So for example,
you could have a phone.
That has a battery to it.
If you replace that battery,
there's sometimes software with
that battery that now your phone
does not work anymore. So that
would be an example of a parts
pairing that only that part will
be able to function with that
electronic piece of equipment.
Um, consumer electronics that
are covered, uh, this applies to
personal electronic devices that
are sold and used in New Mexico.
It, but it excludes medical
devices, motor vehicles, HVAC
systems, solar power equipment,
and video game consoles. Uh,
documentation should be
available for free with possible
charges for printing and
shipping.
Repair tools should be provided
without access restrictions and
parts parts must be sold at
equivalent cost to the
independent repair providers as
they are to authorize service
providers.
Uh, once again, some more
exemptions, trade sequence,
trade secrets and intellectual
property protection are
maintained, manufacturers are
not liable for damages caused by
independent repair providers,
and it does not apply to
specific industries, for
example, like I was saying some
of the exemptions, including
medical automotive, and power
equipment.
Uh, some of the enforcement.
Uh, the Attorney general can
investigate violations and with
this bill, they would impose
fines of $1000 per day.
If they're not following through
on this, um, and this.
Um
No, I'll skip that. I wrote
something else wrong, I'm sorry,
um.
This would be effective, uh, 1
July.
Um, enforcement actions would
happen in July of 2027.
Um, and once again, this bill
not only allows consumers the
ability to fix their own items.
Um, it's also environmentally
friendly in that folks continue
to use their items, fix them.
They're not ending up in
landfills so quickly. And
lastly, this is also an uh
economic development driver. Uh,
I equate it to, uh, you know,
working on your car. We don't
have, you, you own a Honda, you
don't have to go to a Honda
dealership.
Anymore, right? You can go to
certified mechanic to work on
it. Uh, this could be a way for
folks to start their businesses
to work on some of these
consumer electronics just like,
uh, folks have standalone PC
companies to work on laptops and
computers. Um, with that, Madam
Chair, I'd like to give uh my
expert Gay Gordon Byrne, uh, an
opportunity to say a few words
if you'd like.
OK, if you will, uh, go ahead
and unmute yourself, um, and uh
you have a couple of minutes to
give a testimony for uh as an
expert witness. Yeah, uh,
terrific, thank you very much,
Madam Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Gay Gordon
Byrne. I'm not usually
congested. I'm the executive
director of the digital right to
repair Coalition. Uh, we have,
we are the group that has been
behind
I'd say roughly 300 bills in
various state legisla
Nature's 49 out of 50 states,
including New Mexico, have
considered legislation, uh, 5
states have passed it and it's
already in effect in 5 states in
effect in New York, um,
California, Minnesota, Oregon,
and some parts of the same bill
are in effect in Colorado. Um,
so it's already been through the
ringer. It's been kicked around
a lot. We've had a lot of
discussions and work with
stakeholders, council, um, you
name it, it, I hope that
I hope that I can be of help if
you have any questions. But it's
really quite mainstream. If you
bought something, you own it,
you should have the opportunity
to fix it if you want. And the
whole point of this is not that
you fix it yourself. Um, it's
that you have the opportunity to
have somebody else fix it for
you and not just the, not just
the Honda dealer. You, you
should be able to go to a local
repair shop just like we all
used to do. I don't know if you
recall, I certainly do that um
there were
repair shops and camera repair
shops, and computer repair shops
and radio repair shops, um, in
every town, and they're gone
because they couldn't survive
without being able to buy basic
service materials. Uh, when
manufacturers stopped selling
them parts, um, and stopped
sharing diagnostics and stop
printing schematic diagrams and
putting manuals in the box, uh,
these businesses went under
because they couldn't, they
couldn't offer any services, so
We hope that when the businesses
are able to operate again, that
they will grow and we will see
more repair and we'll see more
small businesses in every town
that will help consumers fix
whatever it is that they want to
fix.
So happy to answer any
questions.
Thank you so much. So we're
going to go to uh public
testimony, so those in the room,
uh, anybody with a raising their
hands in support of this bill.
Our interpreter in the back.
Hey, anybody in opposition of
this bill?
one
OK, we have 3 in opposition.
Alright, and we have 2, so let's
go ahead, um, Denise, I know
that you're busy putting away
your equipment, so we'll just
register unless you want to
speak.
You're entirely welcome to do
that. In the meantime, I'm gonna
go while you're doing that, uh,
Camilla online, you are in
support and then we'll go to
those in opposition, OK? So,
Camilla, if you will ummute
yourself and go ahead and uh
you've got
2 minutes.
Great. Thank you so much, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee, Camilla, here again
with the Sierra Club's Rio
Grande chapter. Just grateful
for the introduction of the
legislation as folks know,
electronic waste is a huge
issue, and even the bill just
before this where we're giving
tax credits for kids to get the
stuff they need to take to
school. We want it to last, and
having the right to repair is
key to reducing our
environmental impact and for
those reasons, we support the
legislation.
Great. Thank you so much.
Denise, you don't have to if you
don't want to, if you.
Come on up, please.
I don't think Senator Pope could
have timed that any more
perfectly by having you here in
the room.
Uh, I have these devices that I
go ahead and say your name if
you from Albuquerque, New
Mexico. I have these devices and
they're constantly breaking. I
have called.
That I can think of at least 5
different small businesses in
Albuquerque because I do want to
work with small businesses,
every single one has told me
that I am better off.
Just going straight to the
company to fix them because they
know that I will lose my
guarantee. So I lose time, I pay
more money on shipping. I have
to wait 2 to 3 weeks. It affects
my job. I can't do my job
sometimes. I, I don't have
enough of these, and I can't
support small businesses, which
is something that's really
valuable for me.
Thank you so much.
All right, thank you. So, uh,
we've got the 3 in the room. Uh,
if you wanna go ahead and come
on up, and then, uh, we've
registered the 5 online, uh, I
would like to have David.
And Turner, um, the other three,
I think it's Renzo, if I can
read your writing correctly,
Dustin and Michael, we have
registered that you are in
opposition of the bill, um, but
just for time's sake, we're
gonna go ahead and hear from
David and Turner after we hear
from the three here in the room.
So if you will, come on up.
And we're gonna give you 2
minutes. I won't need that.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
Linda Siegel for the right to
repair Coalition, and we support
these right to repair laws, but
we do have some concerns about
that, and we have talked to
Senator Pope, and we hope we can
negotiate some changes.
No, nobody else?
All right, we're gonna go to
David and Turner online. David,
go ahead and unmute yourself and
then turn her, uh, you'll be
next. So, David, you've got 2
minutes.
Madam Chair and members of the
community of the committee.
Thank you very much for having
me here today. My name is David
McGarry. I am the research
director at the Taxpayers
Protection Alliance, a nonprofit
that educates policymakers and
the public about the effects of
regulation. A regulation rarely
comes at no cost, and the
process of policy making
inevitably requires weighing
trade-offs and balancing
competing goods. Uh, I believe
that the costs of SB 69 outweigh
its benefits, and I therefore
urge you to oppose it.
Despite the facial appeal of
right to repair laws, they very
often force open devices to
unsafe technologies and endanger
consumers, and those dangers, I
would emphasize, are
particularly problematic for
women.
Almost all widely marketed
digital devices and operating
systems come with guard rails
that promote security by
limiting user choice. It's a
balancing act. It weighs
flexibility against security,
but consumers consistently
signaled their desire to trade a
significant amount of the former
for the latter.
It's true that in the case of
repairs, many consumers have
asked for more options, and
accordingly, as has been noted
just a couple minutes ago,
recent years have seen a
proliferation of authorized
repair shops, showing that the
market is responsive to device
users' desires. The market has
weighed the trade-offs and is
now arriving at a proper
balance, blowing apart the
entire system of manufacturer
provided protections with a bill
such as SB 69 would not
vindicate consumer choice, but
overrun it.
Manufacturers too have a good
reason to oppose right to
repair, as it can compromise the
workings of their technology and
thereby their brand name. Thank
you again for offering the
opportunity to testify, and I
would welcome conversations with
your offices to provide further
information.
Thank you so much. Turner,
you're next. You have 2 minutes,
sir.
Hello, thank you, chair and
members of the committee for the
opportunity to testify. My name
is Turner Lozell, a technology
policy analyst at the James
Madison Institute. While they
commend the committee's
dedication to repair
accessibility for the written
right to repair legislation
could have serious unintended
consequences on consumer safety
and device security in New
Mexico. The bill's current
language would compromise three
critical protections. First, is
it parts pairing serves as a
vital defense against
counterfeit components. We have
documented cases where
counterfeit batteries have
caused fires and catastrophic.
failures by restricting parts
pairing this legislation could
expose consumers to these
dangerous counterfeits. Second,
the bill's provisions regarding
biometric sensors create
substantial security
vulnerabilities. These sensors
safeguard access to sensitive
personal and financial
information, forcing
manufacturers to accept
non-original biometric
components would undermine the
trusted authentication framework
that consumers and businesses
rely on daily. Third, is this
regulation is unnecessarily
given that the market's
effective response to repair
accessibility.
concerns, as David mentioned.
Major manufacturers have already
launched comprehensive
self-repair initiatives that
provide direct access to
official repair documentation,
genuine parts at competitive
prices, specialized tools
previously available to only to
authorize technicians and online
technical support. Furthermore,
New Mexico residents already
benefit from an extensive
network of manufacturer
authorized repair providers.
These facilities employ
certified technicians who have
the expertise, tools, and
genuine parts needed to ensure
safe, high quality.
s The current market-driven
approach successfully balances
consumer choice with essential
safety protections rather than
impose regulations that could
disrupt this ecosystem, I urge
the committee to allow these
market solutions to continue
expanding access to safe,
affordable repairs. Thank you
for your consideration, and I
welcome any questions from the
committee.
Thank you so much.
I go to the commun the committee
and O'Malleys your hand up for
like, OK, so Senator O'Malley.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Well, I,
I really support the idea of,
you know, because I'm of that
generation, right, that, you
know, we
I don't think there was a
Walmart when I was growing up,
um, pretty much everything got
repaired, and of course it was
sturdy, in refrigerators lasted
a long time, washing machines
last a long time. I mean, you
didn't have a lot of choice,
right? But, you know, all of a
sudden we have all these goods
and uh you know, basically just
Things don't go right. We just
start, they break and people
just throw stuff away, so, you
know, of course, that's a
concern. We have all of this
waste and, and so I get that
part.
Uh, but, so I, I guess I'm
curious as to what prompted this
bill because
And my husband is a, is
basically a gearhead, and he's
worked on cars for a long time.
He gets aftermarket parks. He
works on our cars when they need
to be fixed. Um, of course, if
we don't take it to an
authorized dealer, a lot of
times it's not guaranteed, in
other words, they will guarantee
anything. But, you know, we take
that chance and we go ahead and,
and sometimes, not always.
Sometimes he's like, I don't
understand this, we gotta take
the car in.
I guess I'm wondering about
that. And then we do have some
devices that
Quite frankly, I mean,
especially, I mean, some small
electronic devices that I, you
know, because of the kinds of
chemicals and other metals that
are in there, you know, that'd
be kind of dangerous to start
opening them up. So, uh,
Senator, if you don't mind, I
would like to kind of get a
sense of why, why.
Thank you. Sure, thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you, Senator.
I, I think we've all
experienced, um.
Issues with maybe a tablet or a
cell phone and right now, a lot
of the repair shops can really
only do your charge port or your
screen right now. And so where
this really came from was just
giving folks the option to keep
their electronic consumer
electronic longer.
And have an option to repair it.
And uh I see this type of
legislation, um, happening in
other states and actually um.
This has been discussed in CSG
as well. So, um.
It's, like I said, it's already
in 5 or 6 states right now, um,
I've seen where it's been
working. I just wanted to give
folks really this option.
Um, just like one of the
Um
The young lady who came up and
talking about her issue. Um, I
think we all kind of have a
story of, of an issue or an
electronic item that we wish we
we could get fixed, but don't
have that option. I do share
your concerns about.
Um, electronics, what's in
there, you know, any type of
You know, toxic material or rare
earth metal, things like that.
But I'd also say that this would
be the manuals, the training,
the tools that the folks now who
are working on them, um, would
have be exposed to them as well.
So I think as long as we've had
the training and the expertise
and.
It was done. I think it could be
done the right way, and if it's
not, then I would say.
Thank you Senator.
All right, Senator share and
then Senator Ramos.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair.
I, I read an article just this
morning, um,
They talked about two different
styles of the right to repair.
One of them was, and I don't
know anything about it.
Just except what I read. One of
them was the Oregon model.
Which
Manufacturers hate, and some say
they can't even deal with. The
other one was the California.
Uh, Michigan, I don't remember
and Colorado model, which
they're all OK with. I, I didn't
see anything that was.
But what this article said is
that this was the organ model.
Senator, that's correct. So if
or if everybody's on board with
the California model.
And why do we want the organ
model?
I mean, it seems to me there's
no fight with with the
California mob. I'm not gonna
fight.
But
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator, if
it's all right, I'd like to
defer my expert gig if you could
help me respond to that. Sure.
Gay online if you do, if you
need the question repeated, let
us know, but if you'll go ahead
and respond to Senator Sheer.
OK, I'm unmuted again.
Or now I am muted.
Oh, you are unmuted. We can hear
you. Oh, good, good. Um, yeah,
the California model and the
Oregon model are really very,
very similar. The only
difference is that Apple helped
write the cap, the, the
California model, so they're a
little happier, um, Oregon went
a little bit further with the
parts pairing, but they also um
wound up getting support from
Google and from Microsoft and
from a bunch of other companies.
So they're very, very similar,
um, there's no one better model
than another.
all stems from the same theory
that it's yours, you should be
able to fix it. Um, and to the
question of uh battery safety
and particularly the putting
women at risk thing, I don't
know where that came from. Um,
we've very bizarre. Anyway, um,
batteries are dangerous, and
everybody knows it and um if a
manufacturer is installing a
battery in a way that is unsafe
to repair. It's unsafe for
everybody, and there's a lot of
laws that are already coming on
board, particularly
out of the European Union that
are covering that, uh, banning
things that make battery removal
unsafe, such as gluing them in.
So it's um it's an evolving
thing, but it's really, there's,
they're just the same model with
a little bit different verbiage.
I don't know if that answers
your question, but um that's the
way I look at it.
Man, Senator.
Is that OK?
Well
Yes and no.
Uh, it seems to me again that
the
The right to repair coalition,
if that's, if I got the right.
They're all on board with
everything except the Oregon
model and so it just seems to me
that if, if we just want to ask
this.
And it's not that much
different.
I don't know what it is.
Um
Then let's adopt the California
model.
Both are unanimous. Nobody
fights about it.
And I don't know just the
California model hurt hurt
anything? That is the question.
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator, I, I
think the big difference is the,
the parts pairing, and I, I want
to be clear, I've been talking
uh to some of the
representatives here, I think
that's, that's an issue and
that's kind of a bit of
negotiation, but I also think
from a consumer standpoint.
Um
That's an added protection for
consumers on their items, so.
Um
I think right now that wouldn't
be friendly, I'd wanna.
You know, push for this model,
but I would want to continue to
have discussions on what you're
talking about sometimes we don't
get all we want, we don't get
everything we want in the bill,
right? And so I think.
Having the California model is
still a win.
OK. Um, thank you, Madam Chair,
and I never get anything I want
in a bill.
Why aren't you are presenting
the bill.
Thank you, Senator Sheriff
Senator Ramos. Madam Chair,
thank you very much, uh, Senator
Pope, thank you for bringing
this in front of us. Uh, I just
wanna, I mean, I, I reiterate
percentage um Mali just said
earlier, I mean it there's a lot
of chemicals in these there are,
there's batteries that could
blow up in your face. I've seen
some major problems with
batteries blowing up and hurting
people. Um.
Oh, heck, I, I just buy the
insurance and send it in when it
goes bad. I mean, I prefer it
that way and I, I think uh it
keeps us out of harm's way. So,
uh, I, I just wanna, is there
any statistics on any type of uh
uh
Accidents and what happens with
phones when they do open them
up.
Uh, Madam Chair and Senator, I,
I don't have any of that, and,
you know, I'll refer it to gay,
but I, I don't, I haven't seen
anything about that. I, I would
say though that.
You know, the they, we, we all
know these batteries can be
dangerous. You remember earlier
on it's on the cell phone
and I would say that danger is
not going to change when you
mail your phone off, and they're
going to be operating, but I, I
do understand your concern and I
think that goes back to locally,
right? Do we have the people
that are really trained to
handle these batteries. Um,
Madam Chair, uh, Senator, um,
Gay, I don't know if you have a
response for that.
OK,
do you, uh, have you heard,
heard the question there for
Senator Pope.
Yes, I did. I did. I'm sorry, I
was unmuted again. Um, yeah, the
Federal Trade Commission looked
into this pretty extensively
starting in 2019, um, and they
asked manufacturers for evidence
of these things, and the only
evidence that came out was a
single uh battery fire in
Australia.
In 2011. I was the only
documented instance where
somebody was actually hurt. Um,
I've seen battery fires that
have been um I've seen people
damage batteries and see them go
up, but they are not generally
the kind of flames that would be
dangerous to a human, uh, they
become dangerous when they're
in, um things like uh solid
waste facilities where they,
where they do go up when they're
crushed and set the whole thing
on fire. So there is definitely
Danger, but that's not really a
danger of repair. Um, they're
just, they're just dangerous.
Sorry to say that, but there's
not a lot of evidence um that
they are dangerous to you, um,
unless you decide to take a
hammer to it.
Another question, doctor. That's
good for you.
All right. Thank you very much.
Any other questions from the
committee?
Um, before we go to a motion, I,
I, I want to say, I mean, the
senator sponsor knows this, is
that I love repairing things. My
mama, my single mother taught me
that I should learn how to
repair things on my own, but
also be smart enough to know
when I'm above my skill level.
Um, so I won't change breakers
and electrical boxes, but I will
hook up a ceiling fan. I will
hook up my dishwasher. I will do
anything of that because I know
to shut off the breaker. I have
repaired our washer, I have
repaired our dryer.
I have, um, fixed up on my own.
The thing that is a concern for
me was the comment about
dangerous to women because as a
woman, um, I'm pretty damn smart
for stuff like that. So, uh, I
certainly appreciate it and I do
appreciate what Denise was
talking about because we are uh
trying to stifle the opportunity
for small businesses, but also
for people to save money.
Um, and I also would think that
our consumers are smart enough
to know when they uh run the
risk of avoiding those
warranties, and I think that's
something that's very clear. So,
um, you know, I think we're
empowering people to, uh, first
and foremost reuse their items
so that we don't continue to
waste new items, uh, but also
that we have people who are
entrepreneurs who might want to
go ahead and start this because
they are handy, just like I am.
So, um, I appreciate the sponsor
bringing this bill forward and
uh I think I I kind of signed on
to it, so, you know, it was like
a no brainer.
Uh, me as the, the tall lesbian
who likes to fix things. It was
kind of a no brainer.
So I appreciate that and I thank
the sponsor, and at this moment
I'd like to know what the wish
of the committee, the committee
is.
move would do pass.
do pass from Senator Figueroa.
Do we have a second? Second from
Senator Jaramillo, if you will,
please take the vote.
Senator Figueroa.
Senator had a meal. Senator
O'Malley, OK.
Senator Paul, Senator Ramos.
Senator Sanchez, excused Senator
Shar.
Senator Wirth, yes.
Senator Bergman's, yes, Senator
Hamblin.
We have 6 yeses. no, 6 to 3, you
have a due pass.
Uh
Good luck in your next committee
on a 63 vote, um, thank you.
Absolutely, thank you. Thank you
committee for being such
troopers and going through the
entire agenda today. I
appreciate it greatly. We will
meet again, um, uh, next
Tuesday, but thank you very much
and thank you for everybody
who's watching.
We are adjourned.
