We have a quorum. Thank you very
much. All right. Welcome
everybody to the tax business
and Transportation Committee,
um, for those of us watching on
the webcast, thank you so much
for tuning in. Just gonna go
over, um, just one more time
and, and then we won't do it for
the rest of the committee, just
how I like to run, uh, a
meeting, um, for those of you
who know me, I do like to run a
tight meeting. Our colleagues
here on the dais have been,
we've been communicating a lot
and I'm very grateful for the
committee members who are also
on the same page of us being
very effective, impactful, and
also have a, a vibrant
discussion.
Um, before we hear this first
bill, I would like to reiterate,
uh, that I have the utmost
confidence in this committee,
uh, that will bring very
informed and impactful
discussions to our bill debates.
We've already started that
conversation, so I'm very
excited about the next 7.5
weeks, but know who's counting.
Um, I would also like the
actions of this committee to be
efficient and informative. So I
do ask committee members to be
concise and direct with your
questions. Um, I will not
curtail committee discussion,
but if I do see us and we have a
tendency of doing this as
politicians.
of kind of going off track. I'll
just, I'll just politely bring
you back, um, you know, our
agendas are going to be filled
with important legislation,
working with the ranking member,
uh, we are dedicated to uh
hearing hopefully 10 bills a
day.
It's ambitious, but I think we
can do it and uh we've had some
great conversations about bills
that we want to go ahead and
make sure they have a hearty
debate and then those bills that
we know are ones that can move
quickly, so, um, I'm excited
about that. And so also though,
um, I do ask for uh those who
are giving public testimony, we
will have time limits if we have
a lot of people, you'll see that
as we go along. I do ask the
bill's sponsors also to please
pay attention to your experts
because we all know that experts
who are talking about certain
issues might go on and on, and
I'm not saying that you're
gonna do that. Um, but we do
want to be efficient and so
there is uh the bill sponsors
have been sent, uh, procedures
of what we'll be doing and so
there will be a 20 minute bill
presentation from the sponsor,
and then we will have public
testimony, um, and then after
that, and, uh, Vice Chair
Bergman's will be testifying uh
timing that, um, she will be,
she'll let you know, uh, and
then after public testimony,
which we will institute a time
limit on all depending on the
nature, so that's, that's always
fluctuating, but then we will
also
give the bill's sponsor an
opportunity to respond to public
testimony before we go to
committee.
And then after that, then we'll
go ahead and we'll go into the
committee discussion. So, um,
I'm really grateful for that.
Uh, I do expect that there will
be respectful, uh, dialogue from
the audience, um, but there and,
and something that uh should
there be an instance of attacks
on anyone or comments about
motives, I may ask you to leave
the committee room, and I'm just
putting that out there so that
we can go ahead and see why. Um,
so, uh, here we go. If, for
those of you, for committee
members, for those of you that
are new, if you would like to
ask a question, either make my
eye, uh, make my eye contact or
with Rebecca's the.
secretary, and we will start a
list and make sure that we, we
get that, but of course always
there's no problem if you just
kind of raise your hand. Uh,
I'll always give an opportunity
for um uh other opportunities
for conversation and and
comments, uh, if you don't jump
in right away. So, uh, we have a
couple of bills, Senator Hickey
is out today, so we are not
going to be hearing that bill
for those of you who are keeping
track and score. So we will
start with Senate Bill 9.
With Senator Souls, and then we
will move to uh Senate Bill 15
with Senator Stephanics who's
Ready to go. And then um we'll
go to Padilla and Garrett. Uh,
Woods has two of them, and then
Senator Brantly will finish this
off today. Um, also, for those
of you if you're, uh,
interested, if you're feeling a
little sniffly and want a mask,
we do have masks up here behind
the dais and the attendees will
go ahead and get that for you.
We wanna make sure, given that
we're gonna be here sharing time
with each other for the next 7.5
weeks. We want to make sure
people stick around as long as
they can. So, uh, at this
moment, then, um, Senator So,
you are our first bill.
In our committee. So thank you
very much and welcome.
Uh, thank you, Chairman. I do
have one process uh question. If
I don't use the full 20 minutes,
can I bank it for a later time
in front of your committee.
You're so clever. You're so
clever. We'll, we'll see how it
goes. Senator, thank you for
asking. Thank you. First, uh,
there is a very quick short
amendment that needs to be made
when this bill was being drafted
on page 2 at the very bottom of
page 2, where it says section
602122. There is a
Hypo in there it should just be
60122, not 602122. So we need a
very short amendment to fix that
typo. All right, can I have an
emotion, emotion for uh the
amendment for discussion. Thank
you very much. We have a motion,
so Senator So, go ahead.
Do we need, do we need the rest
of the vote? Do we need a vote?
We can discuss whether it ought
to be 6011211, but
I think it's pretty simple. I
don't know that there's any
discussion. Can I move adoption
of the amendment 0.230082.1.
So anybody opposed?
All right, Senator, thank you,
on the main bill, uh, this bill
is brought, uh, from the PRC. It
is mostly what might be
considered a cleanup bill, the
pipeline safety Act uh collects
fees when there are violations
to that, the current
Uh, limits on it need to be
changed and by aligning this
with the federal one, it
prevents us from needing to come
back every 6 years to update it,
it would automatically update
with the federal regulations
based on where the federal
regulations are now, it
effectively doubles from 100,000
per violation to 200,000 per
violation and from 1 million in
aggregate to 2 million in
aggregate based on what is there
currently. I think the FIR
indicated this would bring in on
the order of 10.
$25,000 big money in our budget
of somewhere around $11 billion
but it makes it a whole lot
easier on the PRC. I do have
with me Jason Manoya, who is the
pipeline Safety Bureau chief
deals with this every single
day. He's here as an expert. If
you all have questions or need,
but we do or he does did bring a
letter that indicates, and this
is from Zach Barrett, the
director of state programs at
the US Department of
Transportation pipeline.
hazardous material Safety
Administration in full support
of making this change, and so it
automatically would now change
with the federal government
rather than have state
government, federal government
at different levels.
That's what this bill does.
All right, thank you very much.
Uh, so at this point, um, so
you'll just answer questions,
uh, if, if they're asked, so at
this point, we're going to
audience testimony, um, so by a
show of hands, how many of you
in here are uh in support of
this bill.
one. All right, by show of
hands, how many of you are in
opposition of this bill?
So let the record be noted that
there's one in the audience. How
about online?
None?
All right. So, um, just for
giggles, why don't we go ahead
and have Camilla come up since
you're the only one, you wanna
go ahead and come on up.
We don't have a handheld, do we?
of the committee as the bill
sponsor names, um, this is just
an update bill keeping up to
speed with federal rules,
pipelines really do transect the
state and we just want to make
sure it's done right and
appreciate the service of our
local officials.
too much.
Anybody else last chance. All
right, Senator, you do have an
opportunity to respond at all,
but it doesn't seem like it was
really anything in, in line with
what you're doing. So at this
point, I opened it up to the
committee.
If they're, uh, I wanna make
sure there are no questions or
comments from the committee.
Just make a motion if you're
ready. I'm ready for a motion.
We do.
We would do pass
as amended, we have a 2nd from
Senator Sanchez.
Will you take the role?
Senator
Senator had a meal.
Senator O'Malley.
Senator Paul.
Senator Ramos.
Senator Sanchez. Senator Sheer.
Senator Wirth,
Senator Bergman's Senator
Hamlin. Yes, we have 9 for Du
pass. So, um, on a, on a vote of
9 to 0, you have a due pass
senator. Thank you very much.
Thank you. by my count, I've got
about 15 minutes banked for the
next time. Thank you. And you're
gonna keep that, you're gonna
keep a running log, aren't you?
All right. Thank you very much,
Senator Stephanics.
You even get, like, walk up
music, apparently to somebody's
phone ring.
Thank you Madam Chair, members
of the committee,
um, Senator, if I may interrupt
just quickly, um, because yours
is a tax credit, we are not
voting on this as a committee.
We are going to hear the bill.
We will debate the bill, but we
will not, but we will hold it
because it will go into a tax
package at the end. So thank
you, thank you very much,
Senator Stepanos. Go ahead.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
there is a committee substitute.
Did you receive it?
OK, so this bill was endorsed by
the Economic and Rural
Development Committee, and then
during the interim, then it was
changed before the revenue
stabilization could look at it,
then re revenue stabilization,
um, did endorse it, and then it
was looked at by the fire
marshal, the tax and rev
department, Department of
Health, and it got changed
further for this committee
substitute.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, what this does is I'm
sorry, Senator Stephanics, do we
need to move on the committee
substitute. So if we could, um,
I do need a motion to, uh, do
not pass on Senate Bill 15 and a
due pass on the committee sub
for Senate Bill 15.
So
I'm not motioning. I need
somebody else to do it. So,
Madam Chair.
All right, any opposition?
Do we need to just to be clear,
we're moving to do not pass on
Senate Bill 15 and we're moving
for discussion purposes as do
pass on Senate tax, business,
and transportation Committee
substitute. Thank you. Thank
you, Senator Wirth.
You're my first one to do that.
So I appreciate that. OK. Any
opposition to that? Do you need
to take the role?
This is for discussion. Thank
you. All right.
Thanks. I appreciate you going
along with me on a bumpy ride.
Absolutely. Thank you, Senator
Fan. Go ahead. Uh, so this bill
was endorsed by 2 interim
committees, and it has been
reviewed by taxation and revenue
Department, the State Fire
Marshals, um, office as well as
the Department of Health. This
was brought to me by volunteer
firefighters as a possible
recruitment, uh, initiative. It
would offer a $1000 tax credit
per year for volunteer EMT.
and volunteer firefighters were
going out on 52 calls or putting
in 52 hours, that would be
certified by their supervisor.
The firefighters are supervised
by one entity, the fire chiefs,
the EMTs are supervised by our
by the Department of Health. And
so the state fire marshal did
have some clarifying language,
that is why there is a committee
substitute, and um I don't know
if we have any volunteer
firefighters, obviously they
have other jobs to do, but it
If there's any support or
opposition, I'm happy to hear
it.
Thank you, Senator Stephanics.
Um, so at that point, so at this
point, um, remember we are
holding the bill, but we do want
uh testimony. So is there
anybody in the room that is in
favor of this bill. I show of
hands.
OK. Anybody in opposition?
You know anybody online? No? All
right, so, um, we have one in
support, um, and so if you don't
mind coming up and speaking over
the senator's shoulder into that
microphone, that'd be great.
Got it. Good morning, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
My name is Joyce.
Executive Director for New
Mexico counties, as you all are
well aware in New Mexico, the
rural lifeblood for health and
public safety is our volunteer
firefighters and volunteer
emergency medical services. We
saw during the pandemic, many of
them disappeared. They no longer
felt comfortable serving, many
of them aged out, and we have
not had a large significant
amount to regenerate this. The
legislature was very kind last
year in helping us get um some
additional recruitment.
funds and we think this is one
more beneficial tool in that
toolbox and appreciate the
continued support to stand up
our fire and EMS in the state.
Thank you.
Thank you so much.
Anybody inspired to other, to
make other comments.
Uh, senator Stephanics, you have
an opportunity to respond to
anything, um, that was said in
public testimony, if you'd like,
or we can go ahead and go to the
committee. I prefer to go to
committee. Thank you. Thank you,
Senator Stephanics. So any
discussion or comments from the
committee, Senator Jaramillo.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Senator, for bringing this
forward in rural northern New
Mexico fire volunteer
firefighters are lifeline that
are first to calls of accidents,
but more recently when
wildfires, the threat because of
climate change and how dry
conditions have been.
I want to thank you for bringing
this forward. We have so many
volunteer firefighters who
reached out from my district in
support of the bill, so I just
wanted to say thank you.
Thank you, Senator Jaramillo.
Anybody else from the committee,
Senator Ramos, Madam Chair of
thank you again for bringing
this bill also uh being that uh
we're such a rural area. We're
having so much trouble getting
uh help in these areas. So, and
this is just going to help. And
I think this is the first step
in a, in the right direction.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Ramos.
Anybody else in the committee?
Senator, thank you, Madam Chair.
So just, so why $1000?
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator Wirth, for the
question. $1000 was felt that
remember this bill came to me
from volunteer firefighters here
and specifically in Santa Fe
County, but it's been shopped
around. $1000 tax credit was
felt to be substantial enough
for people who are working
Middle income, maybe even
working poor that if they could
add that to their tax credits,
it would really help reduce
their liability. And so they saw
the uh importance of this. They
also felt they might step up a
little bit more into the
volunteer ranks, and that they
might not retire as quickly from
the volunteer ranks.
Some have chair and Senator, I
appreciate that, and there's $4
million cap. Is that correct?
It's a 4 million for each, uh, 4
million for the EMTs, 4 million
for the firefighters. So a total
of 8 million total of 8 million.
And how many?
Volunteer firefighters and EMTs
do we have?
In the state just a ballpark uh
thank you, Madam Chair and
Senator. It's split on both
sides. It's approximately 4000
on each side. But we also know,
Madam Chair, Senator, that not
everybody will either qualify
for a tax credit because their
income will be so um small or
that some people won't pay
attention. So we don't expect to
utilize the entire amount.
So I'm sure, I appreciate that.
I think this is, again, one of
the things we've done on this
committee with.
Creative
Coming forward with constituent
types ideas is really weave
those into the tax package and I
just think this is a great idea
and we've probably got the
capacity and I appreciate the
explanation. So thank you, ma'am
Chair.
Thank you, Senator Wirth.
Senator Schiff, thank you, Madam
Chair. So I'm just reading the
uh
The committee analysis right
here.
But it does, it, it asks a
couple of questions.
Potential ambiguities. I can't
say multi-syllabic words. I
have.
Um, so it says 52 times.
Um
What does 52 times refers to.
The uh certifying entity, so
that 52 weeks or 52 hours or but
it's 52 times meaning.
Uh, thank you for the question,
um, Madam Chair and Senator. The
52 times could be either. It
could be 52 hours if we have a
long, um,
Event where somebody is working
12 hours, 24 hour shifts, and
then going off and then coming
back, or it could mean
responding 52 times during the
year. Then in the rural areas,
the volunteer firefighters and
the volunteer EMTs are the only
thing.
Uh, that can respond and so some
of them are very worn out. Some
people, uh, Madam Chair,
Senator, will retire early, even
though they get no pay for
retiring just because they don't
want to get up in the middle of
the night. So it could be a
couple times a day that somebody
is going out.
OK. Thank you. And then on the
last page of the FIR, um, we put
this new table in, uh, the tax
expenditure policy principle.
Um
It's the last page of the FIR.
And so they have stars if, if
If the policy was not met, a
check if it was met. So it says
vetted, which really means did
it go through any interim
committees.
Uh, apparently not targeted, uh,
you know, so the tax expenditure
has clearly stated purpose.
And it says, no, so that's a
concern that not going through.
Interim committee, so I don't
care about, but here it says
that um
Clearly stated purpose,
long-term goals and measurable
annual targets.
It doesn't have clearly stated
purpose, a long-term goal or
measurable targets, at least
according to the sapphire.
I know this is gonna roll into
something else, but
Make everybody feel warm and
fuzzy. So Madam Chair, Senator,
um, before you came in, I did
indicate that two different
interim committees did endorse
this, but it got, uh, between
economic and rural development.
It was changed by, um, tax and
Rev.
And the Department of Health,
and then it was endorsed in um
revenue stabilization, so it was
endorsed by two interim
committees, and then the state
fire marshal came to us with uh
further changes. So in terms of
clearly stated purpose,
long-term goals, measurable
targets, you know, the bills
don't really have a purpose
section. Um, if we went to
another committee, they would be
whited outstripped out.
So, um, but I'm happy to discuss
other long-term things. OK. So I
just wanted to bring those up. I
think it's a good idea, not
going to oppose it. Thank you,
man.
Thank you, Senator Sheriff. Any
other comments, Senator
Figueroa.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, I
was wondering if that was
intentional that the definition
of two volunteer on page 4 for
the MS.
And page 6 for the firefighters
was slightly different.
And I didn't know why.
Um, for the EMS on page 4, it's
responding to service or
providing an hour of on duty
volunteer station time, so it's
an oar.
But on page 6 for the
firefighters, it's responding to
fire department service and
providing an hour of on duty
station time. And I just
wondered if that was
intentional, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Senator, um, those are
definitions by the groups that
actually supervise a rule these
groups of professionals. So the
Department of Health sets the
standards and rules for the EMTs
and the state fire marshal works
with the fire chiefs around the
state for their own rules.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
I thank you, Senator. Any other
questions or comments?
Uh, Senator, I'd like to thank
you for this because as, as
we've talked, this has been an
inspiration in uh rural District
38, we have a lot of volunteer
firefighters as well. Um, but
also, uh, you know, inspired
and, and hopefully I'm working
to bring another bill very
similar to this, uh, that deals
with search and rescue in our
state. So I appreciate that and
I appreciate you, uh, answering
the questions here from this
committee. Um, if there are no
other further questions, then at
this point we are going to hold
this bill and it will move into
a tax package.
And uh thank you, Senator
Stephanics. I appreciate.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee.
We had to vote on this committee
said.
And Madam, you'll tell the
public one more time that
doesn't mean it's dead.
Absolutely, for the record, when
we hold the bill, it does not
mean it's dead. It's that it's
going to be uh uh.
Considered for a tax package.
Thank you.
All righty. Perfect timing,
Senator Padilla.
We are on Senate Bill 24, the
Apprentice and training program
contributions.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair and
Madam Vice Chair and members of
the committee. uh, thank you.
I'm here today with Matthew
Swazzo of the Carpenters and
Secretary Sarita Nair, come on
in, everyone.
Thank you. And we are before you
today with Senate Bill 24 and
thank you for hearing me. I was
right across the hall, ran right
over.
So essentially what the
legislation does is we're
attempting as a body, as a
legislature over the past
several years to build out a
successful, useful and
meaningful, um.
Apprenticeship, uh, training
fund that uh that that is funded
by, you know, contributions from
a number of sources, but with
this particular legislation does
is it strikes out the
exclusionary language related to
street, highway, bridge, road,
utility or maintenance
contractors, um, from the public
works project or as public works
projects and, and adds them to
the contributing uh bodies that
make these dollars, we find that
in one of the things you may
hear today is that um.
You know, this is gonna increase
costs, this is gonna think, you
know, things of that nature. If
you do the analysis, which the
FIR clearly states out under the
page 2, the fiscal implications,
it's looking like about a
$900,000 hit to local
governments.
And then a hit to the state
Department of Transportation of
somewhere between 983,000 and
1.1 million. Um, if you look at
that across, um, these projects,
it, it does, it's pretty minimal
based on on what it costs us to
do this kind of work, um, in
terms of cost related to
implementation of this work.
It's looking like about $25,000
or so, probably a lot less by
the Department of Workforce
Solutions, uh, to implement this
and make these changes to our
systems and the department has
said that they
can absorb that. So that's
essentially what the legislation
does. It helps us to to meet the
goals of workforce development,
economic growth, supporting
these very important
apprenticeships and making the
the workforce very desirable
that way, um, industry
collaboration and we've had a
number of conversations with
industry on this, uh, retention
of talent and it brings us, you
know, forward with with having a
successful workforce related to
apprenticeships. So I'm going to
ask Matthew to speak for a
little bit.
And then I'm also gonna ask the
secretary to speak as well.
you said
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Matthew
Swati, and I'm with the Western
States Regional Council of
Carpenters. We represent over
1600 members in the state of New
Mexico with 90,000 members
across 12 states.
As the senator alluded to, this
is about removing the exclusion
and growing apprenticeship and
training throughout the state.
Workforce development and
building their skilled and
trained workforce. We're very
happy to be working with the
center as our sponsor and to
move this bill forward to create
more opportunities for on the
job training and apprenticeship
in the state of New Mexico.
Thank you.
OK, just to let you know, you
don't have to have the
microphone so close cause that's
what we're getting the, the, the
popping. So you should, you
should be good secretary.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. Uh, my
name is Sarita Nayer. I'm the
workforce solutions secretary of
the department is neutral on
this bill, but is happy to serve
as a technical expert if there
are any questions on how
apprenticeship funding works.
And of course, we appreciate the
state's considerable investment
in apprenticeship over the past
few years. Thank you.
Great. Thank you so much. All
right, now we go to audience,
um, in the, uh, those of you in
the room, uh, by a show of
hands, how many people are in
favor of this bill?
123456, 78, Brian, a little bit.
OK, so we have 8 anybody in
opposition.
1234. All right. So what we're
going to do is we're going to
have 4, an opposition for, uh,
in favor speak, um, we will give
you 2 minutes apiece, if you
don't mind. Let's go ahead and
have those in support. Come up
first. You will stand behind
the, the bill sponsor. We'll
give you 2 minutes. Vice chair
will time you.
Uh, and she will let you know
when you have 30 seconds left.
We will cut you off.
Yeah
I know, John, you know, you know
me.
Yes, or you'll give him, do you
have a 32nd on there somewhere?
It might be under time is up.
OK, that's right. All right, go
ahead, uh, John,
go ahead,
but thank you, Madam Chair,
members of committee, John
Lipschutes with the New Mexico
Federation.
AFL-CIO, we represent over
40,000 union members across the
state covering all sectors of
private, public, um, we stand in
strong support of this measure.
We have ever since, uh, its
inception years ago, uh,
obviously we are firm believers
in the in the apprenticeship
process. This is how we build up
our, our trades and we give the
younger generation a good
pathway to, to earning great uh
great wages and, uh, engaging.
great jobs. Um, we, I guess,
stand in strong solidarity with
our trades, brothers and sisters
for this measure, and view it as
really just closing a loophole
that was developed years ago,
uh, you know, lots of other, uh,
industries do contribute to this
fund and uh for whatever reason,
the, the roads were, uh, the
road uh contractors and bridge
contractors were exempted back
in the day, and now I think it's
just time that we bring
everybody onto the same playing
field. So for those reasons, we
thank you very much.
For your consideration and hope
you support.
Great, thank you. Uh, while
we're waiting for our next
speaker, we do have one online,
Jane, who is against. So what we
will do to even it out is we'll
have, we have a total of 5 who
are against this, this, uh,
legislation, so we'll allow one
more in support, uh, if they
want to get up, um, so, uh,
we'll go ahead and we'll keep
count. Go ahead, sir. Good
afternoon.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee.
Um, my name's Mark Trujillo. I'm
uh
tri tion with the IBEW.
On the JATC our apprenticeship
trustee.
And we train apprentices, but
The funds that were talked about
today, um.
Help us build that next level of
our next generation of worker.
Is like me are getting old. I'm
in my mid-50s, on the tail end
of our career, and we definitely
do um the training for.
Trains.
Reasons we stand in support,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Jason Espinoza
speaking on behalf of the
mechanical contractors
Association in New Mexico and
the sheet metal contractors
Association in New Mexico.
Uh, we all know workforce,
especially in construction. It's
everyone's problem. And so we
look at this bill, really just
to create create equity.
Everyone needs to be paid into
these funds so that we can
support apprenticeship programs,
registered apprenticeship
programs, run through the, you
know, with the support of the
Department of Workforce
Solutions are really the gold
standard, um, and the state has
been making a lot of investment.
We just believe everyone needs
to contribute, um, to solve our
workforce issues, especially in
construction. Stand in strong
support. Thank you. Madam
Chairman Brian Conte, members of
the committee, Brian to New
Mexic
go building trades council. I'm
one of those old workers are
talking about. We know what's
happening to the the workforce
in New Mexico.
Not only in New Mexico, but
nationally, there is an extreme
shortage and construction craft
professionals. If we are not
investing,
And
Formalized apprenticeship
training. This problem is only
going to exacerbate itself, and,
uh, we have billions of dollars
in capital outlay, that's
sitting there ready to go to
work. If we can provide the
manpower, uh, and woman power.
Uh
Kraft worker power to complete
these projects on time and on
budget. Everybody would be
better off including our
committee, so we stand in full
support of this.
Thank you
And senators,
uh, Joo Naja, president of
Carpenter's Local 1319, uh,
showing a strong support of this
House bill, Senate Bill 24, um,
it really does, does come down
to getting the taxpayers their
money's worth.
One of the big problems by
having this exclusion is a good
percentage of our work done, the
highway work done in the state
is done by out of state
contractors.
And by then, by them not having
to pay into this fund, it
totally messes up the taxpayers'
money and what the intention is,
what the taxpayers' money, why
we have prevailing wage rates on
these projects to begin with.
Um, having them not paying into
this phone or having that
exclusion, it's definitely not
helping the situation that we
have a high demand and trade
workers that we do have in this
uh state right now, that's only
gonna help. Um, everybody else
in the industry, with the
exception of the highway
workers, does pay into this
fund. It has been proven that it
does not raise the cost. It's
actually a lot cheaper to the
contractor should they choose to
participate in a state
apprenticeship fund, um, because
then they don't have to, um,
borderline misclassify the
workers. Right now if we pull a
certified.
Payroll to any of these
projects, you're gonna find the
same name for the guy working 3
hours as a laborer, 4 hours as a
carpenter, and another 3 hours
as a rot buster, and that's just
not right. It's not contributing
to the problem that we have,
which is the high demand for
trade workers. Um, so I think
it's just right, it's uh none of
us really know the reason why
the exclusion was put through
many, many years ago, but I
think it's time to remove the
exclusion and they help
contribute to the problem, you
know, taxpayers' money went into
that project. It should benefit
the local community, not just by
getting that project.
Do, but actually investment
being back into the community
through apprenticeship.
Thank you. All right. So we have
um, those 5 that spoke 4, we
have the 4 in the room, if you
will go ahead and line up behind
the Senate sponsor.
And then, uh, if you will,
online, let her know that she'll
be the last person and to listen
so she can unmute herself.
Right, thank you. Go ahead and
start.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair. Mike
Sandoval, registered lobbyist
with the Associate Contractors
in Mexico, all the heavy highway
contractors. Um, I think we
agree this is a great program. I
think we're the biggest
disagreement is, is how to fund
this. And I'll tell you why we
shouldn't fund it through
highway projects. First of all,
we already have our own training
program. It's approved by
Federal Highway Administration
approved by NM and 0.33 programs
that we have directly relate to
highway work, and I'll tell you
why that's important. I'll give
you the perfect example. You see
people out there, the pilot car.
slow, the the traffic control
folks, um, small businesses, the
striping people that do all the
yellow and white stripes, small
businesses, they will be
starting to pay into this fund.
And yet, they will get no
benefit. There's not an
apprentice for that. They don't
want it, nor do they need it to
be a traffic control person to
be a striper, to be a guardrail.
So all of these contractors are
paying into a fund that they
will not see benefit from,
number one, the other thing is
that this includes maintenance,
the majority of the maintenance
money, millions, hundreds of
millions of dollars is done
through price.
agreements, those are fixed
costs. They bid those, they're
on there. So when you start
adding 60 cents on the dollar
and instead having to contribute
to this fund, how are those
people going to raise the price?
It's basically taking from their
bottom line, because there's no
way to, and they won't benefit
from it. Um, so I know I'm
probably close to my time, but
also remember I haven't even
talked about the utilities and
bringing in all the utilities
work that's done through co-ops,
broadband, all of those, all of
those folks will also have to
start paying into this. And the
main thing is we agree with the
program, we had great
I really appreciate the Sander
gave us together. We just
disagree on how to pay for it.
We don't think we should have to
pay for it because we already
have our own and we're not going
to benefit for the most part
from it. So thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you so much.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee,
Franklin Garcia with uh Asphalt
Pavement Association, um, I too
was involved in the
conversations earlier and so we
appreciate the opportunity to.
Try to hammer out, uh, the
differences, um, couple things
as far as the economic impact
and out of state vendors, uh,
doing the work, uh, all the work
on the roads is actually done by
instate contractors, um, and so
those are local entities, um,
they're putting gross receipts
tax back into the the projects
in the areas that they're
working on for about a two-year
period, so there is some
economic impact and economic
opportunity, um, the FIR
actually notes that
the exemption to road projects
may conflict with the definition
for building trades, and it's
currently recognized by the
Department of Labor or the
Apprenticeship council. So, um,
with that. Thank you, Chairman
Senators. My name is Jim Garcia.
I'm the executive director for
Associated Contractors of New
Mexico representing the 137
contractors and subs that build
our roads. Um,
We have a program called TTCP
Technical Training and
certification program. We've had
that for 30 years. The reason
that that is in place was, uh,
to be able to train our people
all the way up through
journeyman status. Uh, and
that's why we've been exempt for
30 years. So this, this didn't
happen now, where, why haven't
we been paying into this fund.
We, we build this fund, we
actually do the training and
it's free. So we have a great
program that's been in place for
30 years. We have 33 different
uh training programs that are
directly inside of that program
that that
for that, and in the FIR it also
states that this will increase
the cost of road projects, and
we know that will happen. This
is not a good time for this
bill. Thank you.
Thank you so much.
about a chair and committee
members. I'm Dan Lewis,
executive director of the
Asphalt Pavement Association of
New Mexico.
Members represent the people
that build the roadways and
infrastructure around the state,
employ thousands of people in
the state of New Mexico, uh, and
our members are absolutely
opposed to this bill, um, I
believe it will raise costs uh
for building roadways, certainly
raise costs to not only with the
DOT and much needed uh funding
uh for uh critical roadways
around the state and
infrastructure, um, but also
raise the costs on, on families
around the state in that regard
and so our members are, are, are
convinced of that.
I could tell you that there's,
there's as far as the
development of this bill,
there's been no coordination uh
with the industry. We represent
the industry. There's been no
coordination in the development
of the bill and all some recent
conversations about us, so at
the very least we'd ask you to,
you know, defer this bill, keep
it in this committee, uh, allow
us to have some more time to
actually uh give some input into
the bill that's uh that's that's
much needed in that regard.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, Vanessa. We've
already had 4. We've got 1.
Where is that person still
online? So we're gonna go ahead
and let that person online since
they've been waiting. Jane, if
you don't mind unmuting and
going ahead and giving your your
testimony.
Uh, good afternoon, Madam Chair,
committee members. Uh, my name's
Jane Jernigan with the New
Mexico utility Contractors
Association.
We do everything from the curb
down, infrastructure, water
treatment plants, road and
highway projects and mostly work
on public works projects. Many
public works contractors such as
utility contractors do not have
access or have apprenticeship
programs in place and therefore
would be forced to pay into a
fund that they cannot see that
receive a benefit from. Funds at
approximately 60 cents per hour
sent to an apprenticeship fund
will take away funds for
in-house training and other
training by the business.
Industry and crafts that do not
have approved apprenticeship
programs are still highly
trained and are held to the same
safety standards as all public
works contractors, including
state and federal safety
standards, forcing contractors
to contribute to a fund that
cannot benefit from is wrong.
During last year's session,
House Bill 5 was chaptered
appropriating 50 million from
the general fund to the newly
created workforce development
and apprenticeship trust fund
with 2.5 million to existing
public works apprenticeship
training fund in uh fiscal year
25 and 26 and 1.5 million
thereafter, and that same amount
of money also goes to the
Department of Workforce
Solution. We would implore the
committee to keep the type A
prevailing wage exemption in
place and vote.
on Senate Bill 24. Thank you.
Right, thank you, Jane.
Appreciate that. Uh, so at this
point, uh, we give the sponsor 5
minutes to go ahead and respond
to public testimony, and then we
will go to committee, a reminder
to committee, this is a bill we
will be voting on today. So
Senator Padilla, thank you,
Madam Chair, and really
appreciate all the comments I
thought they were all very good
and very helpful. I will say
that um on a couple of points
that I did hear from some of the
opposition, um, to the bill,
the, the discussion of working
with industry has been ongoing
for about 4 to 5 years,
actually, this is not.
First time this bill has been
introduced, it has had um um
couple of different iterations,
that is true, but it's been
essentially the same bill since
about 2023, so this, this
discussion of commentary that
that there was no discussion
with industry is not accurate
actually, um, you know, I will
say that uh I heard earlier that
this is 60 cents on the dollar,
that is also inaccurate, it's
about 60 cents on the hour uh of
pay there, not, not on the
dollar, so I don't want to shock
the committee and think there's
a 60% increase going on here
because it's not.
accurate at all. Um, I, I will
say that uh once again that the
the uh cost of the local and and
projects is gonna all local
projects as a whole are probably
it's probably somewhere on the
name in the neighborhood of a
million dollars, uh, statewide
projects, uh, state
transportation projects, 1 to $2
million so the, the discussion
that this is, you know,
something that's earth
shattering is is actually not
accurate there either, um, I
would say that that
There are programs that do exist
out there, and I think they are
very good ones, Madam Chair, and
I think they've been very, what
they're very thought, well
thought out, um, but then there
are there are workers that
aren't covered this way as well
and and and when you say
something like, gosh, you know,
the guys and the gals waving the
flags on a construction project,
you know what, that is true,
what you heard from that speaker
is true, but I want that person
to be able to grow into the
higher paying job.
By getting their apprenticeship.
Uh, squared away and taking that
higher paying job down the road,
and that this legislation is
exactly how we help that worker
move from waving a flag to
actually paving the actual road
to actually running the project
eventually to building their own
business and succeeding this way
as well.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Padilla. At
this point, I entertain
questions from the committee.
Senator Jaramillo, thank you,
Madam Chairwoman. Thank you for
bringing this bill forward,
Senator, in the, um,
In the FIR.
It does say that this bill will
conflict with House Bill 19,
which I looked up, which is a
trade ports Development Act.
Have you by any chance heard
about that bill or have those
bill sponsors come to you?
We don't believe we've seen that
one yet. OK, so what it reads is
the conflicting distribution of
the motor vehicle excise tax
just to be aware, Senator, that
you might want to look at how
it's conflicting, and then the
last comment, Madam Chairwoman,
is in my day job. I'm the chief
of staff at Los Alamos National
Laboratory for Craftsmen and
women and understand the
importance of apprenticeships
and what it means to develop a
workforce. And for so many
years, we turned away from
craftsmen and women and focused
on just.
asking everyone to attend
college, and we're now seeing at
Los Alamos National Laboratory,
the need of craftsmen and women
and not enough people to fill
the needs of the demands of Los
Alamos so just wanted to make
that comment. Thank you, Madam
Cha.
Thank you, Senator. Thank you,
Senator Jaramillo.
Senator share is looking at like
me who me?
I'm, I'm ready, Madam Chair. I
just thought somebody else was
gonna be the lead off batter
here, but
You know, not a problem.
Uh, so,
Senator Padilla, Madam Chair.
The contractors
have a program already, right?
Uh, they teach
CDL and I mean there's a lot of
things that go into what the
contractors already have their.
they're doing.
Are you familiar with their
program?
Uh, yes, madam Chair, and, uh,
and uh Senator Sheer, uh, you
heard about a few of those. I
heard one of them that was
mentioned was the I think TTES
or something like, I'll give you
the exact um, yeah, TTS, I
believe, but that doesn't cover
all of the folks in this program
becomes much more comprehensive
with what we're designing here.
So Madam Chair and Senator.
But there are other
Other groups out here, such as
uh people that are the striping
companies, for example.
Do they need apprentice? Do they
need um
Do they need to be told by the
state.
That they need apprentices out
there. Do we need to say, hey,
we're gonna take money from you.
But not really train anybody for
you.
Because you don't
Need those folks.
But we're gonna take money
anyway.
my characterizing that my
mischaracterizing that.
Well, of course you are.
But I'm gonna let my expert
respond to that one, then I
might have a few more comments.
Madam Charon, Senator Sheriff,
um, with the British
apprenticeship programs,
contractors have the ability to
invest in their own program and
have apprentices therefore not
having to pay the 60 cents.
So if you had a register
that 60 cents is not to be paid
by the contractor. When it comes
to the asphalt and paving, we
can look at the project taking
place in Albuquerque, where they
have the space for 60
apprentices, yet they only have
one. So there's definitely the
room for growth on a major
project happening now in the
city of Albuquerque and across
the state, multi-million.
projects that are happening
where we have the environment
and space to create on the job
training and a person on the job
to lower the costs to the
taxpayer.
Uh, so, Madam Chair, if they've
got space for 60, but they only
have 1.
Does that mean they can't find
people to work, and therefore
they're going to pay 60 cents.
An hour
But they can't even fill the
slots that they have cause they
can't find people that just want
to start.
Yeah, Madam Chair, Senator, I
could speak from our end. We
have a list of 300 applicants
waiting to enter our
apprenticeship program. The
issue is having a job to put
them in. I can't speak for the
associations and the groups that
are not currently part of
registered apprenticeship
programs, but I can say from our
space as a registered program,
we have a list of hundreds of
people looking to enter our
program for carpenters. It's a
matter of having the space on
state projects, public works to
place them for to registered
apprenticeship program and to
get them training to make good
money and have benefits in
retirement.
Oh
Madam Chair, I'm not, I'm not
opposed to making good money and
benefits and retirement,
absolutely.
Oh
What I'm questioning is, now
we're imposing another set of
regulations, another rule on, on
businesses.
Um
That aren't going to benefit
from this at all, at least
that's what it appears to me.
And I think that in, in a broad
sense, Senator,
One of the things that I think
hampers economic growth in New
Mexico is the regulations, the,
the rules on how businesses
operate.
And driving up the cost of
business, yeah, in every case,
not just this, uh, I think that
we're, we're making life.
More difficult for local, any
local business, but certainly
local contractors in this case.
So,
If they have an apprenticeship
program right now.
Great, they're, they're working,
people are working, uh, get
those higher paying jobs and
benefits and so forth.
And I'm not, certainly not
opposed to apprenticeship.
I think what I'm opposed to is
the cost. So you say it's only
$900,000 for local governments.
It's still $900,000 of taxpayer
money that's not going to.
Something else.
Um, and then it's what was the
other 100, 1.2 million uh for
state project, well, that's
another, another million dollars
that isn't going to fix our
roads, actually, it's going.
And I, I'm not, I'm struggling
to see the benefit of paying 60
cents.
Especially if we can't find
people to fill the job anyway.
Maybe there's 300 people that
want to be carpenters.
I was once upon a time. I just
drove a nail gun. I wasn't smart
enough to do anything else, but
I knew how to drive a nail gun.
Um
So
That's what's confusing me is
we're trying to force.
Businesses
Into something they can do
themselves right now and our
contractors do do, at least the
highway contractors do.
And uh we're trying to force
people into a system that I just
don't think if they wanted it,
they'd already do it.
Well, thank you, uh, Madam Chair
and and senator, and there are 3
options for contractors here.
I'm gonna ask the secretary to
review them and what they mean
to the actual contractor, but
there are 3 ways to do this.
Uh, Cheer Hamblin, Senator
chair.
So under an NMSA 134D 4. Um, the
three options are that the
contractor can elect to
participate in training so they
can have their own registered
apprenticeship program, train
their own people at their own
sites. That's option one. option
two is to agree to make
contributions to approved
apprentice and training programs
in New Mexico in which the
employer is a participant, so
that means they could partner up
with either a
and our non-union apprenticeship
program. We have many of both
and decide to, uh, serve as an
employer under that
apprenticeship program. And then
again, they would not have to
pay the 60 cents. And then the
last option is to agree to make
contributions to the public
works apprenticeship and
training fund. So what we would
expect to see right now, there's
only one dedicated road
apprenticeship registered
apprenticeship program in the
state. It's, um, asphalt and
paving. Uh, we would expect to
see some employers and also some
Program sponsors decide to
actually just stand up
apprenticeship programs of their
own that meet their own needs.
So, so, Madam Chair and Senator,
the, the contractor does not
have anything to worry about if
they bring up their own
apprenticeship program. Uh,
that's one of the options that
they can do, so they don't have
to have that 60 cent levy on
every hour.
So
Madam Chair,
So the road contractors are
doing this, but they're still
gonna pay or are they gonna be
exempt from this because they
have their own programming.
If they have a program that is a
certified apprenticeship
training program, they all bets
are off for them, they don't
have to pay this.
Can I ask one of the other
witnesses or not their expert
witness, but somebody from
Contracting world of question.
It's entirely up to the sponsor.
And I thought that was up to
you, Madam Chair. I'm more than
happy. I think we should have a
let's let's air out everything,
put everything on the table
today, yeah.
So, from the contractor's
perspective.
You think this is going to add
60 cents?
Wait, I guess, I guess one of
the questions, so you have a big
apprenticeship program, but you
don't have piece of it. Does
that mean you're
Am I, am I just lost, which is
certainly possible. I do want to
just keep it to one person
answering if that's all right.
uh, Madam Chair and Senator and
Secretary did a great job about
learning those three options,
the issue or the one where you
don't pay is number one, you
have to get your program
certified as an apprenticeship
program. All of ours are
certified through FHWA and
approved.
And
The, the, the, the current
apprenticeship programs don't
have a lot of the highway
specific job, so that's number
one. And number 2, the only way
you don't have to pay into it is
if you have someone enrolled in
it.
And so what about the times when
you don't have someone in so you
can get someone enrolled, they
could take a 40 hour class and
you can pay into that. But the
other 11 months of the year that
you're not enrolled in it, if
you don't have someone actively
enrolled, then you'll be paid
into. And so
The other example is the
striper.
Um, there's not an apprentice
program for a striper. It's not
an apprentice program for a
person that holds a flag.
There's not an apprentice
program for the guardrail
person. And so those would have
to be created, I guess. And
then, um, people would have to
be enrolled in that to not have
to pay into it. So that's my
understanding of it, um, as to
why that doesn't work for us,
when we already have a program
that is free that we pay into.
Thank you, Madam.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you. OK, so I'm just trying to
get my mind wrapped around.
A why, why this program at all?
Because certainly, if I wanted
to
restrain somebody for whatever
business you want to train him
to drive a nail gun, well then I
would train him to drive a nail
gun.
Um
And certainly
If I want my business to
succeed, no matter what that
business is.
I want to train people to do it.
Anyway, I'm just confused as why
this.
Why this is necessary.
I think that's, it just seems to
me that it's gonna be a burden
on local government, it's gonna
be a burden on attacks on the,
on the state budget, and, and I
don't really see the, the
benefit.
Because people are training
their, their
Cruises already, where and where
there's apprenticeships
available, they're using
apprenticeships, but if there's
no apprenticeship for
stripers then
I don't, I don't see how that, I
don't see how it's a benefit for
the striping company to pay an
extra $60 an hour when there is
no apprentice program for them
to use. Thank you, madam.
Thank you.
60s, 60 bucks an hour.
Thank you. I don't want there to
be any confusion.
Thank you, Senator Sher. I have
Senator Sanchez, others, so
Senator O'Malley, Senator
Sanchez. Thank you, Madam Chair
and Senator.
So
I'm just trying to understand it
to a Senator Sheryl, I'll try to
make it a lot faster than that.
Um, so where are your nearest
training facilities.
Are they only in Albuquerque,
and in Las Cruces or then in
Santa Fe.
Um, Madam Chair, Senator, our
regional training center is in
Alca, New Mexico. Other trade
organizations have them in
different locations throughout
the state.
So, I'm gonna ask some questions
from all my constituents as
small businesses. So we have a
shortage of people and you have
to have a person enrolled to
what we just heard all the time
we're gonna be paying this.
So we don't have enough people
to cover that person that we're
gonna have at an apprentice, so
I don't understand how we're
going to put this burden on
small businesses of 60 cents per
man hour.
We have to have another person
hire another person to cover
that guy, so we can send him to
the apprentice program.
So coming from small businesses.
It doesn't make sense at all,
especially if you're farther
south of Albuquerque.
Um, you know, Socorro.
You gotta travel all the way out
for this apprenticeship, and you
got to have one employee
enrolled all the time out of the
12 months out of the year.
And just some quick math at 60
cents per hour, what it's going
to cost a small business and
you're pulling this out, you
know, you're gonna collect this
out of the
Employee's check, and then
pass it on or how's this?
What's the 60 cents per man hour
coming from?
And I'll ask the secretary to so
she knows how this works.
Uh, Hamblin, Senator Sanchez, it
is just paid directly by the
business. It does not come out
of the employees' wages. So this
is going to go directly to all
small businesses in New Mexico.
This 60 cents per mile an hour
that they employ.
Um, chair Hamblin, Senator
Sanchez, not, not every business
in New Mexico, just those who
participate in public works,
highway and utility contracts.
Thank you for
an apprenticeship training
program or someone involved in
it.
Thank you for that, um, Madam
Chair, Senator, and most small
businesses that are in
construction besides the big
guys don't have friends
programs.
So, on this business, 60 cents
per hour.
Usually in construction, we're
working a 10 hour day, that's 6
bucks a day. Most small
businesses, I want everybody to
hear this, most small
businesses, you know, 20
employees or so, that's gonna be
$600.
A day on your 20 employees.
So that's $3000 a week.
You know, so times 52 weeks,
that's $156,000 on a small
business.
We are trying to keep small
businesses construction
businesses here in New Mexico.
If, if I'm understanding that
it's gonna be 60 cents per man
hour.
Just real simple math.
On, on your employees, you have
5 employees, will the numbers
last. If you have 100 employees,
it's more.
Is that how it's going to break
down?
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator. Well,
when you go through uh the RP
process or get on to say a
statewide pricing agreement or
one of the purchasing vehicles,
those, your, your bid is gonna
take that into account. I'm
assuming that's what I would do
if I were the business owner
there. That's one. And I do want
to go back to something that uh
Madam Chair, that the senator
said, Senator Sanchez said
before, uh, you can actually
partner with uh another
organization.
You're a smaller business out
here, you're a secondary
tertiary subcontractor or
whatever, and that would qualify
you to be exempted from the.
Because you, you're a part of
maybe a consortium of businesses
that do this together.
Yeah, an apprenticeship training
program.
Right, so, Madam Chair, Senator,
when you, we heard, uh, one of
the people speaking about type
A, type A, highway, you know,
when you bid these jobs, you
have that.
If your company is non-union,
then that goes directly to your
employee, you don't pull it out
and send it to the union hall
for, you know, your benefits and
all that stuff.
So they received that on their
check.
Um, so, one other question. Has
this program, Madam Chair,
Senator, has this program, uh,
been funded by the general fund
before, didn't it come to us a
couple of years ago and we got
some money from the general
fund.
Madam Secretary.
Uh, chair Hamblin, Senator
Sanchez, yes, last year the
legislature put aside, I believe
it was $30 million into the
workforce development and
apprenticeship training fund,
which in the current fiscal
year, fiscal year 25, and next
fiscal year, fiscal year 26,
will distribute $2.5 million to
the public works apprenticeship
and training fund, and then
after that, it's limited to 1.5
million if, if the um earnings
cover that.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
senator, so we, we got 30
million appropriated for it.
And now we're going to ask small
businesses to contribute more to
it. How come we're not, Madam
Chesson are not asking for money
from the general fund. Well,
everybody should give at the
office. I mean, I, I'm not
trying to be silly here, but at
the end of the day, uh, the
state did its part, and now, you
know, the, the employers are
going to benefit from this will
do their part and eventually the
fund will be at the size that it
it'll need to be.
Madam chair, sir, thank you.
No further questions. Thank you,
Senator Sanchez. Senator
O'Malley.
Thank you, Madam Chair. The
person who was online and I, I'm
sorry, I don't know her name but
she was representing industry
and said that they didn't want,
they wanted to continue to be
exempted from prevailing wages,
and I think that's part of the
crux of this maybe, is that we
want to make sure that when we
put public dollars into
infrastructure projects that we
do pay prevailing wages and we
do offer good benefits, that's
gonna be very important. Um,
I think that's key, and I, I do,
you know, I, I do believe you
when you say you reached out to
industry and that you work with
them because you're a
businessman, and I know that
you've always, uh, have always
advocated for small business,
Senator.
So, um, you know, that gives me
a lot of, you know, confidence
and, and that you, this is
something you want to do. I
think, um,
You know, it's, it's
competition. It's always
competition in the market, and
so, um, and workers are also
looking for an opportunity to
make higher wages if they can,
so that's the part of the that's
labor and that's competition as
well.
So, um, I just wanted to make
that statement that I really
feel strongly that when we put
public dollars infrastructure
projects that we do right by,
by, uh, those who are working,
working on those projects. Thank
you.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator O'Malley. Any
other questions or comments from
the committee, Senator Wirth,
thank you, madam Chair. I just
think it would be helpful again
to
Just give us the definition of a
public works construction
project. Remind me again.
What we're talking about here
because we're we're talking
about a set of small businesses.
There's a whole bunch of small
businesses.
That are all
Currently contributing to this
fund, I understand it correctly.
And Madam Chair and Mr. Majority
Leader, you're correct, uh, what
the legislation does, though, is
it brings into the definition.
Uh, street, highway bridge,
road, utility, or maintenance
contractors into the definition
and removes their exemption.
Uh, because many other.
Apprenticeship bearing and and
training programs are already a
part of the, the definition.
Hope
that answers your question and
so on, Madam Chair, just to be
clear, and Senator Ma, I think
was
Focused on this. These are
projects of a state agency,
correct?
And could be a local as well.
Yeah, local government. These
are, these are taxpayer projects
that small businesses are
bidding on.
And right now, what I'm hearing
is we, and I
Listening to my colleagues on
the other side, we've got a
group of small businesses that
were exempted, and then we got a
whole bunch of small businesses
that are all participating on
the other side, and I think
just, just reiterate for us what
the benefit of this.
Of the by, by bringing in and
broadening the pool.
I think it's important to just
restate what we gain.
By doing, by passing this
legislation. Thank you, and
Majority Leader, really, I would
say there's 5 solid benefits.
One is, is uh workforce
development, we will continue to
strengthen the the workforce
base with these apprenticeship
programs. Um, there is uh
something that can be said about
economic growth on these
projects as well, because
suddenly you'll have um more
money within the communities
because as a result of, you
know, these workers actually
getting to earn much better
wages, um, there's support for
these apprenticeship programs,
so that the workforce becomes.
stronger that way, um, industry
collaboration and retention of
talent into the profession
rather than coming working for a
period of time now you're
suddenly on a track to make this
an entire career for yourself,
not just a, uh, you know, a stop
in, you know, for a period of
your career.
So, I really appreciate framing
it in that way, and I think it
just follows up on what Senator
O'Malley was saying. I mean,
these are
Public projects and we're up
here representing.
range of constituents and
I think the
is that we can make is what are
the thresholds to be able to
apply.
You know, for these projects,
and that's what we're looking at
here, and I, I respect what I'm
hearing on the other side too.
Uh.
But again, I think at the end of
the day, it's
You know, by broadening this,
what's the benefit, and we've
got to weigh that, so I
appreciate it. Thanks, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Senator Wirth.
Senator Ramos, Madam Chair,
thank you very much and, and,
uh, Senator, thank you for
bringing this bill in front of
us today. Uh,
When it comes to affecting local
government being that I've been
in local government for a long
time. I just did not like that.
Anytime that something goes
wrong, local government takes
the hit and that's the part I
don't like about this bill.
Local government has to take a
hit. I, I, I just don't like it.
Um, uh, although the concept is
good, uh, the local government
entities taking the the the
bratti is just.
Um, not something I like. I just
want to make that comment. Thank
you.
Thank you, Senator. Thank you,
Senator Ramos. Anything else
from the committee?
Um,
Second time for Senator Sanchez.
Senator, um.
I just with some comments I've
heard on the other side, I just
want to clarify, when all these,
uh, public works projects are
bid, you do have some kind of
wage that you have to, it's
always a prevailing wage, any
public work project.
Whether you're a laborer,
whether you're operator or
whatever, it's always prevailing
weeks, every public work, but
you're getting paid more than if
you just working at any
business. You have to, and you
have to report it to this, our
secretary right here,
uh, Madam Chesson, and if you
don't
You'll be blackballed and you
won't not do public works.
So the wages up, the thing that
is that it's gonna, on every man
hour, there'll be 60 cents at a
small business will be paying
into apprenticeships that they
may or may not be able to use
depending on how far they are
away from Albuquerque.
So, the shortage of people, we
don't have someone to cover that
one spot to send a guy out, so I
just wanna make that clear.
Thank you, Madam chair Senator.
Thank you, Senator.
Thank you, Senator Sanchez.
Anything else from the
committee?
What is the wish of the
committee?
Madam Chair, I move to pass. We
have a passion, Senator Berns.
We have a second? We need no, we
just need to vote, right?
S.
Somebody
O'Malley. Mhm.
Senator O'Malley.
You will take well. Thank you.
Senator Figueroa. Yes, Senator
had a meal. Senator O'Malley.
Senator Paul.
Senator Ramos.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator Shar
Senator Wirth, yes.
Senator Burton. Yes.
Senator Hamblin.
We have 6 yeses and 4 nos for to
pass
by 6 to 4 vote. Congratulations,
Senator. Thank you, Madam Chair,
members of the committee.
Thank you very much, uh, Senator
Woods, we have 2 of yours coming
up. Uh, your second one, Senate
Bill 28, will be one that we
will hear and we will discuss,
but we will hold.
As it is something to be
considered for uh uh a tax
package. So we're gonna hear
Senate Bill 27 1st.
This.
It.
Wait, what?
Or
yeah.
Mhm
You did say 28,
yeah, we're gonna do 27 1st and
then we'll do 28. 28 is the one
that we will consider and we
will, we will discuss. But
because it involves attacks, we
will, we will hold it and
consider it for the tax package.
It doesn't mean it's tabled.
It's just we're holding it in
place.
Got it.
All righty. Madam Chair, today I
have a, a, a member of the
legislative finance staff.
That he cannot
Testify for or against my bill.
He can only give you factual
information.
So I wanted to uh ask him to
identify himself for you.
And, but I wanted you to know
that upfront.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair. My
name is Brendan Gray, LSC staff
as the senator mentioned, won't
be uh sporting or, or opposing
this just providing technical
information as requested by the
senator. Thank you if I may
clarify, my apologies. I looked
at my notes from LFC and this is
actually something that also is
to be held, so both of your
votes will be, both of your
bills will be considered for the
tax package, but we will discuss
those and debate those as well.
So you're welcome to continue,
Senator Woods. OK, thank you
very much. Thank you.
Uh
Senate Bill 27.
Uh, the title is simply says
related to taxation, eliminating
a distribution of the motor
vehicle excise tax to the
general fund and increasing the
distribution to the state road
fund.
This is uh uh a tax that you pay
when you buy a vehicle.
Uh, that's where it directly
comes from.
And uh the effect it will have.
It will be uh um
181
600,000.
Out of the road fund, out of the
general fund directly going into
the road fund.
So there's several things that
the excise tax goes to mostly
now, but it mostly goes.
To the road fun. I mean, to the
general fund.
And that was done a few years
ago from the way I remember it.
Now this is history. I don't
know whether it's true or not,
but we've either to make it
true, what the hell? Where the
legislature.
I think at one time we had this
designated for the road fund,
Madam Chairman, and, and it just
simply came to one of those
times that uh things went
against us, and we needed to
scrape everything we could
scrape, and we thought, well,
we'll just drag it out of there
and mostly
Probably under the assumption it
was a temporary fix for a
temporary problem, but it just
happened to stay that way, and
it is uh
And, and I guess what I'd like
to say, Madam Chair, and this
may be factual or not.
But my roads aren't the best in
the world.
And I'd like you to consider.
If you have great roads where
you are.
Or do you have some problems
with your road, both local
government and state government.
We have
A heck of a deal going, Madam
Chair.
That uh we can't get around to
all we need to do.
And so I'm presenting you with
the way
To put more money in the road
fund, just as simple as that.
So with that, um, I will take
any questions, but I know we
have people for and against.
Thank you so much. I hope that
makes the quote of the day. What
the hell, we're the legislature
attributed to Senator Woods. We
all have that goal in mind.
Thank you. So, um, at this
point, so we're going to have
public testimony both in the
room and online, and then you
will have 5 minutes to go ahead
and respond to those. So at the
moment by a show of hands, how
many in the room are in favor of
this bill.
1234567,
OK, 8.
Yeah, like a little shy. Again,
everybody who's in favor of
this, please hold up your hand.
Thank you. 123, Heather, you're
helping.
13 in favor. OK. Anybody in this
room opposed to this
legislation.
Senator Sanchez.
OK. Online,
neither for each. All right, so
just to to entertain, let's go
ahead and we'll do 5, and you'll
get 2 minutes apiece of those of
you in favor, so we can go ahead
and hear that. Uh, so 5 of you,
you can do rock paper scissors,
you can arm wrestle in the back,
whatever, by folks to go ahead
and, and come up and give
testimony. You'll get 2 minutes
apiece, uh, and then the senator
will have an opportunity to
respond. So, uh, go ahead. Thank
you, Madam Chair. My name is JD
Bullington and I'm speaking to.
today on behalf of the Greater
Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce.
It supports Senate Bill 27
because it puts motor vehicle
tax payments, uh, where they
belong back into our roads and
transportation projects. The
proposed changes in this bill
will ensure recurring source of
revenue to keep our roads and
bridges in safe traveling shape
to date, the road and
transportation funds have relied
on revenues from gasoline and
diesel taxes, commercial
trucking fees and vehicle
registration fees and these
revenues have just not kept pace
with the increased.
cost to repair and build our
roads, so the greater
Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce
urges it do pass on this bill.
Um, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Rikier as secretary
for New Mexico Department of
Transportation, as you all may
be aware, we've introduced, uh,
with, um, representatives Harman
B. Hill, Lundstrom, and Chair de
la Cruz, House Bill 145, which
is aimed at increasing um or
authorizing the state
transportation commission to
issue up to $1.5 billion in
bonds for road construction
projects. Uh, what the senator
is proposing in this bill would
generate revenue that would
support the debt service
payments for.
that bond for those bonds over a
period of time and help support
what's uh been a more greater
than 20% increased cost to
construction going back to the
pandemic. I, I do need to point
out that uh I hate to put an
asterisk on our support, but we
too are looking at what the
impact of the full amount coming
out of the general fund to the
state road fund would do. We
understand that you all have a
responsibility to build that
budget, uh, but we appreciate
the measure that would bring the
revenues to support what we're
trying to do.
with our House Bill 145. Thank
you.
Madam Chair, Mike Sandoval
registered lobbyists with
associated contractors of New
Mexico. Thank you Senator Woods
for bringing this bill forward.
Um, we support this bill. We
know that roads and highways are
several billion dollars, um,
underfunded. Um, the roads need
more money as a former cabinet
secretary a couple years ago. I
don't know how Secretary Cerna
does it because the cost of
highway and road construction
right now is probably 5 or 10
times more than even a couple of
years ago. Um, so we fully
support, um, this initiative
and, and um asset. Madam.
Lois asphalt Pavement
Association of New Mexico, we
support this bill, asphalt is
the uh uh is 100% recyclable and
the most recycled product in the
world, uh, and uh we believe
that this bill, uh, is a
much-needed revenue stream, uh
for roadways in New Mexico, and
we certainly support this bill.
Thank you. Good afternoon, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
My name is Vanessa Lari and I'm
a registered lobbist for
multiple economic development
entities, specifically in Donana
County, Bernao County, Sandoval
Co.
Just to name a few. I just want
to speak in support. Thank you,
Senator Woods for bringing this
bill. Roads are an impediment to
economic development or road
construction, so this bill will
certainly help with economic
development and creation of jobs
in New Mexico. We need more
areas to um increase job
creation and without having
roads, we have a barrier to
entry. So thank you again,
Senator. Thank you, Senators,
the opportunity to speak.
OK, thank you very much. Senator
Woods, you have an opportunity,
if you'd like to respond to
that, or we can go ahead and go
to the committee.
It's It's 100% behind me, madam
chair. I, I'm gonna stay with
that. There you go, smart man.
Uh, anything from the committee.
So, Madam Chair, I can't
remember the year, but the, a
history lesson when the price of
oil and gas dropped and
production dropped and we didn't
have any oil and gas money.
We were in dire straits.
And that's when we did this.
That's when we said, nope, we're
not going to put this in the
road fund. We have to use it
just to keep the lights on in
this building.
It's time to put it back where
it belongs.
Thank you, Senator Sher. Senator
O'Malley.
came in here. So I'm looking at
the crossed out parts of this
bill, and so the question I have
is,
That we've got the state road
fund.
And then we have the
Transportation project fund.
I guess, can somebody speak to
that?
The difference between those
two.
Madam Chair, Senator, the
transportation road fund is for
local uh road projects. It's
used by local governments for
their roads, whereas the um
State fund is for state roads.
OK, so when you say state roads,
are you talking about roads or
is it, I mean, so when you talk
about transportation, that means
a lot of different things. So I
represent an urban area, right?
So that means a lot of, you
know, it's for uh transportation
fund can mean a lot of different
things, right? It just doesn't
mean a road.
So I guess what I'm asking is
the road fund, does that just
mean road?
Um, Madam Chair, the, uh,
The
The limit, the transportation
project fund is a program that
we manage that allows for local
governments to apply for funding
to support a local road project.
For the most part, the statutory
limitations on those projects
are anything but a
beautification project. So that
can be a study, a design, it can
be a bike lane, um, it can be
other modes, it can be any of
the modes of transportation that
the local government can apply
for.
Oftentimes because the fund is
limited right now at about 52
million, then the districts who
rank the projects primarily, of
course, are supporting.
Much needed improvements to poor
pavement and poor bridge
conditions priority.
The state road fund statutorily
is to support any public
transportation system in the
state. And so the state roach
fund could be used for
Different modes of
transportation as well. It can
be used also to support, perhaps
even support and provide revenue
to the transportation project
fund to give locals more, so the
state road fund essentially is
the budget $500 million a year,
give or take, that we use to
operate as an agency and that we
use primarily for maintenance of
state roads because our federal
funds can't be used for
maintenance.
OK, just hold on just a second,
so I stepped down.
Oh yeah, I think secretary,
you're gonna, you're gonna be in
demand for this one. OK.
So the state, the state road
fund is essentially for the
whole state, but it does not
mean it could mean studies, it
could mean other modes of
transportation, that sort of
thing.
I just wanna be clear, Madam
Chair, Senator, that, that's
correct. The, the agency, of
course, prioritizes the use of
the state road fund for our
operations as an agency and to
support maintenance of state
roads, to be sure, there are
opportunities for us to provide
financial support to locals or
tribal governments to support
their infrastructure needs as
well. OK. I just want to be
clear on that because, you know,
we've got a state's got very
different needs, right? Urban
centers have
Very different needs
transportation wise, then, uh,
you know, and I'm assuming that
some of these roads are in
terrible condition. There's
long, you know, we've got areas
that are
You know,
You drive a long ways, it's a
long roads, and so I could see
the concern, especially in rural
areas for maintenance of those
roads.
I just, I just kind of wanted to
get a sense of that so that I
was looking, you know, where are
the dollars, you know, coming
from, because we're all gonna
put into this fund, right? So,
uh, I just wanna make sure that
we, you know, essentially,
You know, in one way or the
other we put into the sponge,
right, if we, you know,
basically we're talking about
vehicles.
I just want to be clear on what
that meant.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator O'Malley,
Vice Chair Bergman. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Um, this question
is also probably for the
secretary, but if is this bill
is House Bill 145 contingent on
this bill passing?
Like, would you have the bonding
capacity.
Or House Bill 1 145.
Pa?
Madam Chair, um, and senator,
um, great, great question, yes,
they are not tied together.
Well, yes, no, sorry, cause you
did ask, are they tied together?
No, they are not tied together
and they're not contingent on,
on them passing if say this bill
were to pass in 145 or not to
pass, then we'd have new
recurring revenue with which to
put towards maintenance
operations and even local
support. If House Bill 145
passed and we wouldn't receive
new revenue.
Then the state transportation
commission would make a
fiduciary decision about how
much it can borrow based on how
much it would cost to pay it
back, and it could use existing
state road fund revenue combined
with federal funds to pay that
debt. But what it fundamentally
does is takes capacity from
those funds.
That's all. Thank you.
Thank you, Vice Chair. Anything
else from the committee?
All right, seeing none on this.
Thank you, Senator. We are
holding this for consideration.
Um, secretary, I have a feeling
you're gonna be needed for this
next one as well.
Don't run off.
And so, um, thank you. We're now
on Senate Bill 28, the corporate
income tax to State Road Fund.
OK, we just had a discussion.
We've already had the discussion
that we think we need money.
OK, we just had a discussion on
bonding.
And I'm sure everybody in the
room understands bonding.
What that is,
I borrowing money.
To do work today and paying it
off in the future.
Now, New Mexico is in a is in a
position today.
That were not very
Very, you, we're not usually in.
We are cash rich.
Yeah
You'll hear every story in the
world, and it's so hard to get
your hands around how much money
we have. They'll say, well, this
is new money and that is new
money, and the funny thing about
New Mexico, Madam Chair.
We spend that money as it comes
here.
We, we estimate revenues. You've
heard that word.
Estimated revenue.
What I am proposing with this
bill.
Is putting enough money up.
That we don't have to bond.
Use actual cash. We've got it.
We don't burden future
generations.
We say, let's use it today. Now,
in analysis says, oh hell, we
can't do this forever.
Hey, you know what?
Each one of you have a right to
vote every year on how money is
spent.
You can change that law anytime
you want. All you got to have in
the Senate is 22 votes, Madam
Chair.
What I'm proposing with this
bill.
is to cash that deal.
To use cash to build highways.
Think what that does for your
future generations.
Here's a possibility here.
Now
The pluses and minuses, madam
chair.
I know.
How important is it for you?
To have your highways.
How important could we do this?
Just take a wild guess, if we
could do this for 3 years.
Mr. Secretary, what would you
think if we could do this for 3
years.
Um, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, um,
If I were to multiply what this
bill is estimating to do, it
would mean that we'd have 2.1
billion approximately of road
funding, uh, over the course of
3 years.
Um, the only concern we would
have with that is the capacity
with which the staff could get
those projects ready and uh out
the door and prepared for
construction, and so but but
with that, with that, who's to
say that we don't set up a
little trust fund.
To, to, to, if we can't burn
this all in one day.
We don't have to.
We can stretch this out.
We can do so many things.
Madam Chair.
Don't, don't think outside the
box.
Don't let them think that.
You got your thumb on you. You
guys are the transportation
committee.
Y'all have great power.
Act
Madam Chair
Can we get a shirts that say
that.
Thank you, Senator Woods,
yeah, exactly. Uh, all right,
thank you very much. At this
point, uh, we're going to
audience and so just by a show
of hands, how many here in the
room are in favor of this bill.
Uh, lone JD, OK, there we go. We
have 23. All right. Anybody in
this room, uh, in opposition of
this bill.
All right, see none Senator
Woods. What about online?
Have anybody who is in favor,
raise your hand on Zoom.
Right, while we're figuring that
out, those, uh, 3 of you that
you wanna go ahead and come on
up and, uh, and give your public
testimony.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. My name is JD
Bullington, representing the
greater Albuquerque Chamber of
Commerce, which also supports
Senate Bill 28. All of us who
drive our roads in New Mexico,
we know what kind of conditions
they're in and in many places
when we cross state lines, we,
we, we see some differences.
Funding our roads has always
been a challenge.
Sort of a cobbled together
system that never quite catches
up with the backlog of
maintenance and construction
needs and good roads are a key
to economic development,
tourism, and safety. So the
greater Albuquerque Chamber of
Commerce supports this bill.
Thank you, Chairman Jim Garcia,
executive director of Associated
Contractors of New Mexico, uh,
Senator, we thank you for
bringing this bill. We think
that any options that we can
bring to the table that will
give us some type of a vehicle
to be able to spend more money
on roads is a good thing, um, so
we endorse this bill. Thank you
very much.
Thank you very much. Was there
one other
you know
All righty, and we do not have
anybody online, um, and so at
this point, Senator Woods repeat
of our last one, you're welcome
to respond to to uh.
Public testimony or we can go
ahead and go to committee
questions and comments.
Yeah, let's go to
you're not gonna look like in
the mouth. What you, what, uh,
I'm thinking I'm in pretty good
shape. I think, I think you
might be just a little, a little
bit. All right, if I can uh go
to the committee, uh, Senator
O'Malley.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Well,
first of all, I don't see any
problem with
Bonding out. I don't know what
the rate is for, for right now,
but it's pretty low to borrow
money, so I don't see a problem
with that. I think the other
issue is, you mentioned all this
cash on hand, but we don't have
the capacity to get it out the
door. We just don't. Uh, we have
so much in the pipeline now,
there just isn't enough, so I
don't, I don't oppose. I just
want you to know I have no
problem with a, a state agency
or local government borrowing
money to do infrastructure
projects.
I say.
Thank you, Senator. Any other
comments or questions?
Right, see none. Senator, thank
you very much for your time. I
appreciate that. Again, with the
same bill, uh, with your
previous bill, we will hold that
for consideration to a tax
package, appreciate your
advocacy for our roads.
So,
I know Senator Brantly just
bolted. She'll come right back,
but I do wanna acknowledge our
FFA students who are there in
the back. It was lovely seeing
you on the floor today. If you
are the group. Am I, am I
correct in the identification?
OK, I just wanna make sure, but
I'm so sorry, you know, and I'm
thinking of my calendar because
I have a 10:30 appointment with
FFH tomorrow. So my apologies. 4
H. thank you. Uh, while Senator
Brantley comes in, do you all
want to stand up and say where
you're from, Madam Chair, and
they're the leadership team.
So they're the leaders of
orange. Fantastic.
Thank you so much. And I
appreciate you all being here
and I hope you've had a
wonderful experience at the
legislature today. Senator
Braley.
Thank you, Madam Chairman,
members of the committee, I'm
joined here today with Luna
County manager Chris Bryce,
who's gonna be our expert
witness on all things Southern
New Mexico right now, we did
have some others, but cell phone
service down in southern New
Mexico, as you know, is poor and
so I'm not able to connect with
them to get them here. I'm also
it was Senator Ramos,
Representative Luis Tarasas, and
together we have Southern, uh,
New Mexico delegation. As you
know, in many rural communities,
cell phone coverage is shoddy at
best and in southern New Mexico
some of those.
areas have had deadly
consequences and so because we
have the investments of
cellphone companies go into
areas where they have a customer
base. The reality is that
there's more cows down there
than there are customer base and
so we have long areas along that
southern New Mexico border from
Donana, Luna and into Hidalgo
County that do not have radio
coverage and do not have cell
phone coverage. This is a very
straightforward basic
communication, uh, rural
infrastructure bill. We're
asking for $3 million.
would provide enough cell phone
radio towers that would be
provide complete coverage along
the southern New Mexico border.
I direct you first to your FIR
on the back. It's mentioned that
there has been minimal
investments already made.
To clarify the investments made
to the uh Messia Park in the
Donana County, those radios were
not cell phone infrastructure,
those were handheld radio
devices that they much needed
but did not address this
problem. What was invested was
in Taunna County. We've made
substantial investments around
the tune of $200,000 for them to
do the proper planning of where
these cell phone towers would
go, land management, uh,
designation, and we are ready
and sitting on go for.
these uh cell phone towers and
so uh we stand for any
questions. I'll direct you to
our county manager who's here or
any of the other legislators.
Senator Brantley, does anybody
else want to make a uh a quick
statement, Senator Ras Maur,
thank you so much and uh
Really appreciate you. Um,
To me, this bill is all about
protection for a police officer.
OK, I don't know if most of you
know what Stone Garden funds are
and they're federal funds that
uh let local governments within
the southern border, I believe
it's 125 miles from the southern
border, utilize federal funds to
pay overtime. OK? So we have
people from this town of Hurley,
Santa Clara, Silver City, Luna
County, Demi, Grant County, all
the uh all the local governments
within 125 miles of the border
that can.
apply for those funds. With
those funds, they can pay their
officers overtime, but only over
time to be down there to protect
the border. OK? And we have
numerous uh uh people or
organizations, police
organizations that participate.
And what scares me is they're
usually down there by
themselves, OK? So when they
have no communication,
And they're at the border.
With everything that's going on
now.
They're leaving themselves in
harm's way.
And we have to do something to
help. And I think this is the
perfect way of doing it. Also,
while, while I was down at the
border, um, I spoke to some
local ranchers and I, I heard
this story from one of our
ranchers, which his name is
Russell Johnson. OK, great. He,
he, uh, he fell off the horse,
broke his back.
And they, they took quite a
while to get a hold of an
emergency unit, and they finally
got out there.
When they got out there, the EMT
that was on duty decided that he
needed to be flown out.
They had no communications.
Until they drove to the
rancher's house, leaving the,
uh, Mr. Russell out there, uh,
drove to the, to the rancher's
house to make a call to make
sure that they could fly him
out.
So, communication on the border
is very, very crucial. You not
only our, our safety, for the
safety of our police, but the
residents that live along the
border of the state of New
Mexico and Mexico.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Ramos. So,
uh, going to the audience, um,
in the room, uh, by a show of
hands, who is in favor of this?
I'm sorry, Representative
Tarasis, did you want to go
ahead and say it. Thank you.
Just quickly, without repeating
everything that was said
already, uh, our, I have a um.
A business down there to the
funeral home that responds to a
lot of the calls uh to
immigrants that are found along
the border. We do.
We do have quite a few uh
instances that this happens,
sometimes we, we remove 3.
23 at a time because uh that are
dying of exposure out there. Um,
and so we have to send our
people out there, and there's
many times that they struggle
getting a hold of us, the
medical examiner's office, um,
and, and the sheriff's office
and so it's, it's dangerous to
send our people out there and
again, without repeating what
everyone else has already said,
we have other residents and
people that are just traveling
up and down that corridor, have
no way of communication. So for
safety purposes and for uh good
health out there. We appreciate
it.
your support.
Thank you so much,
Representative Tarasas. I
appreciate that. Thank you, Vice
Chair for pointing that out. Um,
uh, I appreciate your comments.
So those uh in the room who are
in favor by show of hands,
please.
What
Well, that's a given that you
all are in support. OK, great.
Thank you. Anybody in
opposition?
Be careful. I used to teach, I
used to teach college classes. I
watched those hands.
So there's, uh, for the record,
nobody in the audience in
opposition, and so we have one
person online who is in favor,
nobody online who is against.
All right, so why don't we go
ahead and get 5 people? Um,
we'll include Mr. Johnson
online, so we'll have 4 here in
the room to go ahead and come on
up. If you wanna go ahead and
give your testimony, that would
be great. And then after that,
uh, Senator Brantly, you will
have an opportunity to respond
if you so choose, otherwise
we'll go to the committee, and
this is a bill committee that we
will be voting on. So if you
will go ahead and line up behind
the sponsor.
And please say your name for the
record.
committee problem Montoya,
director of public safety for
Luna County.
I just want to say that we have
several instances in Columbus,
where residents from the village
have called 911 and the calls
are going directly to Juarez,
where they're asking for an
ambulance, so we have to, we're
now one in Juarez has to say,
hey, we're not in your country.
Call back. So they call again,
same thing happened. So finally
the per the person has to send
somebody to the station in
Columbus, where they have to
call in an emergency number for
somebody to get some help down
in the border, so.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Secretary Bowie for
the Department of Public Safety
representing United State Police
and law enforcement. Uh, one of
the challenges that we often
have within law enforcement is
communications as a whole. I can
tell you from experience, a lot
of times it's very disheartening
when you can't reach the help
that you're looking for. And so
when radio comes fail often we
rely on cell phone use and I, I
found personally in
circumstances, you know many of
our officers have where that
doesn't work either, and, and
you're left in a position to
really kind of just handling it
on your own, and we work border
operations along with the
governor's organized Crime
commission, and we've done
Uh many border operation there
as of late and our officers are
definitely at risk anytime that
communication is lost and for
those reasons, we really
appreciate the sponsors bringing
this forth and we support this.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, committee members,
Jenny Berner, I'm a private
landowner in a rural area in
southern New Mexico and I
support this bill and thank the
sponsor for bringing it forward
uh for a matter of public safety
for farmers and ranchers and
other constituents living in
those areas. Thank you.
Thank you. We have room for one
more in the room if you want.
Otherwise, we will go online.
Go ahead and go online. Mr.
Johnson, if you will, please
unmute yourself.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair. Uh,
members of the committee, I
appreciate the opportunity to
speak on this bill. Uh, I hope
that you all do consider a
recommendation of do pass on
this, uh, Senator Ramos beat me
to the punch. I'm the rancher
that broke his back on the, on
the border there about a year
ago, so I can't speak on that
story anymore than what already
has been, but I, I can attest to
the communication issues and
struggles that we experience on
the, on the border.
and in these remote areas of
southern New Mexico, probably
better than than most. I also
spent 5 years as a border patrol
agent working these remote areas
of southern New Mexico and
I'll just leave you with one
story that happened recently.
Uh, we did encounter, uh, my
wife and I, we encountered uh uh
individual who had crossed the
border illegally and it passed
out on the highway that runs
through our ranch, and we, we
came up to the group and we were
unable to
To call out and get any medical
help for this person. So we had
to actually backtrack several
miles back to our house where we
could get on a landline, so that
we could get some aid to this
person, so, again, I strongly
recommend that uh a do pass be
considered on this bill. Thank
you.
Thank you, Mr. Johnson.
Appreciate it. Um, Senator
Brantley, you're more than
welcome to respond, um, given
that all the comments you're
gonna uh follow and and Senator
Wood's footsteps.
Absolutely. Thank you. Thank
you. And so, uh, now up to the
committee.
Any questions or comments from
the committee.
OK, we'll go ahead and we'll
hold on, we'll, we'll let you
have that. We're gonna have
Senator Worth and then Senator
Perkins. Uh, thank you, ma'am.
So the appropriation is to the
local government division of DFA
is the intent that this, that
the infrastructure is gonna be
built out by local governments
or is the intent that this is
supposed to go to private.
Private cellphone or tower
companies.
Madam Chair and Senator Worth,
we're
We're intended to be the
Assist on the past through the
funding, um, we passed a
resolution back in 20 or 2022,
essentially begging cell phone
companies to come to the area
and that we would do anything we
could could to support them to
come down. Uh, we're also in
talks with New Mexico Tech who's
working or possibly going to
work a 5G, uh, cell phone
service down there in
conjunction with Plius and all
that's going down there, so
we're looking at every avenue we
can to make this happen.
So, the only reason I'm flagging
you could have an anti-donation
problem.
If it's private companies,
they're gonna get the money, but
it's going through local
government division, and I think
the key thing they'll, they'll
coordinate with.
The various
Local governments that apply or
they do an RFP for this, but I
just think to the extent that
the idea is we're gonna take $3
million of state money and use
it for infrastructure.
There could be. I mean, I don't
know that there is, but I'm just
flagging that as a poss
possibility. I know we've, we've
tweaked some different
exceptions to the anti-donation
clause for kind of the last mile
piece of it, but
I just, I just want to flag that
issue there. So there's a
That would be something that DFA
would certainly
Focus on. Senator, yes sir,
we're, we're
And more than aware of it and
we're, we're working to make
sure that we don't violate any
of that. Again, that's probably
why we're gonna go through New
Mexico Tech with their with
their assistants, uh, they've
done a lot of this in the past
and they're a lot smarter, quite
frankly, than we are, so.
No, I think they're smarter than
all of us. So I do have a
possible amendment that I think
you'll like, uh, because one of
the concerns raised in the FIR
is that doing this in one year
is too short a time period. So
I'm wondering if you would
consider this a friendly
amendment on line 20 after 2026
ad and 2027, which would give
you two fiscal years to spend
the money, and then down in line
24, have the money, the balance
revert, uh, delete 2026 and
replace it with 2020.
7, that would just give you a
little more time and I think
address the issues that are
In the FIR so I don't know if
that's a friendly amendment.
That's a very friendly
amendment, Madam Chair.
I'm sure I would make that
amendment again, I think, not
sure how you wanna do that, but
I think that's pretty
straightforward, so we can, we
can do that.
So, on that moment, given that
the sponsors have said that's a
friendly amendment. Can I go
ahead and have, uh, actually, I
have a feeling that there's not
gonna be any opposition. So if
there is any opposition, uh, can
you go ahead and show your hand?
Otherwise, we will take the
amendment as uh added to this
bill.
See no opposition.
So we'll do that as a
If a unanimous.
I like that idea too. That's all
I have. All right, thank you
very much, Senator Wirth, and I
think that's something also that
would prepare for long term that
really is, is essential. Uh,
best chair, you had, uh, any
questions or I think Senator
Worth also hit that for you,
answered my question.
Right. Any other questions or
comments from the committee.
Otherwise, we'll go to, OK,
Senator Figueroa. Thank you,
Madam Chair and thank you,
senators, um.
And maybe someone on the
committee can answer this
question. I'm gonna take the
opportunity to learn something
this reads like a straight up
capital Lley bill, so why isn't
it in our state capital outlay
framework, or why isn't it one
of our capital outlay requests.
Madam Chair and Senator
Figueroa, there has been capital
outlay allocated to that. In
fact, if I directed you to the
FIR, the 250,000 that Luna
County has received before to
begin the planning of this so
that we're well prepped for this
was actually my capital outlay
fund that helped, that helped,
um, seed the money on that.
There will be asked, we're
running this as a bill, um, uh,
because it, it it is straight an
appropriation bill. That is an
ask is for a capital outlay
appropriation bill, and we will
be
For finance after this committee
should have passed this
committee.
Thank you, Madam Chair, that,
that essentially was my question
with capital outlay requests, we
get a bunch of other information
like whether it's in an ISA and
whether there's been bonding to
pay for part of it, what parts
the municipalities and counties
have already put in, and other
than that, 230,000 in the FIR
that information isn't here, so
I would have loved to see it,
but that's my only question,
Madam Chair. Thank you, Senator
Figueroa. Anybody else, uh,
Senator O'Malley?
for a second time. Don't worry,
Senator Sher, I haven't
forgotten you
Thank you, Madam Chair. I mean,
this is, um,
Uh, kind of a unique situation
in that, you know, I, I can
understand the public uh safety
angle, I mean, clearly though,
it, you know, it's gonna go to
the experts as to, you know, to
build it, right? I mean, it's
likely going to be
communications companies that
are going to get it. Um, and my,
my understanding is that you
couldn't get anybody interested
in the private sector to
actually build these cell towers
because they were so out in the
middle of nowhere.
Uh, so once they get built, um,
who owns them?
OK, Madam Chair and members of
the committee, I just want to
verify we haven't and we're not
going to in the actual statute
say who we
would do the construction of
this. But as um our county
manager, uh, Mr. Bryce has, has
referenced in Senator Ramos and
Luis Trasas and I have visited
with New Mexico Tech. They have
a very large institute down
there in Plius right along the
border. The technology that they
were putting out there is
Mind-boggling, and the reality
of what they said is, should,
should this communication
infrastructure money come
through. They would like to
assist us in providing more
coverage at a lower cost. That
is our intent is to, to, uh,
combine with New Mexico Tech and
getting these infrastructure
communications out. With that in
mind, it'd be working with the
county to identify uh land
ownership and where those towers
would need to go, that process
has already started, um, but at
the end of it, New Mexico Tech
would only.
Towers if they were the ones who
constructed it, correct?
Hm
That is a interesting. I don't
see how that work, but, uh, and
I'm just saying this because
once you have that
infrastructure up and whoever
owns it has the ability to
Lease it, lease the, the air
whatever that they do, right, to
lease it, so how does the, you
know, the entity or the, the
county or whoever agency
benefits from that.
Right, so, I think that, you
know,
There's some, you know, really
need to think about this is I
guess what I'm saying is how do
you really benefit from the how
the community benefit from that,
and not just, you know,
basically build something for
private industry to benefit and
Senator, um,
Regardless of whether it ends up
in New Mexico Tech state in your
uh.
the County's property, you're
right, it does allow us to.
Ha other antennas on that tower
that might not otherwise be
allowed through a private cell
phone company, um, because it
would belong to us.
That also increases our reach
for
Lunar County Volunteer fire, um,
you know, the sheriff's office
and all of those we can.
Put repeaters out where we might
not otherwise be able to, if
it's solely owned by a private
cell phone company, we have the
controlling over that, so that's
one of the big reasons. Madam
Chair, I just pointed it out
because of the Senator Worth's
comment as well about the
anti-donation law. You could get
into, you know, there could be
an issue there. That's all.
Thank you.
Extension.
OK. Any other questions,
comments from the committee
before I go to Senator Sheriff
for a motion.
Yeah,
yeah, OK, Senator Sher moves to
due pass. Do I have a second? As
amended, thank you. As amended,
Senator Sanchez, uh, 2nd, as
amended.
If you will call the roll 7.
Senator Figueroa.
Yes
Senator had a meal. Yes, Senator
O'Malley.
Senator Paul
Senator Ramos.
Senator Sanchez.
As
Senator Sharr.
I want to eat.
Yes.
Then Sanches, you're confirming
your past
Senator Sharp.
Yeah.
Senator Wirth, yes, Senator
Bergmann's, and Senator Hamlin.
We have 10 yeses for a due pass
by unanimous vote
congratulations, Senator. Thank
you very much. Enjoy uh Senate
Finance with this.
All right, committee, we have,
we have blown through a, uh, an
agenda. However, this was just a
primer to what we're going to do
on Thursday. Uh, we will have 10
bills on Thursday, um, as the
committee is working together,
so thank you very much and uh we
will see you on Thursday, a
committee is adjourned. Madam
Chair, no Saturday, correct? at
this moment.
