The hands of those in support
and those in opposition. We will
hear from an equal amount on
both sides. After seeing how
many will be speaking, I will
assign a time limit that will be
applied to everyone. Um, so that
this is your advanced notice of
being prepared to make sure that
your points are heard. Um,
chances are it's gonna be one or
two minutes, so just kind of
prepare for that.
Um, you will be given a 32nd
warning by Senator Leo had a meo
and then we'll be asked to stop
when your time is up. Please
respect that that will also be
applied to everybody. Then we
will go to the committee for
comments or questions and then
we are going to start as a
subcommittee because we do not
have a quorum, but because of
all the people that are here
today, we do not want to delay
this. We want to be respectful
of the time. The time that you
have taken from your work from
your businesses from your jobs.
To make sure that your print
that your points get across and
get hurt today. If we do not
have a quorum by the time we are
done with this presentation
today, we will hold on the bill
and we will do a hard vote on
Tuesday is the beginning.
So my good
Yeah. Alright. If you know, I
like to run a tight meeting, so
So let's get to it, Shall we?
Senator, We do need to do a roll
call of attendance before we get
started. And then Senator
Stewart
here.
Senator she right, So we are
going to operate as a
subcommittee, so Senator
Stewart, representative Cerrato.
You're welcome to start.
Thank you.
Um with me, one of the House
sponsors and Tracy McDaniel from
the Southwest Women's Law
Center.
Southwest Women's Law Center,
the president charity they have
been working on this for four
years.
From the House.
So I want to just review with
you all what This bill is, and
then I want to talk about the
change last year because you
heard this bill last year, there
are good and significant changes
made and we'll talk about how
that happened. So I'll briefly
tell you what it is tell you
about the changes.
I asked my sponsor to Tracy is
going to answer all your hard
questions. So again. We're here
with paid family and medical
Leave act. It creates a fun
that's going to be a
Paid Family Medical Leave Act
will be funded through small
employee
0.4% for employers. That's $4
for every $1000 of wages
multiplied by 0.004. There's
been some, um and, uh
0.5% for employees. Now, if
you're an employer with fewer
than five employees fund your
employees do so. The
66% of our businesses are the
ones that won't have to pay it.
That's how many small we have a
significant number of small
businesses in this last year.
We not only did we pull 350 of
them.
But we started working with the
small business majority and we
started working with another
state.
Because small, this probably
will gain the most out of this
bill.
Uh, more larger employers are
under family Medical Leave act.
It's not paid, but they have to
follow that federal law and many
of them offer some type of pay.
So, um, what does it do? It
allows employees up to 12. Weeks
of leave for very specific
reasons.
Um the medical leave has to be
determined by a healthcare
professional and has to be
approved by the workforce
Solutions. There are high bars
to get into this program.
We do only partial way to
replacements.
To make sure that workers go
back to work when they're done
with either there are three
months for pregnancy, maternity
or paternity leave or the home
either their own serious medical
condition, caring personal
condition.
Also, victims of domestic
violence are part of this. It's
a very small part. Connecticut
has the same provisions we do
they had 32,015
Word domestic violence. So we're
55,013
55,000 cases, 13 domestic
violence. She's in a correct me
all afternoon. I'm ready for it.
And accepted.
I have a hard time with this
exigencies rising out of a
family member pink ultra
military active duty, so it's
paid for through the small fees
every year, 34% of them five or
more employees. Hey, 218
priests.
We? We have a cap on the amount
of funds you get while you're on
this
Average. It's the state average
wage divided by 52. So that's
currently $1046.
Uh, one of the changes we've
made is put in a cap on
contributions of the way they do
that also
So medical leave is not calling
in sick. You got a cold or flu
Or all of that, Um it sick
leave. This requires an
application to work for
solutions, a verification
process so leave takers are
required to put in that
application.
And include a healthcare
providers signed verification
with an estimated length of
leave necessary. So on that
documentation from the medical
provider will how long to be
For military circumstances.
Military leaders
The workforce solution will have
up to 20 business days to
process claims. We have 14
states with paid family medical
leave laws. They reported very
little fraud and abuse
California They just say it
barely drops.
So the benefits to small
businesses are numerous. Um you
know our larger business, As I
said, often already have this so
The question of solvency and
sustainability, and we have
worked with the U. S. Department
of Labor Women's Bureau. Um they
are the people that work with
the other fourth. The 14th.
And they looked at our and they
determined that our son will
remain solvent their own opinion
about that. I certainly think
the s I r had three different
scenarios. One scenario was we
could lower the these and the
other to read raise them so that
will be determined as well. So
the bill protects employers and
the fund.
Like capping contributions in
crow 0.1% of wage It will keep
that same 45% by the employer
and 55. That's the breakdown on
whose pace for it, So if we need
to raise it, we have a cap on
helm. A that, uh 45 and 55
portions for
Employer and we've delayed the
implementation on this until
2027
That's when people could
Apply for the fund in 2026. We
passed this now the rest of this
year. Um, and plenty of next
year will be groom making from
the workforce Secretary from
Workforce Solutions is on. So we
require employees to have worked
at least 90 days in their
employment before they have the
job protection.
Because this bill, just fun idea
is that you have to take Leah
average and many other states as
and you come back to your same
job.
And so if you've worked at that
employment for least 90 days,
then they're required to have
you go back to your job or or a
very similar job with the same
Uh, salary.
So employees have to have paid
in six months into the fund
before they can apply. Can't get
a job and turn around the next
day and apply. You have to have
worked for at least six months.
We are requiring an eight hour
minimum leave increment. Think
about someone who's on dialysis
house to do it every week. Uh,
we had four hours last year.
We've changed that for the
business community eight hours
straight of time.
We allow self employed
individuals to opt out.
Or to participate.
Up to them.
We clarified that the federal
Medical Leave Act which is not
paid must be taken concurrently
with paid family medical leave
if you're in a business, and of
course we incentivize employees
return to work.
My only providing 60 some
percent of their wages above
minimum wage with a cap at the
average now is 1000. So let me
just talk a little bit more
about the changes and then
Toronto.
With added causes for leave.
talked about it already that
military we've clarified that
leave of the loss of a child is
only available for the
contributions with talked about
this already. We happen on the
contribution added language,
clarifying that employers who
have the waiver
And their employees are not
required to pay premium. You
have a program that
substantially similar and you
want to you apply for a waiver,
Then you don't pay into the
fund. You're already providing
your employees with
substantially similar greater
than we're offering.
We have added a required five
year waiting period for an
employer to reapply for private
plan waiver after so we have
solvency measures that we've
added, We've added a requirement
for the workforce solutions to
conduct a qualified actuarial to
contract with a qualified
actuarial firm.
To conduct an actually study by
January 1 2025.
That could possibly change. See?
It adds requirement that the
secretary ports results of the
solvency two though we've we
have an advisory committee for
the secretary to help her in the
first year and a half where
she's educating
Employers and employees and
working with them on rule making
to make all these other things
that we do like unsafe Asian
bike, etcetera.
So we've put in place is
implementation of virus. Every
committee. We've added a member
representing small business
owners, and we've added a
represent
Add the requirement for leave
that applications include that
medical professionals assessment
of the timeline for expected
return to work on that for both
of family and medical leads.
And we've added requirement for
the one other change all
mentioned and then I'll pass it
over to representatives. Serato.
Ah, we clarify that claims for
leave are based on an
application so we don't have a
issue where you try for three
and we adjust some processing
timelines to ensure that
workforce solution.
Can process claims complaints
and appeals and pass it over to
represent Serato and she can say
what I
Thank you, Chairperson. Thank
you, Senator. Thank you senators
for having us today. Um, this
iteration of the bill has been
worked on for more than two
years, starting with the task
force and meeting many different
stakeholders and accumulating
this, this broad coalition that
we've been able to bring
together.
And in that time three other
states have been able to pass a
version quite similar to ours.
Main, whose economy is very
similar to ours, and a very
different place, Minnesota,
Colorado, just north of us who
we often compete for the job.
And so we see. This is moving in
the same direction. The
definition of family is very
similar. The re 12 weeks is
similar. This is happening
across the country and we see
other states who have older
versions moving towards this
model employer employee. Uh,
contributions going in
And so it reminds me of the
question. Why not New Mexico?
Because our population works
really hard, and we take really
good care of our families as
much as we can. But we need a
robust policy that acknowledges
what are modern workforce looks
like and that is a mix. Those
are people that are business
owners and workers. That's a mix
of people who are in the gig
economy. That's people who are
on the side Hustle that is a
generation of people and they're
making means in this new way.
So we need a policy that
understands that both new
Mexican values that we have in
our modern economy.
We see this in the data. We have
one of the highest sandwich
generations in the nation
sandwich generation as many of
you right now who are taking
care of your elders? Your
parents, your godparents, your
family and your kids. Um, you're
still taking care of everybody,
and that's what we do. We used
to looking at McKinley County,
and they have one of the highest
percentages of of sandwich
generation individuals in the
nation.
Because that's our culture, and
that's that's how we do these
things so we need we need to
understand how this is. As the
senator mentioned. We have been
listening. This is this would
cost $4000 on a million dollar
payroll.
For an individual employee. It
would cost, uh around $218 for
the medium household income in
the state of and if it's a in
the rare occurrence that you are
a restaurant, hip to worker
working 40 hours a week, 52
weeks a year.
For an employer it would cost
$25 a year to cover this, but
the benefits are massive, and I
see this as a real win win win
for the entire state. Um, and
I'll use my own experience. I
came back to New Mexico when my
husband got a job here and I
was, you know, collateral, And
so they said, Come and join us
in New Mexico. This will be
great. I love New Mexico. And
when I When I looking at that I
was coming from California,
which has a robust
Paid family medical leave
policy, disability policy. All
these elements in my edition. We
didn't have that here. We don't
have it here. And so there's a
handshake agreement that they
would be able to honor that
agreement. When I moved to New
Mexico when I had with you.
Should I ever have kids and I
got pregnant and that handshake
agreement disappeared before my
eyes, and I found a wonderful
employer in New Mexico. Who
said, Hey, your kid can get away
on the road with us. We're okay.
That's fine.
And I had this economic
security that is so important
for raising families and
reducing stress and my first
daughter and I had that bonding
time breastfeeding was
established through mastitis
through a number of
difficulties. Um and and tongue
ties and everything, and we made
it to just about a year of
breastfeeding.
With my second despite the fact
that my New Mexico nonprofit
cobbled together three weeks of
paid time off, um, that I had a
cesarean and I had to get back
to work after three weeks, and
they were as generous as they
could be that cost them $5000
for me to be. My colleague also
is out. Her husband had an
illness that we they didn't they
weren't able to diagnose another
$5000 for small nonprofit.
$10,000 out the window.
Now this policy been in place
The full budget for that profit
was around a million dollars.
This budget been in place, they
would have been able to offer us
both 12 week process if we
needed it intermittent leave as
my colleague needed for $4000
just on that budget definitely
less for actual payroll cost
itself.
And so for my second daughter,
we didn't have that economic
security that I had with my
first She was a much better
breast feeder. We only made it
about six months. I regret that
I wish that would be different.
And I will say that as people
are looking to where to move
their economy, where to move
skilled workers, they go to
where they will get what they
need. And we see that across the
board. There are studies that
show that this would add 22,000
workers to the economy, and I
believe that it is for the good
of our Mexican workers to have
this benefit to take time Take.
I believe it's good for our
communities that we ensure that
we have these values in our
communities every day.
And I believe it's good for
businesses that we have a
stronger labor economy labor
market when we were competing
across the board for the chair,
I think we're ready for
questions or comments from the
audience. Alright, thank you
very much. We also have
workforce Secretary sorry to
near who is online so she can
answer any questions from the
committee when we get to that
point?
So, Rebecca, I'm gonna need your
help in this, um just by a show
of hands, how many people in the
audience are in favor of the
bill, Please keep your hands up.
We're going to count them.
You count that side. I'll get
the side 234 Pi eight.
40. Okay. Thank you. Now by a
show of hands. How many are in
opposition? Please keep your
hands up. Kind of hoping to be a
little bit more balanced here,
to um Alrighty. So, um, what
we're going to do is first hear
from all eight of you who are in
opposition.
Okay, So if you will, Tracy, I'm
gonna have you scoot over
because they're going to need to
use that portable Mike.
This one.
In the middle, So there's one on
the side. Alright. So all eight
of you who are in opposition,
please line up behind.
The table here. If you will, you
will have two minutes apiece. So
Senator had a meo will give you
a 32nd warning to let you know
that your time will be nearing
its end. When the two minutes
are up. He will ask you to stop
so please stop. So be be aware
of your time.
And we will also offer the same
thing up for those in in
support, given
That we're gonna have to decide
on that number, but at the
moment
Let's go ahead and hear from
those in opposition. So you will
need to state your name. If
you're representing an agency,
and you've got two minutes and
Senator had Emilio will make
sure he warned you with the 32nd
and to stop. All right, Go
ahead, Terry, secretary and
members of the committee. My
name is Terry Cole. I am the
President CEO for the Greater
Albuquerque before I present the
Three points I wanted to share
in opposition to the bill. I
wanted to let you know with
Senator with, um
Center Yes with Senator Stewart
over the last six months or so,
and it's just been terrific to
be able to talk so openly about
this bill. I want you also to
know that our board voted
unanimously to support parental
leave, and we would be very
happy to support a bill like
that should it surface.
With response to this. The first
is that imposes a new tax on
employers and employees alike,
which is the latest in a string
of increased costs imposed on
business seconded harm small
businesses. We believe they lack
the flexibilities and third, we
cannot overstate just how hard
it would be to manage a small
business under the
circumstances mandated.
By this bill, So thank you very
much for allowing us to, um,
testify and we urge you to
oppose the bill today. Thank
you.
Madam chair. Alright, that
worked, Um members of the
committee. Um, I'm Kristin
Thompson. I'm representing the
New Mexico Restaurant
Association. We are opposed to
Senate Bill three and have been
working.
On the House side on an
alternative proposal. So, um
Ah, um
Senate Bill three represents a
400 birth $370 million tax
burden that will directly impact
working new Mexicans, including
many in our industry.
At a time when we're grappling
with historic inflation rates
higher costs for essentials and
recovering from recent economic
challenges this additional tax
Could be devastating.
Our employees are already
struggling, increasing their tax
burden and chose a disconnect
with the realities faced by
working class New Mexicans.
Many of our member restaurants
are small businesses, and
they're still adapting to the
existing
Sick leave mandate that was
written recently passed.
The additional financial
And administrative strain
imposed by
Senate Bill three could be
overwhelming.
This is particularly true in our
rural communities were finding
temporary replacements is
already a significant challenge.
New Mexico has one of the lowest
labor participation rates 30
seconds. Thank you in the
country, and this bill could
exasperate exacerbate the issue
by burdening the other hourly
employees who have to fill in on
a temporary and often
intermittent basis.
Finally, the projected
structural deficit within three
years. Time for this year's
proposal is alarming. We've seen
other states struggle with
sustaining similar programs.
Often resulting in increased
taxes year after year.
Thank you. Thank you Before we
continue. Um I would recommend
that those of you who are in
opposition use your full two
minutes because what I'm going
to do just because of the
disparity is that we will have
for those in support 16
speakers, but you'll have one
minute apiece.
Okay, So you all get 16 minutes.
They get 60 minutes. So use your
two minutes.
Oh, sure, if you know you're
done.
You used your two minutes and
Terry. I'm sorry. I didn't do
that. But before I did, I
thought you would be able to
easily do two minutes. I know. I
know. I'm the one who's under
pressure so that we know that
those of you who are in speaking
in favor you've got a minute. Um
you all have got your remainder.
12 minutes. I'm under pressure
to for it. Um, Madam Chair
members of the committee. My
name is Kathy Kamal on the CEO
for the New Mexico Hospitality
Association and I'm here today,
representing hundreds of small
hospitality and tourism
businesses in every county of
the state. Um, I will echo um
Terry and the restaurant
association that we have also
been actively working as part of
a coalition because we are not
opposed at all to the concept of
paid family leave. We just have
some serious business concerns
that we would like to see
reflected in whatever policy is
put in play. And so we've been
working actively. You will see
some of our concerns addressed
in hospital 11.
Um, but today I will
specifically address our
concerns related to to the
Senate bill.
Again. We're not opposed to the
concept, but we do have serious
concerns with the usage and
participation rates that were
used as part of the financial
analysis and the solvency issues
that have been brought up by the
fiscal impact report, and I know
there's there's lots of opinions
on that. But I just want to
stress
That that is an ongoing concern
for us, Um and then the main
issue that we have concerns with
is just the fact that most of
our businesses are small
businesses and especially those
businesses in rural communities
are going to struggle to cover
the 12 week leave that's opted
in this bill, and so we are
proposing shorter terms for that
paid family leave.
Because again when you're a
small, independent business
trying to cover 12 weeks and
especially again in rural
communities, where they have
limited labor resources that is
probably our single biggest
concern, And so again, we are
willing to continue to work on
this issue. We want to have
success for our employees,
especially
And for her business owners, and
so we look forward to working to
find a compromise that allows us
to move forward and not have to
say
Why not? New Mexico? Madam Madam
Chair, Madam chair.
Madam chairman, members of the
committee Tiffany Rivera
registered lobbyists. Mexico
Farming Livestock Bureau where
the state's largest and oldest
agriculture advocacy
organization, Um we respectfully
stand in opposition this
afternoon. While we appreciate
the spirit of the bill and the
work that the sponsors have put
into this effort, ultimately
believe that this approach to a
fate paid family medical leave
program.
Will place a large burden on our
state's agricultural producers
and small based businesses.
Agriculture and New Mexico and
across the country continue to
face challenges in accessing and
securing a reliable labor
source, especially in our rural
communities.
The nature of our sector
requires careful planning and
execution due to the parish
ability of our products and food
safety standards that we must
account for. We have many
concerns with this bill on the
financial burden that old place
on the state employers and
employees and for these reasons
Madam chair and members of the
committee. My name is Abby O
Connor. I'm 1/5 generation
rancher from Stanley, New
Mexico, and I represent 1000
members of New Mexico Cattle
Growers Association.
Cattle growers opposes Senate
Bill Three. There are provisions
that are overly broad, ambiguous
and invited abuse. For example,
Section two s in the cattle
industry. Some compensation is
non cash, House utilities, beef,
truck and fuel before an
employee were to go on leave the
employer and employee would be
paying premiums on wages that
As defined in section two s
would include that non monetary
income. How do we value this non
monetary incomes? Section two D
for the replacement help.
They're probably day laborers
who make themselves available
from their other jobs on their
days off are these also
employees that are under Section
two D qualified for this?
If we can find more stable help,
But the leave isn't taken
consecutively.
Um, what do we tell them? Their
job terms are for this day
Labor. How long will their job
last? What benefits do they
receive?
Section eight G is the employer
now paying for health insurance
for both employee and the
replacement and is that there
When the employee returns from
leave, Do we pay and employment
And is that there too? The
employer respectfully for these
reasons Cattle girls opposes.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the Committee
Travesty. A registered lobbyist
for the New Mexico Chili
Association. We appreciate the
work by the sponsors on this
bill. However, we still have to
respectfully oppose it.
The bill will put a strain on
employers and the state of New
Mexico. Our industry already
suffers greatly from labor
shortages and having a broad,
all inclusive membership.
And trying to get their crops
out of the field.
And narrower approach to
creating a paid family medical
program will accomplish the
needs of New Mexico employees
while protecting the employers
across the state.
Additionally, we have concerns
about how federal migrant
workers will be impacted by this
program and a lot of our members
because of the lack of the
American workforce rely on
workers from other countries to
come over and we just have some
issues and concerns about those
folks paying into a program that
will only benefit American
workers are all these reasons
amongst others. We asked the
committee opposed president and
CEO of the Greater Los Cruces
Chamber of Commerce.
I had a friend once. Tell me
that even though we're on
different sides, you want the
same thing for our communities
and for our state right now, it
seems like there's a big divide,
but my chamber still is not in
support of SB three. We are in
support of paid medical leave
for medical leave in support of
having great opportunities for
our employees. We are faced in
Dona Ana County, too, with the
agriculture of seasonal workers
that we feel like needs to be
explained more, But just
remember, we've got different
ways to get there. But we can
get there. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Oh, madam Chair members of the
committee. My name is Chelsea,
Canada, and I'm, the director of
public policy at the New Mexico
Chamber of Commerce, Like other
colleagues in the business
community have stated the state
chamber has been actively
involved over the interim
discussing it paid family
medical leave proposal. The
chamber respectfully opposes SP
three for many reasons.
Including some of those you have
already heard. Additionally, we
believe this proposal adds a
business tax that undermines the
social safety net by adding an
unfunded mandate on Medicaid
waiver based programs like
senior Care, Home Hospice and
programs supporting folks with
disabilities. The plan is also
not fiscal, fiscally solvent by
the state's own analysis.
The chamber supports an
alternative paid family medical
leave Bill HB 11 this
alternative proposal includes
important feedback from the
business community, addressing
many of the concerns that we
have brought forward during
these discussions. We hope you
get to see it later this session
in this thank you so much,
everybody and thank you for
being respectful of the time.
I'm very grateful. I'm I'm
surprised, though, that
Even go all out for all 16
minutes, But um and so now for
those who are in support, I'll
let you rock paper scissors, but
we get 16 people.
Uh, until line up behind the
podium.
And each of you get one minute
and Senator had Emilio will let
you know when you have a 22nd.
So let's let's wait and make
sure everybody gets in line
first. Before we start, we start
the testimonies.
And sergeant at arms if you can
count to make sure that there
are 16 people
We'll get to those folks online.
I do need to see if this is
updated, Okay?
Alright if you will update that
All right. So you do have a
minute. You will get a 22nd
warning. Okay. Alright, madam
Chair members of the committee.
My name is Paul Chavez, and I
feel like I'm in a unique
position to share my clients
around Senate Bill three.
For the past 30 years, I've been
an employer of small businesses,
and now I am the founder and
executive director of State of
the Heart recovery. We are a
nonprofit substance use and
mental health treatment program.
focusing on uh, on a lot of
homeless clients in the
community, and also I'm a
licensed professional clinical
concert.
So I'll start with that last hat
and just say that, you know, we
often think the monetary side of
things What? Where it's costing
us. Money wise from an employer
or employee standpoint is the
main concern about our health
and well being is not
appreciated with that situation.
And so my staff as we try to
create health and well being in
the community, we we focus on
our staff and so
Retention recruitment and also
just best delivery of of giving
our services is critical. This
bill would at that minute goes
by real fast.
All right. Good afternoon. Good
afternoon. Members of the
committee. Madam Chair, OT MBA.
Who Me with AARP, New Mexico
Advocacy director. We know that
we have an aging and increasing
older population in New Mexico
As such, family caregivers are
the backbone of our long term
care service systems, so some
interesting statistics 270,000.
Unpaid family caregivers are in
our state they provide over 250
million hours of care for free,
which translates to about $3.8
billion and and free services.
So as such, we want to be able
to provide the flexibility to
enable family care givers to
take care of their older parents
or spouses or siblings so that
they don't threaten to lose
their paychecks.
Or their jobs. So please, we
urge you to pass paid family
medical leave. Thank you.
Hello. Okay, madam Chair members
of the committee. My name is
Lansana, policy director for the
Center for Civic Policy. More
importantly, I'm a cancer
patient battling stage four
cancer for the fourth time upon
learning that my chemo stopped
working and the cancer was
spreading to other organs. I
asked my doctor to get me to
September so I can have one last
hot girl summer.
My doctor didn't think I could
make it.
Rather than flying halfway
around the world, chasing my own
hot girl summer I am here
advocating for a comprehensive
12 week paid family medical
leave because I know how
important it is for patients
like me and that it will save
lives.
I've been advocating in policy
because I know that although my
doctor has tried to save me
numerous times, it is a vote of
yes. That can save thousands.
With that. Urge your support.
Uh, Madam Chair Deborah Condit.
I'm standing before you not as a
lobbyist. But as a small
business owner. I own a
bookstore in Albuquerque, New
Mexico. I have eight employees
who I love with all of my heart.
They are my family and if any
industry should be up here
opposing any additional cost, it
would be the book story industry
If you want to get into a job,
or you're not gonna make money.
This is it.
And, um yeah, so and if any, any
costs go up the list prices on
the back of books or the list
prices. I cannot raise my
prices. Unlike restaurants, so
This is a good edge for me to be
able to attract deploy ease. And
unlike some of the bigger
bookstores out there, I won't
name it, but to offer for my
employees to be able to happen,
And so I stand in strong support
of this year. Hamlin and members
of the committee My name is
Julie Radosevich. I am a
community leader and advocate
from the West side of
Albuquerque.
And I'm a daughter, Mother and a
grandmother.
I understand the intensity of
caregiving for elders. I helped
care for my uncle who died at
94, as well as my mother, who
died at 93.
I watched my sister care for her
husband as he lost his fight
against bone cancer.
Caregiving taxes us emotionally
as well as physically but I hate
that it threatens our economic
security.
Last week, I had the privilege
of holding my six week old
grandson, My son and daughter in
law work in New York state, a
state with paid family medical
leave.
And with no fear of distress or
financial distress. They are
bonding and caring for their
newborn, and both will return to
their jobs just like they did
after their first child.
Paid family and medical leave
puts our families of New Mexico
first and I support Senate Bill
three.
Good afternoon, everyone. My
name is Janice Petersen. I'm
from Galilee, Mexico.
I wish this Pammy medically was
acting back in the years I
choose my job over my head
shears because he passed on with
the lung cancer and it was hard
for us to meet the end because
Um, I couldn't have any other
benefit to track back on him.
But this is what really helped
and generate our community and
our area to help put future
Generation, not just the state.
It's our future generations, but
we're looking at it for their
best of needs for younger people
that they need what they're
going to fly back on it, But
it's our days now. Yes, we all
had titles. We all have position
that we carry, but with the
Navajo Nation has been very hard
for us to continue on with their
life with their people. So this
pay paid family medical leave
were really help us out. I'm
really supporting that very
happy to be here. Thank you and
have a good day.
Chair Hamblin members of the
committee. My name's Alexandria.
Taylor. I'm, the executive
director of the New Mexico
Coalition of Sexual Assault
programs. We stand in support of
SB three because it includes
critically important safely
provisions for survivors of
sexual and domestic violence,
the important safe leave and
paid family medical leave policy
is about safety, equity and
economic security.
Survivors need paid safely in
order to maintain economic
security, leave their abusive
partners and seek safety and
healing for their families. Lack
of paid safe leave harms
businesses and the economy
through reduced productivity in
the crop cost of increased
turnover. A recent study
estimated that workers Ms 741
million days of work over their
lifetimes because of domestic
violence and sexual assault.
Lastly, as nonprofit leaders. We
are also managing businesses and
employers and we support SB
three.
Okay. You're chairman members of
the committee. My name is Diana
Marina and I serve as a lone.
Hello. No
Hello. It's working. Okay,
perfect.
Yeah. Thank you. Members of the
committee. My name is Diana
Marine, and I serve as a
lobbyist for the leukemia,
Lymphoma Society, and I am here
to testify in support of the
paid Family Medical Leave Act.
Cancer patients in New Mexico
need paid family and medical
leave so they don't have to
choose between treating their
cancer or keeping their jobs,
Cancer patients and their
caregivers can face devastating
financial choices when illness
strikes, roughly half will face
financial hardship due to the
lack of paid leave access.
Additionally, more than 40% of
cancer survivors had significant
changes in their employment due
to their condition. This
includes switching from part
time status to retiring early
Paid Family Medical Leave Act
will ensure that every working
new Mexican residents can access
paid leave protection when
eating
TD with respect. Good afternoon.
My name is Alicia Ortega. I'm
from the pueblos of Milwaukee
and Santa Clara. I'm here as a
pueblo woman, a new NICU mother
and as a Nikki baby myself on
behalf of NM native vote and as
now a small business owner.
I think it says a lot about our
values as a society when we
value profits over people and we
expect employees to invest their
time in our companies,
Organizations businesses, yet we
abandoned their most basic
needs. No one should have to
choose between being there
during their most critical time
of their loved ones lives and
their jobs, and this is coming
from someone who went from a six
figure salary last year to food
stamps.
After spending three months in
the hospital due to serious
medical complications during my
pregnancy that nearly took my
life with no economic security
from my job, thousands in
medical bills and a family of
five to support with that said
economic security at our most
vulnerable points in life is
love, compassion and just good
business. Thank you.
Good afternoon. Senators. My
name is Reverend Erica Ferguson.
I'd like to say that there is a
spiritual connection called
compassion that all spiritual
traditions emphasize it is the
importance of compassion that
allows us to care for others.
Paid family leave aligns with
this value by recognizing the
sacred duty for caring for
family members, especially in
times of need. It embodies the
spiritual principle of
selflessness and love for one's
family, allowing individuals to
be fully present for their loved
ones without the burden of
financial worry.
With my last 20 seconds like for
us to take
a breath.
Just a gentle inhale.
That breath is what families get
to take with this. Thank you.
Thank you, Reverend.
Thank you, madam Chair members
of the committee John Lipschitz,
representing the New Mexico
Federation of Labor, F l c i o
We represent approximately
40,000 workers in every corner
of the state. Um, while some not
all some of our members do
actually have the benefit of
some form of paid family leave
through negotiations. We have
certain core values in our
organization, and we believe
that certain basic and
inalienable rights such as paid
family medical leave
Should belong to all workers,
not just those who we represent,
And so for that reason we urge
your support and we very much
thank the sponsors and all the
advocates that have been working
for years. Years on this
measure, Thank you very much.
Honorable chair and members of
the committee. My name is
Jennifer gets and I'm, the
executive director for the
commission on the Status of
Women. Part of My job is to
speak to women around the state
about what is most affecting
their lives. And I hear time and
again that domestic violence and
sexual assault or two of the
issues affecting most women in
New Mexico well, there are many
ways in which paid family
medical leave is good for women,
One of the most important and
often overlooked is the
opportunity to take safe leave
as a victim of domestic violence
or sexual assault.
After an attack victims are
offering, confronted at their
place of employment by the
person responsible for their
abuse. Being able to step back
from their jobs increases their
chances of avoiding being
victimized again. It also
provides time for healing both
mentally and physically and to
care for Children and other
family members who might have
been traumatized by the abuse
for this and the whole host of
other reasons discussed today,
the commission on the status of
Women stands in support of this
bill.
Afternoon.
Good afternoon, madam Chair
members of the committee. My
name is Claudia Vargas. I am
part of Ole Organization and I'm
here as a single.
As an only child of a single
mother. When I was in high
school, my mother got injured on
the job. She worked for a small
business.
Unfortunately, she was not able
to get Workman's con she was not
able to get any assistance. And
shortly after my graduate, my
graduation, my mother and I lost
our home. I understand that this
is not uncommon. This is very
common in our community that due
to an injury of a single parent,
the child and the parent both
become homeless.
And I would urge you
Good afternoon, madam chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Tatiana Prieto, and I'm
a community engagement
specialist with the American
Civil liberties of New Mexico in
alignment with the advocates who
spoke before me, we stand in
strong support of this bill
because it would ensure that no
new Mexican would have to make
the difficult decision between
their health caring for their
loved ones and their financial
stability.
Senate Bill three will benefit
everyone across the state
because it is inclusive and
reflects the diverse needs and
experiences of all new Mexicans.
Senate Bill three will create a
more healthy, resilient and
economically stable new Mexico.
Thank you, madam. Sure.
Madam chair members of the
committee. My name is my seat
American Heart Association. I
know your name again that Mike
dropped out when you said your
name Mahesh Sita with the
American Heart Association.
I know, Uh
You as a committee and the
legislators pay a lot of
attention to polling.
And just recently, the American
Art Association conducted a
Uh, national family, Hispanic
polling and more than 90% of the
Hispanic families and New Mexico
support paid family leave.
And the interesting factors more
than 90% 93% of, you know, self
proclaimed Republicans also
support this paid family leave
medical leave.
And 20 seconds interesting for
is expecting parents. This
includes both men and women, you
know, supporting the paid family
medical leave, so we strongly
urge it to support this bill.
Chair members.
Chair members of the committee
chair. Members of the committee.
Jessica Audrey, vice president
of operations at CH I ST
Joseph's Children as the largest
provider of home visiting in the
state. We journey with families,
prenatal tell their Children
turned three years old. We
experience lots of joy and some
sorrow. We see the devastating
impacts of particularly women in
tribal and rural communities to
do not have access to prenatal
care and have to drive hours to
get care so maternity leave can
help.
Increase the outcomes for birth,
especially for women of color,
And this isn't a time then after
babies born newborns when we
need to keep stress very low for
babies that has a huge impact on
their long term development and
well being, so I urge you to
support SB three. Thank you.
All right. Thank you, Everybody.
Thank you So much for response.
Respecting the time limit. We're
going to continue that with our
folks online. Um, have received
feedback that there might be
some challenges of some folks
getting online. So I do want to
those who may be watching the
Webcast but not able to get on
zoom to comment. You are able to
email your comments.
To Rebecca, our secretary, her
email and if you can also type
this in the chat is S T B T. C.
S t btc dot
C o m M one.
C o m. M one at nm ledges dot
gov
So if there are folks online who
are not able to testify, you can
email your comments. Rebecca
will send those to the
committee. We do have some folks
who are online. We have 23456 in
opposition. I have 123 that are
in support. So what we are going
to do is everybody gets a
minute.
Online.
We will go with those who are
against first. So I'm going to
read the next few names of those
of you online. Please make sure
when I call your name to a mute
yourself. We always seem to have
a challenge with people that
still like the not only not from
2020, but it continues into
2024. You're on mute. So we have
Carlos Santiago first, then Paul
guessing.
And then Michele Maynard. You
are the first three up, Carlos
on take If you will, please un
mute yourself. You've got one
minute. Senator Leo had a meo
will give you a 22nd morning.
Thank you, madam chair and
members of the committee. I
appreciate the work that's gone
into this, and I do appreciate
the comments that the supporters
gave, But we are in opposition
to this bill. Senate Bill three
I think this is a tax on
employees and employers, and
this is a tough, tough time of
high inflation. Families are
struggling right now, and I know
that you say the dollar amount
is small, but every little bit
is very difficult. Right now One
of the biggest things that were
challenged by is the affinity
clause that opens this up for
just about any reason. And I
think that would make it very
difficult.
20 or this program to be
sustainable.
And I would note that this was
not something that was, uh, a
consensus bill. We surveyed our
members and to other member
organizations, both employees
and employers, and it was
overwhelmingly opposed to this
legislation right now. Carla,
please, Please wrap it up. We're
gonna be muting mics when you go
over the time limit, So I'm
gonna give you the opportunity
to wrap it just want to say
thank you for your consideration
of my comments. Thank you.
Alright. Next. Is Paul guessing
Then we have Michele Maynard
Carol, Right, Jason Wiley again
just to remind you that you will
have one minute senator had a
MIA will give you 22nd warning
the zoom operators have been
instructed to cut your Mike. If
you go over one minute, just
like what we did here in the
room. So, Paul guessing you've
got one minute, sir.
Thank you, Madam Chair members
of the committee. My name is
Paul guessing I represent the
Rio Grande Foundation of public
Policy Research Institute based
here in New Mexico. This is
indeed a tax increase. And the
thing is New Mexico has a $3.5
billion budget surplus and is
flush with cash if this is a
priority for the Legislature, I
would encourage
You to use the existing money
that we have available in the
form of the surplus in order to
provide tax credits in order to
provide some kind of other
incentives or to pay for the
policy, uh, through funds from
the state rather than simply
foisting this onto the backs of
businesses and their employees.
Thank you very much for your
time.
Thank you, Paul. Next is
Michelle and then following
that, Carol, right, and Jason
Wiley Marina will be the last
person in opposition. Uh so,
Michelle, you are next. Please
remind you have one minute.
Good afternoon, madam chairman
and members of the committee. My
name is Michelle Frost Maynard,
my family ranches near San Ho,
New Mexico. I testified at a on
behalf of in Mexico, Will
Growers Association. We stand in
opposition to Senate Bill three.
It is coolly designed for a
class of employees in urban
areas where replacement help is
readily available where there
are many skill levels in where
where wages are monetary. That
doesn't fit. The cattle and
sheep. Industry members have no
ready access to replacement
labor. Among our biggest
challenges is finding qualified
and knowledgeable labor in our
remote rural areas and training
them to know the country in our
cattle.
So that we can finish our fall
and spring works for our grazing
requirements with the
government. Therefore, we stand
in the Post two Senate bill
three.
Thank you. Michele Carroll
Writing and Jason and then
Marina. So, Carol, you have one
minute.
Good afternoon, madam chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Carol White. I'm the CEO
of the New Mexico Restaurant
Association. I'm here
representing a coalition of 15
associations and chambers that
have been working on this issue
over the interim. We formed this
group after realizing that the
business community was being
left out of paid family medical
leave discussions.
Our members strongly opposed
Senate Bill three. Well, the
intent behind paint family
medical leave is commendable.
Our coalition believes that this
legislation will have unintended
economic consequences for
working families and businesses
and could be improved with
alternative sustainable
solutions.
Our coalition members are the
associated builders and
contractors in Mexico. Cattle
growers know Mexico Hospitality
Association, New Mexico Chamber
of Commerce, Hispanic Chamber of
Commerce, Las Cruces Chamber of
Commerce, The Gallup Chamber of
Commerce, The associated
Contractors of New Mexico,
Greater Albuquerque Hotel and
Lodging Association.
Thank you very much. Carol,
Jason and then Marina.
You are next. Um so, Jason, if
you will on your mic, you have
one minute.
Hello. Thank you, Madam Chair
members of Committee. Um I will
echo a lot of what the New
Mexico Restaurant Association is
saying. I'm the president, co
founder and CEO of transmission
brewing, and we operate to
retail restaurants and breweries
here in town house. This will
just go further to impact are
already struggling Workforce.
We won't. We cannot find people
to work on a regular basis. Um,
any out that they have to be
able to and you know, I mean,
supporting our workers were we
have good retention. But finding
new ones is very hard and I
think this will create a whole
and in our labor pool that we
that is very weak for us. Thank
you.
Thank you, Jason. Please make
sure for those of you that are
chiming in on zoom to say your
name so that we can take that
into record. Marina, You are the
last of those in opposition, and
then we will go to Bryce
Flanagan. Uh, Mingma Sherpa, and
I believe in. My apologies are
wish to, um so go ahead. Marina.
You were the last to speak. You
have one minute.
Um, its name.
Marina is no longer here. All
right Now we're going to go now.
We're going to go to those in
support Rice. You are first and
then magma. And then a wish to,
um rice. Go ahead and make sure
you're muted. You have one
minute. Please make sure you
state your name. Hello. My name
is Bryce Flanagan. I am an
employee at the town Smith's
brewing.
Company, Uh, Towson, New Mexico.
Time off is a human rights
enshrined in the U. N
Declaration of Human Rights. New
Mexico has a historic
opportunity to lead the nation
with 12 weeks of paid medical
leave for workers and we deserve
it. We are not just laborers
moving the gears of business. We
are human beings with rights and
dignity, and how dare he's
craven may have been worshiping
money, hungry owners and C E O s
stand against all rights as
human beings. How dare they pull
a mother?
From her newborn.
Father from his sick child, a
spouse from their alien partner.
Your owners say they take a risk
by starting a business. That
risk is that they may go
bankrupt and then have to get a
job like me and become a worker.
That is the risk that they take.
That is why they don't want this
bill to pass because they want
to keep us under the
Thank you, Bryce.
We all just squirmed in our
seats.
Alright? Um Sigma. My apologies.
If I'm mispronouncing your name
your next and then the year the
last person so make him if you
will. I mean your mic. You have
one minute.
Madam chair and members of the
committee. My name is Dr
Mingling Sherpa and I am an O b,
g y n and training in New Mexico
and I am in support of SB three
as and they'll be doing Ryan. I
take care of patients who
returned to work 2 to 3 weeks
after the C section when their
body has not healed completely
because they're choosing between
their health and continue to be.
I also take care of families who
drive back to their communities
three plus hours a week.
To return to work while they're
pretty damn infant is still in
the NICU.
Not having paid leave, adds to
the moral injury that we as
providers face. New Mexico has a
significant shortage of
providers and bypassing two of
weeks of leave, We will finally
be able to complete we will be
providing a benefit for
individuals considering
positions in our state, which
may attract and region workforce
both inside and outside of
medicine as a red resident of
the state as a health care
provider who continues to see
the impact of unpaid leave or
families. I urge you to pass, as
between. Thank you so much for
your time.
Thank you so much. Lastly, uh,
West staff, if you will, please
amuse yourself.
You have one minute.
Thank you, madam. Chair and
members. I'm a West, a public
policy director for small
business majority. I have spoken
with countless small business
owners who face challenges with
workforce retention because they
struggled to offer robust
benefits to their employees, and
they're not alone. As such small
business employees often leave
to work for a large businesses,
undercutting our small business
economy. This is a trend we're
seeing across the state. Earlier
this month, we released a
scientific poll.
So not about our network and
actual, nonpartisan research
that found New Mexico. Small
businesses overwhelmingly
support the creation of a state
run program by 85% folks have
argued that a state program
would place a burden on small
employers. However, through our
research and speaking with small
businesses across the state, I
know that businesses are trying
to informally address their
employees need, but it's really
expensive, so this program is
going to help fill the gap and
help take much of the financial
burden off of small businesses,
allowing
Them to use those dollars
elsewhere like hiring part time
health.
All right. Thank you so much.
Thank you all for acknowledging
again, the time limit. We didn't
have to have senator had Emilio
go down behind the podium and
arm wrestle somebody to get the
microphone, which many of us
would have paid money for that.
So thank you all for your
comments. We appreciate that. We
appreciate the respect that you
have shown this chamber. I now
open it up to the committee of
for any comments or questions
Senator worth first. Just just
obviously the
Colleague to come up and ask
questions because we're not
going to open this back up
recording, you know, respect the
process and not push forward
just on one party basis.
But in a situation where you
know none of them are here again
If that happens again on Tuesday
morning, and we will move
forward with a vote out and give
them a chance to presentations
from both sides, and very sure
that the arson questions on the
questions. Thank you, Senator
where Senator had a meal.
Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and
I just want to make sure that I
read the bill. Right? And I
heard you right, Senator
Stewart.
Did I hear you saying And did I
read the bill right that fewer
than five employees? It's the
employee who pays into this and
not the small business owner.
Madam Chair Center. How to me?
Oh, that is correct.
And I also said that
That's 66% of our businesses are
the ones who will not because
they have fewer than five. Madam
Chair. Senator. Did I read the
bill? Right? And here you right
by saying this is not sick
Leave. It's not calling in to
say I have a called I need to
stay home today, but this is an
application process where I
would need to have my health
care provider.
Sign off to allow me to take
that It's both for a maternity
or paternity and medical issues
Got to have it documented and
Madam Chair, Senator The reason
why I brought those two up is
because the number of
constituents who called me in
regards to the bill had a
misconceptions about the bill.
And what I told them. That's
what I read and then hearing you
say it in your opening
statements. I know they're
watching online. I wanted to
make sure that we reiterated
what's written in the bill.
And I've said this before to
you, Senator and Madam
chairwoman and I want to say it
again.
As new Mexicans were raised to
believe that community is
family and we do anything we can
to protect and care for our
families, and no one should have
to sacrifice their economic
security in order to welcome a
new child care for a stick to a
loved one or recover from our
own health.
Now I see this Bill, Madam
chairwoman and senator as a way
to help new Mexicans balance the
demands of work.
How and family by protecting
their jobs. They take time to
recover from illness or care
from a loved one. And I want to
thank you for looking out for
new Mexicans, because community
is family and we're responsible
as leaders to take care of our
family. Thank you, madam
Chairwoman.
Thank you. Senator had a meal.
Thank you, Senator Romeo. I've
got Senator worth both of you.
All right.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you for the presentation.
Um, I think the actuarial study
is numbers and so just tell us
exactly kind of the timing How
that works, and I think
flexibility depending on what
that Madam
So Manager center. We're
starting on Page seven. This is
where we've put in the
To determine future premium rate
setting mechanism.
The department shall contract
with the call qualified
independent.
Actuarial consultant who is a
member of a leading actuarial
professional association and has
the relevant experience to
analyze premium re premium rate
structure, the weekly benefit
Formula the Duration Benefits
Fund reserve.
And other necessary components.
January 1 2028.
Ah, and then no later than a
secretary, then we'll ensure and
maintain that self sufficiency
and solvency with the fun by
Performing an annual finance
following calendar year.
Now we put a cap.
In here line 13.
So the secretary through this
actuarial analysis and other
analysis will ensure that for
the following year, there's at
least 135%.
Left of the previous fiscal
year. Um, so that includes
administrative costs, minus the
net assets, so to do a
calculation, see how much they
raised how much they spent to
ensure that the that we need is
is it needs to be raised theirs.
Capital only point
1%, $1 and $1000. That's that is
the cap for her. We have 14
other states, too. Look at
there's one state. Washington
started off with very low
amount, and they've had to
increase that year over year
because they started up and
0.2% so we think
What we've started with the
0.9% 0.4 for employer, 0.5 for
employees, according to Beeper.
They started with the first
analysis. Then we got an
analysis from the U. S.
Department of Labor, the Women's
bureau, they said. The same,
they said, this looks like it
will work. It's in line you did,
And I think this change and then
then obviously
second question Madam chair
talked about collective
bargaining Agreement Act I
assume, provide and then
managers. Same question about
A business now that currently
provides
A bank, assuming that they their
benefits are greater than what's
in the bill. To do that, Madam
Chair Senate Worth Absolutely.
Um, that it had to be the same.
They had to have exactly the
same. We have now put
substantially similar. It seems
like you know, there is some
variation.
Part of the rulemaking process.
secretary of significant amount
of time to do
And this advisory committee.
This small business people who
understand leave ministrations
to help her craft some rules
around the waivers, but
definitely if you
You know, for example, you and M
touts their plan. It's only four
weeks, so it's probably not long
enough.
But they pay the full salary.
This doesn't so, uh, the
secretary will have to create
rules that will help determine
who gets a waiver and who
doesn't? Definitely if you if
you have potentially similar,
then you don't pay into the fund
neither with your plan If you
look on page 30
Section 12. This is the
collective bargaining agreements
unaffected. We just want to make
sure that we don't get in the
middle of those collections. I
appreciate Madam chair one thing
that that I just want flag. I
know it and or local
governments.
And so I guess if you've gotta
Collective bargaining
government.
And that stands because we well,
I just I do. The preemption does
make me pause. Because here in
the city of Santa Fe, we want to
put in place a program that's
for state law. I think we're
being pre. I don't want to have
a situation where where local
governments could do something
that's below what's being done,
But it just I just it jumped out
at me because I heard about
unions. I heard about
Businesses that are providing
more robust can ask Tracy to
Madam Chair and Senator Worth
that is sorry. That is for the
discipline. Alito he
To establish an ordinance or
resolution or policy, not for
their employees, but for their
constituents. So that's the the
difference there So if they're
providing that for their
employees, that is not included
in this, Um
That was the intent.
So again, we should look at
that. I just want to make sure
that we've got
This is a local governmental
benefits for its employees. I
think in that and just one final
thing I can
Only imagine that the eight
employees that work for Debra
Condit or incredibly Happy
employees, happy employees and
for a good business, and I just
appreciate with her bookstore.
But again, it's just that that's
certainly resonated with me
again. And it just shows though,
when when there is that kind of
relations and if you can
navigate this, and I certainly
I'm also very cognizant of the
testimony and the other side of
this and appreciate that there's
a desire to do this. It's just
But again, I support this and
support. Thank you, Senator
words, Senator Tommen and
Senator Lopez, and then I have a
few comments as well.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Yeah,
I've been to Deborah's
bookstore, then we're very
friendly. So I don't want
anybody to interpret my
question.
But
You get started to get
And the cars.
Soldiers.
Um, and a chair, Senator Tom and
I'm I'm not quite sure.
So we we've changes We've made
our around. Um
I don't know what you're
looking. You might be looking at
some of the rephrase it so it
says.
Page one of the Pirates.
25 million and
Fiscal. You're 37 million
physical. Your
And then, uh,
Page 11. It says that the first
two cost the first two fiscal
years, but you add up to two
years.
So many chair Sierra Thomann.
Those are the
Start. Um so and those startup
costs are paid years. Um, but
those startup costs last year we
suggested 36 million in the
ballpark. There will probably be
another 15 or both of that.
Both stuffing for the right, um
and for doing and they will be
paid back. So
It's the same. There's we've
figured out a little more
consensually.
That's funny.
Okay. Thank you for that. So you
said HB 11 is
I'm not sure that's a different
bill and health.
Yesterday.
Um so I believe it was comments.
these his house till 11 most
expensive.
Ah, man, cheers up.
Knowledgeable enough to do that.
It's quite different than ours.
I know the House members are in
on both of those bills.
That's not over here. That is
not over here and that built
Thank you. And
The company father bills would
be more acceptable.
The bill. They're referencing at
this point Businesses.
What about when there's a third
bill?
No. Well, yes, There are three
bills. There's two bills that
are just the same madam chair
since And then there's a third
film.
So
So I'm page five, it says.
This package proposed package
opposing this bill covers a
broader set of eligible events
and more broadly defines family
concept. But
Broader than United States.
Um, Madam, We have several other
states family that we do.
Seven. Those states tend to be
like us multicultural.
They populate, Adjust
definitions and seven
Thank you.
Thank you and have a couple more
questions, Madam Chair.
You don't have a limit. No, I
don't. I mean, I've had a full
soda, so I'm kind of hoping that
you'll moving on. Mm. That's
alright says, uh,
Mexico ranks and favorably and
several potential that may
elevate the number of military
Uh, Madam Chair. We don't have
that information. It's part of S
M L. A. It's part of the
National Family Medical Leave
Act.
Required.
Okay. Thank you and Paige.
Six of the I, R says, uh, as
proposed, Let's go provides a
lower threshold for eligibility
than
Can you comment?
Have worked six months s M L. A
Right six months in the last 12
months, and they have to be with
their employers. SML A is a
year. Several folks in
opposition to this
Benefits.
Managed care and Senator Tollman
What we hear from other states
is that
This plant gets better morale of
oil.
But you're on the list. Tracy,
maybe somebody else in their
differences, Madam Chair. We're
trying to tell you what's so
that we can counter some of the
opposition that we don't believe
is accurate.
No opinion, But when people
state states but if I can ask,
and as Tracy to answer your
question, more specifically,
Madam Chair and Senator Tallman.
I would point you to page 14 of
the um Fiscal impact report,
which highlights the actual
benefit to load the labor force
participation rate, particularly
among women in the state that is
anticipated as a result of
passing this bill. Um there was
an analysis done by the National
Partnership for Women and
Families in 2023 that showed
that
If New Mexico had the same
workforce participation is
placed is, um other states and
nations that have access to paid
family medical leave. We'd have
47,000 additional workers
available for work in the state.
An additional $1.4 billion in
wages.
I guess you see my point.
Yeah, that's it.
Well, I guess sometimes backed
our opinions up with sax. Yes.
Are you okay? Thank you. Thank
you, Senator Tony Senator Lopez.
Thank you. I want to say thank
you, Senator Stewart and of
course, your house sponsor.
And others who have worked on
this measure for
A few years. We'll just say a
few years.
This is so important for those
as they said, if those of us who
are in a sandwich generation
older, your parents or others
that you're taking care of
Um
And for those and madam chair,
you know.
When we talk about issues and
you know I have a bill, we all
have bills in this body about
rent control and all the other
But
Employees contributing
You're also But then we also
have another.
We try not have to make a
choice.
That hurts them. Financial, Um
That should have been afforded
people.
But it's the way that I know
that. You know, there's a
couple. I know. One of these two
point out for the
For tribal communities. I know
that you have an advisory kind
of ask Madam chair on this. Why
is the advisory committee going
to exist? Maybe this would be a
wonderful opportunity that could
still add and give more
information to the secretary
stood any further, Madam Chair.
Usually, if we have we have
sunsets. We have all these other
options for different changes,
You know, society changes in
such and maybe
They could invite dates at some
point in time, because that's
It's a good idea. Thought, um,
This was education and the
You know, it's
Madam. Um, but I just think
sometimes there are advisory
Committing an opportunity to
advise the secretary. Whoever
else may come after at least
good.
Aside from that.
Thank you, Senator Lopez. Um so
I'm just gonna make it. I have
to go to questions that are very
short because it had a full
can Isoda. Um, but you know,
there's really interesting line
that that I have the wonderful
on and, uh
You know, we've had some
comments that have come up today
and I look at this as employee
retention because I know that
for many as much as I love the
affordable care act can't get
it. They can't afford it.
And especially also are
nonprofits can't afford those
things. And so any opportunity
for employee retention and
loyalty.
Um, it's something that I would
hope that a small business would
would want. Um, but you know,
they're They're the couple of
those those things that that
especially like my colleague,
Debbie and I have talked about
this since I run the last
Christmas Green Chamber of
Commerce and we talked about the
importance of small businesses.
The most small businesses can
cover for a couple of days.
We're like, OK, we're gonna make
it work.
Somebody else is going to do a
little bit more work and we'll
be able to do it for a couple of
days.
But when you look at weeks, and
most small businesses are going
to look at the full 12 weeks,
even though we know that that's
not the case that that that
doesn't typically happen to the
full 12 weeks.
Um, but that they're like, we
can't cover that long.
And so, um, the conversation
that my colleague and I had, and
I think I also had this with
secretary near is the specialty
jobs and that was brought up in
some of the comments about what
about those jobs that need
specific training skills. I
think it might dental hygienist.
I think of my doctor's office. I
think of, you know, we talk
about ranching and stuff that
that's out there. And so I'm
wondering, and this is more of a
suggestion.
Rather than I think, a question
that can be answered, but
something to think about an
employee pool for those
positions because I can see that
like my dentist office. If
they're out of hygienist, they
might be able to cover for a
couple of days. But for 12 weeks
Which chances are is not going
to be the full 12. Weeks of what
for that period of time. That is
that is unnerving for a small
business owner.
And so that is something that I
would recommend also to
secretary near, but that that
that conversation be heard about
how we can address those needs
because in many cases that's
going to be what's going to hurt
a businesses when they have to
scramble for those or a
nonprofit. I'm thinking of, You
know, Case managers for the
housed those situations are a
little challenging.
Um
But some some I just just those
those bits of thought my
question, Senator Stewart, you
had made the comment about the
advisory committee and Senator
Lopez also talked about that.
Um, can you talk about like the
representatives of that Because
I know that I get real crabby
when Southern New Mexico gets
ignored out of
And so I'm hoping
That that advisory committee
would clarify People
representative
You know who's gonna be on that
committee?
Um madam.
We added, We changed this up
last year, just a little bit
from again the business
community. So that is a member
representing
No, this is the committee's kind
of geared towards the
technology. The technical aspect
of how to make this
No. It's a representative and
non profit organization that
advocates for women and girls.
Representative for in White
Chamber of Commerce.
Small business develop.
Medical society, expertise and
care of Children.
Member representing parents,
adoptive and foster parents.
Unpaid family caregivers,
director of the commission on
the Status of Women or
University based Bureau of
Business and Economic Research,
Small business owner.
Experts.
Expertise, representative
expertise and disabilities to
representatives of the statewide
organization representing labor.
And then the addition.
It's it's chosen by the
secretary.
What I know she is on Zoom. Uh
Madam Pro TEM. And I and I, um
yeah. If she wants to chime in,
you can certainly Secretary
over. I just I guess I would
encourage a very thoughtful
effort to make sure to represent
all parts of the state. Um,
because we know that rural New
Mexico is a little different
creature, then
Last Cruces or Albuquerque or
Santa Fe, and the their needs
are a little bit different.
Um, the other question I have,
and and this might be something,
Tracy that you can answer is the
definition of a small business
because the S B a says
Where we going with this one. I
mean, you may have already
covered that. But if the and
that's my last question
So, Madam Chair. Um
Remember sent committee that the
depth small businesses not
actually defined in the bill.
the number of, um employees of
fewer than five
Is based on the numbers that's
looking at the the economic
analysis and saying, What can
the model
Bear as far as a waiver of
contributions for employers and
that number of our small
businesses have fewer than five
employees. If we said five b, I
think we could probably name
them because we know those
things. It's very few and so if
we excluded
All in most of those probably
already have private programs
that provides substantially
similar greater benefits. So
Um, when we're looking at this,
practically that was the number
that the more the the model can.
Madam chair if I could make a
comment
So one of their around about
this bill.
People don't realize that when
you go on leave, your employer
does not pay your salary. The
only thing your employer pays is
their share of the health care
if you've got health care
So many small businesses don't
right. So so the idea is that
when you you don't you're not
paying them so that you can use
that salary. I really like your
idea, really the businesses that
have the most trouble with this
are not talking about the fees
they're talking about how to and
I say.
Well, what are you rambling mhm
or people are quitting Those
work doesn't Oh, baby.
And then we look at the time it
takes to train a new employee
investment into that. And so,
um, I know that that my
colleague and I would like to
come up with creative ideas
Secretary on that, But I
appreciate that. I don't have
any other comments. I don't know
if there are any other comments
here. Given that we are
operating at a subcommittee
level. We are not going to vote
on this bill. We will vote on it
and the first thing on our
meeting on Tuesday.
Which will take place 30 minutes
after the floor session, So
thank you all for your
thoughtfulness. You respect your
passion and your commitment.
