Senator Tom.
Senator Padilla.
Senator Shendo.
Get to.
The ticket.
Okay we have a quorum so I'm
gonna go ahead and call the US
Senate tax business and
transportation committee to
order thank you all for for
joining us.
Oh sorry I I just.
Uniformed at the webcast is not
working at the moment so.
The sister standing place for
second.
Okay looks like you're.
We're good to go.
for.
Again thank you Senator for.
will be here of we have our
first bill that we would have
was held over from the last
committee meeting Senate bill
twenty two.
The vehicle drivers you'll to
right away Senator Gonzalez I
believe we have the amendment.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
thank you members of the
committee all of the test in our
discussion from all the build up
of the last time.
Posen amendment and that is
so point two one nine.
Five six zero point one.
Mr chairman of members some what
the amendment does for Senate
bill twenty two this is
On page ten.
Line fifteen after lane in
search from a designated bus
stop.
And the second part to the
amendment on page ten line
seventeen after install concert
Luminate is.
Mr chairman members saw this was
the discussion that we had all
the last time that all we wanted
to make sure that up it was not
margin and on the free way or
other highways so it's strictly
just from a bus stop going to
Tulane and then also the concern
that to make sure that he wasn't
any other kind of sign unless
it's of lemonade at sign so this
is what the amendment us Mr
chairman and members.
Okay thank.
Thank you senator Mr chairman I
move a do pass on start with a
do pass for purposes of
discussion okay I'll move the
the amendment for purposes of
discussion excuse me.
Any opposition to the motion.
No.
Very nice.
Senator had a meal and I second
that motion.
Okay we're over so of medical
call roll for the of the
members.
Mr chairman this was just a
clarification for it with your
permission this is a my motion
was for purposes of discussion
okay.
Okay.
One moment.
Which.
We'll.
Thank you.
Right a call.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Griggs yes.
Sen.
Yes.
Senator Hickey yes Senator Hati
mu.
Senator Kernan who yes senator
Sanchez.
Yes Senator home yes.
Senator Wirth.
Senator.
Yes.
Senator tion.
Mr chairman I am here I tried to
vote but so unmute me okay.
Senator will on the amendment is
yes.
Thank you.
One excuse.
dollars.
L..
So we're back on the on the bill
for.
Mr chairman the amended.
Chair if there's no discussion
on moving to pass on the bill as
amended a we have a motion for
do passed by Senator Padilla on
the amended bill tell so Mr
chairman Senator Kernan here
just clarification going forward
when we have an amendment and I
appreciate Senator Padilla is
our motion to move the amendment
for purposes of discussion and
so what are just was a recent
vote on the amendment are just
I'm confused a little bit what's
the procedure there.
Just going forward I think we're
good for now I think everyone
agrees the amendment should be
on the bill but I'm just curious
going forward when we when we
make a motion for discussion
purposes we're not actually
voting on the amendment that are
we know we're on discussion that
that.
Okay well I must've missed a
step but I certainly support the
M..
Met on.
Sorry Senator Kernan you got cut
off we didn't I didn't hear what
you.
So just clarification we've
already passed the amendment
then so the amended bill is now
up for discussion or were voting
on the bill now.
if there's any discussion on the
amended bill at this time got it
okay thank you Mr chairman.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt thank you Mr
chairman I think the the
confusion comes in is that we do
things that are in the rules.
they just kind of become habit
there is no
actual motion for something for
purposes of discussion
discussion is actually supposed
to happen after a motion for do
pass or after a motion because
the discussion is actually on
the motion.
And so I think we just got
gotten into this habit of doing
things that really are the way
it's written in the rules and so
that causes some confusion as we
go forward I don't know how you
want to handle that.
In your committee.
The rules actually don't have a
motion for discussion purposes
you introduce an amendment
someone moves the amendment and
seconded and then there's
discussion on the amendment
correct on the motion before you
have about.
I hope that helps clarify things
a little bit it I know that that
that's good I yeah I appreciate
that.
Okay with that we have an
amended bill.
If there are no discussion we do
have a motion by Senator Padilla
for a do pass.
We have a second second.
Second by Senator Griggs.
to grow for the.
Senator Brandt.
No.
Senator great.
Yes.
Senator Hamblen S..
Yes.
How to meal.
Senator Kernan.
Yes.
Just.
Yes.
Senator Tom.
But.
Welcome back okay Senator Wirth.
Senator Padilla.
Yes and Mr chair and land I
don't think we heard Senator
Commons vote.
Yeah we're we're gonna come back
to my he's.
Madam here yes.
Hello this Thomas.
C. mobile.
Yes.
Sorry.
Mr chairman I don't know if
everyone else is having a hard
time hearing our secretary I can
barely hear her I don't know if
it's your microphone or what it
is but I could barely hear my
name being called.
Okay Senator Brandt.
that.
Is that better.
Not really are you are muted
yeah I'm not in the United.
I'm right I don't know how to
make it I was making it with
echoing.
So we'll try it let me know if
you can't hear it next vote
Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr.
Nine four one.
Okay Senator Stewart nine yes
votes.
One.
Propose and one excuse so
Senator you have a do pass on
Senate bill.
Twenty two Senator Gonzales.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
very much thank you to the
committee.
Thank you.
Okay now we have a Senate bill
thirty seven construction
manager general contractor that
Senator Padilla.
Okay thank you very much Mr
chairman this is a bill that I
am caring for the New Mexico
department of transportation and
with your permission Mr chairman
I do you have after I introduce
the bill and talk about a little
bit I do have a secretary
Michael Santa with us I do see
him already online so when we
get to that point if you allow
him to say a few words Mr
chairman.
So this is a bill that affects
my district as it does many
others it does a lot of has a
lot of affect on the folks that
the our own and operate
businesses in my district that's
the construction manager general
contractor Act and essentially
it adds to in a men's.
The procurement code to provide
an alternative project delivery
method as an option for certain
department of transportation
projects Mr chairman we're
construction manager general
contractor services are procured
separately from a contract for
design services and a contract
for independent cost estimates
services so really in the long
run this is going to really I
find it very interesting how it
will save us a great deal of
money so projects don't run out
of control and things of that
nature just to some background
Mr chairman the.
Construction manager general
contractor Act will add an
alternative project delivery
method to the preferred design
bid build project delivery
method that were used to be a
construction is we call it the
C. M. D. C. will be used when it
is in the department's best
interest and will not be used
for any other purpose for every
purpose it's considered to be an
additional tool in the toolbox
to project delivery method so we
can get things done while
they're in the range of what
they cost when we propose them
rather than projects sitting
there and you finally get going
and the expense of the project
has gone up exponentially based
on those those issues this
really for things that it does
to the procurement code to make
this possible it allows the
cabinet secretary to utilize
this but the procurement when it
is in the state's best interest.
allows the secretary to adopt a
procedure facilitate
solicitation and award of C. GMC
contractor contracts with
specific requirements and
contractor Services things like
preconstruction participation in
design because cost control and
value engineering which is very
important these projects as you
can imagine it allows for an
optional second phase contract
for construction work under a
guaranteed maximum price
agreement and there's that cost
savings to the state that I
mention for which the C. N. G.
C. will be financially
responsible for these projects
and it also requires and finally
the department to establish an
advisory board for outside
stakeholders including those
from the road construction
industry and I have multiple
contractors in this area in my
district in this profession this
industry and this is going to be
something that's helpful to get
these projects done a little
little quicker and a little more
efficiently and under and in
cost and all that business so Mr
chair with your permission I'd
like at secretaries on the file
to be able to speak he is here
already and secretary if you can
on mute your line and say a few
words about what we're doing
here thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman and first
I just want to thank Senator
Padilla for caring this bill for
the department.
We appreciate that I won't go
into too much detail about the
bill other than just to say we
look at a project Mr chairman we
have very limited options for
how that is procured we have the
standard design bid build
project process which is low bid
and then if it's over fifty
million we can do design build
which is a little bit more
efficient this is this would
give us a third option gross to
look at I can tell you that a
lot of our western states
already have this option when
you bring it home to New Mexico
tribal governments in the
counties such as Bernalillo
county have also have this
option it's not something all
that new it's just as a state
DOT right now we were not able
to do this and so it's part of
modernizing our department I
think we do a lot of things well
but there's also some things
that were behind on in being
able to look at the project can
apply the right procurement
process is something that isn't
a benefit the project in the
efficiency but ultimately the
taxpayer and how that projects
gets done annual price save some
money and some time in some
situations but depending on the
project this is a bill that has
been tried
quite a quite a ways of go maybe
five seven years ago it never
passed I think we were always on
the opposite side of industry
over the last couple years we
work with industry I think we
work out all the differences I
think you'll see when the time
comes that the industry is
supportive of this bill this is
a bill that with the house bill
last year went through the
entire house and I went through
this committee last year and we
just didn't get a hearing in
Judiciary because of timing
so it's something that's widely
supported in the past and now
that we have industry and it
worked out those details we
think this is a good bill for
the state so I appreciate your
support we do have some expert
witnesses I don't know that they
need to say anything right now
but Mr Burke Thomas Mr David can
Tana who's our chief engineer
and W. secretary Justin Reese if
you have any detailed questions
about the bill I would obviously
if.
Senator Padilla if you want to
answer if he needs to access one
of those folks will be happy to
answer so we adjourn we really
urge your support so thank you
Mr chairman and once again thank
you Senator you at and Mr
chairman I did provide the
reason those folks on I did
provide the names and email
addresses of the experts in a
should we need them to chime in
I'm happy to answer any
questions Mr chairman.
Okay thank you Senator thank you
a secretary Santa
at this time we'll go to public
comment and you have anybody.
Of.
That is in opposition of this
bill will go with the opposition
first.
No one emailed me ahead of time
stating that they oppose the
bill however at this time if
anyone was join the meeting
would like to make a statement
and opposition are now is the
time to raise your hand.
Okay it doesn't appear we have
anyone here in opposition first
we'll hear from Michael Miller
Michael.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee Michael Miller
Permian basin premise
Association we stand in strong
support of this bill thank you.
Thank you Mr Miller Mr Eric
Martinez.
Thank you Mr chairman members
the committee my name is Eric
Martinez I'm the uninsured
lobbyist for the missile
additional development group
we've been working closely with
DOT in the interim to all show
support for this legislation we
believe that it it enhances
highway infrastructure projects
that support economic
development projects such as
Mexico soul in in a very timely
and efficient manner so
therefore we stand for the
legislation thank.
Thank you Mr Martinez and we
will hear from Mister Jim Garcia
Mister Garcia.
Thank you Mr chair Senator
Mr secretary we are in favor of
this I represent the associate
contractors of New Mexico the
heavy highway utility we believe
that this is a another arrow in
the quiver for the DOT we also
believe that establishes
efficiencies in project
completion protects the NMDOT
from cost overages and that also
limits the liability to the A.
T. and we are in favor of this
thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Mr Garcia and now if
anyone wanted to make a
statement but didn't get a
chance to send an email now is
the time to raise your hand.
Mr chairman.
Senator yeah I just I think
Thank our webmaster Martell a
Clinton I just wanted to make
note that I did receive a
written letter from the Permian
strategic partnership who are in
full support of Senate bill
thirty seven and they're member
organizations and they're doing
a lot of working great work over
in the Permian area and also
from dance over the former
chairman of the house
transportation committee and and
now an executive with the
associated general contractors
of New Mexico I just want to
make note of that for the record
Mister chairman.
I appreciate.
With that I believe that is the
last person for public statement
that concludes public statement
for Senate bill thirty seven.
Okay thank you I tell us so now
we go to a
committee members because some.
And it's going up.
Senator Griggs.
Thank you Mr chair and
You know conceptually I don't
think I've got any real real
issues with the bill I'm I'm a
little concerned when were on
Page page three I believe it is
in his new material starting on
online ten and we talk about
that the the secretary may use
this method if the department
makes a written determination
that is appropriate and in the
best interest of the department
to use this method.
I don't know what that means
particularly and I don't know
how that is completely justified
or or not and I think that
there's some things that as the
as the department you know goes
through it it needs to be a
little tighter on it says.
On his requirements will be sure
that it is and I think there you
know the secretary can certainly
work on that as a as we go
forward with the next the next
stop for this bill I think
Senator pretty it looks like
it's Senate judiciary
sure there will be a variety of
things maybe get scrutinized
there for just the way the the
bill the drafting of the bill
and what that actually does that
the the concept I think is
certainly.
Reasonable I you know I'm I'm
actually in prices is an
interesting concept I.
You know I I hope that that is a
deal that actually helps us make
make better decisions and make
you know make a project to be
more more affordable I I don't
know that it it actually will
but maybe it will and so I'm I'm
willing to support the bill but
I do believe there's gonna be
some some questions regarding
some of the language come up
Senator Padilla shy I would just
suggestion that you may be a get
ready for that and and be able
to to address those questions so
thank you Mr chairman thank you
Mr chairman and senator Griggs
and but I appreciate the
comments and I agree with you
there will be that's why I have
so much firing power with me
right now just in case we need
to to go through that exercise
we go to Judiciary wanted them
to hear this and hear your
questions like this will help us
prepare for the next committee
but I I do want to call out
online thirteen and you did
Senator Griggs the written
determination that that makes it
much more succinct and clear and
then also the items listed
starting on line twenty through
I'm sorry Page three line twenty
all the way over to line for on
page.
On page four so there's there
are some specific safeguards and
specific documented items it'll
have to be required there but
thank you very much senator rex.
Okay Senator I don't see any.
Other senators that have
questions so what is the
pleasure of the committee.
Mr chairman I will move it to
pass.
Second do passed by Senator
Padilla we have a second by
Senator Kernan.
But in the world.
Senator Brandt yes.
Senator Griggs.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Your Hotmail.
That.
Yes.
Senator Sanchez.
Yes.
Senator Tallman.
Senator yes.
Senator Wirth.
Senator.
Yes Senator Shendo.
In the S. one on excuse.
Okay.
Thank.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee thank you to the
expert witnesses they were here
as well.
Right.
No.
Fifty.
Senator will be able.
No.
Yes.
Senator only.
They.
Okay
Senator o'neill was not on the
with my Estes on as well.
We're gonna hear requests to
just have a.
Of.
Discussion on that because he
has a pretty extensive amendment
and I don't know we had a chance
to I certainly have had a chance
so what we'll do at this point
asus move on to Senate Bill.
Act.
Fifty eight.
Senator Tolman.
Electric vehicle charging unit
credit.
Of.
S. as in for the Senator earlier
we're gonna have this question
as we've done with other bills
that are.
Affecting our revenue stream we
will hold this over but will
certainly have that discussion
and debate today and then the so
with that Senator common.
Okay.
Senator Mr chair and members of
the committee.
I bring before you today as
Senate bill fifty eight electric
vehicle.
Charging in tax credit.
Senate bill fifty eight creates
a.
Refundable personal income.
Thanks credit for the purchase
release of electric vehicles.
Well this is a new tax credit
obviously they're going to
affect January one twenty two
and extend for five years and
that expires in January one
twenty six.
Not to qualify for this credit.
Vehicle must be either a total
totally electric vehicle or
a plug in hybrid electric
vehicle.
It must be a.
Have a pretext manufacturer's
suggested retail price of forty
eight thousand dollars or less.
The credit is twenty four two
thousand five hundred dollars
for most vehicle purchases
however it provides a five
thousand dollar tax credit.
For a.
Lower income of folks.
Single taxpayers with adjusted
gross income under fifty
thousand and married filing
joint taxpayers.
With the AGI of seventy five
thousand or less they would
qualify for a five thousand
dollar tax credit.
Others for parts of this bill
that's the first part the second
part of.
Provides a a.
And the tax credit for the
installation of a charging unit.
Which normally I shouldn't cost
more than three hundred dollars
so the the tax credit.
Allows for.
The insulation that for allows
for an amount not to exceed
three hundred dollars for the
installation of electric
charging station.
the tax.
the credit is the total amount
of credit is capped at ten
million dollars per year.
And the charging unit credit is
capped at a million dollars
however the tax and
Representative the don't expect
it to that camp to be have
reached or are expected to come
anywhere near that.
The third part of the bill are
cause for.
An annual registration fee of a
hundred dollars for electric the
total electric vehicle and fifty
dollars for a plug in.
Effective January one two
thousand twenty two seventy six.
Seven seventy seven percent of
the the registration fee will be
distributed to the road the
state road fund and twenty three
percent.
Be distributed to the local
governments road Fund.
The fourth part.
Of the bill provides that the.
Thanks for Register complete
compile an annual report for the
purposes of the value waiting
this tax credit.
And then the report this post is
to be presented to the the.
Revenue stabilization and tax
policy interim committee.
And to the LFC.
Mr chair the fiscal impact.
This briefly up.
Provides a.
A little over a million dollars
in tax credits the first in the
FY twenty two fiscal year which
is only a half a year so it
doubles to two million dollars
in the fiscal year twenty three
which is the first full year of
a and those implications.
And so the.
In the amount of registration
fee.
going into the state road fund
the first.
Half year.
Is a hundred and sixty thousand
dollars and the forty eight
thousand dollars into the local
governments road Fund and then
the first full year of operation
fiscal year twenty three
it roughly doubles to three
hundred seventy six million to
the road Fund and hundred twelve
thousand to the local
governments
road Fund so over the first.
Year and a half.
of operation the first half year
of operations total two hundred
and eight thousand dollars in
the into the D. O. T. funds and
four hundred eighty eight
thousand almost a half a
million.
Dollars sent to the.
Wrote wrote funds into for in
the fiscal year twenty three
which is the first full year of
operation.
Senate Bill.
It is capped at.
As I said before ten million
dollars for the twelve million
dollars for the the charging
stations.
So Mr.
Mr chair the the.
Representative has been very
supportive of this and are
willing to assist and this new
effort.
there are.
The first three years of
operation would be a
nonrecurring expense of fifty
three thousand dollars to tax
and Representative.
Total over the first three years
of operation of a hundred little
over a hundred thousand
recurring costs.
The New Mexico that.
Supports this cause will
contribute some funding to their
road maybe for for road
maintenance construction energy
minerals and natural resources
supports this because of
Medicaid collusion because he
these can dramatically reduce
carbon emissions.
Transportation in New Mexico is
the second largest source of
emissions.
Another advantage of the EDD's
that they save motorists money
to the lower operating and
maintenance costs.
You may have heard the last week
General Motors announced.
By the year two thousand thirty
five they're going to this
totally cease the manufacturer
manufacturing gas powered
vehicles let's only fourteen
years away General Motors will
not be manufacturing any gas
powered vehicles.
The big three for General Motors
and Chrysler expect to have a
hundred.
The electric vehicles on the
road within the next five years
General Motors is investing
twenty seven billion electric
vehicles over the next four
years.
Mr chair like to give a shout
out the camera.
General course Ortiz who is the
course the secretary of the
General Services.
He's working on a plan to
construct.
Of.
Thirteen.
Charging stations on state owned
properties located throughout
the state I contacted the
secretary Jesus.
Several weeks ago heard he was
interested in and charging
stations and I was gonna sponsor
of appropriations bill to
provide one point four million
dollars to construct charging
station to say on properties
there we found out that that
wasn't the appropriate route for
funding funding so we are now
seeking
The funding for installation of
charging stations from the
capital outlay funds.
So
Thank you Mr chairman as if you
are indicated we are not going
to vote on this today so I'm
sure that'll disappoint a lot of
the members of the committee
our.
Extremely excited and anxious to
vote on this bill thank you Mr.
Thank you senator Clemente we
will go on to
Of the public at this time.
Or or a Senator Tallman they
have anybody else that wanted to
speak on your behalf this bill
before we go to public comment.
Hi yes I have three.
Folks lined up the secretary of
the.
By energy minerals and natural
resources.
And have a gentleman from the
Sierra Club I'm sorry forget his
name.
I mean senator Tom and I'm I'm
your expert witnesses and this
year a.
Are there a party expert
witnesses for your introduction
of the bill.
And a part.
No.
Well they they they can do it
and I don't mean to micromanage
Hey yes we can get on they can
do this speak now or answer
questions.
Whatever they are.
Whatever they wish to do.
We also Mr chair also have a
gentleman from the New Mexico
Alectra Cooper's Association
okay will if they don't if
they're not your expert witness
is part of the introduction of
them they can speak when we go
to public comment.
Voting and the bill that's
that's fine.
Okay thank you I will go to a
public comment now.
We will be hearing from
Melinda's.
in actually sorry one moment
Melinda is there anyone here in
opposition that would like to
speak first I did not receive
any opposition emails and
support.
I can go ahead if you're here to
speak in opposition of Senate
bill fifty.
I'm sorry I'm in favor.
Okay no problem one more time is
there anyone here who is here in
opposition of the bill who would
like to speak at this time one
more time only opposition.
Okay it doesn't appear we have
any poses at this time so we
will go ahead to Melinda Smith
Melinda.
Yes thank you very much Mr
chairman and members of the
committee I'm Linda Smith on the
co chair of the legislative
committee in the Rio Grande
chapter of the Sierra Club we
strongly support this bill the
tax credit is needed to reduce
the purchase price of the needs
and get more clean cars on the
road.
Of the tech the tax credits
targeted low and moderate income
families which make up most of
the families in New Mexico.
Our and it would not apply to
luxury models.
Our this year it does feel
however that we would like to
see the row the road fee reduce
stress to fetch the bill follows
up on the the infrastructure
bill passed in two thousand
nineteen to increase the the
charging stations throughout the
state.
And our as stated before the
UV cars use much less energy
company powered by locally
produced renewable energy.
And the significantly reduce
greenhouse gas emissions and it
is estimated that you can save
drivers eight hundred dollars a
year and fuel costs it's time
for New Mexico to join nineteen
other states in creating
incentives for low and middle
income residents to purchase or
lease electric vehicles thank
you very much.
Thank you Mr now we will hear
from miss Murphy Federal Murphy.
Hello can you hear me.
Yes we can okay thank you hello
Mr chairman and members of the
committee my name is major
Murphy and I am the clean fuels
program manager for the energy
minerals and natural resources
department energy management
conservation division we are in
support of the stealth
transportation emissions are the
number two source of air
pollution in New Mexico if
enacted Senate bill fifty eight
compliments Senate bill eleven
which is the governor's clean
fuel standard bell and acting
Senate bill fifty eight
addresses financial obstacles
for Evey adoption and is a
critical step in expanding
transportation electrification
in New Mexico this tax credit
would help New Mexicans be able
to afford EDD's and home
Chargers especially low and
middle income residents
establishing purchase incentives
for eighties and eighty charters
is crucial to support broader
transportation electrification
outcomes in the state thank you
for your time.
Thank you Mr Murphy out now we
will be hearing.
From Ramon.
Add.
Yes good afternoon Mister
chairman and members of the
committee and Roose want
registered lobbyists for the New
Mexico rural electric
cooperative association.
We stand in support of Senate
bill fifty eight the beneficial
electrification concept is
growing and providing benefits
to us all.
And at the macro level this bill
is just part of that concept.
We see the electrical vehicle
market electrifying
transportation and the expansion
and growth of the evenings have
allowed electric cooperatives to
create partnerships and install
Evey charging stations
throughout rural areas.
Beneficial notification is
increasing the use of low
emission technology well at the
same time providing low growth
opportunities for rural electric
cooperatives and for those
reasons we stand in support of
this legislation thank you.
Thank you now we will be hearing
from this terrible thank all
court.
Thank you chair members of the
committee and team if you will
corn with southwest energy
efficiency project or sweet and
we support SB fifty eight these
tax credits are needed to foster
the market in New Mexico and
provide economic and
environmental benefits to all
New Mexicans I want to point out
that a feature fully the
American council for an energy
efficient economy earlier this
week released its transportation
electrification states for car
in New Mexico was in last place
the switch to electric vehicles
is definitely coming in this
country and I don't want New
Mexicans to be left behind this
tax credit is an important step
towards getting the the the
benefits to all New Mexicans
therefore we ask you to please
support SB fifty eight.
Thank you now we will hear from
Jim
yes hard.
I apologize if I mispronounce
your name good afternoon
everyone Jim dejar Dan.
Thank you of Mr chairman members
of the committee I'm here to
represent the renewable energy
industry association of New
Mexico we're known as ria we're
out of the trade association
predominately of local solar
installation companies.
And I'm also speaking as an
owner of electric vehicle and I
do want to say and I have one
for about two and a half years
this is definitely the
technology of the future and
it's actually here right now and
it has a lower maintenance lower
cost of ownership much smoother
quieter hi performance for you
car folks in you can fill up at
home and of course no emissions.
There's about one point five
million electric vehicles on the
road in the United States right
now but is can if people court
pointed out hardly any in New
Mexico so that tells me that we
definitely need to stimulate the
market locally so that we can
accelerate that adoption so
really believes that this is a
very important to electrify both
the transportation.
And all basically all the
economy and also we can do this
who renewable energy resources
thank you very much here to from
your time.
Thank you we will now hear from
Mr Charles has has.
Mr Charles hasn't he I see you
in the meeting.
My apologies let's fund.
Thank you Mr chairman and are to
the sponsor thank you for
bringing in a bill that will
Help the the consumers have that
little bit more incentive to
prevent electric vehicles more
stoner road and I hope we follow
up with the vehicles with some
work on furthering
infrastructure for the charging
of these vehicles of the New
Mexico automotive dealers
association support this bill
and one bank to sponsor thank
you Mr chairman.
Thank you.
We will now hear from Barbara's
Barbara.
Madam chair committee members my
name is Barbara Sierra and I'm
representing three fifty Santa
Fe a chapter of the
international organization three
fifty dot org.
We are a nation educating people
about climate change through
monthly public meetings with
guest speakers weekly digest of
news wiki on our website and
through taking citizen action on
legislation and rulemaking.
According to the New Mexico
climate change report twenty
twenty transportation is the
second largest sector in New
Mexico in terms of generating
greenhouse gas emissions.
This bill will encourage people
to buy or lease electric and
plug in hybrid vehicles.
General Motors was in the news
recently and I learned that this
major carmaker has promised to
have twenty new electric vehicle
models by twenty twenty three.
I just want to mention that the
fiscal impact report for Senate
bill fifty eight has input from
three state departments.
It is interesting that on page
thirteen one of these agencies
states that the yearly
registration fee for electric
vehicles functions as an
additional tax the tax revenue
department gives an alternative
arrangement that would provide
revenue to the department of
transportation.
For road maintenance.
So I'm not for but the
alternative seems like a good
idea and I hope the crafters of
the bill have a look into that
alternative.
So with all due respect
all he did for the internal
combustion car I encourage
committee members to support a
move toward the future and do
pass for Senate bill fifty
eight.
Thank you very much more
rapidly.
We will now hear from John
Martinez.
Mr Martinez.
I'm here but actually I'm here
to speak on Senate bill fifty
three fifty eight.
No problem will come to you Mr
Ricardo Gonzales.
Nearing Mr chairman.
Yes Sir we go we we can hear
requesting.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee reopens all us
it newly back back without Paso
electric I just started back on
Monday so it's great to to see
you all and we are hardly in in
in favor of this of this bill
giving all folks from sources
from different socioeconomic.
Conditions ability to to get
into this new technology is is
something that I'll pass
electric stands behind
completely we just came up with
a with a.
A program with Nissan for el
Paso electric customers so
Senator Hamblen Mr chairman has
a chance to get a discount on a
on a Nissan all electric vehicle
if she so chooses up maybe she's
down this weekend she can visit
some of the some of the Nissan
dealers
and
So add to that and I'll pass
electric is very much in favor
of this bill and I I would be
remiss though Mr chair if I
didn't say that your zoom and
see as the greatest stereo echo
of any of the committees I've
listened to so I really do
appreciate that thank you.
Thank you Mr Gonzalez.
Now we will hear from the idea.
Hi everyone I was also
requesting to speak on behalf of
Senate bill fifty three.
No problem and that concludes
the public statement that I
received an email is there
anyone else in the committee
meeting from the public I would
like to speak in support of
Senate bill fifty eight.
And it looks like we don't have
any wind so that concludes our
public statements for Senate
bill fifty eight thank you.
Thank you thank you Micaela so
now we'll go to a.
Committee members.
Senator Padilla.
Thank you Mr chairman I am a I
just want to give kudos to
senator Tom and and he has been
through quite the journey on
this bill over the years that
he's been in a attempt to
staying on top of this I I feel
confident that he has now if you
listen to the experts answer the
folks that spoke.
I'm in favor of the bill and the
experts that he has truly work
hard and broader coalition
together to get this thing done
I think a different years he's
he's had some of these people on
the boat with them and others
you know kind of dragon the boat
down I don't know if that's the
right way to put that but I'm
sure it felt that way to him at
times I just wanted knowledge is
hard work on this and also want
to acknowledge the fact that you
know New Mexico.
Is is right for this type of
energy production as well as we
respect the hard work and the
diligence that oil and gas down
for state for many years and we
start making the transition and
other things I think this is
going to help to promote that
industry as well so I just want
to acknowledge that also you
know if we if we don't get our
hands around this particular
part of society we're just gonna
end up that you know with the
world heard for all of us so I
don't have any questions Mr
chairman I just wanted knowledge
is hard work and and also the
coalition these brought
together.
Thank you senator we have a
Senator Griggs and then we'll
have Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
Senator tall and on page eleven
of the bill.
We talk about that and electric
vehicles gaps should be capable
of going at least fifteen miles.
What are what are we looking at
that you know as far as.
Motor vehicles and staff we what
were we looking at this goes for
fifteen miles.
Is that a reasonable number does
that Senator he doesn't want you
to get a golf cart
Senator my golf cart just about
do that.
I have cable okay Page Alaina
love in nineteen.
I'm all right now on page eleven
line nineteen it right.
Right and it's just a me we use
we use fifteen miles of the just
seems like a an awfully low
number for.
For one of these vehicles that I
I think you're talking about
you're you're talking about
previous's and Tesla's and staff
and you're you're trying to go
for further and further show
fifteen miles just just kind of
an interesting number to me
we're where did that that
particular number come from
Santo well I think the chairman
answered your questions this
golf cart.
But again.
Senator analyst in my golf cart
or pretty close to go fifty
miles or maybe I can get a tax.
It's a.
I don't have a good answer for
it would make a note of it and
we'll have a.
plenty of time to maybe offer an
amendment that the.
X. Committee.
Thank you Mr chairman chair
thank you just a lot of talk
about a little bit and see if
that's really a reasonable
thing.
Maybe it's the yeah it's it
raise a good point I have a good
answer but all.
Be more than glad to follow up
on thank you.
And thank you Mr chairman thank
you senator thank you Mr
chairman and senator and you
know if you lowered a little bit
more golf cart will for sure get
it show thank you.
Thank you.
Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman thanks for
your great screens up really
good point at that so.
The only thing we're looking at
is fifteen miles.
I don't really think that's the
intended purpose of your bill so
I'm gonna take a look at that
you have in several other places
as well or at least one other
place on page twelve.
So I have a couple of questions
one of the extra you were
talking about I think it was
with can Ortiz or about to enter
keys and I'm not sure if I heard
correctly Mr chair search Holman
what did you say fourteen
charging stations.
fourteen locations with the.
Two churches to charging it
charges at each location.
And that was one point four
million dollars.
Well yeah that does seem
that's because the faster
fast Chargers are very expensive
but we we might.
It this is negotiable.
We might.
Reduce it to just the two
regular Chargers which are a lot
less expensive.
So that's it so.
The Goshen road so up for
debate.
Chair center yet I I I
understand that since this is a
that's the legislative process
right to go through these and
try to make the best bill that
we can.
Thank you set in stone and.
Really in the bill that was just
in the testimony right I just
want to call out that's a
hundred thousand dollars yeah I
thought each time I thought
maybe I would should say what
the figure was because I was
afraid I'd get that question so
we.
Mr.
It does seem that we be honest
with each other and honest with
the public when we're trying
thus the slayings and not.
Not mentioned things because
we're afraid it might get called
out well Mr chair and senator I
did mention it.
No you did absolutely and I
appreciate that Mr chair center
I I have a couple other
questions when it comes to the
actual tax credit itself
And I think I've seen this and
some other bills
but help me out with the
difference between a single
person getting the special tax
rate.
We're not supposed to read with
the the doubled rebate.
No five thousand at a fifty
thousand dollar income.
But a married person only gets
that
At.
Below thirty five thirty seven
thousand in New Mexico.
Are we purposely penalizing
people for being married.
My it's.
The information was embarassing.
text here with ADI is.
Income of fifty thousand or less
so married filing jointly.
Is seventy five and that
usually.
The case where the very filing
jointly obviously has a higher
threshold.
You Mr chairman for not to be a
penalty that would be double the
threshold not one half and then
you've got on page two of
section two you've got that if
they're filing
separate returns it's thirty
seven.
And I wondered what which page
are you on page two.
All right I've got a ten
fourteen page adolescents six
page analysts.
The house is which what how
which one are you I'm on page
two of the bill itself well the
bill are very.
Sure a lot of times I like to
work straight from the bill.
Fifty thousand plus the two
phones.
So what is your question again
well I I'm wondering why the
difference in the threshold to
receive the larger tax credit
for married versus single if you
were trying to keep it the same
level then wouldn't it be a
hundred thousand for married
filing joint returns and we're
gonna stay fifty thousand for
married filing separate returns
and I guess I don't understand
the differences just penalizing
people for being married.
Earlier you raise an interesting
point I have a very good answer
but all the.
Sir
Senator.
Senator a we have our Committee
analyst a.
Kelly you want to maybe time in
and maybe clarify some things.
I have no problem with that.
Kelly thank you Mr chairman
Senator Brandt
the the.
So the so the minimum to get the
minimum income to get to the
higher level of credit for the
single individuals fifty
thousand dollars the minimum
income for the married couple is
seventy five thousand dollars so
it's actually not a penalty it's
a it's an advantage a greater
advantage to the married couple
because is not toward the
threshold isn't well.
Well that's that's incorrect
because you're right you're
absolutely right now now that
I'm back.
And since the one right you're
absolutely right now thirty
seven five for this the married
filing separate is just is just
happened seventy five that's
generally how it's done
and Mr chair Kelly I understand
a lot of times is the way these
things are done it is always
rubbed me the wrong way that we
penalize people in our tax
system for before getting
married effect honestly don't
think the government has any
business knowing or even being
involved in whether I'm married
or not but that's a whole
different discussion we can save
that for another day hopefully
increased we shouldn't be
penalized.
On our taxes because of the fact
that we're more.
So Mr chairman and senator.
Would you.
Be happy if we chit increased to
thirty seven to fifty Mr chair
Center are I think that would
make the bill better for us to
do that so I think I would look
at just you know making it
double one all of the yeah what
were you.
I just don't see any reason not
to I actually do appreciate the
fact that you're trying to make
this are one of the things I've
brought out several times in the
past and others out is the only
rich people can afford electric
vehicles
and so I actually appreciate the
fact that you're trying to make
this more affordable two of the
lower income level I actually
with my preference would be to
get rid of the twenty five
hundred and say that you only
get the credit if you're below
that level because quite frankly
if you look at the FIR on page
six to talk about the analysis
so now pull you into the FIR if
you look at on page six.
Is the household income under
fifty thousand only accounts for
eight percent.
Eight percent.
Of the electric vehicles in our
state.
That's a state that's a state
number.
Thirty one percent or if the
household income is about two
hundred thousand dollars well
quite frankly someone that's
making two hundred thousand
dollars doesn't need a credit
from the government to buy
anything.
Thank you for to pay for
themselves and so.
Well I appreciate what you do in
more of I I think that all
you're on the right track with
making it more but I don't even
think we need to have that for
someone that's making more than
the fifty or a hundred thousand
to paid to people making a
hundred fifty thousand will be
buying the the vehicle is in
excess of forty eight thousand.
Maybe to the
The reason this is excuse
because.
Like everybody is told is
probably you Mexico I would dare
say has the least number of
vehicles.
Per capita could you go to
California Texas Arizona my
gosh.
Edie's all over so in this.
Because a lot of the early Evey
sales were test wells which are.
Which is the on first miles came
out over fifty thousand that's
why you're gonna see the skewed
but obviously as the price comes
down you're going to see this
more evenly spread over income
brackets so
that that explains why there's
such a.
High percentage of people.
Owning
EV's over a hundred fifty two
hundred thousand dollar income.
Your point is well taken a look
at that and
Will the.
Give serious consideration to
adjusting the the income
brackets Mr chairman Senator
that's a that's a really good
hypothesis yeah I appreciate
that on why
you know and and we've we've
discussed the whole test law
sells issue in the past and and
we'll revisit that discussion
you and I individually at some
point
but you know that is
I think it's really interesting
that GM is looking at having all
elector vehicles I think it's a
pretty nice goal
but I think the some point we're
going to look at the total
environmental impact of electric
vehicles I think we're ignoring
so very significant
environmental impact I've been
reading some some studies
on the actual impact of them of
electric vehicles I think it's
it's a discussion we need to
have if we really do care about
protecting the environment.
but I I do think that if we're
talking about you know
subsidizing so in being able to
buy a vehicle we'll look at what
income level that we really want
to subsidize that because that's
what we're doing we're making it
easier for someone to buy on.
if we usually do that at the
beginning of an industry and we
did have.
credits for solar panels the
federal government had credits
for vehicles those I thank you
mostly gone away you probably
know more than me on that one.
that is basically to get an
industry started not to continue
the industry and you know
forever but just to get that
industry get a foot in the door
so they get going your tassels I
think that making a profit so
why do we need to subsidize
their business anymore so I
think those are some things we
need to consider with the US
this bill sends Mr chair and
senator bill sunsets that into
twenty twenty five or twenty
twenty six.
Right but the companies were
trying to subsidize are already
profitable they're already
making a profit on these
vehicles so why are we needing
to subsidize them anymore what
we have there's the the door
they're already growing in the
percentage that they are in the
market place I don't understand
why we're continuing to look at
subsidizing that.
Well Mr chair Sarah subsidizing
manufactures.
Little bill this is a bill to
help the vehicle owners in who
does that help.
The manufacturer because they
sell more vehicles in your
really subsidizing the
manufacturer because you want
them to sell more vehicles so
we're giving money yes to the
individual so they can actually
afford to buy the vehicle that
probably not just like because I
think those for brand new ones
all the I know Sir you've told
me and I've looked at it there
there are some around forty
forty five thousand.
So if you can that lower in
Tesla you can get into a tussle
for less than the fifty thousand
but you're mostly looking at
things like the whole things
like.
I remember all the other names
of all the different
manufacturers but you're mostly
looking at the other companies
other than test low
but the reason you're doing that
are you what you're doing is
really subsidizing them so they
can sell more vehicles.
What the dealers association is
on here saying yeah we support
this because it helps us sell
more vehicles and that's great
we want to sell more vehicles
well let's.
The government needs to
subsidize them well Mister
chairman center let's agree to
disagree okay and we'll of.
Price of the new vehicle now is
thirty five thousand so it would
at that forty eight is that far
from a new I just read that the
other day of surprise how high
it hi to.
Price of the new vehicles thirty
five thirty six thousand.
That's that's actually.
You know the the vehicle prices
of increased and I'm trying to
remember last time I paid less
than forty five thousand for a
new vehicle
so I guess my wife's car was
less than that would barely you
know so yes you're absolutely
right
It's not a big difference but no
one's going to give me a tax
credit.
For buying the truck that I need
to pull my travel trailer.
The less it's electric but they
don't have those yet and we're
working on when they get want to
consider especially if it go no
more than six or seven hundred
miles so I think there's some
concerns within the way the
bills drafted at least for me
the I think you can work on
between now when we actually
vote on this bill Mr chairman I
thank you for giving me the time
to bring up some of my concerns
with the bill answered phone
thank you for bringing I do
appreciate some of the changes
you make to it I really do thank
you thank.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator.
I don't see any other.
Of hands up from the committee
members.
So we're not gonna take action
on this at the moment so
appreciate Senator Tallman and
appreciate that discussion I
know you worked on this for a
number of years and I think
we're we're getting close I know
this is important
to you and
But the we will get a chance to
revisit this again of will bring
the bill back up.
Thank you Mr chairman of
reshaped you're.
In this bill forward in the
early part of the.
Legislative session thank you.
This thank you.
All righty we will now move on
to.
Senate Bill
Fifty nine do we have of the
Senator Stewart.
Yes you Mr chairman okay good
great Senate bill of fifty nine
reserve funds transferred
Senator Stewart go ahead thank
you so much Mr chairman and let
me also say that in your waiting
room is Donick less yes the
chief economist from the LFC I'm
here just to answer any
technical questions if you have
them.
So Senate bill fifty nine.
transfers to and from between
certain general fund research.
So you remember in twenty
seventeen we set up the tax
stabilization Act.
This bill just some of the funds
going into that act up a small
amount of this bill increases
the cap on the operating
researchers from it's current
eight percent up to fifteen
percent it's the of the prior
year recurring general fund
appropriations so it raises the
fund balance in operating
researchers
it also changes the fund up well
let me let me first tell you why
I think we need to do this
Our research about two point six
two point seven billion.
One point six billion sorry.
Two point something billion two
point six point seven billion
one point six billion dollars in
a research are directly
attributable to the tax
stabilization Act when we set
the tax stabilization act up to
create a rainy day fund by
taking over a five years of
what excess oil and gas.
Reserves going into the pub and
to the school fund we took some
of them off the top and put them
in the tax stabilization Act the
tax stabilization Act is very
restrictive it requires either
of governor's proclamation and
two thirds vote of the Senate
and house to use that so I have
been concerned the last few
years that the legislature
itself is taking too much off
the table and I question to one
of our secretaries in the last
interim and she admitted to me
that she thought they had made
in there and that they had taken
just too much to put it into
this tax stabilization Act so
this bill continues the
restriction on the tax
stabilization Act it also
continues the
funds going into the early
childhood fund if it's over
twenty five percent it doesn't
change the third that but by
increasing the cap on the
operating research and setting
extraction taxes instead of to
the.
Tax stabilization reserve into
the operating research it gives
the legislature a little more
wiggle room with using operating
reserves I'm probably not
explaining this very well but if
you see on your revenue this
gives us about forty nine
million dollars more in our
general fund operating reserves
next year it kind of maintains
that by twenty five it's it's
going up a little bit so we we
wanted to continue to have the
solid Tax reserve of the
situation we have where it's
hard to get into it but by going
from eight percent to fifteen
percent in our operating
researchers it just gives us a
little more ability to use some
of those research which we have
so many
So.
That's generally what it does
it's very simple by that
adjustment and if done would
like to add anything Mr chairman
that she's not speaking against
or in favor of the bill she's
just an expert on this and if
she might add something if she
wants to.
Good on thank you Mr chair thank
you Senator Stewart and yes
again thank you madam here
representing either in favor or
in opposition of the bill that
and willing to provide some
technical analysis on what the
bill does and if any questions
there are on how our general
fund reserves operate or their
balances are how these this bill
changes some of the interactions
and so just to summarize really
quickly the two things that the
bill does so first the as
Senator Stuart mentioned it
increases the cap on the
operating reserve so currently
the operating reserves cap to
eight percent of the prior
year's recurring appropriations
so if there are additional
transfers into the operating
reserve which occur if revenues
exceed expenditures and given
fiscal year those monies will go
into the operating reserve and
if it sends the operating
reserve above the eight percent
cap the excess distribution is
transferred to the tax
stabilization reserve and if you
look on page two of your FIR the
sort of illustrates exactly how
that happens.
And that the transfer between
the operating reserve and the
tax stabilization reserve is the
most responsible for the growth
of the tax stabilization reserve
in the last three years I it
transferred that mechanism
transferred on over five hundred
million dollars in FY eighteen
it transferred another three
hundred and seventy seven
million dollars in FY nineteen
and another four hundred and
forty eight million dollars in
FY twenty as the the oil
production boom
resulted in additional revenues
on top of what was expected in
the revenue estimates that
additional revenue went into the
operating reserve the operators
are hit the eight percent cap
and therefore transferred to the
tax stabilization reserve.
By increasing that cap to
fifteen percent it does not
change the current balances of
either reserve fund monies will
stay in both reserve funds as
they are currently however if
revenues exceed probation and
there are additional
distributions to the operating
reserve this raises the
threshold at which it would
trigger a transfer into the tax
stabilization reserve meaning
that the operating reserve would
now need to exceed fifteen
percent of the prior year
appropriation before being
transferred into the tax
stabilization reserve.
The second thing that the bill
done is take the excess oil and
gas revenue from the school tax
and sends it first to the
operating reserve under current
law it first goes into the tax
stabilization reserve as long as
the reserves are less than
twenty five percent and if the
more they go into the early
childhood trust fund what this
bill would do is send it first
to the operating reserve.
if you all turned to or look at
the reserve decision tree that's
on page five of your FIR this
illustrates the way in which our
reserve funds sort of operate
between each of those transfers
and I'll be referring to the
reserve decision tree on the
bottom of page five where or
what this bill does is by first
sending it to the operating
reserve we look at is there an
nexus of the five year average
if there is then a transfer
occurs then we look at what are
the reserve percentages if
reserves are already at twenty
five percent of the excess would
go to the early childhood trust
fund as per current law.
Now if reserves are less than
twenty five percent it would go
first to the operating reserve
under this bill and then they
would ask the question is the
operating reserve over does this
put the operating reserve over
the fifteen percent limit set in
this bill if the answer to that
is yes then those monies would
still be transferred into the
tax stabilization reserve so
this still allows the
possibility of those excess oil
and gas school tax revenues to
end up in the tax stabilization
reserve but it will send them
first to the operating reserve
and it will depend on the
operating reserves balance and
whether it exceeds that fifteen
percent cap for whether it sent
to the tax stabilization reserve
I'm happy to stand for any other
questions if if that is helpful
thank you.
Thank you done so much better
than nine taxes aren't exactly
my wheel house so and that is
our presentation Mr chairman.
Thank you
will now go to the.
Public testimony we have anybody
tell.
I did not receive an email from
anyone who want to speak in
opposition to this particular
Senate bill so I will give the
public a moment to restore hand.
One more time this is for public
statement in opposition of
Senate bill fifty nine.
And it doesn't look like we have
any I also didn't receive any
emails in support either so if
anyone in the meeting with the
like to speak in support of the
bill public statement now is the
time go ahead and raise your
hand.
Okay and that concludes Public
statement percent of the line
thank you.
Mr chairman I don't think
anybody knows what this bill is
for what it does and I don't
have my own lobbyist this is
just something I've been working
on personally for several years
so there you have it.
Thank you I have Senator Kernan
Senator Padilla and senator
Gramm so Senator Kernan.
Thank you Mr chair and I don't
want to step in front of Senator
Padilla I don't know if he was
ahead of me about it I was but
that's fine I I'm gonna be a
gentleman here thank you.
You always are thank you very
much and and I'll be brief so
I'm Mr chair and senator and
maybe this is a question for don
I'm looking at the end of the
analysis on page to and the the
third paragraph
Can can you remind us all why we
established the tax
stabilization reserve.
I don't know if that's a
question for Senator Stewart or
for
that on maybe don would you like
to answer
Mr chair Senator Kernan I and I
am happy to answer unless
Senator Stewart would like to
answer first no I think you'll
be bettered answering I've got
my answer but I bet you'll be
better.
I'm and thank you Mr chair
representative Stewarton Senator
Kernan
the tax stabilization reserve
was created an effort to create
a true rainy day fund for the
state the tax stabilization
reserve existed prior to twenty
seventeen when it was changed
but it was capped at a certain
amount and any excess
distributions went into a
different bucket so it could
never actually function as a
rainy day fund but in twenty
seventeen we were falling off
the oil and gas crash that
occurred in twenty fifteen and
twenty sixteen there were a
variety of solvency measures we
blew through our reserve funds
very quickly you'll see on that
page the we indeed the one
hundred and forty seven million
that was in that fund in FY
fifteen and it remained at zero
and sixteen and seventeen and we
recognize the need to have an
actual rainy day fund in which
the operating reserve could draw
on for emergencies particularly
oil and gas shocks and we
decided to fund or the
Legislature excuse me decided to
fund that oil and gas that tax
stabilization reserve with
excess windfall revenue from oil
and gas revenues by giving at
that specific mechanism for
transfers of the excess school
tax it also allowed for any
other windfall revenues by way
of setting a limit on the
operating reserve and saying if
you get a lot more money than
you would expect it to happen a
year then the accession go into
the tax stabilization reserve
and it just so happens not
uncommon for New Mexico that in
FY eighteen and nineteen and
even in FY twenty the oil
production billing that was
occurring resulted in even more
additional access windfall
revenue particularly from large
bonuses payments for and large
royalties on Federal production
as well as gross receipts taxes
so a lot of other sources than
just the school tax that has
that current mechanism for the
five year average so that
reserve fund was really.
He set up as a way to capture
excess oil and gas revenue in a
period of revenue booms and then
have that funding available
during those market downturns in
order to shore up budgets thank
you very much Mr chairman thank
you don and that just kind of
leads me down to another
paragraph
it at almost to the bottom and
it eight in the FIR it talks
about December twenty twenty
consensus revenue estimate and
so that estimate is our most
recent estimate is that correct.
Mr chair Senator Kernan that's
correct so my concern is going
forward
waiting and wondering what the
next estimate is going to say in
certain we'd have had a much
better year in twenty twenty
than we anticipated with
production I'm but I think that
we would have to consider the
risk associated with recent
executive orders from from
Washington as well as many of
the pieces of legislation going
through this legislation
legislature currently and so I
wonder are you going to consider
as you prepare the next revenue
estimate the risks that we just
talked about.
Mr chair Senator Kernan
absolutely all of those
outstanding risks will be
considered when we set our
revenue forecast you are
absolutely correct in saying
that production was higher than
we anticipated where it would be
in December twenty twenty also
prices are much higher so that's
one factor but also outstanding
as a lot of that uncertainty
from the recent executive orders
and those are all things for our
consensus estimating group to
consider in the next revenue
estimate one thing that I'll
point out about that estimate
that you're referring to on page
two of this FIR again as part of
the December twenty twenty
revenue estimate is that if in
the event school tax revenues
did not exceed the five year
average all school tax revenue
would stay in the general fund
in the events that are they came
in more than what is projected
here that additional access
would be sent under this bill
still to reserves and this would
be to the operating reserve and
again still has potential to go
into the tax stabilization
reserve depending on where the
operating reserve in the fiscal
year.
So that again Mr chair that
makes sense that I as revenues
drop over the next three to four
years which I anticipate that
intentionally could that first
it goes to the operating budget
so there's nothing that would go
into the resources under that
circumstance is that correct so
only when we have
High production more money
coming in if that's the only way
I can get to the research that
that that I think is really more
secure than the operating
research that but I understand
what we're doing and I kind of
look at it as if you know the
operating reserves that's sort
of the checking account that we
use and then when we talk about
the stabilization reserves
that's kind of the savings
account a little bit harder to
get to if I am correct it's
going to be easier to get to
under this circumstance or at
least it's it's more it's going
to stay in the operating correct
before going to the
stabilisation reserves and I
guess I'm at I don't have an
objection to the bill but I just
think going forward we have to
be so careful about using that
checking account beyond what
we're going to be able to have
the use down the road so I'm
really looking forward to the
New Testament the new consensus
estimate that that they'll be
coming out and I hope that that
we are all to take that into
consideration as we can look at
all of these appropriation bills
coming through especially if
they're recurring because the
impact is can be significant and
we can spend down that does
stabilization texted will
sessions are very quickly if
we're not careful so I do I do
support the bill I do think it's
a maybe relaxing a little bit.
Too much getting to to the.
I need a fund that's a concern
but on the other hand I think of
it it doesn't mean we have to
spend all that money so let's be
careful about what's in the
checking account and that's not
to spend and what we have in our
state so thank you very much
that's all.
Thank you Senator Kernan of
Senator Padilla.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
madam pro tem and and on I'm not
sure who wants to answer this
one but let's just take
a walk down memory lane just for
a second so when we set up the
early childhood Trust Fund I
think the enabling are the
legislation that we passed that
you're resulted in about a three
hundred and twenty year three
hundred thirty million dollar
initial infusion into the fund
is that right.
You can go ahead and answer.
At thank you Senator Stewart Mr
chair Senator Padilla the
initial distribution was three
hundred million dollars when we
passed the bill you're correct
it was three hundred and twenty
million that was pared back to
three hundred and the June
special session that's correct
so if because it was a result of
what we did that you're to make
that suddenly available to put
into that fund if the changes
that the pro tem is proposing
here would have been in place
then at would would you be
willing to give us an estimate
of what that infusion into the
attic that trust fund would have
been.
Mr chair Senator Padilla because
the distribution of the oil and
gas school tax would only occur
to the early childhood trust
fund if reserves exceed twenty
five percent this bill keeps
that mechanism in place so in no
way would have changed the
estimate of what would have been
distributed to the early
childhood Trust Fund.
Thank you said exactly what I
was hoping you would say I think
most people know that this is
one of my major swim lanes and I
want to make sure that we're
still gonna shepherding that one
just right so going into the
future we would expect the the
trust early education trust fund
to remain where it is today with
regard to its it's having
It's distribution would be the
same under the previous with the
current rules versus what the
pro tennis is proposing here.
Mr chair Senator Stewart current
excuse me Mr chair Senator
Padilla that is correct thank
you I know I said that in a
really convoluted way so I
really appreciate your response
thank you madam Protandim Mr
chairman.
Thank you Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman
Senator I think Sir current did
a pretty good job of.
Getting to the nuts and bolts of
what the bill does.
Remind me of what it takes for
us to take money out of that
stable with the stabilization
fund.
This so it's to Mr chairman
Senator Brandt it's a two thirds
vote of both houses
I think it also requires the
governor's agreement
and there's also a mechanism of
things get really horrible then
we can use it without those
mechanisms but trying to read it
to you done can probably say it
better than I just did.
Mr chair if you wouldn't mind
letting done just kind of how is
that tax stabilization fund use.
on a normal basis and then how
would we pull additional monies
up.
Or Mr chair Senator Brandt so as
Senator Stuart mentioned there's
two ways to get at that funding
one is the most difficult way it
does still require a declaration
from the governor that the use
of that fund is necessary and
then it requires agreements on
that use by two thirds of the
the house and the Senate that
would be the first most
restrictive way the second way
and and still restrictive way
and getting out the tax
stabilization reserve is yes
revenues are exceeded eight are
expected to fall short of
probation and given fiscal year
then that's the rainy day fund
function of this of this fund
that allows it to be drawn on by
a simple majority vote.
But it does have to require a
governor's emergency and it it
does need it's it's usually
accompanied by a governor's
emergency and it does need to
have revenues fall short of
appropriations and as you all
may recall in the June twenty
twenty special session revenues
were indeed expected to fall
significantly short of FY twenty
appropriations and therefore as
part of the June twenty twenty
special session legislation
there was authorization in that
session to utilize some tax
stabilization reserve funds as
needed up to a certain amount if
by the end of the year those
revenues do still fall short of
appropriation.
Let me say Mr chairman we're not
changing anything in this bill
about those restrictions on the
tax stabilization act the same
way we're not changing anything
that has to do with the
distribution of the early
childhood really the only there
the two changes are simple so
that there's a little bit more
in operating research.
Mr chairman Senator I guess
that's where I'm confused I'm
understand we're not changing
how we pull that money out but
we're making it more difficult
for money to go in is that right
so that so that we can spend
more money I mean that's that's
the purpose right well I Mr
chair I've certainly heard from
people and you can see it in
your analyses that says that the
eight percent cap on the
operating reserve has not been
looked at and some folks think
that it should have been raised
then when we put in place the
tax stabilization Act so right
now yes it's capped at eight
percent of the previous year
going into operating reserves
and this would raise that to
fifteen so it does put more
money into operating researchers
that we can use of with a
without all these restrictions.
So Mr chairman Senator so does
that then make it where we have
more money to appropriate.
We can raise our budget even
more.
Mr chair I don't see it like
that because it's still in there
is service.
It's an operating reserves it's
not you know in the general fund
so I think it makes it easier us
easier for us to use the
research when we need to and
we're at thirty five percent
we're it what almost three
billion and half of that is
because of that tax
stabilization Act.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator I appreciate that
it it's still concerns me I'll
continue listen but I I.
I I think you know we're we're
good to have thirty five percent
with everything that we're
seeing
that is being brought during the
session and with everything that
we're seeing with the current
presidential administration
three minute billion dollars is
going to be gone the first year
we banned fracking.
Because that money is just gonna
be out the door and we're gonna
be trying to figure out now what
we do so good thing we have
thirty five percent
I don't think we're gonna be
able to make up three billion
dollar shortfall in our
revenues.
In one year which is what is
about to happen if all the bills
that have been proposed go
through and if the I
administration doesn't left this
in Bargo on fracking on public
lands thank you.
Thank you Senator Griggs.
Thank you for sharing that and
madam pro tem um the the fifteen
percent number is there any
magic to that we're we're G. as
you just wanted to you felt like
would be more reasonable.
Mr chair Senator Griggs I have
been trying to work on this for
several years last year I had a
bill that I I could not explain
to anyone so I never actually.
trite so I reached out to David
Abbey David Abbey reached out to
don we also reached out to the
secretary of DFA and I basically
said you know Clark are there
some changes we could make a so
that we're not looking at a huge
amount in the research that we
can not appropriate and
and through several memos that
were produced by LFC there were
several suggestions and I took
the suggestions that did the
least kind of damage the tax
stabilization act so I left that
alone the least damage the early
childhood left that alone and
chose one of the options which
was raised the operating
research to fifteen percent.
Okay Mister Mr chairman and
madam protein much I mean I I I
think I understand the way all
of this is working out I mean
there's the the growth in the
tax stabilization fund is.
Is potentially reduced you know
maybe dramatically maybe not but
it's just want to get to that
gotta get fifteen instead eight
showing it won't grow up but the
operating reserve will we should
give gives the legislature I
guess and I've been done maybe
you'd have to say is all of this
calculated into the the total
reserve showing a fab.
In the eight percent operating
reserve cap of before we go to
the stabilization fund now has
seven more present in it so when
we talk about the reserve which.
This gives us a substantial
growth in reserves that are
available so that the thirty
five percent reserve number that
we're here and.
Is this going to make that
thirty five percent say forty
two percent and that that number
may be far from right but with
the reserve number that we're
talking about potentially
increase overall because we
would do that.
Mr chair Senator Griggs no so
this does not change the amounts
of funds that are currently in
the the reserve funds at all and
currently there exists two point
four billion dollars in the
reserves that's thirty five or
so percent this does not change
what is currently in either the
operating reserve or in the tax
stabilization reserve and this
does not have any means to
increase the reserve balance it
is a little tricky when we think
about our reserves in terms of
percentage terms because we're
sort of talking about slightly
different things.
The tax excuse me the operating
reserve cap is calculated as a
percentage of last years
probation when we talk about the
reserve balances percentages.
in our conversations that that
is always the present balance at
calculated as part of this
year's recurring appropriations
so the percentages can don't
always even out necessarily when
you try to equate one to the
other but no it does not add to
the reserve percentages and it
doesn't change where the funds
currently set at this moment.
Thank you for sure and and thank
thank you madam pro pro tem and
and dont I guess what I'm show
maybe too many word is we've got
so many reserve so much richer.
Which include the tax
stabilization reserve.
So when we look at our number we
say we've got thirty five
percent in reserve that includes
the tax stabilization.
Okay so that that helps me show
what this will mean is more than
likely that.
that number was something
fermented but it'll stay
relatively.
Constand for a little bit but
the well actually for the FIR
looks like it would probably say
constant and the growth in the
operating reserve.
Would be.
You know almost twice used twice
as much available in the
operating reserve that would
have gone to the tax
stabilization reserve and that
may not make sense either I I
can certainly understand why
Senator Stewart had issues with
social work over time but it's a
it's
it just makes it to work frankly
it puts a little more into the
operating reserve which is
easier for us to use in the
impact of of need and right now
I'm I'm sure lunches were to
occur we're gonna have people
you know salivating at that
because I can say let's cut to
reserve down to twenty percent
we can get that.
we're if it was in the tax
stabilization reserve we could
get at quite solution so I I
think I I think I've got eight
and
it you know the reserves are
going to be going to be
important to us so this is our
vision balance point ballot
discussion thank you Mr chairman
thank you senator stored and and
all.
Thank you of Senator Griggs.
I'm looking at my short I don't
believe we have any other.
Senator with questions.
So with the senators what is the
pleasure of the committee.
Moved you madam chair.
moved that passed by the.
Senator Senator Padilla.
We have a second by Senator how
to meal.
One hundred other meal Senator
Hotmail so lane to the to call.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt.
No.
Senator Griggs.
Yes.
Senator Hamblen.
Yes Senator Hickey yes Senator
how to meal yes Senator Kernan
yes I'd like to explain more
about.
Senator Tallman.
Yes.
Senator Sanchez.
No.
Senator Wirth.
Yes.
Committee call everybody and she
can explain okay Senator.
Yes Senator Shendo.
Yes.
Nine four two against nine four.
Senator Kernan we have a due
pass motion of nine four two
against of Senator current
explainable.
Thank you Mr chairman I just
want to Act I guess I wish we
had the updated revenue
forecasts because I think that's
going to change a lot of thanks
and I I would have liked to have
had that before this vote I
understand that we're talking
about reserves at.
On both sides operating and then
the the special tax
stabilization reserve fund but
but I'll tell you we we need to
know for certain going forward
what we're looking at in the
years out and I I continue to be
concerned I think that you know
this is going to be a tough
thing I hope we've done the
right thing here because we may
look down the road in twenty
twenty five and and wished that
we had done this but.
Going forward we sure need to
hear from LFC and we need to
hear what the updated forecast
is before we make many more of
these decisions thank you.
Thank you Senator Kernan
settlement program thank you so
much for the great conversation
I appreciate it.
Thank you.
And I hear what Senator Kernan
is saying loud and clear.
A good thank you senator we'll
move onto your next committee.
So I understand that senator
o'neill is on so we will.
Move back up to Senate bill
fifty three.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee yes and
I'd like to bring in my panel of
experts are secretary of GST can
Ortiz and then his colleagues
mark Hayden and also Randall
Cherry if they can be admitted
into the into the panel that
would be great.
So why don't I just go ahead and
start okay first of all Senator
Mr chairman and members we have
a list of expensive amendments
so what we would like to do if
it was okay with U. S. president
bill in a general way I'm here
for and against maybe experience
some discussion from the
committee and then come back
with the with the committee
substitute and then that would
be our preference you know you
are and hopefully you're
creating your finalists and
gotten all the amendments and so
forth does that make sense you
Mr chair yes it does senators so
go ahead and the.
Of.
But your bill on okay thank you
so Mr chair members.
Senate bill fifty three is the
general DST's.
After to update the procurement
code with a focus on growing New
Mexico small businesses in
keeping more of the approximate
six billion dollars in annual
state.
And within the state to
stimulate our post COVID Kanemi
the preference approach is
intended to drive more state and
local government contracting
dollars to New Mexico businesses
in general with New Mexico
exclusive procurement and target
better and Hispanic minority
women tribal an African American
black owned businesses Mr
chairman members minority owned
businesses have been
historically economically
disadvantaged and a
disproportionate number of
minority and women owned
businesses have collapsed
nationwide because of the Covid
pandemic this bill will keep
more New Mexico tax dollars in
New Mexico helping homegrown
businesses recover grow and
create jobs and etcetera and the
measure measure also promote
purchases of sustainable goods
reducing the carbon footprint of
state and local governments to
cutting greenhouse gas emissions
this bill is of course good for
all businesses New Mexico
businesses and the environment
and so
basically the secretary can list
the changes in the procurement
comment that's a general just in
just in a in a larger sense you
know what I like about this bill
you know this is a these
contracts are awarded on a
points system so what it does is
it systematically awards more of
a point
grade for for applications that
come into GSD.
No current making it very clear
that New Mexico businesses your
minority owned businesses
etcetera are preferred and so
what I like about it is that
it's a systemic it's a
systematic approach to these
contracts and this is like you
know these contracts that's a
lot the goes out the out the
door with these contracts so
having said all that since of
Secretary Ortiz could follow up
that would be great.
Thank you senator Neil Mr
chairman members of the
committee thank you for the
opportunity Senate bill fifty
three started out as a concept
in a discussion last year we're
working with the administration
in various different agencies we
we created we came up with the
plan.
Called by New Mexico and
additionally our discussion was
working with various agencies
such as tax and Representative
secretary of state's office
regulation licensing and GST we
wanted to provide as much
assistance technical assistance
toward businesses to start a
business like registering it
with the secretary of state's
office tax compliance with tax
and Representative B. being able
to obtain licenses through
regulation the licensee and most
importantly being aware and of
all the different opportunities
to contract with state and local
governments
our outreach includes chamber of
commerce we've been working
really closely with the Indian
Affairs chamber of commerce's
bandaging were of Commerce
African American chamber of
commerce at cetera with the
pandemic a lot of our outreach
efforts kanu was put on a pause
so as we heard back from them we
we understood that the veterans
resident preference is set to
sunset at next year and that's
one of the items to build us we
also wanted to provide a new
preference for tribal
of businesses that are either
owned by tribal members or on
sovereign land because they
could not qualify for the right
the resident preference and then
we've expanded to the minority
to allow them to also receive
the same type of preference as
veterans and now hopefully
tribal trying to even the
playing field the the just of
this bill is to try to keep our
tax dollars to New Mexico
businesses one of the items is
in HSD at their discretion may
limit a procurement and a
contract to New Mexico only
companies however it's at the
discretion number one and number
two if the price does not come
in competitive or is otherwise
on responses.
They can always open it up and
read that some of the amendments
is working with tax and
Representative on any type of
appeal process related to the
certification they wanted to
expand the fifteen day timeline
to.
Basically appeal to ninety days
standard with other appeals and
all of those appeals should be
handled the independent office
the administrative hearing
office not nearly necessarily
tax and Representative the last
item is persistent sustainable
products if a bid comes then
that's within ten percent of a
non sustainable product we will
like that agency to contract in
game is much sustainable
products and options as there
the the amendments are the
purest sense of but basically
what we're trying to do is level
the playing field and also
increase the dollar threshold
that was set in statute so
currently to qualify for one of
these preferences are the the
business has to have not
exceeding three million dollars
the preceding year that amount
was set in statute in two
thousand and twelve so what we
did is we applied the consumer
price index and we brought that
three million to two days
dollars at three point five
million and then one of the
other amendments is going
forward allowing the consumer
price index to adjust that
revenue threshold every other
year so that's a general sense
of the amendments we're ready to
either I answer any questions
have a discussion your feedback
is very important and a Senator
o'neill said we could either
walk through line item by line
item on those amendments I just
kind of give a broad overview or
we'd love to hear back from you
and possibly come back with the
committee so Mr chairman I also
just wanted to to let you know I
believe that there are
attendees are that have
registered to speak either in
support or possibly in
opposition bill thank you
Senator we'll turn it back to
you thank you thank this
secretary and that a new
collective to say I.
Are you as.
My our co sponsor representative
my Estes he's not on right he's
busy doing his magic in the
house right yes some one Mr
chair representative now I
believe Representative
Representative molasses was not
able to attend today's committee
hearing okay thank you okay what
with that
Mr chair members of and and last
you know we have to of Secretary
Ortiz's college market Randall
ready to answer questions as
well so can we go to the public
to see air net whether this is a
good idea.
Mr chair.
What is the current.
Well thank you so as the public
response and testifies I need
clarification are they
testifying on the original bill
on the amendments to the bill
are we going to see a substitute
bill I think it's really
important that we know what
we're hearing from the
supporters and the opponents of
before going forward I I don't I
don't have a copy the amendments
I think it's very difficult in a
virtual setting to try and do
massive amendments to a bill
when I am on one computer and I
have a small laptop.
Trying to to do this so do we
need to see a substitute bill
before we have
discussion and and testimony I I
guess I'm just questioning
whether we're we're hearing from
people that have seen all the
amendments we have not or
whether we're going to see a
substitute bill so if you could
clarify that for me I would
appreciate it.
Thank you senator if I may this
would be people that have the
original bill and my
understanding is that the
amendments are technical in
nature and do not change.
Significantly the the general
upshot of the bill but I totally
understand if you want to hold
off and and get all of the the
amendments and so forth but I I
just in the interest of time you
know people have put this on the
schedule to show up today to
speak air nee so that I'm fine
with whatever you decide
secretary said Senator Kernan
and and Mr chairman.
So Mr chairman I don't oppose
hearing from the participants
and I agree with senator o'neill
these people have been waiting
they need we need to hear from
them but I think going forward
with regard to what we do as a
committee I'm gonna feel much
more comfortable saying as
either a substitute bill or have
some time to actually put the
amendments on to the bill that I
currently have so I certainly
don't mind hearing from people I
think that's very important but
before we moved to any action I
need clarification on what we're
really looking at this is very
significant and I just wanna
make sure we have all the facts
that's all thank you Mr.
Works thank you Senator Kernan
up.
But Canadian secretary stepped
out so I I I just assumed that
this was sent out to everybody
yesterday when it came in so I
apologize
So with that I think the
representative of the sponsor is
indicated we have folks that
have looked at the original bill
it's you know so would like to
hear from them of but and would
use of.
But.
Get the.
Hello.
In public statements okay all
right all the clear.
the statement.
Great thank you.
Thank you.
So at this time if there are any
people from the public in the
meeting that would like to speak
in opposition to Senate bill
fifty three now is the time to
raise your hand I did not
receive any prior emails in
opposition so I don't have
anyone on my list.
Heather rentals if you want to
speak in opposition.
yes thank you good afternoon
Mister chairman and members of
the committee
I'm speaking in opposition to
not the complete bill but that I
do have some issues on a few
points a number one the fact
that it allows procurement
exclusive to New Mexico and or
small businesses how will this
proposed change allows the
flexibility of issuing exclusive
procurements it poses a problem
to those agencies who have a
governing body run by local
elected officials I can for CD's
governing bodies using this to
create policy that forces their
procurement departments to issue
exclusive procurements
restricting competition and
causing an increase in taxpayer
spends resulting and on the
budget.
For example of that was
advertised where wanted was
received they were in New Mexico
vendor and the proposed pricing
ranged from two hundred percent
to fourteen hundred percent more
than the previous contract
needless to say the contract was
not awarded another perfect
example is the bit that was just
issued by state purchasing for
help of verification units there
were twelve bidders total only
three of them are from New
Mexico to the New Mexico vendors
had absolutely outrageous
pricing.
Soliciting an exclusive
procurement whether by choice or
direction from a higher
authority it limits competition
and puts the proposed cost and
the good stewardship of taxpayer
dollars in question the simple
fact that we compete nationally
let's the vendors know that they
need to sharpen their pencil.
Also we already allow for
resident preference so there's
not a need for this proposed
change.
The second issue I have is the
broadening of the New Mexico
preferences this would
potentially open up the
possibility of continuing
continuing to add preferences
and there would be no into it
what would be next.
Procurement is set up to be fair
and transparent to all bidders
and offers.
Of the third issue is the ten
percent preference for
sustainable and recycled goods
these types of goods are costly
this proposed legislation gives
a preference but it doesn't
affect the offers price why why
are we proposing such a high
preference and considering that
our budgets have taken a hit
this year his budgets can
sustain that.
And then I also have a proposed
addition regarding ex parte
communication thirty seconds.
On June twenty twenty the state
ethics commission issued
advisory opinion twenty twenty
dash zero four where there is an
issue with the local school them
board member using confidential
procurement information that he
received as a member of the
finance committee to contact
vendors and interfere with the
procurement process it also
resulted in confidential
information being discussed in
the public board meeting which
because the procurement to be
canceled currently the
procurement code does not
prohibit ex parte communications
with potential offers about a
procurement for the procurement
is not the subject of a protest.
Thank you miss Reynolds I'm
sorry your time was on we will
narrow Lucien Randall Cherry Mr
chair.
Chair members I am not here to
support or
propose on general counsel to
the estate so I'm just.
Provide technical support and.
Okay we have on our list Mr
Jason Weaks.
Mr chairman I believe this is a
secretary can Ortiz case it Mr
weeks just texted that he's
getting out of one committee and
is gonna is in the process of
signing on so if you don't mind
Mr chairman maybe we could turn
back to Mr weeks at the end of
the public comment.
Okay Mister Reiss at this time
Mr Archie Garcia.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Senator Ortiz so.
Up Senator o'neill
I'm here to support the bill I'm
a service disabled veteran
company and Representative on
backroom through veterans
procurement assistance center
and I'm a member of the New
Mexico veterans business
advocates.
Association I think that this
implied does what we had asked
for before and that is basically
to expand the resident veteran
preference beyond year twenty
twenty two.
The.
The cost of living increase of
three million dollars to three
half million dollars I think is
is an excellent idea.
Slides the economic growth of
companies and and their ability
to compete in this economy.
I think the preference itself
should.
Target by local.
To stimulate the local economy
yup I think that.
These people from out of state
that do business here.
Don't necessarily pay taxes
here.
And
I think that.
The resident veteran business
and the resident Ben
contractors.
Who do pay taxes should be given
the benefit of the preference.
I think that the the native
American thirty seconds.
Native American businesses were
in the a prior bill others
sponsored by Mister Padilla
Senator Padilla that did not
pass the last legislative
session but tax revenue was not
allowing native American
businesses or on tribal land to
be considered as the New Mexico
business and I think this takes
care of that so with that Mr
chairman I I would unanimously
support this bill.
Thank you next we will hear from
Joanna Neilson Joanna.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Joe and Nelson and the
strategic programs manager for
the economic development
department for New Mexico and
today I am standing in for the
cabinet secretary our cabinet
secretary Alicia keys and our W.
secretary John Clark The New
Mexico economic development
deport department is in support
of this bill and initiative this
will have major positive impact
for New Mexico businesses and be
able to help and economic
recovery as our businesses move
forward and continue to navigate
dealing with the devastating
COVID nineteen affect.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr Nelson next we will
be hearing from Mr Jeremy Farris
Mr Ferris.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee members Senator Neil
I'm Jeremy Ferris the executive
director of the bipartisan state
ethics commission ethics
commission has jurisdiction for
the procurement code and also
provides advisory opinions on
the code the commission has no
comments related to the
preference action of this bill
but offers one comment related
to section seven on page
seventeen of the bill which
defines the term negotiation
process the commission has
concerns for how that definition
might have unintended
consequences for the
confidentiality provisions of
the procurement code.
Last year the commission was
asked to opine on whether a
person involved in procurement
or decision could discuss the
contents of a proposal for the
award of the contract and the
commission concluded no because
under section one sixteen of the
procurement code the contents of
a proposal shall not be
disclosed to be available to
competing offer ours during the
negotiation process and the
commission interpreted that term
negotiation process to run from
one proposals are submitted to
when a contract is executed and
this bill section seven defines
negotiation process process to
limit it to the time frame from
an award of contract to a fully
executed contract and so if that
section becomes law because it
would interact with the the
terms in the confidentiality
provision one sixteen the
commission thanks that section
one sixteen also needs to be
clarified to make it clear that
the contents of any proposal
shall not be disclosed after the
submission of proposals and
before the accident second
contract and so Mr chair I hope
that the sponsor Senator o'neill
and secretary Ortiz and the
General Services Division
staffed with the immutable to
the inclusion of of this
amendment as well in a potential
committee substitute to protect
confidentiality and
competitiveness of New Mexico
procurement thank you.
Thank you Mr Harris right now we
will hear from Mr Martinez more
than.
One more time Mr ness Mr
Martinez.
Okay moving on we will be
hearing from Derrick watching.
You Mr watchmen.
Okay moving on Mr Stephen
Hawking.
Sterile available.
Yes thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee members Senator
o'neill Senator Ortiz I
appreciate this opportunity just
to express my support in favor
of this bill as a member of the
New Mexico veteran business
advocates group a veteran
business owner into a board
member of that same group and
also I work for the New Mexico
procurement technical assistance
center P. tech so I work with
small businesses on a daily
basis in my opinion what I see
here is the opportunity can
level the playing field for all
small businesses similar to the
way the federal government is
done with their setasides.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr Hogan now we will
hear from Gabrielle of Marquez
Gabrielle
Hello
Mr chairman and members of the
committee I am Gabriela Marquez
director of the minority
business development agency here
in New Mexico funded by the US
department of commerce serving
midsize businesses and the state
of New Mexico we are in support
of Senate bill fifty three
minority owned businesses are an
integral part of New Mexicos
economy and have been additional
disproportionately impacted by
propose pandemic economy SB
fifty three will help foster
inclusive intrapreneurs L.
system eco system supporting
growth of minority business
enterprises and local businesses
upon building upon existing
assets and strengths in New
Mexico this is a monumental
economic development
opportunities to bring minority
owned businesses the support
they need to thrive we are in
support thank you.
Thank you Mr
Mister John Martinez.
Martinez.
Okay I see him it seems.
Excuse me I'm John Martinez but
I'm for more percent bill sixty
six there's two John Martinez is
on the list I believe.
Okay so the other Mr.
Available so we will go ahead
and move on to Nadine Padilla.
Hi everyone.
Mr chairman and committee
members my name is Nadine petty
and the secretary at the Indian
Affairs Department and we stand
strong supported this bill as it
will be greatly beneficial to
tribal minority and women owned
businesses providing an
advantage to these businesses is
an investment in tribal and
minority communities and tribal
communities native women are the
backbone of tribal economies
recent estimate estimates
indicate that two out of three
native American mothers are the
primary breadwinners in their
families.
Ginnelly the national women's
law center estimates that native
women are paid only fifty cents
for every dollar paid to their
male counterparts Senate bill
fifty three seeks to address
some of these inequities and it
makes investments where it is
needed the most we are do so
support of this bill thank you
very much.
Yeah now we we hear from Mister
drew setter.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is to set
a registered lobbyist for the
problems of is what out sent
late they Santa Clara okay when
gay and any public marketing and
I will repeat what everybody
else said about that but we
really appreciate the sponsor
making these changes to allow
for our tribal organized
enterprises to be able to
benefit from the procurement
code changes thank you very
much.
At this time is there any other
members of the public I would
like to speak to Senate bill
fifty three in support that and
get a chance to send an email
ahead of time now would be that
time is hand.
Mr Jason Weaks I believe we
skipped you are you here now I I
am I am Jason Weaks on my
registered lobbyists for the
Albuquerque Hispanic chamber of
commerce we stand in strong
support of this legislation we
heard about the legislation the
department and actually we've
been working on a piece of
legislation to create a hub
designation understand what the
utilization of minority
businesses and businesses owned
by women in this bill is great
because it really does create
what is been a successful
program both in the federal
government in other states and
quite frankly in our state for
veteran owned businesses this
isn't really a new concept
expanding the relevant advantage
to a new set of business is that
correct the very much needed we
think that this will help
encouraging state usage of in
state businesses we think it'll
help grow our economy and we
think it will help diversify the
growth within our economy and so
for those reasons the
Albuquerque's fantastic chamber
stands in strong support of this
legislation I want to thank the
sponsors and GST for bring it
forward thank you so much.
Thank you Mr Weekes I believe
that was the last person for
public statement we Irvin I see
with their.
Thank you Mr chair committee
members my name is lily Irvin
Vitela and I'm the president and
executive director of New Mexico
First.
On New Mexico first has been
working on agricultural
resilience work for over seven
years and one of the things that
we know is that the majority of
agricultural businesses in New
Mexico are minority owned and
the majority of them make less
than fifty thousand a year and
by giving emphasis to local
procurement we and with
particular attention to minority
businesses we think that we can
see the kind of utilization and
investments in our local food
system that are really important
to me to this pre pandemic but
it's become.
Increasingly clear during the
pandemic the importance of local
food systems so we strongly
encourage you to support this
bill thank you.
Thank you now you'll hear from
Mr article.
Mr chairman members of the
committee harvest ergon with the
American Indian chamber of
commerce of New Mexico serving
as executive director the the
chamber support Senate bill
fifty three of the idea behind
the New Mexico GSD spotting New
Mexico a campaign I think it's
beneficial to the state keeping
more taxpayer dollars in New
Mexico helping home grown
businesses and creating jobs the
pandemic of course has been very
detrimental to the momentum that
we need to regain every
establish allowing native
American Indian owned businesses
to be recognized as New Mexico
businesses
it's it's a it's a great
opportunity these businesses to
participate in state procurement
and provide services and
products to the state plus also
there's much social economic
benefit when businesses in these
communities are able to
participate so we think the
sponsor Senator o'neill and we
support this.
Are there any more members of
the public that wish to speak in
support of Senate bill fifty
three please raise your hand at
this time.
Mr Davenport did you want to
speak thank you very much Mr
chairman members of the
committee of I am the public
purchasing retired employee and
stay in New Mexico but currently
in the last few years I've been
to teaching property purchasing
classes to cheaper cover
officers throughout the state of
losses on procurement code to
over a thousand cheaper cover
officers for all the cities and
communities in schools across
the strait I'm speaking as as
instructor and hearing input
from from those very sanity
throughout the entire state of
New Mexico and here again I I
really commend Joe serviced
apartments a purchasing for
putting this bill together
because one of the questions I
deal with all the time is hi how
do we recognize our local local
suppliers and our native
American and other other
suppliers under the recovery
code and so the this this really
shows that that problem has been
longstanding it much stated for
many years so I I am strongly in
favor of this bill.
Thank you Mr Davenport.
Is there anyone else from the
public who wishes to speak in
support last call.
Okay that will conclude public
statement for Senate bill fifty
three thank you very much.
Thank you mark a lot so we'll
now we'll go to the committee I
have but Senator Padilla Senator
Hamblen.
Thank you Mr chairman and gosh
what a an effort this has also
been over the years I know that
I've carried gosh for five times
a set aside bill.
on just that for everybody not
not just for particular group
but I guess I have a question
to the sponsor senator Neil so
to talk to me is there a set
aside here or is this a this is
just a preference you get more
points in the.
In the procurement R. F. P.
response portion.
What exactly does this do
thanks if I can to turn it over
to six Secretary RTC would be
better at answering that
question sure Senator new Mr
chairman Senator Padilla
excellent question so this bill
does not have any type of set
aside on requirements on the
actual bill however I do want to
read for you Senate bill eighty
eight sponsored by senator Tom
in in the twenty nineteen
session it required agencies to
report the total number of in
state versus out of state
contracts it starting in fiscal
year twenty to the state
purchasing division at the end
of June of twenty twenty all
agencies reported and I'm happy
and pleased to report that the
total number of in state
contracts were was at sixty five
percent verses out of state
contracts so for the first time
the state at.
When or or the benchmark if you
will of where we're at and now
we can just work to improve that
number but I was very pleased at
a sixty five percent in state
contract reporting.
And Mr chairman and and and and
so Mr secretary so is that for a
statewide our state government
wide or is that just for the
areas with which you pointed out
for this.
The space this legislation
doesn't relate to every business
in New Mexico relates to certain
certain swim lanes and certain
types of businesses is that
right yes I Mr chair Senator
Padilla to answer questions the
reporting requirement was for
state agencies which included
the legislature in judicial but
it did not include local public
bodies.
Thank you Mr chairman and when
you say that so was it every
state agency every state
department every thing the state
does it's is it sixty five
percent.
Mr chairman yes it is sixty five
percent Senator Padilla however
on the EDD's were not required
to report like a purchase order
for example if they bought you
know some office supplies
through the normal process it
was in the if you will a
contract which is basically a PO
the requirement and Senate bill
eighty eight were actual
contracts that had to be
reported.
Are that's that's a that's
really remarkable the state
auditor the previous state
auditor reported some different
figures along the way and I I
would would be interested in
seeing that Mr secretary if you
can please send that report over
to me I would really appreciate
that a U. and I worked very well
together I know you believe give
out my email address but I'll
get it if you don't
and it and it.
Mr chair senator beauty I do
have that and that report was
also provided to the LESC at the
end of fiscal year twenty and we
plan on sending an updated
report the end of every fiscal
year but I can email Mr chairman
I'm not sure if you prefer me to
email it to you to distributed
to committee members or I can
email it directly to Senator
Padilla so active pleasure we're
happy to do which whichever way
you prefer.
I wonder if I'm sorry Mr
chairman the is the.
Mr secretary of the Senate to
our secretary we can get up to a
of the committee should think
about the use of.
Thank you Mr chairman and so on
on the maybe I misunderstood but
are there only certain
industries that this is going to
apply to I I wanna make sure I
heard that correctly or maybe
heard incorrectly I don't know.
You Mr chairman Senator Padilla
as far as the preferences that
we're creating training
preferences are and we're
extending the veterans
preference so first of all
there's a resident veterans
preference for veteran owned
businesses in statute that is is
due to expire in twenty twenty
two so we're extending that in
eliminating the expiration date
there's also a provision where
once a business qualifies for
certification it was only for a
ten year timeline and then
they're no longer able to
receive that certification we're
basically repealing the ten year
limitation and then on top of
that we're creating to princes
also it can present which is the
same as the veterans in the
residence those are specific
tribal owned businesses or or
businesses on tribal sovereign
land as well as a new programs
for minority owned businesses.
Okay I'm gonna have to look a
little what what you know I know
where I don't think we're not
voting on this today if that
seems like the sponsor made that
call when he introduced a school
I'm gonna review that part to
make sure I fully understand
what you just said Mr secretary
I think I understood you but I
want to make sure so it would be
say veteran or tribal if the
anything that those two examples
that you called out in any type
of businesses operating there.
Mr chairman again I'm sorry for
not being clear but in order to
be eligible for these new
preferences.
A business would have to qualify
with the taxation and revenue
department because the in
working with tax and Rev they're
gonna adopt for example some
federal departments already in
existence like to recognize of a
federally recognized tribe but
they're also going to work with
us in various stakeholders to
create other avenues for a
business to be able to become
certified once they become
certified in the respond to for
example in R. F. P. they would
receive a ten percent preference
in the scoring of that R. F. P.
we'll for possibly involvement
award by the agency based on the
highest score typically receives
that.
Our contract or the offer and
then the contract negotiation
occurs after that.
I appreciate it Mr chairman and
Mr secretary you were being
clear I was just having and one
of the brain health over here
and then this anything here
touch the current.
Procurement code with relation
to our cities like for example
service viability of the of the
company
delivery.
Quality and all the other things
that go into what are the.
Mr chair representative body
that's really good good question
I don't believe it addresses
those however to defer to our
state purchasing director of
marketing who may have some
additional information director
hated.
Thank you chairman US secretary
teas and Senator Padilla yes
this bill does touch on R. F.
peas because the preference
rather than showing up is a
discount on on price will affect
the the scheme of the point
system we years for deciding the
awards for our of peas so it's
built into that the points came
as opposed to just a percentage
on a price.
I appreciate that Mr chair and
I'm almost done I know others
have questions and and just full
stop one of the folks that spoke
I think in opposition talked
about
pricing and how this could
potentially result in in a
pricing that is higher than what
we would normally the state
would rate we don't have to talk
about it now but between now and
and the next hearing of this
bill here Mr chairman I I would
like some more detail on that
and what that would truly look
like.
Senator Padilla if I may like to
address that you know what one
of that items in this bill is
the HSD at their discretion may
limit an RFP for New Mexico
owned companies but it's only at
the discretion and our thought
is if prices come into high as a
testimony suggested or that is
otherwise deemed non responsive
they can always open it up for
all businesses in and out of
Mexico to to basically respond
so it's an option and their
discretion but it's not
mandatory.
And and Mr chairman when you say
discretion who is the who's the
bay that has discretion I'm
sorry Mr chairman senator but
yes typically that the chief
procurement officer okay you can
see working with their
leadership for example if they
want to contract with the
custodian or plumber company I
think a limit that and and other
large procurements like a I. T.
software system there may not be
our New Mexico companies able to
respond or the pricing be not
competitive so we left it at
their discretion is.
Thank you Mr chairman I
appreciate that extra
explanation I was just going to
ask about that you know silos
where there isn't but then
that's a very good problem to
have right because and it
creates a vacuum and and and and
entrepreneurs in New Mexico can
get into that game or that
business or whatever it may be
so I really appreciate that I'm
I just want to thank the sponsor
for and the two Sanchez for I
this is something I took on for
about four five years and this
is not an easy one this was a
really difficult one and I just
want to thank you both for
continue to beat the drum on
this I didn't bring my bill on
the set aside this year because
I've heard through the grapevine
that Senator
teen wolf o'neill was probably
going to do one of these so I'm
I'm happy to to maybe look at
that the next time it comes in
front of the committee and I
just appreciate the work that
you're doing thank you Senator
thank thank you Senator Padilla
Senator o'neill is the closer.
Finally needs.
All.
Anyway we have of I don't know
about that Mr chairman I don't
know about that.
This project last year with
that's just like a blur.
Thank you up on the list I have
Senator Hamblen Senator Tallman
Senator Griggs but before we go
out to Senator Hamblen of vice
chair of to go over for a moment
I need to step out of for just a
second so we have Hamblen Tolman
and Griggs.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Hamblen thank you Mr chair I
appreciate the opportunity and I
hope the team will references
and actually to teen wolf to.
Because you know that's that's
the one that we need to forget
couldn't pass that up my
apologies as as you know I talk
about my wife is here in this in
the background listening because
she thought that was years we
actually watch teen wolf too
I I do appreciate of any
opportunities that we can take
to help support our small
businesses and recognize that
there is a balance between
bringing out of state companies
into New Mexico but also making
sure that we support our local
economies this Padilla talked
about the importance of
supporting tribal women as the
business owners and and and
business women in southern New
Mexico we have the women's
intercultural center where
majority of the business owners
there are women who are making
the income for the household and
in rural communities we see that
all over the place and I'd like
to just provide it's actually
don't have a question but just
to provide support to senator
o'neill's efforts to help
support our locally owned
businesses money spent at local
stores stays local so when you
spend a hundred dollars and a
locally owned business anywhere
from forty five to sixty three
dollar stays in the local
community we spend a hundred
dollars and a national chain
fourteen dollars stays at a
local community and as many of
us now we've got in our
different rural communities
we've got our small mom and pops
we've got our restaurants we've
got are places that we can go
that we don't even need a menu
because they know our order
because of that personal
connection with the small
businesses but also we have to
remember that local businesses
give back to community charities
and functions three hundred and
fifty percent more than do
national chains and it's because
we know the owners we know the
managers either our friends our
family or employed there or
there are some connection with
that it's much easier for local
charities to get work support
from local businesses than it is
from national chains and I just
say those point just to drive
home how it's really important
that that should be a priority
for us is to help support our
small businesses of those that
have been struggling beforehand
especially women owned minority
on LGBTQ on businesses prior to
the pandemic.
It's exacerbated now that that
that we are having the pandemic
and so when we talk about
economic development if we're
talking about supporting money
going out of the state then
we're not focusing on keeping
money in our communities so I
appreciate the senator's efforts
on doing this as the sponsor of
this and I look forward to when
this bill comes before us so
that we can vote on it for a
past so thank you Mr chair and
thank you senator o'neill.
Thank thank you senator ham one
and thank you senator Neil I
will go to Senator Tallman.
Thank you Mr chair.
And thank you for poet laureate
o'neill for bringing this bill
forward.
I'm.
This.
Secretary Stewart Ortiz mention
I worked on a bill a couple
years ago it did three major
things we tied up emergency.
spending
language the single source
language and.
I remember correctly didn't
really help us handle on how
much business was going out of
state.
so.
This is directed to secretary
Ortiz.
So.
Is a lot of business.
Going out of state secretary.
Mr chairman Senator Tallman
great question so I due to the
passing of Senate bill eighty
eight which is sponsored all
emergencies and and I have to
correct myself director hate in
Texas B. that we do have local
public bodies also reporting
their contracts in its in state
versus out of state to the state
purchasing division so at the
end of fiscal year twenty this
last June the report showed that
out of all the contracts from
state initial provided the local
public bodies sixty five
percent.
Were reported as in state
companies so the majority to
answer your question Mr chairman
and senator Tom and the majority
of contracts are issued to New
Mexico based businesses.
But thank you Secretary thank
you Mr chair.
Of.
Now this page one analysis.
Number seven cents provided ten
percent bidding preference.
First sustainable good
procurements what's what's
sustainable good procurements.
Mr chair senator Clemente I
believe director heating has
X. I researched this extensively
and he's probably better
position to give you a very
succinct answer director hated
you want.
Thank you Secretary tease
chair Senator tall man what we
plan to do for sustainability
because it's a complex of
assessment there's energy star
ratings their screens their
ratings or EPA ratings there's
energy for buildings there's eco
friendly products there's such
an array of different types of
ratings that what we'd like to
do is put this in rural we
figured that would be a more
appropriate way rather than to
try to do it statutorily so we
will have those rules in place
after the statute that she's.
Thank you.
Thank you for that explanation.
The ten percent.
So is going to be no advertising
out of state is that correct.
Mr chair senator common in HSD
at their discretion can limit an
RFP for only New Mexico owned
businesses to respond but it is
at the discretion like us like I
mentioned before Mr chairman
senator Clemente if they choose
to do that and the bids come in
too high or do not meet the
requirements or are deemed non
responsive they can always
revisit it and open it up to
everybody so it we're leaving it
at the discretion.
Well thank you Secretary thank
you Mr chair I don't have a
problem with preference.
But it seems a little.
Open ended let me ask you this
did you to give any
consideration to.
Having a.
rule whereby.
The he every advertised
nationally or regionally.
But you give ten percent
preference to
In state businesses.
If you're if they had to say.
Business was you know.
Twelve percent better.
But.
So I said item because the
hundred and.
The the.
In state business bit of ninety
dollars and on.
The.
And this is ninety dollars in
the.
The estate Business.
The.
At ninety two.
Then the.
They would.
The and say this is would get
the business even though they
were several dollars higher.
So Mr chairman senator Tom and I
think you talk touch on a couple
things one is the.
Limitation for only New Mexico
businesses but the other part is
really related to the
preferences I'm gonna ask
director he didn't just to
provided a general description
of what the evaluation committee
typically how how I should say
the evaluation committee on our
P. typically evaluates proposals
scores and how the practices
work director hated.
I'm so the preference scheme
would provide an advantage in
the scoring mechanism.
Well I would like to point out
that even though a business
might get a preference they they
may have been selected already
based on their pricing so we
don't know for sure whether or
not the preference is is costing
anyone more and with regard to
this the scoring mechanism it's
in the points that's where the
preference comes in for RF peas
for for the I. T. V.'s it would
be in the costs you do you you
look at the cost and then you
apply the preference there and
then you compare your
competitive bids and then the
the the awards would go to the
the lowest in the in those
categories what the prices are
will be what the prices are
quoted not with the preferences
yielding the preferences just to
give the advantage for the
award.
Mr chair senator Clemente.
Rector heating can you kind of
give a quick summary of like
scoring factors that ultimately
to in a war.
What the evaluation committee
actually scores on just for the
benefit of the committee
members.
Certainly secretary to chairman
and and senator Clemente but the
way the scoring would work for
an R. F. P. is there be
mandatory requirements for
certain categories in it might
be financial it might be
referral letters it might be
there there comprehensive
program that addresses a certain
need for an agency it might be
their reputation in in the
business community how long
they've been around how
successful they've been how many
other government programs
they've been involved with in
each one of those is assessed by
the evaluation committee and
assign points then at the end
you'll some of those points and
if there's a preference given
you'll apply their preference to
the sum total so that when you
compare the come the competitive
of proposals the award will be
given with the preference in
place.
Thank you director.
Okay thank you for that
explanation thank you Secretary
thank you.
Mr chair I.
Again I don't have any
Problem with.
Reference but.
Seems like.
It's really pretty open ended if
we're not going out of state how
do we know we're getting the
best price.
Mr chairman Senator Tallman
that's why it's discretionary
and it gives the option and they
can always go back and repeat it
if they feel the prices is too
high.
Right okay thanks again thanks
for us secretary.
Sure that thanks.
Senator mail for.
News for thank you Mr chair.
Thank you senator Clemente we'll
go now to Senator Griggs
followed by Senator Kernan.
Thank you Mr Mr chair the
procurement code is certainly
one of my favorite sayings are
Senator Padilla and I've been on
the on the opposite side of a
couple of discussions but the
the question I guess I have on
some of the issues what we're
doing is we're creating two new
classes resident minority and
then our our resident tribal
business owner revisions.
What is really the difference
between the resident minority
and the resident business
because it looks to me like in
in reading this.
That all we've done.
mean is just create another
category that gets that the same
thing but if it's a resident
minority business in New Mexico
it should be the same as our
resident business in New Mexico
so I mean I understand some of
the discussion earlier about how
resident tribal businesses maybe
didn't get a preference but
there's other seems like they're
the they're basically the same
saying we're just add another
word to that is you have to.
Mr chair Senator o'neill
secretary Ortiz is that is that
right orders a resident minority
business get a different break
than a resident business that.
Mr chair Senator o'neill would
you like for us to handle that
question is yes secretary so Mr
chairman Senator Griggs year as
usual you right on point it's
basically the same preference
the minority and a resident
however we're strongly
encouraging minority businesses
to respond and it gives state
purchasing the ability for
tracking and reporting down the
road how many contracts not only
are going to in state companies
but now we'll have another
category to segregate is a going
to a minority a tribal or just a
resident business but to your
point be it's it's a level
playing field they all receive
the same preference but it
allows us to track it report
back to the legislature how many
contracts are going to which
category as I mentioned prior to
Senate bill eighty eight passing
there was never a collection of
this and we as a state never had
that data and now we do in state
versus out of state but we also
want to
Further categorized the types of
contracts going to the types of
businesses director he did you
have anything else on that I'd
like to get your input on that.
Yes secretary thank you in
chair and Senator Griggs a
technical level when vendors
register we have no ability
right now to verify whether
there's a minority or women
owned business so with the
certification process we have in
place to taxed Rav implemented
through our preference system
it's the procurement we can now
track with certainty which of
our vendors are in fact minority
women owned business tribal
inside Exeter and we're able to
track that data because New
Mexico never did a disparity
study like Colorado and Texas
and others in those cost
millions of dollars this will
give us a baseline for how many
of those contracts are going to
these different entities without
having to go to the disparity
study.
Thank you senator grace I just
might add that on the business
formation like a articles of
incorporation or articles of
organization that data is never
collected at the time of
business formation nor when
applying for let's see a tax ID
number nor for applying for a
license this would give us the
ability to start capturing that
data and see where we're at as a
state.
Mr chair and restrictor yelp
etcetera I I appreciate that
explanation because I I was
drawing that that conclusion to
the same conclusion that we're
creating a category that really
didn't accomplish anything but
the fact that you want to use
it.
For tracking that's yeah that
makes sense to me repairs are
there's I didn't see the reason
so I I appreciate that.
one of the things that that that
I've brought up several times
over the years is is the fact
that when we we go through this
this preference
and then the the preference is.
Well basically get two guys and
you're doing the dollar for
dollar staff and one guy bids a.
Thousand dollars and he's out of
state and the Interstate guy
budget thousand five dollars he
can get the bit even though he's
he's a higher bid.
Our and the argument the council
he employs people in town and he
does does all those things but
we also have to remember who's
paying for that.
It is the tax payer of your
community the taxpayer of New
Mexico so when we we get engaged
in some of their we wind up
having issues like we see with
Building public schools any
argument should ban that in
building public schools we could
build for.
Instead of the three because the
three winds up that we're having
to pay a little Davis bacon
wages and we're doing we're
doing different things that
honestly the support New Mexico
businesses.
But the cost New Mexico
taxpayers and so we have to
somewhere come up with something
that that works and maybe work
better and what I've always
brought up to Senator Padilla
and and to to secretary or chief
is a city of Alamogordo has
always given preference on the.
But what happens is when they
give that preference.
The.
The guy who's gonna get it.
Has to be within five percent of
the guy that was low better so
both the business owner in New
Mexico you see opportunity to
have various employees work on
this job but the taxpayer gets
the benefit of the low bid.
And I think Alamogordo has has
done that that very well and I I
think as we move forward when we
talk about these things it's
important to remember not only
the best.
But the taxpayer of the
community in the state and I I
think that's important
Secretary artesian and Senator
o'neill twenty one one last
question and what impact does
this change have if any to home
rural community.
Is there any.
Senator Neil was like for me to
take effect yes yes okay Mr
chair Senators that's a great
question home rule
municipalities are not subject
to the state procurement code
they have their own procurement
code so I believe it has no
impact on the home rule
municipalities.
Okay Mr chair thank you thank
you madam chair and richer
o'neill and thank you Mr
secretary
thanks thank you Senator Griggs
and and Senator o'neill the
sponsor can we now go to Senator
Kernan.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
this is kind of a quick question
I had someone contact me on page
twenty five it says a
procurement cultural product
marketing.
Will just cause any problems for
lodgers tax allocations
deceptive it was just a question
us million maybe at Secretary
tease.
let me know if that's going to
make any difference there.
Mr chair Senators are turning
can you the I heard page twenty
five can you point to the line
number of possibly.
I can't now Mr secretary because
my could other computer
secondary computer just died but
it's okay twenty five it says it
exempts media so it's if you can
find that under the exemptions
that exempts media but at
concerned about a lodgers tax
and this is a county manager
there and so he's worried about
but that this will impact our.
Problems for the lodgers tax
okay I'm probably gonna need
director cadence help on this
what I think hi you constituent
is referring to is in line seven
through nine on page twenty five
and this is related to current
exemptions within the
procurement coat so currently
what's exempt it is purchases of
advertising in all media
including radio television print
and electronic we're adding some
new language we're basically
indicating that marketing it
will be an exemption.
Part of this and the reason why
our thought is marketing is more
a wholistic approach and
typically a high dollar amount
that we feel should belong in
the procurement code where the
media by like a radio station
commercial television commercial
is much smaller and it's
currently exempted so our idea
is the wholistic marketing
campaign should go through
competitive bid the procurement
code but the smaller that's
currently exempted should remain
the same.
Thank you and I think that's
what they're they're concerned
about is
is specifically with regards to
our chambers of commerce if they
would be included in this and so
metes exam but with the added
Senate's it could be a problem
for our chambers and I don't
know if you want to dress that
now maybe we could talk off line
and see if that could be fixed
because our chambers a very
important.
Organizations in our communities
and they're going to be hampered
you know maybe six that but
they're not gonna be able to
accept marketing that that might
be a concern for maybe that that
was a question you've answered
it I think and I will talk more
the only other thing I wanted to
mention in the analysis it
talked about
text in red having maybe some
difficulty in credentialing or
certifying at our it will that
be able to be resolved because
that's in the analysis of that
might have some difficulty in in
doing that madam chair so
Senator Kernan originally
attacks and Revenue Alice's came
in and they were basically
making some suggestions we met
with them and we've added their
amendments concerns to this bill
we're based in the we're gonna
work with them within a top some
federal standards we're also
going to create some other
certification avenues and then
on the appeal process they
wanted all appeals to be handled
through the independent office
administrative hearing office
related to all other tax free
tax appeals I should say so
basically we met with them had a
really good discussion and we've
incorporated the recommendations
into the bill.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
Senator Kernan we would love to
have an opportunity to discuss
with your chambers of commerce
we've been meeting with several
of them in the formation of the
bill their input is reflected in
their and we would be happy to
have that conversation with them
to at least explain our thoughts
hear their concerns and maybe
come back with something that I
think we could.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
thank you Mr secretary and will
communicate offline and I'll get
you that number and then we're
gonna talk later about another
issue that the question out of
when the discuss online so thank
you very much thank that's how
long it thank you senator and Mr
chairman is returned.
Thank you vice chair of for a.
Step in in back a change my Max
to.
Anyway
I don't believe I have anybody
else from the committee.
That has their quest to race of
Senator o'neill I think you've
got some really good comments
suggestions and so forth so it
can go back in the.
Do you know who this work on the
amendments and then come up with
the substitute bill that would
entertain that the next time
around thank you Mr chairman
thank you committee great
discussion and thanks to
everyone who participated from
the public there was system
excellent excellent ideas and
input that will well really take
up so thanks again.
Okay.
Committee members just for your
information we are going to go
ahead and have Senator o'neill
put on a Senate bill fifty six
that's only going to be for
discussion we're not gonna take
any action on that as well and
then Senate bill sixty two and
sixty six will be rolled over
and then of we will continue
always Senate bill seventy two
and seventy three we're going to
try and see we can do a hard
stop at five thirty I've been on
zoom since seven this morning I
have in the
and then a little bit of
breaking so my eyes are going
crazy so that's your chair yes.
Sure so so just just for the
rest of the committee I actually
have to step away right at five
PM I'd I'd budgeted a little
over three hours for this
meeting so I'm gonna have to
leave it I thank you okay
appreciate that thank you
Senator so with that we're going
to go ahead and continue on with
the the Senate bill fifty six
Senator o'neill thank you and
thank you Mr chairman thank you
committee for your patience
today so basically I have to
experts that I want to bring in
I have a
and a half Pam Stokes we all
know from the Legislative
Council Service to drafted this
bill and then I have Page night
from New Mexico voices I'm I
have to say from the outset I'm
not an expert in tax taxes and I
really appreciate the expertise
on this committee your that was
so clear the last bill would
basically okay and I understand
you're gonna get a lot of these
kind of bills and you're going
to keep him on hold and that's
an excellent idea I think but
here's here's the genesis this
bill I I am introduced versions
of this in the past we all
remember the two thousand three
tax breaks under governor
Richard sin that unfortunately I
think it's been documented
repeatedly had no effect on on
the and on our economy the the
whole assumption back then was
okay we we make New Mexico a
more lucrative place for high
end earners still located and
you know it's going to pay off
for us but unfortunately it
hasn't and as we as we try to
figure out how to come up with
revenue other than thank god we
have oil and gas but you know
we're so dependent upon it we
really need to look at all
alternatives revenue strategies
and again I just I am not this
is not around that I really know
very well but in a simplistic
way.
You know we left a lot of money
on the table through those tax
breaks from a lot of money and
so what I've done in this bill
is create a new tax bracket for
high and high and high end
earners and and you can see what
they are with the whole point is
you know as a lay person we're
I'm looking for what interests
me is something that spends off
significant revenue so as I
understand it this bill would
would spin off potentially
seventy five million dollars
that would go directly to our
you know general fund and it's
just that you know we're all
just trying to look at ways that
we can diversify our economy so
basically the bill creates a.
A tax bracket you know eight
point two percent taxable income
over a hundred and eighty seven
thousand for married individuals
three hundred seventy five
thousand for married individuals
filing joint returns two hundred
fifty thousand for single
individuals so with that I'd
like to turn it over to page two
nine eight you can talk more
about you know the the origins
of this bill she's with New
Mexico voices and then of course
Pam Stokes is ready to answer
any technical questions so so
there you go thank you senator.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
and members of the committee my
name is Paige knight and I am a
research and policy analyst with
New Mexico voices for children I
want to first just thank senator
Neil for sponsoring this
legislation and for inviting me
here today to provide a little
bit of additional context on
Senate Senate bill fifty six and
its merits.
So as senator on you mentioned
the top right that is proposed
eight point two percent is the
same top right we had prior to
the big personal income tax cuts
of two thousand three so those
those tax cuts also eliminated
the top three brackets for
higher earners and lowered the
top rate from eight point two
percent down to four point nine
percent.
So this compression that maybe
our tax rates essentially flats
and process hundreds of millions
of dollars in reliable recurring
revenues every year revenues
that could have been invested in
our families and our communities
and quality education affordable
health care modern
infrastructure and broadband and
all the other services that
create a strong economy and help
families and businesses thrive.
And as senator and you also
mentioned that there has been no
research to show that these cuts
benefited our state economy or
brought about the jobs that were
promised.
So in contrast this bill it
raises revenue that can be
invested in those crucial
programs.
So the tax changes proposed
would begin creating a fiscal
impact in FY twenty two and in
FY twenty three and beyond the
state would see a four year
impact of around eighty to
eighty five million.
So we believe that this added
tax bracket is necessary and
warranted for a number of other
reasons as well.
So first among those is that it
would improve fairness and
equity in our tax code and
that's because the personal
income tax is the only major
source of state and local
revenue that can be based on a
taxpayer's ability to pay which
is especially important given
the equal health and economic
impacts of the COVID nineteen
pandemic.
So high income earners have been
much less likely to lose jobs in
other workers to the COVID
nineteen and many have even
profited during this time while
low income workers have seen
dramatic employment and income
losses.
And for New Mexicans growing
wealth and income inequality is
a big concern for our
communities so seventy percent
of New Mexicans support
increasing rates on high earners
in a recent poll from data for
program progress showed that
sixty two percent of New
Mexicans support raising the top
rate specifically to eight point
two percent as it was prior to
two thousand three for high
income earners.
And this level of support is not
unique to New Mexicans so in
neighboring Arizona for example
voters just approved in November
and ballot measure that brings
their top tax rate to eight
percent for their highest income
earners.
So in addition to improving
fairness and equity in our tax
code.
This bill would also increase
revenues for the general fund
and help reduce our over
reliance on the outside the oil
and gas revenues.
So we know that the two thousand
three income tax cuts that they
resulted in hundreds of millions
of dollars lost in sustainable
recurring revenue every year
let's just met which just made
in New Mexico even more reliance
on Daltile revenue from the oil
and gas industry.
The industry has certainly
contributed significant revenues
terrorist states but this over
reliance is particularly
dangerous because research shows
that the oil and gas industry
was already in decline before
the pandemic even began.
So the steady growth of
renewables and changes in energy
consumption patterns means that
we cannot continue to rely on
this industry as an ongoing
source of revenue there's too
much at stake and our children
and our classrooms to serve more
funding reliability.
And this is an issue that I
think this legislature really
understands recognizes and is
really moving the state forward
when it comes to diversifying
our revenues which we are very
grateful for.
But the personal income tax we
believe it needs to be part of
that equation and for going to
provide fair and adequate
revenue.
So finally by increasing the
income tax for high income
earners those who have been
relatively unharmed by the
pandemic and are in the best
position to afford it we can
take an important step in
generating the stable revenue
necessary to invest in the
programs and policies like
quality public education
healthcare and modern
infrastructure all these that
promote shared prosperity and
well being from New Mexicans.
So again we think the sponsor
for this bill and we thank you
all for your time and
consideration on Senate bill
fifty six.
Thank you page and and I believe
Pam is here to answer technical
questions on the bill and so Mr
chair we can go to the public if
there are people that want to
weigh in this would be the time.
Okay thank you senator
Micaela who have for public
comment.
This month yes so in opposition
we will first to hearing from
Sarah fitz Gerald Serra.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee thank you for the
opportunity to to weigh in my
name is Gerald I'm senior vice
president of the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
unfortunately the chamber of
strongly
opposes this bill sorry less
money transmitter you.
for so this is not a topic the
we think we should be
considering the session we've
heard time and again in recent
months the state revenues are
stronger than expected last
summer so there's really no need
to raise taxes Furthermore
raising taxes in the middle of
the pandemic I would families
and businesses have faced
unprecedented challenges is just
uncalled for
additionally of the notion that
New Mexico should tax wealth
more would of course require
them to be significant wealth
here in the first place and
there's just not our top one
percent of earners earn less in
New Mexico the top one percent
or in any other state in the
country and it's really not even
close so more than anything this
bill would probably hurt the
middle class families that that
they need help right now finally
it's those like these that
affect our competitiveness and
attractiveness as a place to
live work set up a business
retire reason personal income
taxes especially makes it harder
to recruit working professionals
alike those in the key feels
where we have major workforce
shortages right now like in
health care so for these reasons
we ask the committee not to
insist measure thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman now we
will turn to T. J. Trujillo Mr
Trujillo.
One more time Mr TJ you
Trujillo.
Okay we'll be moving on to Jason
Espinoza.
Chair members the committee
Jason Espinoza state director
with the national federation of
independent business we
excessively Representative small
independent businesses.
Ross the country and here in New
Mexico what we do stand in
opposition one of the things
that we do point out is that due
to the structuring of many
businesses here in New Mexico
they are structured as pass
through entities are so many of
our small business owners to pay
taxes on their personal income
tax rather than a corporate
income tax so this would be an
increased direct tax center
small businesses here in New
Mexico it would mean less
dollars for small business
owners to reinvest in their
business whether it be increased
wages expanding their businesses
creating new jobs and all these
would be certainly detrimental
to small businesses especially
as we're looking to recover from
the pandemic so for that reason
we do stand in opposition
because that would have for
small businesses thank you.
Thank you Mr Mr Espinoza I
believe that was the last person
for opposition from public
statement is there anyone else
and members of the public I
would like to speak in
opposition Senate bill fifty six
again this is opposition public
state.
It looks is all we have for
opposition statements we will
now hear from Bill Jordan in
support.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee Bill
Jordan with New Mexico voices
for children
I specially want to thank
senator Neil for his persistence
and bringing this bill back year
after year.
There's a lot of talk now about
diversifying our revenue sources
and there's a lot of talk about
the need to make our tax system
more fair especially families of
color.
I want to urge the committee to
give serious consideration to a
personal income tax increase for
high income earners this year.
US personal income taxes are one
of the few taxes that we have
there are progressive.
So when you do consider personal
income taxes I urge you to go
big.
It is where we have given the
biggest tax breaks over the
years and that's one of the
biggest reasons our tax system
is so unfair now and why we've
become so over reliant on
revenue from fossil fuels.
Personal income taxes are best
source of new revenue and it's
our best source of fair revenue
thank you.
Thank you Mr.
Right now we will be hearing.
For Mr.
Thank.
One more time Mr Weiner.
We will now hear from Mr Kirk.
Rangers.
Current.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee my name
is Kurt record on the Director
Lutheran advocacy ministry New
Mexico with one avid's to
ministry also speaks on behalf
of the New Mexico Congress of
churches.
Today we're here to offer our
support for SB fifty six and I'd
like to begin by thanking and
giving our gratitude to senator
when you all for the sponsorship
of this bill Mr chairman and
members of the committee
Lutheran addicts ministry
supports a policy supports
policy that will correct the
regressive tax system that the
state of New Mexico relies upon
and we believe that the citizens
of New Mexico should be taxed
progressively in relation to
their ability to pay we believe
that SB fifty six is certainly a
step in the right direction
finally we believe that there's
a critical need to look at this
bill in the all bills considered
by the legislature from racial
equity standpoint and we believe
the impact will be positive and
thus we support espys fifty six
from that perspective as well
thank you for the this speak
this afternoon and we urge your
support.
Thank you we will now hear from
Mister Richard Mason Mister
Mason.
One more time Mr Richard Mason.
Okay is Mr Paul Gibson available
Mr Paul Gibson.
Yes.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members and I
especially want to thank Center
o'neill for bring this
legislation my name is Paul
Gibson co founder retake Our
Democracy we're all not all into
your organization with twenty
five hundred members statewide
we work with allies across the
state to identify bills we
support each year wishes for
children is certainly one of
those allies this year we
identified twenty built in one
of those isn't really a bill at
all it's an umbrella concept we
have labeled as tax and revenue
reform SB fifty six fits very
well in the some roller as it
will make significant progress
in making our personal income
tax more progressive.
You will hear from our allies
voices from children and others
speaking to the nuances of this
bill but I'd like to speak from
thirty thousand feet and speak
about the principle of recognize
tax and budget and tax and
budget policy involves moral
decisions involve decisions
involve decisions about whether
you will ask those that have
resources to contribute their
fair share to deuce and to do so
our make government able to
to use those resources to
provide support to underserved
communities to invest in
infrastructure to invest in
education and early childhood
and to invest in our economy.
We've just heard from the
chamber of commerce thirty
seconds this is.
I'm sorry
Today we have an opportunity to
send a message to the essential
workers of our state you have an
opportunity to take a moral
stand we take our democracy and
its supporters highly engaged
very active members strongly
encouraged a yes vote on SB.
The six thank you for your
service.
Thank you Mr Gibson that was the
last person who emailed ahead of
time to speak in support of the
bill is there any other members
of the public who would like to
speak in support of Senate bill
fifty six.
Please raise your hand the
stock.
And I think that concludes
public statement percent of bill
fifty six thank you so much.
Thank you Micaela so now we'll
go to the the committee would
have a Senator Griggs.
Thank you Mr chairman and Irish
I agree I find it interesting
sometimes when we talk about
taxes and we we talk about
increasing taxes and we think we
can should and make that tax
reform our tax reform measure is
far more than that to me we've
got we got a lot of things that
I think we can work on and
potentially do but this is this
is current sample a a tax
increase
it's interesting when you when
you look at surrounding stage at
the top tax bracket currently in
Arizona is four and a half
percent in Colorado which four
point six three Texas it's
nothing because no income taxed
in Texas.
Yeah we want to take New Mexico
eight point two.
I find that probably gonna be
counterproductive especially in
communities and counties that
lie along the border of Texas
and Colorado and an Arizona of
which I represent some of those.
We'll run the risk
of driving all some of our high
income earners to Lubbock to
Midland tail passion they won't
choose to locate in New Mexico
because their cost of living
become fire.
We also have an economic
development part that is
striving to bring in high wage
jobs.
And if we tell those people that
we're gonna bring you here but
we're going to tax you twice as
much as the traction Colorado
and Arizona that might wind up
being problematic to.
I find it interesting that the
the gentleman talked to is from
the from the Lutheran church and
well let's be sure we we taxes
guys more which for the most
part means I will have less to
contribute to their churches
less to contribute to little
league baseball teams less to do
with almost anything that also
benefits the community our.
I think truly we need to sit
down and we need to talk about
what genuine types of tax reform
can we do and should we do and I
think just because eight point
two is the number several years
ago I have eight point two to
necessarily need to be that
number today.
Maybe there are reasonable
increases in.
In the high wage earners but
maybe there's also you know
there's bills run around
eliminate the tax on social
security and on on military
retirement.
Maybe we do need to deal with
Thanks relating to economic
opportunity incentives.
There's things that I think we
need to look at and put together
a package that is not just a
let's raise taxes on these guys
that we're going to drive out of
our state so I think the you
know the the FIR and those
things considered one nobody
leaks.
I think Senator Kernan and our
and others can talk to you about
the shortage in doctors already
along the eastern side of the
state where they gonna go if
they decide that you know what
we're just getting taxed too
much issues time leave and we're
just gonna go to well we're
gonna go to Dallas which.
We're done with New Mexico and
so I think we genuinely have to
be very very careful when we
talk about this and we say that
this is going to raise more
money.
I can't say that I believe that
it is thank as we move as we
move forward we need to really
consider.
All sorts of things when we talk
about tax reform but we can't
just turn around and say let's
raise taxes on on these guys
because they're not like they're
not like Senator Padilla who
loves New Mexico and wants to
stay here regardless how much
tax you have to pay.
There are guys are just here
because they're here.
And they needed to be here to
get started and now it's time
for them to leave but I I think
we just have to be careful with
the staff and I I wouldn't I
mean I don't vote on it or not
but I'm I couldn't support Asian
encouraging and I'm really
concerned what it might do to to
our state so thank you Mr
Senator only all of the body but
that but not this one.
Senator if I may you know if I
can just interject thank you
Senator for your comments you
know we we have a lot of back
and forth on these kind of
issues and I also want to thank
R. J. Senate Sir for their
comments you know and again I
can't stress enough Tax Court
taxes are not my jam but looks
in two thousand three you know
the assumption was at eight
point two percent we get rid of
that and all my goodness we're
gonna just experienced some home
which did not materialize it did
not so I just don't you know
from my point of view I don't
understand the importance like
it's not as if it doesn't seem
to have had any impact at all so
what kind of impact would have
if we restored what was a fair
tax rate that's I that's just
kind of my argument you know and
that's I leave it to others to
you know that really know the
subject like you senator
Gretchen and others that does
concern me that passed through
the Jason Jason brought up I'm
here and I'm learning a lot but
I think no larger context you're
gonna in this committee see a
lot of different approaches and
again what I like about my bill
is that it just restores what
once once in existence and the
seventy five million is this a
significant chunk so but anyway
I totally respect you senator
grace and everyone on the
committee so thanks I just
wanted to say that.
Thank you senator I have Senator
Kernan and Senator Hickey.
Well thank you very much and
thank you Mr chair and senator
o'neill I want to follow up a
little bit on what to Senator
Griggs said about the
possibility of people actually
leaving the state I know there's
been a little bit staff in the
newspaper recently and and I'm.
I don't think people are are
gonna all pack up and go but I
will tell you for certain that
over the last few months just in
my area I know in Artesia New
Mexico we've lost over twenty
eight families and these are
probably families that fall into
the high income earners.
And they have left to say not
because of taxes because their
children could not go to school
so they have bought homes in
Lubbock and Midland and they
have moved out of state for the
very simple reason their kids
couldn't go to school so I can
imagine.
What and not just in our teacher
that has happened in my
community and Hobbes we've lost
hundreds of children that have
moved to Seminole and diversity
for that very reason so I do
think that if we are going to go
down this road we can anticipate
numbers of people that have the
opportunity to that that that
will because when you look at
Texas and Colorado granted
Arizona has raised their taxes
somewhat but but I will tell you
people do look at the settings
when their high income earners
in just in twenty nineteen we
bump that back taxes for high
income earners from four point
ninety five point nine percent I
had calls when that bill was.
Senator Kernan near your screen
just froze.
I'm back can you hear me now.
Yes again sorry I texted New
Mexico where you were frozen I'm
president I hope it wasn't a
terrible picture you know when
you freeze and it's really weird
I don't like that but anyway
I'll be brief here it was
reported.
In any of the and I do worry
about what might happen with
regard to two people packing up
and leaving but you know those
those decisions people make but
I do want information on how
many individuals are I'm
actually in that high income
bracket if we can get that data
Senator all know that would be
helpful and then how many
individuals in the state of New
Mexico actually pay no taxes.
And so that would be interesting
to and I know we have our
working families and and they
got a benefit under house bill
six in twenty nineteen where
where they can benefit from that
tax effort but I do you want to
find out that information and
we'll just go from there but I
do appreciate that senator Joni
all our waste that along with
Senator Griggs I would not be
able to support them thank you.
Thank you Senator Kernan I've
Senator Hickey senator Wirth and
Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Senator nail for bringing this
forth
Being a newbie in this area I am
learning and as you said it's
not my jam out
so I have a few questions to to.
Trying to put my arms around
this.
I I believe the progressivity is
a a very fair principle and and
it exists in our federal income
taxes and
and and and we need to do that
but one of my questions I think
was answered and what what's the
tax rate prior to the with this
call the regents in tax bill
could you answer that.
Yes sorry I have some idea
issues Senator thank you can you
please repeat that question
about the riches in tax cuts
certainly a Mr chair page
what was the tax right before
that Richardson
Bill as it's called that lowered
the rate.
Right yes so at Mr chair Senator
Hickey the top rate was eight
point two percent but there were
seven rates in total in the top
three rates for higher income
earners for cuts so the meeting
that the bottom for so those
rates I can tell you what those
were and so the top one was
eight point two percent and then
and there is a seven point nine
percent bracket and a seven
point one percent bracket.
Okay thank you
I guess I'm just wondering are
can you give me an analysis why
you didn't take the step
approach this time.
Yes if I can and I work with
miss Stoke Fund S. but basically
I just.
You know as of late person I
like the simplicity of
disappearing and you know the
tax code as you as you are
learning and now by now I'm sure
to some very complicated so I
thought I'd stay in my lane so
to speak and
like Senator Padilla likes to
talk about swim lanes so this
this bill is some something I
can understand without getting
too deep into the weeds so and
again of what I really like
about this or they are in the
water so seven hundred fifty
million dollars you know that's
that's what I was looking at
like how can we come up with
something with that hasn't.
So that was my reason why I went
with this approach.
Thank you senator o'neill and so
this is projected I'm trying to
read the I. have the FIR excuse
me late in the day
and it's there is this in
addition of annual revenue of
seven hundred and fifty million
dollars or over a period of
time.
I believe it's annual and and
page you can.
Time in on that and and I think
as she pointed out it actually
goes up
down the road the eight to what
she had those numbers but yes
its annual.
Well that's that that that's
that's great it's the I guess my
next question is are we going to
see this as itself the panacea
New Mexico's revenue problem
that way added Senator as we
know I mean my goodness we were
so lucky to have oil and gas and
we have such a dependence on it
so we're gonna seriously talk
about diversification while
these numbers are daunting I
mean I wish the number was much
higher than seven hundred fifty
million but I think what we're
looking at and you'll see this
all on your committee you've
got.
Lots of work to do I'm sure you
and your up to it this committee
is very impressive with
everybody's knowledge on this in
this area but you're gonna see
all kinds of bills coming in
with different ideas on
strategies to raise revenue and
it is it's a you know it's a
mosaic.
You know it's not a patchwork
it's a mosaic of revenue
strategies.
Thank you senator o'neill couple
of other questions if I may
Mister chairman Senator mail and
H.
and one of the orientation our
meetings that we have to I think
of the LFC
and and I'm not sure that I have
this right that.
Corporate taxes only make up one
percent of our budget is that is
that true and does that mean
that we're not taxing
corporations that are generating
a fair amount of margin or are
they taking that margins and
taking it out of state not
coming in here will we also be
looking at that in the future.
I'm sure I'm sure we will but
page did you want to answer
that.
Mr chair and Senator Hickey so
yes corporate income tax
revenues are they make up the a
much smaller share of our
general fund revenues than they
did in the past and there's a
few reasons for that
so in twenty thirteen corporate
income tax was cut significantly
and so that resulted in a loss
of of a lot of revenue for the
states similar to the personal
income tax in two thousand
three.
But also the don't tax credit
takes a portion of the corporate
income tax revenues so the past
three years about fifty million
from those gross receipts of
corporate income tax has been
going to pay for that the film
tax credit and that is going to
grow a little bit sense that cap
was extended
so yes it's making up a small
even less than one percent in
the out years moving forward.
Thank you is nine
Senator o'neill and Mr chairman
one last question
it as I understood and Senator
o'neill you also said.
That that was an insight that
maybe haven't been able to wrap
your arms around and that's a
small business people being hit
with this earnings are their
personal income is is is there
some way you know I again I have
no idea to hold them harmless
and it is I think a lot of
people work really hard time
they do spend you generate to be
what we want to do and they
generate a lot of personal
income no there there start up
takes off and I don't want to
chase him out of the state I
want to stay here and grow those
this
year and and not thank you
senator for that question and
you know we've talked a little
bit about that we had a working
group before the session started
in our and ours caucus and that
came up and I think a couple
things I think
You know it is a concern but I I
do think that there might be a
way or that's what you know
honestly a lot of us are
counting on your August
committee to come up with
solutions so
that is a that is a concern I
mean I think that's a legitimate
concern about on the other hand
you know we just sometimes
they're tough choices and and I
would just need more information
and I did talk to
Pam Stokes about possibly
addressing that in this bill is
pretty complicated that's what I
got back so but I'm I'm
confident that you and others on
this committee will we'll be
diving into that issue
especially since the others
similar bills so thank you.
Thank you Senator o'neill Mr
chair are we voting on this bill
today.
Think about that we're just
having a discussion right thank
you thank you very for himself
just want to finish with making
the observation to Senator
Kernan
the doctors are already leaving
the state even at four point
eight percent of
and and that has a lot to do
with the states have Medicaid
than their ability here here
versus other areas in the
southwest is night and day I
don't know that this is going to
drive them out in the.
You extent but with twenty five
percent of our physicians within
two years at the time that we
have that all this the average
age of positions of any state in
the country
if we we do need to be cognizant
of as we go through the money
that the number of bills the
impact and being able to attract
and retain physicians is it's
not just a saying it's really
it's it's happening is I lived
in the infrastructure of health
care the state for about thirty
five years so this one to make
that observation to Senator
Kernan and I'm I will support
the bill but I sure like to see
how we can find a way you know
just because it's complicated
right.
We with what Senator Stewart
asked us to do now that was
complicate that.
So I think we can probably find
a way that I really want to
encourage those young people or
younger people of making these
investments in the works and it
pays off they don't pick up and
go somewhere else because
they're small businesses thank
you very much Senator Neal for
bringing this forward and I'll
I'm not an expert about be happy
to work on our we both hold them
harmless Mr chairman thank you
very much for the time and thank
you my fellow senators to allow
you to.
Come up to some speed on this
issue.
Thank you I I just wanna make a
correction I know senator of
million you said seven hundred
fifty million it's seventy five
million I'm sorry I was get
carried away.
Really carried away.
We.
Well as you know again I can
just invoke this is new but I'm
learning all right or will you
want to Senator Wirth and I've
Senator bread Senator Paypen.
Thank you Mr chairman I
appreciate the the discussion
we're having and just want to
add a couple thoughts uh.
you know I think the point that
Senator Griggs made about us
looking at a comprehensive tax
package is spot on and I want to
give a shout out to you Mr chair
because that's exactly what
you're doing by holding these
bills I it's having an overall
discussion.
I do think progressivity in
income taxes worth looking at it
makes no sense to me that
someone to make sixteen thousand
dollars pays the same taxes
someone who makes sixteen
million dollars so there really
is room to look at this but on
the other side we've got to find
some revenues so that we can
lower the gross receipts tax the
gross receipts taxes gotten very
regressive the rates are high
and we've carved away at the
base and basically to reduce to
lower the gross receipts tax
back quarter percent is a
hundred and sixty million
dollars I want everyone to think
about that a hundred and sixty
million dollars we've got to
figure out how to do that how to
pay for it there's some pyramid
in the gross receipts that's
another hundred million dollars
to reduce our Senator Hickey I
do have a bill that would roll
back the corporate tax cuts from
twenty thirteen that were done
on the C. Corp snot The New
Mexico past records those are
the big box stores those the
entities that have done pretty
darn well most of them during
this recession and again I in
the same bill I I use the
revenue I don't know exactly
what it's going to be at to
reduce the G. R. T. by an eight
and again it's just to
demonstrate that Senator Griggs
point about there being a
package so that you really kind
of figure out how to do overall
global tax reform that's what
needs to happen so you know we
did that in twenty nineteen
thank goodness we imposed and
internet tax.
Thank goodness let me just say
over again if we hadn't done
that you know we would be really
in trouble given what's happened
to spending during this pandemic
but we did it and we've been
implementing that and that's
resulted in a in a spring and
revenue so I just appreciate
Senator Neil you know your
willingness to have this
discussion it's a really
important discussion and we did
a piece of it as part of the
overall tax reform in twenty
nineteen with a tweak to the
personal income tax I definitely
think it has to be part of our
the discussion as we work to
figure out how to make our tax
code more fair and also to
generate the revenues that we
need to do to do the work of
government but again making sure
that we do with the balanced way
and so I just wanted to make
those comments Mr chair and
certainly I think that's where
Senator Griggs was going I
appreciate that and I'll leave
it at that for now thank you.
Thank you Senator Brandt thank
you Mr chairman I appreciate it
Sir on the L.
You know I love this term fair.
who gets to define it.
I think we as a as a legislative
body that we have a big part of
that and it's just a.
You know is that we don't need
to demonise somebody isn't being
unfair necessarily if they don't
agree with my opinion about
stuff but I think we can come to
a consensus I think that is
what.
The better part do you know what
I'm hearing from senator worth
and senator grace you know I if
we just making a big picture
what what is your what is you
know what senator Wirth just
centimetres somebody making
sixteen thousand should not be
and the same taxes This somebody
make and one point six million
you know what.
If if I may sixteen million and
I'd love to by the way so.
Glad to Hey the taxes on sixteen
million if you'd like to give it
to me I'd love that but
if I want to buy a house.
And they said well you make
sixteen million so the house is
going to cost you one point six
million.
And if the next person I want to
buy the house only made a
hundred thousand and so they
said well the house is going to
cost you sixteen thousand is
that fair.
This is real I mean I don't know
what but to me that's just not a
good analogy with all due
respect.
Okay you know I just.
I think this is.
I mean
you have a wonderful moral
stance and I I love your moral
sense so let me we all have
different takes on this and it's
just to me
again I just keep getting back
to two thousand three note
neither one of us were here when
that happened so we you know
we're not responsible but it's
but it just was not a.
And what was not a good policy
decision I mean it didn't
deliver what I think the people
that did vote for that I thought
it would deliver that so I mean
that's kind of my my my context
years two thousand three eight
point two percent.
Vanished there wasn't anything
that happened and so we're
looking at the strategies this
you know I just think it's worth
discussing so Mr chair Sir I
think Senator Wirth you have a
really good point worries
talking about you know we have
you know trying we need to be
looking at the entire tax
structure yes what one portion
of it.
I guarantee you the person that
makes sixteen million although I
don't know that there's that
many of those in the state
anymore they've probably all
left already just at you
dropping this bill they probably
sold their houses and left
already but which is what we
seen in New York and California
where all the rich people are
fleeing those states
but no the the the fact of the
matter is that when you got that
person I guarantee you puts more
money into the economy the
person only makes thirty
thousand a hundred thousand.
and we're really talking about
sixteen million here you're cut
off I mean I I love how we keep
redefining research.
Because your call also hundred
eighty seven thousand dollars
it's not even close to a million
young I remember you all just a
couple years ago was a
millionaires tax no now it's a
hundred eighty seven thousand
dollars affects our thousand air
tax number you put it it's not
rich although again I wouldn't
mind making that kind of money
either you know that wouldn't
hurt me but we probably have
some people that make that kind
of money still in the state they
won't be here for a long but
they're probably still here now
but I guarantee you that person
is making a million dollars or
more is is putting more into the
tax coffers.
Then the person that's making a
hundred thousand.
Even if it's at the same rate.
Because most let's make it easy
if you're making a hundred
thousand you're paying five
percent of you know what is that
five thousand.
If you're making a million
dollars you're paying five
percent that's fifty thousand so
you're putting in ten times as
much as the person who's making
a hundred thousand but not only
that you're also buying that
really nice car that cost a
hundred thousand I've never been
able to buy cars call center
thousand that's great I don't it
doesn't bother me that someone
chair the moment all but they're
paying that tax on that car into
our system where is the person
that's paying making the hundred
thousands prying buying the car
like me that's around thirty
thousand I am paying less into
the system on that same thing
when I go to shopping at the
store instead of buying the you
know special suits at men's
warehouse when they're on sale
or Jos a banks when they have
buy three get you know buy one
get three free use.
We would just do that again but
anyway I digress we don't they
go and buy the single suit for
for five thousand dollars so
what do they do they pay that
money into our coffers it was
the person who's making more
money already paying more into
our system then the person who
is middle to lower middle income
is paying into our system just
by the fact of what they
purchase just by the fact of
what they are using it's a
user's Tax.
And and obviously my personal
opinion as we should if we do it
personal income tax all it
should be a flat tax and then we
should have a users tax the tax
rate of what people are buying.
Is where we should be making
most of our money and I think we
probably do.
But our gross receipt receipts
tax is a mess.
Because it's such a bad system
that every time having how many
of these bills if we sing in
this session in this committee
where people are wanting some
kind of exclusion from that tax
system.
Right so I think you're really
going down the wrong road here
we look at the states around us
Texas has no income tax now I
guess we can do like the
protests as we can all pack our
bags and moved to Texas
currently if we don't like
what's happening in New Mexico
that's what we should all do.
if everyone does that there's
not gonna be very people left in
New Mexico so many to to govern
in that way.
But yeah you've got all these
different states around us
Colorado's top right four point
eight percent.
Colorado's not all that
conservative the state.
Now that marijuana so maybe you
and I can work on getting that
one so we can provide five years
all right twenty five years of.
We wanted I I've worked on that
right.
We can work on those types of
things but raising the personal
income tax things one of the
worst things we can do
especially when the opposite is
happening around the country in
most states that are being
successful you've got you know I
I think that's a perfect example
you got Florida you know that's
very low tax rate I'm trying to
think if they have any personal
income tax I can't remember you
know there's all the states that
are really growing.
Don't have or have a very low
personal income tax and so I
think we're doing the opposite
of what we need to do we need to
do exactly what senator Wirth
said and you know it's it's one
of those things were he's
probably surprised I'm agreeing
with them we really need to go
back and look at the entire tax
code we need to we yeah we did
the study how much do we pay for
the study to three hundred
thousand dollars.
I don't know about you guys but
I haven't seen it.
I'm seeing the results of it.
So how are we supposed to change
it when we pay hundreds of
thousands of dollars for study
that none of us is the
legislature even gets to see so
that we can go back and say this
is what we need to fix we need
to fix the entire tax system and
and you know diversifying our
economy isn't diversifying our
tax system it's getting more
businesses into our economy to
grow our tax base not street the
tax base by making it so
expensive to live here that no
one wants to live here.
So I appreciate your passion on
this I understand why you're
doing this but I think you're
going the opposite direction
that we need to be going on this
thank you in person thank you
senator and it's always that
respect your payment don't
always agree but I would just
point out a couple things you
know as Senator Hickey said
people are leaving the state
unfortunately for a variety of
reasons maybe down the list is
the tax rate you know but I all
these factors we have to make
our state a more attractive
place to live amid crime
education et cetera you know so
it isn't anyway I just wanted to
make a point also I hear what
you're saying about you know the
wealthy I mean you know the
trickle down effect that's what
I keep thinking the trickle down
effect and that goes back to
what the eighties with I don't
know if you were born then but I
but I I was.
But anyway you know it's just
thank you so.
Yeah I think I'm I think I was
born in the eighties so I'm
trying to I just associate that
the trickle down effect and just
how what a minimal impact that
had that whole notion of like
well the ritual just by all
these things were are going to
just go off into some fantasy
world of prosperity because of
that so but anyway I as always I
appreciate you Senator.
Thank you all right well
I have Senator tall man and then
believe Senator Hickey for the
second time is that.
True okay all right thanks so
much.
Thank you thank you Mr chair.
And the thank you o'neill for
bringing this bill forward.
I was just curious why.
The brackets for single.
Merry.
Thank you Eileen married filing
separately.
Are
Do all different for instance
the the for and the single.
Point nine percent right.
Goes sixteen thousand two
hundred ten thousand and then a
merry filing jointly that two
point nine Franken is twenty
four thousand to three hundred
fifteen so goes from.
Lower middle class the.
Upper middle class paying the
same.
Right why is that more graduated
between twenty four thousand and
thirty five three hundred
fifteen thousand the same thing
with married filing separately
four point nine rate is twelve
thousand to one fifty seven so
you're going from lower middle
class to.
Hundred fifty seven which is.
Middle class.
Thank you senator I know you
have a bill similar to this
would probably deals with that
particular gradation better what
I did was I defer to to Pam
Stokes on on the specifics so is
she still on the call and if not
I can get back to you with an
answer to your question but is
Pam still here.
Representative members of the
committee hello I am still here
but could you repeat the
question please.
Thank you for joining us
Yeah I was wondering why the
brackets are different from the
for the three.
For a single married filing
jointly married filing
separately for instance the four
point nine percent the fourth
bracket from atop it for saying
those sixteen thousand the two
ten and for the married filing
jointly the four point nine is
twenty four thousand three
hundred fifteen M. for merry set
filing separately four point
nine is from twelve.
Two one fifty seven so not only
are the different.
But they all range from lower
middle class to upper middle
class paying the same rate why
isn't more graduated.
Well
you're talking about the
difference between the income
level or you're talking about so
I'm not sure exactly what your
question is but let me just
start with one for merry filing
individual filing separate
returns very fine.
Ingle individuals there is
actually a
formula for how to determine so
for that Ingle and that.
Filing jointly.
No for it Mary I separately and.
Yeah.
Trying to get eight thousand.
For the average for married
individuals filing separate
filing separately that half of
the income level of merry filing
jointly and I believe the single
with two thirds of our final
Charlie echo the formula that we
use to figure out of the income
levels between each type of
Pilar
your question was about that it
it it jumped twenty four point
nine percent and five point nine
percent that's what page was
speaking to earlier in two
thousand three under the
rejection ministration of the
top three brackets were chopped
off and then in so for several
years that operate with four
point nine percent.
And then in two thousand
nineteen house bill was passed.
That impose a new top rate of
five point nine percent I
continue to do that became
effective date taxable year.
Your question.
No not really but so the explain
why.
It goes from.
Four point nine percent covers.
Wide range of income from twenty
four thousand to three hundred
fifteen.
For married filing jointly.
Yes.
That.
That's what happened with under
the passage of house bill six.
Which was what two years right.
That's correct.
Well.
What was the thinking.
Is usually.
Mr chair senator that is not a
question I can answer.
Thank.
Senator I mean this are
complicated issues like we can
continue this offline I know
your your we're getting close to
five thirty but your point's
well taken and what what I can
get back to you with you know.
Them can do a better job
answering us and I can't.
Okay well I'm not I don't want
anybody to comment on this but
my bill.
Goes so ten to fifteen fifteen
to thirty five thirty five to
seventy five seventy five
hundred fifty hundred fifty to
three hundred and over three
hundred thousand for married
filing jointly is six point five
but anyway.
Well but released probably
shouldn't be discussing my bill
so we'll save that for later day
thanks.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator for bringing forth this
bill we're.
Both on this.
Going in the same direction
along different paths thank you
thank you senator.
Senator Hickey.
Okay of members of the committee
I I said we would do a hard stop
at five thirty we got six
minutes so
I would just gonna roll over the
rest of the bills till Tuesday
and so
I want to thank the the sponsor
for a good the discussion debate
me I noticed a.
Obligating the issue and that's
one of the reasons why we're
holding these bills so that we
can hear all the tax bills and
and then of and then act on them
in our later time thank you for
that committee members or we are
going to be adjourn and then we
would just roll over all those
of the bills that we get to
today thank you Mr chair thank
you committee.
