Senator Paul.
Senator Ramos.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator share.
I'm not eating.
So, I don't know here.
Senator Wirth here.
Senator Bergman's.
Senator Hambe, here we have 10
present. All right, we have a
full committee. Thank you,
everybody. We have a very full
agenda today. Um, we're gonna
start, there are some just for,
for those who might be new to
this committee. There are some
bills that um we will hold for
potential consideration in a tax
package. So we have 4 on the
agenda today, SB 110, SB 111, SB
141, and SB 129.
So Senator Wirth, all three of
yours.
And then, um, Senator Brantly at
the end, uh, we do have a couple
with amendments and a committee
substitute. Um, what I like to
do is to share with those who
are presenting bills that you
will get 20 minutes. Um, that
includes your expert, and then
what we will do is go to public
comment, uh, and then after
public comment, the bill sponsor
has 5 minutes to address any of
the public comment if they so
wish. We will also include um
online and then we will go to
committee conversation and
questions. And so that's kind of
how we do it. This committee has
been very efficient. I've been
very happy. Um, we're all, we're
all here to make sure that the
bills get debated and discussed,
um, and then moved on. So, um,
at this point, we're gonna have
Senator Duig, you're first up,
and then we'll have Senator
Wirth warming up the seat for
Senator Padilla and then Senator
Munoz, vice chair, uh, Senator
Stephanic, and myself and then
uh Senator Brantley will finish
it off. So Senator Doig, uh, the
floor is all yours.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Man, I'm here with Senate Bill
128.
Uh, man.
A little bit before session last
year, I had taken a couple
pictures of some license plates
I saw when I was driving around.
But I, and I posted them on
Facebook and during session last
year, people started sending me.
pictures of licenses they saw.
And this is now continued. This
has, has grown into something,
uh, somehow I've become like the
license plate person. Um,
and people, every Friday, I, I
post all the license plate
pictures that are sent to me
each week.
Sometimes it's like 70 of them,
uh,
sometimes it's 15, but there are
a lot of funny personalized
license plates here in Mexico.
It entertains me endlessly.
All right, we also have a lot of
people who we're just gonna move
that up a little bit to the
side. It's a weird little echo
going on.
There's a lot of people who
request specialized license
plates that are not appropriate.
That include language that
Uh, promote drug use or
violence, um.
And so our uh DMV right now.
Has in policy that they end,
that they can reject them. Um,
I got a list of some of them
that they had rejected.
There are only a couple that I
think I can say out loud. We
don't have a bleep function, we
don't have a bleep function for
Senator Sheriff of the ones I I
thought you would appreciate
Madam Chair Sharp. Um, because
of my wife. Yeah, that's why. I
don't think that's why you know
what, I just won't say any of
the other ones, even though that
was kind of the reason I agreed
to do this bill cause I thought
it would be really funny, um.
But there are what's happening
is that, that around the
country, some people are
challenging these policies that
allow, uh, motor vehicles to, to
not produce profane, um, license
plates. And they're challenging
them on First Amendment basis.
And so by putting this in
statute rather than just in
policy if a challenge like that
is made here, I think we are in
a better position, um, I don't
think there is a First Amendment
issue.
With this, I, you can have.
Bumper stickers saying whatever
profane thing you want all over
your car. I don't think you can
compel the states to create it
for you.
Um, as part of our licensing,
uh, mechanism. So what this bill
would do.
would be to put in statute.
Uh, that no special registration
license plate, uh, can have
characters that are derogatory,
offensive, or misleading,
obscene, vulgar, sexually
explicit or profane, promotes
drugs, alcohol, other
intoxicating substances or
promotes violence or gang and
Madam Chair, I will share of
denied license plates with you,
uh, after that you can show the
committee afterwards and you
guys will be probably as
entertained as I am.
All right. Thank you very much.
Um, and I appreciate the
discretion just because we want
to not offend anybody. Um, so at
this point, are there any folks
in the audience who are in
support of this legislation. We
see none anybody in the audience
in opposition of this
legislation.
For the records see none.
Anybody online in support of
this legislation. This is SB
128.
Anybody in opposition?
No? All right. So, um, no public
testimony at this point. Um, so
now this goes to the committee.
Are there members of the
committee who'd like to make any
comments or questions.
Senator Sheriff says move a due
pass. Do we have a second?
seconded by Senator Ramos.
Go ahead and take the roll if
you will.
OK.
Senator Figueroa. Yes, Senator
Jamiel,
Senator O'Malley.
Yeah.
Senator Paul.
Senator Ramos.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator share.
Senator Wirth, yes.
Senator Bergman's.
Senator Hamlin. We have 10 yeses
for a due pass. All right,
unanimous.
Thank you, Madam Chairman, I'm,
I think that was the first time
Senator share has ever moved to
pass on a bill. I've car.
Take those when you get them,
those
those golden nuggets, you gotta
hold on to.
I just wondering if the license
plates had a tilda on it or if
it was like my bill that you
can't add any yet into Kanyama.
I ask about that.
misp pronounced it according to.
Yeah
Thank you. All right. It takes
urban.
All right, Senator Wirth, we
have your 2, you're going to
present Senate Bill 110 and
Senate Bill 111. The local
journalist employment tax credit
and local news printer tax
credit together, if I'm correct
with your intent.
Just as we did yesterday, I
think it makes sense cause
they're both uh related to each
other and that way we can.
Get into both and get the public
comments on both and then.
Do the discussion. All right,
so, uh, again, just a reminder,
these are bills that will be
held for a consideration in a
tax package, so we will discuss
them, but we will not vote on
them as a committee because if
it does, we do have the capacity
for a tax package then this
committee will vote on that tax
package. So Senator Wirth, here
you go.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you members, uh, with me
is Patrick Dorsey, who is the
publisher of the Santa Fe, New
Mexican.
And is the one who
Asked me if I'd be interested in
exploring this concept and
I definitely was. It's a
continuation of something that
we've done. I know you've
supported, Madam Chair, uh, last
couple of years using our row
money and junior money, I've
actually uh helped fund the
local news fellowship program.
And I think it's the reason
that.
I think you've helped with that
too, and others have, and the
reason that we were interested
in that is kind of the genesis
of this bill. It's these two
bills kind of a continuation of
that. Uh, the local news.
Industry is like many other
industries is really challenged
these days. Um, and I'm gonna
let Mr. Dorsey get into the
specifics, but when he was just
talking about how much things
have changed, um, in terms of
local ownership, it really was
shocking to me. Private equity
has arrived, uh, these big
corporations are buying up local
newspapers, shrinking them down,
maximizing profits.
And
Putting incredible pressure on
uh the news.
Getting the news out and doing
it in a way that.
Is balanced, uh, is thoroughly
researched and gets all of us
information, I think all of us
have papers in our hometowns of
various different states.
Uh, so what, what these two
bills do, uh, Senate Bill 110 is
the local journalist employment
tax credit, uh, it creates a
local journalist employment
income tax and corporate income
tax credits, so it's both.
Uh, for taxpayers who prior to
January 1st, 2030 are owners of
a local news organization that
employs a journalist, the tax
credit would be equal to 30% of
the wages paid or up to 75
journalists by the local news
organization, uh, wages are
defined as not being more than
$50,000 paid to a journalist,
not including benefit taxes or
other contributions. It's got a
cap of $4 million on it. And
again, as mentioned, it, it can
apply either.
a personal income tax or
corporate income tax credit.
Uh, Senate Bill 111 creates the
local news printer income tax
credits and local newsprint or
corporate tax credit, I think as
Mr. Dorsey will explain, uh,
there are fewer and fewer actual
printers out there for, yeah,
and he can talk about why that's
important. This is a million
dollar um income tax and
corporate tax credit. So again,
I think um states are starting
to do this. Uh, they're starting
to realize how
importance, it is to have an
independence, um, local, uh,
voice in our communities and so
this is a continuation and ideal
to Mr. Dorsey for some.
Intro on both bills and
comments, and then we're happy
to stand for questions and hear
what the audience thinks about
these.
Great, thank you, Senator. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Uh, nationwide and and members,
uh, nationwide, the local news
industry has been plagued by
challenges that threaten our
ability to continue delivering
the stories.
That our readers rely on during
despite record audiences through
combined print and digital
delivery revenue produced by US
news publications has dropped
more than 82%.
Since 2000 due to the distortive
effect of news content being
distributed by dominant digital
platforms.
The Major national digital
companies exert their dominance
over the digital marketplace,
monetizing our content without
proper compensation and
controlling almost 80% of the
digital advertising market and
threatening the long-term
viability of our local
journalism.
In fact, when we, we try to
track our, our traffic on the
website, we use Google Analytics
when we have to place any
advertising ourselves goes
through Google Ad Manager.
Everything is basically
controlled by
To digital companies. More than
33,200 newspapers have shuttered
across the country since 2005.
He's closures have resulted in
thousands of lost journalism and
newsroom supporting jobs in New
Mexico, the number of
journalists.
Has decreased 63% from 2005 to
2022.
This has also led to the closing
of newspaper manufacturing
production and printing plants
throughout New Mexico and the
country. There are only 4
remaining newspaper web press
facilities performing
manufacturing and production and
printing facility functions in
New Mexico, and all of them are
New Mexican owned, just so you
know.
Uh
And in production jobs
nationwide have had the largest
decrease, losing 90,000 jobs
since 2005, a decline of 90%.
New Mexico benefits from a
robust local newspaper and news
service that provide trusted and
essential information of the
community, that limit
corruption, encourage it citizen
participate precipitate.
Participation helps combat
misinformation and mitigates
community and individual
alienation. New Mexico is still
very reliant on printed
newspapers or by these services
with 8 out of 10 adults reading
a print or digital newspaper
every month.
Studies show that when community
loses its source of local news,
it experiences decreased voter
turnout and civic engagement,
increased municipal borrowing
costs that lead to higher taxes,
it decreased transparency among
government and business
officials, leading to increased
wage waste fraud and abuse, as
newspapers shudder.
Communities become more
polarized, leaving us stuck in a
never ending doom loop where we
lose sight of our shared values.
It's in the public interest to
ensure local community news
publications survive and can
thrive.
During this era of intense
national partnership
partisanship, local news offers
a path forward. Local journalism
strengthens communal ties and
provides critical information to
communities, 85% of newspaper
readers in New Mexico vote in
local elections.
The public rightfully trust
their local newspaper with 73%
of US adults saying they have
confidence and trust in their
local newspaper versus 55% for
local national for, excuse me,
for national news networks. 77%
of New Mexicans say that they
having a local newspaper in
their community is very
important.
Local newspapers cover local
government meetings, high school
football games, church church
bake sales, circle of life
announcements. We support Main
Street businesses who've been,
who've also been impaired by the
dominance of the national
digital companies.
We can be neighbors, provide
many viewpoints and support
nonprofits and those in need
through fundraising, direct
funding, and space donations.
We are a trusted channel for
elected officials and local
government disseminate.
Important information including
urgent safety information. We're
an integral part of our
communities and your friends and
neighbors just like our citizen
legislature.
Uh, local newspapers are
resilient, especially here in
New Mexico. Several New Mexicans
have stepped up in recent years
to purchase newspapers from
largely publicly traded
companies. There's only one
remaining newspaper owned by a
publicly traded company or one
of the larger hedge fund backed.
Owners. There are only 3 other
states with such a local media
environment environment.
Nebraska, and North Dakota, and
Maine.
New Mexico is made up of local
owners, mostly longtime family
owners. We are a small
businesses serving the public
good in the communities we serve
and reflecting the values of
those communities. Ownership
includes individuals associated
with both major political
parties and everywhere in
between. The newspapers are a
reflection of the communities
that they serve. This is not a
partisan issue, especially in
New Mexico.
This is not permanent funding,
but assistance to give us
breathing room to improve our
business plans and to the new
reality and develop new models
to support local news
operations. The need is mostly
driven by the distortive impact
of the domination of the digital
companies I mentioned, uh, in
addition, it's not feasible or
practical for most local news
operations to go 100% digital
due to the rural nature of New
Mexico and the lack of
widespread broadband.
That is why so many New Mexicans
remain reliant on local
newspapers and other local news
operations. We're also facing
new threats with terrorists on
aluminum and 25% proposed
tariffs on Canada, where the
majority of North American
newsprint comes from, uh, we
actually buy a newsprint from
Washington state, but it's a
commodity. So if anything goes
up, it all goes up. Uh, and the
aluminum is what the plates,
newsprint is our #2 source after
payroll of expenses and plates
are not close to the 3rd or 4th
in both of those, uh, will be.
in tariffs or could be.
Quality journalism is key to
sustaining civic society with
freedom of the press shine in
the Constitution is imperative
we take reasonable and
meaningful steps to protect this
important institution.
For New Mexico and to serve the
public good. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Right, thank you so much. So,
um, going to the audience now by
a show of hands. How many are in
support of both Senate Bill 110
and Senate Bill 111. If you will
please keep your hands up.
So 7. Thank you. Uh, anybody in
the audience opposed to Senate
Bill 110 and Senate Bill 111.
Seeing none. How many do we have
online that are in support?
8
Anybody in opposition?
All right. So we're gonna take 4
online, if we can have those of
you, let's do 5 in the audience,
if you will come up and line up
behind the sponsor.
Do we have a handheld?
Is the hand held over there?
Thank you.
OK
All right, looks like scented
worth um
Maybe one of your mics is gonna
need to
Here comes.
So we're gonna give you a one
minute, one minute apiece, one
minute also for online, um, but
we'll get to them in just a
moment and I'll call on you.
So if you will, uh, what will
happen is, um, vice chair will
let you know that you've got 30
seconds left and then just to
try and wrap up your thoughts.
So if you will go ahead and
state your name, we appreciate
it.
He
Right up here, but you don't
work.
OK.
My name is Robin Martin.
Madam Chairman, um, I'm the
owner of the Santa Fe, New
Mexican and the Taos news.
And the reason I wanted to speak
is because when my father bought
the New Mexican in 1949, and
started the Tao news in 1959,
the business was very, very
profitable, and he couldn't do
anything to uh make it not be
profitable.
Things have changed very much,
but we still have the same goal,
which is to cover the news.
In small towns and in the
capital city.
And this bill would really help
us. We're struggling
financially. Thank you.
Madam Chairman and senators.
I'm Carol Clark. I'm the founder
and publisher of the Los Alamos
Daily Post newspaper.
Um
Last week we celebrated our 13
year anniversary.
And
We're in a small town, however,
because we have a national lab
in our community. We are red
across the nation and in 129
countries around the world, and
we publish a weekly newspaper.
It is printed at the Santa Fe,
New Mexican, they have done so
for the last decade.
Um, these bills would affect all
of us in a positive way, and I
urge you to support us. Thank
you.
Chair Hamblin, a ranking member
Sanchez, members of the
committee. My name is Esteban
Gonzalez, I'm with the New
Mexico Broadcasters Association.
We stand in strong support of
Senate Bill 110 and appreciate
the thoughtful consideration to
support local journalism. Uh, we
respectfully ask for an
amendment uh to explicitly
include broadcast journalists
who regularly gather and
disseminate local interviews,
field reporting and other local
content on radio, TV, digital
and broadcast platforms on a
daily and weekly basis, we
believe this clarification.
um, strengthen the bill's impact
and reinforce the importance of
all forms of local journalism,
and as fate would have it, today
is World Radio Day, where we're
celebrating radio's important
role in our communities from
providing life saving emergency
alerts, traffic, local news,
sports coverage and
entertainment, uh, radio
broadcasters go above and beyond
to serve our communities. Thank
you for your consideration.
Hello, Madam Chair and uh
members of the committee. My
name's Leota Brijita Harriman.
Um, the publisher of the Las
Vegas Optic, and
Previous to that, I owned a
newspaper called the Independent
in Edgewood, um, which was a
very
Very much of a razor thin margin
kind of operation, and I can
tell you that the pills that
we're looking at today would
have made the difference between
me having to sell that business
and not when I got COVID a
couple of years ago. I'd like to
urge you to strongly support
the, the bill that we have here
will really help New Mexico
newspapers and uh newspapers
formed the basis of a lot of the
journalism that gets picked up
um elsewhere.
Thank you.
Madam Chairman, members of the
committee, my name is Brian
Fantel. I'm with the Albuquerque
Journal and Albuquerque
Publishing Company. Um, the
journal has been a family owned
newspaper in New Mexico for
100 years or more, um, the
journal and its predecessor have
been owned by members of the
Pepper Day and the Lang family.
We are deeply committed to
keeping the residents of New
Mexico, informed about what's
going on in their state. We
think it's a critical mission
and on behalf of the journal and
our community papers in Rio
Rancho Berlin and TRC I'm sorry,
Secorro, please support this
bill. Thank you.
Thank you so much. Now we're
going to go online and so, um,
we, since we have
8 people online who are in
support. We're gonna go with
the, uh, these four, Belinda
Mills, Rashad.
We're gonna go with Daniel
Russell and then Diana Albuilar.
Um, we do have the New Mexico
Press Association also on board
and other folks, so I wanna have
that, uh, in the record. So
Belinda, you're gonna go ahead
and start. Rashad, you'll be
next.
Then Daniel and then Diana, so
if you will, you're gonna get a
minute apiece. What's gonna
happen is when you get the, when
you see the 30 seconds from the
vice chair, type in the chat, 30
seconds left if you will. OK.
So, Belinda, if you will, please
unmute yourself. And you've got
one minute.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
committee. Uh, my name is
Belinda Mills. I am the
publisher of the Las Cruces
Bulletin and the Desert Exposure
here in southern New Mexico. Um,
I just want to reiterate that uh
what we do is important. We are
the 4th estate. We are the
protectors of civil liberties
and the other thing that we need
to remember is that we are the,
we provide the historical record
of our communities as well, and
I would very much ask for your
support on this bill.
We're not trying to get fat,
we're trying to survive, and
increase our newsrooms. I would
like to end with a quote and 9
in 1787, Thomas Jefferson
famously wrote, Were it left to
me to decide whether we should
have a government without
newspapers or newspapers without
a government, I should not
hesitate a moment to prefer the
latter. Thank you.
Thank you, Belinda. Rashad,
you're next, and then Daniel,
you'll follow Rashad, go ahead
and unmute yourself. You have
one minute.
Um, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, thank you so much for
uh considering this bill. Um, as
the, uh, executive director of
the New Mexico Local News Fund.
I just want to speak out in
support of this bill and
emphasize that, um, obviously
newspapers are incredibly
important to local news in New
Mexico, but this bill would also
go beyond that. Um, there are a
lot of new models of journalism
emerging in New Mexico and
around the country. Um, we have
many of those institutions here
and so, um, I, I think
Um, it's important to think
about new forms of news and
access, um, we have nonprofit
news outlets that would benefit
from this bill. Um, we have
small, uh, radio stations as the
broadcast association said,
which should be able to benefit
from this bill. Um, and, uh, we
have digital only startups that
are both serving locally like
downtown Albuquerque News as
well as uh statewide um online
outlets like New Mexico and
Depth, search like New Mexico,
which should be able to benefit
as
as well. Um, altogether, we have
really a vibrant local
independent local news ecosystem
in New Mexico that um we do as
much as we can to support, um,
but this bill would really, um,
be an amazing support to the
sustainability of local news
throughout the state. Uh, thank
you so much for your
consideration. All right. Thank
you, Rashad. Uh, Daniel, you're
next, and then Diana, you'll
finish off online. So Danielle,
if you'll please unmute
yourself, you have one minute.
Yes, Madam Chairman, thank you.
Um, I'm Daniel Russell. Uh, I'm
the owner of the Hobbs New Sun
and the publisher. I also have
two other co-owners. We are
locally owned here in Hobbs. In
the last 10 years, we've seen
our newsroom staff be cut in
half, um, we have a, we have a
community just south of us, the
Eunice, Representative Don
Whittaker, those who know him,
his former hometown, their
newspaper club, their weekly
paper just closed about
months ago. Um, I would love to
be able to hire a reporter to
help prevent that community from
becoming a news desert, so this,
that and these bills would
definitely help us do that. It's
one of the 4 newspapers that
actually has a working press,
uh, it is a struggle to keep
that going. It is uh mightily
expensive. We currently print 3
other newspapers and we hope to
keep that going, but uh the
economics of that is very, very
difficult and unfortunately, our
choice, if we ever have to shut
down, would be to take those
dollars outside the state and
have to print outside of New
Mexico because of a distance
from the the other presses, um,
it's bad, so thank you, and we
support this bill.
OK. Thank you, Danielle. And
then lastly, Diana Alveolar, if
you'll unmute yourself, you have
one minute.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I
appreciate the chance to talk to
this committee this afternoon.
I'm
A former journalist, and I'm
still doing some journalism with
the New Mexico local news fund,
but the New Mexico local news
fund is looking for a variety of
ways to support local news in
these challenging times, um, the
reasons were stated pretty
eloquently before.
By some of the speakers, but the
digital era has really changed
the nature of funding local
news, and I saw that firsthand
when I was a journalist at the
Las Cruces Sun News and the
practical effect of that was
that the numbers of journalists
in the newsroom just shrunk
dramatically, and then that
happened over the past 20 years,
but it really accelerated, uh,
the last
Number of years and so we've
really felt that impact here in
southern New Mexico, and I just
wanted to lend a voice from
Southern New Mexico to express
support for the legislation, and
it should go a ways towards
helping uh some of the
publishers, quite a few
publishers who are struggling
with many of the economic
challenges, uh, just stay
afloat, so thanks for the
opportunity to speak and
I, I hope the bill's pass or
make it into the final
legislation.
Thank you so much, uh, Senator
Wirth, you have an opportunity
of 5 minutes to respond to any
of the comments from the public.
Thank you, Madam Chair, I'm not
gonna need 5 minutes. I think
the last.
Speaker really nailed it. I
mean, we're kind of at a point
here where
Stay afloat.
You know, these folks are all
right on the edge, whether it
comes to the newsroom itself or
I think that printing.
Side of it is even more
critical. And so as we sit here
and look at all these different
tax policy.
Bills and we're trying to figure
out, we heard from
Huge proposed investment
yesterday or 2 days ago, quantum
and.
Different options that can
bring.
an entity here in New Mexico and
provide incredible benefits
benefits. I also think that tax
policy can be used to support
and prioritize.
Programs just like this. And so
that's the purpose behind both
bills. I very much appreciate,
uh, the work that
Has been done on this, um, and
would note this is a 0.7.
Which shows that a lot of
thought went into this and
getting it right and it still
might not be completely right,
but it's, again, it's that's
what that's what before you
today and.
Just really appreciate the
With that information forward
and I think what we can do is
with questions we can target
other issues that are brought
up.
All right, thank you, Senator
Wirth. Um, I'm going to the
committee now. I have Senator
Jaramillo first, and if there
are others.
And I had a meal.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Senator for bringing
this bill forward. As you know,
the chairwoman and I are both
former broadcast journalists,
Senator Hamlin worked in radio
news and I worked in television
news, and so my question was
thinking about my colleagues who
are still at KRQE is my
assumption right that the reason
why, um,
Television broadcast journalists
weren't thought of it with local
news is because they're owned by
a parent company outside of the
state of New Mexico, Madam
Chair, Senator, um.
Yes, pretty much. It, it, most
of the broadcasters are uh owned
by larger conglomerate
companies. We were trying to be
budget friendly, stay focused,
what I thought could do the most
to help local communities and
local jewelerism throughout the
state with his minimal funds as
we could do, and most of the
journalists in the state are
really within newspapers. I'm a
newspaper background, so I talk
about that a lot, but it's not
all newspapers, a lot of uh
digital only, um, but there are
some independent.
Uh, radio, I don't know that
there's any independent TV, but
there's, there are some
independent small radio stations
that if have a website, which
most do, and they post 4 stories
a week and they've been in
business, which most of them
have been, um, you know, talking
to Esteban and and things there.
They would qualify, so, so it
wasn't meant to be an
exclusionary at all to those
that could qualify within the
specifications of serving the
local communities and not being
umbrellaed by a uh a large
conglomerate. Thank you for
that, and that makes complete
sense, and I thought about that
that it's because.
Every television station in
Albuquerque is owned by a parent
company out of state. Now, just
a few comments, Madam Chairs.
I'm disheartened by the number
of journal, the decrease of of
journalists in the state of New
Mexico that are covering local
news because what we're seeing
is less local news means a less
trusted news source. And so
we're fortunate to have Carol
Clark here of Los Alamos, who's
been a trusted news source for
13 years in northern New Mexico
and Los Alamos, but in most
cases, we're seeing people in
our area who are relying on
Facebook to be their source of.
information and because of
algorithms that are tearing us
apart and dividing us. It's not
objective news and as a former
journalist that concerns me,
Senator, thank you for bringing
this bill forward. I was once a
young journalist who would have
really enjoyed taking a tax
credit and so thank you for
bringing this forward. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator Sher, did you
want to make comments. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
So while I am not a journalist
and have never been a
journalist, I did deliver
newspapers.
As a child and an adult, OK, but
my mother was a journalist for
the Albuquerque Journal and the
Farmington Daily Times.
Um, in fact,
When I was 9 or so, I was here
closing session one year. Uh, so
we were up in the press box
looking down, couldn't see all
the way across the room because
of the cigarette smoke.
But you could see the whiskey
sitting right on the table. It
was, they weren't even trying to
hide that they had their
tumblers out there.
Um, but,
I know that the, the Farmington
Daily Times was from 1933 to
2021.
And
It started shrinking somewhere.
Maybe 5 years before it closed,
shrinking physically and, you
know.
And it was really kind of
troublesome to me, and now we
have the Tri-City.
Uh
Tribune, I think it is.
It's based in Colorado.
Yes, it covers Farmington and
Aztec and Durango because they
live in Durango.
And that really troubles me a
lot.
But
This is another hole in our
Swiss cheese of tax.
Things
Uh, and we talk all the time
about how we don't.
How do we just have a single
logical tax system.
Instead of this
Because all the time, Madam
Chair, people come in here for
years and years and years, well,
probably 100 years. Gosh, my
business needs a tax break, or I
won't come unless I get a tax
break, or I'm gonna leave unless
I get a tax break.
And this is another one of those
very same things.
And it's not that I opposed the
newspapers because I would like
to have local newspapers, I like
the Farmington Daily Times to
come back.
Who also printed there, they
printed their own newspaper, but
they also printed other people's
newspapers.
And uh
From that perspective, I wish we
would have a sane.
Has policy.
Because if you look through our
list here.
We have, oh, we're gonna give
the dope shops a tax break, but
we're going to raise taxes on
cigarettes.
We're gonna give the the
newspapers here a tax break, but
we're going to raise taxes on on
uh the enhanced 911.
We need a sane tax policy. There
happens to be one out there.
Senator Worth is going to be my
co-sponsor on it.
But this has been my, my problem
for years.
I support the newspapers, I want
to help the newspapers, I also
want a sane tax policy and this
just makes it worse.
So, thank you.
Thank you, Senator Sher. Anybody
else from the committee?
Um, so before we close, um, you
know, uh, obviously, as somebody
who has supported this and I've
had to look back on my career,
um, and didn't realize, uh,
until a couple of years ago that
I completely forgot that I was
the editor of my 3rd grade
paper.
Now, for those of you of a
certain age, it was the
mimeographed.
That was pre Xerox, um, that,
and I, and I didn't remember
that, but I was also the editor
of my high school paper and a
photographer for the school
yearbook and also the person who
ran the pep assemblies and did
the announcements in the
morning, which led me to a 20
year career in broadcast
journalism. And so for some of
those folks who are here from
Las Cruces, uh, Pamela and
particular remembering me saying
Highway 70 is open all day. And
that's how people recognize my
voice, uh, on a regular basis.
So I'm very much supportive of
this and very much, uh,
concerned about what's happening
because so many people that that
have testified today. I've had
the pleasure of working with in
some capacity or another. And so
I, I hear what Senator Scherer
is saying. And the point is, is
that if we give a tax rebate,
we've got to find tax increases
somewhere else. We have to pay
for those things, and that's the
balance that we're trying to
figure out, um, and it's the
concern that Senator Scherer
has, um, and so, um, I look
forward to seeing more of this
and, uh, and seeing where we can
go with this, so if there are no
other comments from the
committee, um, we are done with
this, with hearing this bill and
Senator.
worth you welcome to finish it
off.
Right.
Sure.
Yeah, I just wanted to make a
quick comment, uh, Madam Chair,
uh, and, uh, uh, Senator, uh, I
appreciate your time.
Unfortunately, you're in uh one
of the areas where one of the
bigger, uh, national companies
basically turned it into a ghost
newspaper and shut down the
plant, um, and, uh, while, uh,
the Valentines are, are out of
state that they stepped in,
actually launched a product and
then merged to try to keep it up
and, and John, uh, who's the
publisher's actually on the
call.
Um
But just to recognize that like
Nick Sebles on the call, he
didn't get to speak, but he
bought two Gannet newspapers
that were the same situation
within there, um, Harvey Yates
is about like 5 of them has
supported as Frank Litos on the
on the call as well. Barbara
Beck, who owns one of the other
production facilities in
Roswell, she's on the call as
well. Um, and so there's been,
uh, lots of people in New
Mexico, New Mexicans who have
stepped up and are really
fighting the fight, and it is a
tough fight in a little any.
help we could do.
Great. Thank you so much. All
right. We have, um, unless
there's anything else, Senator
Worth, we are moving on to
Senate Bill 141.
Thank you for all of you who had
testified today in the
committee. We appreciate that
and online.
Oh, we recognize that fella.
OK fine.
right.
Was that Mr. Abbey's house and
had a conversation with him on
the front steps and here we got
a little bill which uh I, I must
say I did have a.
Senator John Arthur Smith
moment.
Because Senator Smith used to
introduce bills.
You know, to really send a
message. And this, this has got
some of that and center share,
it's perfect timing because it
follows up, we're raising a
little revenue to pay for
something here and it really
shows the policy choices, uh,
that we can have and, and I want
to address that right up front
because I, I've received a
number of
Very angry emails and how dare
you propose to raise, you know,
revenues like this and again,
it's
You know, I, I wanted to
introduce and I wanted to show
the committee what it takes to
raise the revenue to pay for
something that I think makes a
ton of sense, which is a
targeted 100 $100,000 GRT
exemption for new New Mexico
businesses. We currently allow
out of state corporations, we
give them $100,000 exemption.
That makes no sense to me, and I
think it's she's been around
long enough and I, I smile with
its reference to his 2% bill and
a 15 years for me to close one
certain loophole. It's just not
fair to New Mexico businesses to
have a different set of rules.
And so really what this was
trying to do was kind of level
that playing field and create a
real incentive for folks to
start up a new business and not
have to deal with the GRT and
I'm gonna let Mr. Abby go into
that, but I did include
an increase in the corporate
tax, which I did not think was
going to raise $164 million but
it does, which is pretty amazing
to me. It's not that far off
from the estimate of the cost of
this, which I think we think
might be a little bit high.
But it does show
What it takes to put together a
tax package when there's no
capacity.
And this is the point that
Senator Sher was making.
You know, we're gonna have to
figure out here how are we going
to do this? Where do we raise
the revenues?
If we want to make some targeted
policy decisions and I think
those two that we just.
Pass make a lot of that we just
talked about make a lot of
sense, but I completely agree
with the, the challenge with the
tax policy. So let me do this.
I'm gonna yield to uh Mr. Abby
and very much appreciate him.
Uh, being here and being willing
to have this discussion, um, and
what we were thinking and why
we're doing this, so.
Madam sure members of the
committee.
This is, I'm gonna speak mainly
to entirely to the gross seats
tax piece of this bill, and I
view this as a tax equity bill.
I think Senator Wirth.
spoke to that as well as an
economic development bill.
The GRT, the gross seats tax, is
the engine of the state's tax
system. It raises about 4
billion, 40% of the total. It's
very important, but it has some
problems, and I, I'm on the list
half a dozen of them.
First of all, it's said to be
hard to understand. It's
different than a sales tax. It's
on services. It's the
liabilities on uh the seller,
not the buyer, if I said that
right, uh, Richard Anklem of the
Tax Research Institute and tax
expert says the grocer receipts
tax is weird.
That's not a good thing for
selling New Mexico when the
engine of the tax system is
described that way.
Uh, despite some fixes,
pyramidding is a problem.
Pyramidding is paying a tax on a
tax. We've reached the point
that
Some sectors in the service
sector in particular, are paying
effective tax rates that are in
the high double digits pushing
20%. And they're
Say you're intel and you're
building a building, why not
have hire the architects from
Dallas.
And provide the services and
don't pay tax or hire in New
Mexico architect at 9%. So
pyramidding is a problem
competing competition without a
state providers of services is
problem.
Um
The
LSC budget document, there's a
brief discussion.
Of the gross seeks tax, and I
commend it to you. You may not
have it handy, but New Mexico is
rated.
Thirty-fourth
In the gross seats tax, 50th is
worst, 1st is best, by uh the
tax foundation's business
climate rankings. The combined
state and local average rate is
17th highest, and the average
local rate imposed is the 11th
highest of all states. And so,
You know, we wonder why, why our
state economic rankings are near
the bottom per capita income,
workforce participation or 5% at
least below the national
average, you know, we need to,
we collectively in our state
need to think, what does it take
to to get our economy going and
Uh, groceries, it's some sort of
grocery tax relief would be
helpful. Senator Wirth has been
a leader in efforts to address
this with gross seats tax
reductions, but it's very
expensive, say 0.25% reduction
on the average around 9% was
around 300 million, uh LSC staff
told me.
In 22
2022, there was a 0.25% or so
gross seats tax reduction. It
helped a little bit, but then
there are increases at the same
time in recent years in the
local government tax. I'm told
it's more counties and cities,
but off.
Local increment increases of
offset the state reductions
which are intended to help our
economy.
In 2023, there was a veto of a
0.25%.
seats tax reduction that Senator
led, I believe, and at the time
that the veto message said there
was a concern about the
stability of tax revenues, but
for the 3rd year in a row we've
had over 3 billion of new money,
revenues being higher than
spending.
So there is
An opportunity with that kind of
with the revenues still higher
than recurring spending by that
amount.
To, to address these needs in
some way.
A sunset might help, but I the
LFCFIR is good at points out
that as a possibility. And so,
well, how do we know it'll work
or not in the sunset of 5 years
perhaps might be a way to
address concerns about stability
and whether this has the desired
result.
Senor mentioned.
The revenue estimate
I worked with LSC staff in the
fall and said, well, how do we
do this? How can we make it not
too expensive.
And they thought it might cost
this very measure on the course
seats tax side might cost about
120 million.
And now we're looking at an
estimate more than double, and,
and I think good people work on
these estimates. I used to do it
myself as a professional, and
it's not hard. I mean, it is
very hard and it's, it's
A tough duty.
But just, I, I learned that
there are 44,000 filers.
With liabilities.
Hes with tack with gross
receipts as a taxable, I'm not
sure, but under 100,000, that's
a lot. That means the average
tax liability is 68,000, and
that's why you think about, what
about all the fiers with 10,000
or 20,000 or less, so it feels a
little high that the average is
68,000. Hopefully there's
downside risk to this revenue
estimate.
So to wrap this up, Madam Chair,
thank you for the time.
But this is an equity bill. We
have an unlevel playing field,
out of state taxpayers.
Don't pay under 100,000 New
Mexicans do. That's an equity
issue in my view, and we, we, I
think it's, it's sort of a
truism, but there's a view that
small businesses can be the hope
of our economy. They may be an
engine of growth, and this is a
measure that is targeted to
small business to help stimulate
so that, thank you, Madam Chair
for the time. Thank you,
Senator.
Thank you.
All right. So, um, at this
point, we're going to go to
public testimony. So in the room
if there can be a show of hands
of those who are in support of
Senate Bill 141.
See none. Anybody in the room in
opposition of 141.
123. So we have 3.
He noted online, do we have
anybody in support of the bill.
One opposition. OK, so we're
gonna have, so we have uh 4 in
opposition. I do have two, and
I'm not gonna read them, but I'm
just gonna go ahead and um
acknowledge them. We have Ashley
Wagner, the vice president of
government affairs from the New
Mexico Oil and Gas Association
in opposition, and also, um
Carlos Sontag from the New
Mexico Business Coalition, also
in opposition of 141, so the
three folks that are here in
this room, they want to get up
and speak. If you will go ahead
and come up to the dais, uh, and
then we will get that person
online.
uh, after that. Thank you very
much.
And you have one minute. Thank
you. Thank you, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. Uh,
I'm Alison Nichols with the New
Mexico Municipal League, and I
want to note that the municipal
League does have concerns about
SB 141, given the estimated
revenue hit to local
governments, um, as the FIR
notes, local governments could
see $120 million revenue hit.
That's quite significant, and
I'll note that it's higher than
the estimates um for some anti
pyramiding proposals in recent
years, which sparked a lot of
concern about tax base erosion.
As you probably know, cities are
highly reliant on GRT revenues
and many are almost entirely
reliant on GRT to fund services
like public safety, roads,
water, other basic services.
Reductions in GRT revenue leave
cities with limited options to
raise revenue other than raising
taxes, and of course what the
bill does include some
offsetting revenue for the
general fund, it does not
include any offsetting revenue
for local governments.
And we're also concerned given
the loopholes identified in the
FIR, um, that companies could
set up new entities and claim
that deduction multiple times
that the revenue hit could
potentially be even higher than
identified.
We hope you'll consider how this
significant revenue hit would
affect our communities. Thank
you.
Hi, good afternoon. Chair
members of the committee. My
name is Alison Riley, public
policy director for the New
Mexico Chamber of Commerce. I'd
also like to state for the
record that the Gallup McKinley
Chamber of Commerce is also
opposed to Senate Bill 141, but
they were unable to be here
today. We feel this bill moves
New Mexico in the wrong
direction by increasing the
corporate income tax rate and
narrowing the GRT base. Previous
tax reforms this committee has
seen has focused on broadening
the GRT base. This creates a
more stable and competitive tax
structure. However, narrowing
the base makes a GRT.
rate increase very likely.
Unlike GRT, which is broad based
across industries, corporate
income tax revenues, fluctuate
significantly and are
increasingly dependent on the
oil and gas industry.
Businesses thrive on certainty,
and this bill creates the
opposite. This would be the 7th
change to the corporate income
tax bracket in just 11 years.
Constant tax code changes create
an unpredictable business
environment, and this
discourages long-term investment
and job creation in New Mexico
for these reasons, we ask that
you, um, oppose this bill. Thank
you.
Right, thank you so much, JD,
and then we're gonna go to Carla
online, but I do want to remind
folks that this is also a bill
that will be held. We will
discuss it, but there is no vote
because this will be also in
consideration for a tax package.
So JD, go ahead. You have one
minute.
My name is JD Bullington, and
I'm speaking to you today on
behalf of the Greater
Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce,
which has always been a strong
supporter of tax cuts. And when
you have a surplus of revenue
like we do, lowering the gross
receipts tax rate is a very
simple move, a very simple
across the board move that you
can do.
Uh, the problem with this bill
from the chamber's perspective,
of course, is the is the tax on
corporations, and it's been
noted that a lot of these
entities are out of state
corporations, however, they are
in state employers, and we are
trying to do everything we can
to increase employment in the
private sector, increase the
revenues that are produced in
the private sector. So these are
our state's largest employers
that this bill is increasing the
taxation on and for that reason
it's the great why the greater
Albuquerque.
Chamber of Commerce is
respectfully opposing the bill.
Thank you, Judy.
All right, Carla, you, uh,
online, you have one minute, you
will see in your chat box that
uh when you have a 32nd
remainder, um, go ahead and
unmute yourself and you have,
uh, you have the floor for one
minute.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. I'm Carlos
Santag, president and CEO of the
New Mexico Business Coalition.
We appreciate the sponsor's
consideration on the uh GRT
equity issue, and we think
that's a great move. We opposed
the bill because of the tax
increase. You know, other states
with robust economies have found
that supporting businesses,
lowering taxes, and limiting
regulation produces better
results. Those states are seeing
more growth, more, uh,
Spurring their economy and
creating more jobs. If you look
at rich states, poor states,
which is an independent, uh,
publication that was put out in
2019, New Mexico is ranked 29th
in the nation.
But in 2024, it is ranked 38th.
And a lot of this has to do with
our tax policy in the state. And
when we increase taxes, that
reflects negatively on us.
As a state compared to other
states in the nation. I just
would encourage you to, uh, post
this bill for the tax increase.
Thank you for your
consideration.
Thank you very much, Senator
Wirth, you have 5 minutes to
respond to any of the public
comment if you'd like.
Good.
Right, at this point then I'm
going to go ahead and go to the
committee. Senator Sher, you're
looking at me, so I'm taking
that as
Not that you want to stare at me
all the time, but that you want
to get my attention.
Madam Chair, I was just admiring
the hairdo. Thank you.
You know how to get to me. I
appreciate that. Thank you,
Senator.
Uh, 8% tax on the products for
that or 9 depending on where you
are.
Um, so,
Madam Cher was brought up to to
our GRT is weird and yes.
But, you know, there's a
brilliant tax plan out there
that uh uh embraces the
weirdness promotes the
weirdness.
Uh, in fact, um.
But I would like to point out
that, uh, and I believe uh that
uh when we were ranked the first
time in our attacks, we were
50th.
Or maybe 51st.
And it wasn't until TRD and
economic development went back
and said, hey, but we have all
these incentives that it brought
us up to 34 or whatever the
number is.
Um
Clearly, uh, just a minute ago,
we heard about the need for a
tax uh decrease for a certain
group, and now we have a tax
increase from 5% to 6.9 in I
correct with that?
Um
Which, which really troubles me,
I understand the.
The sort of tax break of
$100,000.
Um, it has to then be paid for
by everybody else that pays
taxes, moving it from 9 to 6.9
or 5 to 6.9.
Again
We need a comprehensive tax
package, not these little
things, these little things I
think have been, have been doing
us in for a long time. And I
want to share with you just one
little bit of my other
presentation. When General
Kearney in 1847 marched into
this city. He wrote the Kearney
tax code, he wrote all laws, but
they were a North American tax
code for what until that moment
was a Mexican city, Mexican
territory.
It was 21 cents as long.
Couple of them were really long
run on census that I'm sure my
English teacher would not
approve of, but 21 sentences.
And it taxed business. That's
what it was, X number of dollars
for a bar, 10 number of dollars
for a grocery store, X number
dollars for whatever. He hated
billiard tables, they were $60
every 6 months. Most other
things were like 5 or 10 bucks.
Don't know what the billiard
problem was at the time.
Um, in 1915 we created our uh
our own New Mexico tax code
versus the territorial tax code,
which we actually lived under
for a couple of years as a
state.
And it was a tax on property,
but not just real property, but
property, your bed, your dining
room table, and everything else.
And then we had the Great
Depression, and people would
rather just turn their bed into
the tax collector, then pay the
tax collector, and then there
was no tax, hence the emergency
school tax.
And we've been screwing up our
tax code ever since.
So I'm not sure where we are a
few years ago, we had 362, I
think, credits, deductions and
exemptions in our tax code.
We probably have more than that
now, I've been keeping track for
the last couple years.
And all of that makes our tax
code.
More than weird, it makes it
unworkable for most businesses.
Especially the small businesses.
Walmart has a herd of attorneys
and a herd of accountants to
figure out what we're doing in
New Mexico.
The Main Street business
Has
Oh, my son can add with this new
AI thing, maybe we can use that
to figure out what the tax code
is.
And this is just one more of
those, it doesn't.
I, I, I don't think it fixes
anything.
If anything, it makes life
worse.
And not only weirder but harder.
Although I appreciate the idea.
I still have to oppose it
because I like weird, not hard.
Gosh, I hope that makes the
quote of the day.
I sure yes please
words um to cross out the CIT
increase.
You know, the GRT hit on the
local government's concerns me.
That that clearly the municipal
League is right, and I think
it's another one of those
teachable moments for all of us.
You make a.
Deduction and you reduce the.
The tax, it's got.
hit to the local governments, it
passes through.
cross, cross that one out.
In the middle, I think is an
idea.
That really does have some
merit, it's crazy that we're
again allowing.
Multi-state big corporations to
take $100,000. They, they don't
pay on the 1st $100,000.
And that our small businesses
do.
That doesn't make any sense. And
I think that's really the gist
of.
You know, where Mr. Abbey was
coming from.
And
You know, you could set the
threshold to different places,
you could lower it to $50,000.
Let's to help our really small
businesses. Again, I'm, I bet
there's a big number of those.
So I just think that that's the
The different pieces that are
here, there's a, there's an
interesting concept that's here
and it does necessarily.
Put us into this discussion
about what we're doing and I do
and I, and I appreciate Mr. Abby
saying I have supported.
Reducing the GRT and I really
think, and the problem is it's
so darn expensive to do it.
And then if you've got small
little micro reductions, 1/8 or
1/16 it doesn't.
People don't feel that
reduction.
I, I think small businesses
would feel this big time.
Again, so that was the thinking
behind it, but I, I, I hear what
you're saying and, and again I
think this bill kind of does
lots of different things and
stirs up a lot of my old friends
on these bills and and again, I
think it's a good, it's a good
discussion. I'm, I'm any other
committee members?
Senator Figueroa. Thank you,
Madam chair and thank you
sponsors. I really appreciated
the intent to level that playing
field.
Um, and
To assist our small New Mexican
businesses and balance
disadvantage that.
The larger out of state
businesses have.
Um, but the municipal league, as
you've already pointed out,
Madam Chair is, is a major
concern, so we've got to address
that, but I would also like to
point out, Madam Chair, with
respect to this bill and the two
prior.
Um, the sunset piece was
missing.
And the measure of success
because Madam Chair, I'm not
sure.
How you would measure if you
said a sunset of 5 years, how
you would measure success is
that a certain number of new
small businesses appear or um
I, I don't know how you would
tell when you said his son said,
But this targeted tax credit
served its purpose.
So that's my question, what
would you use as a measure.
I'm sure.
Yeah. Ismael Torres is the chief
economist for LFC, and he helped
us think about this. He
obviously isn't for or against
legislation, but he's a tax
expert and, and he talked his
FIR spoke to the need to
evaluation and I'd like to
suggest putting him on the spot
to brainstorm how to do that. I
think it's hard.
But, and, and may I make one
other point? Is this the right
time? Say it was 50,000.
The reduction in the cost is not
linear.
I mean, if you think of
The proportion of, of the
100,000 by income level.
I, I would wager more at 10,000,
20,000 at the bottom for small
amounts. So, uh, it might be
worth if we could suggest the
staff to look into this a little
bit and, and, and I, I think
it's a fair point about the cost
of municipalities, but if you
could lower it,
By 450,000, it, the cost would
go down by significantly more
than half. I'm just suggesting.
So thank you, Madam Chair and
Mr. Torres.
Madam Chair and Senator
Figueroa, I think, I think you
hit the nail on the head with
number of businesses claiming
this deduction. In part, I think
maybe a piece that's been
missing from this discussion is
um compliance. There's obviously
a lot of taxpayers out there who
are running small personal
businesses, likely under 100,000
who are not filing GRT even
though.
They likely should be. And so,
you know, bringing those
businesses that into the
legitimacy into the taxpayer
pool, uh, so that the tax
department can help them, you
know, reach better legitimacy, I
think is important especially
for scaling to to becoming a
larger business. That's
certainly important. So, I think
that would be a
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, and
thank you for that
clarification. Um, but if the
only measure is the number of
folks who are taking the credit.
I'm not sure that what that gets
us.
Madam Chair, and you don't need
to respond, we can talk offline,
that was that in the municipal
hit for my insurance. How do we
measure success with the
previous bills? Well, we inspire
new.
New small independent
newspapers, or will we just keep
what we have alive, all of
these, if they move forward,
need a sunset and a measure of
success.
Thank you, Senator Figueroa.
Anybody else from the committee?
All right, see you then. Thank
you, Senator Wirth.
Thank you, David. It's nice
seeing you. Um. We have, uh,
Senator Padilla next.
This is a bill that does have an
amendment, but Senator, we'll
have you talk about the bill
first and then we'll move the
amendment.
And then, um,
At some point, we'll need to get
Senator Munoz, uh, on alerts
cause he'll be coming up next.
Thank you Madam Chair, members
of the committee, I'll, uh, just
give a brief on the bill and
then I'll talk about the
amendment if that's all right.
Uh.
Thank you. And I do have two,
experts with me, Steven Weina
from the Department of Finance
Administration and Nicole Brown,
San Juan County 911. Thank you
very much, uh, Madam Chair,
Madam vice chair and uh uh
Ranking member, excuse me, so
essentially what Senate Bill 137
is, is helping us to modernize
our 911 systems across the
state. We um are seeking a
couple of things, um, lining up
uh titles to the various items
that produce 911 for us, uh,
things like in changing enhanced
911 Act to the 9/11 Act,
renaming enhanced 911 fund to
the 911 emergency Service fund
and then modifying enhanced 911
Bond Act to the 9/11 Bond Act.
All those are
importance to line up and down
with monies and different things
that come into the state and how
we manage them across New
Mexico, uh, with the legislation
specifically does is it raises
the surcharge, this is where one
of the, the points are that we
want to make sure that you're
aware of because it will lead to
the amendment that I have. Um,
it'll raise the surcharge uh for
services to generate additional
funding for 911 services, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee that has not been
increased since 1989. If we were
to uh adjust that 1989 rate, uh,
for inflationary purposes.
that would put us at something
like $1.29. We came to you, uh,
with this legislation seeking to
go from 50 cents, um, to $1.50
which would have been a 200%
increase. Now, that is uh not
quite where the inflationary
increase would have been, so the
amendment, if you're willing to
move that for us, Madam Chair,
is, um, 230771.1, and
essentially what that does is it
strikes $1 50s, I'm sorry, on
page 14 lines 12 and 13.
It strikes $1.50 and it inserts
in lieu thereof $1. So we don't
even quite reach the $1.29 which
inflationary tells inflation
tells us it should be, um, but
instead we set it right where it
needs to be, and that's what the
dollar actually does for us. Um,
I'll talk more about once we're
done with the amendment,
hopefully, why it's so
important, and then I'll ask my
witnesses to say a couple of
things, then we'll start. But
you have that amendment. So
230771.
All right, can I get a motion to
move the amendment for
discussion. Move the amendment
230771.1. Thank you. You have a
second?
Thank you.
Any opposition to moving the
amendment.
All right. Let's go ahead and
for the record, uh, unanimous.
Go ahead, Senator Padilla.
Wonderful. Thank you for
amending the bill. Again, want
to underscore the fact that uh
that we were seeking $1.50 which
would have put us sort of on
par, so we don't have to come
back again, um, uh, at $1.50
dollars, we we settle on a
dollar, and which, which is, uh,
I, what the advocates and and
the various 911s that I worked
with on this legislation are
telling us is adequate to the
the modernization and
innovations that we're wanting
to do to bring us to next gen
911. I'm gonna ask my witnesses
just to say a couple of brief
words on why they're here and
then we
have quite a few people here,
however you want to handle it,
so.
Madam Chair and committee. Thank
you for having us. Um, my name
is Nicole Brown. I'm with Salmon
County 911 and I'm also the vice
chair for the 911 affiliate and
this surcharge increase not
being increased for so long.
Really shows that 9/11 has tried
to do the best they could with
what we had and for a long time
we were able to do it and 911 is
something that everyone uses and
sirens don't roll in your
communities without 9/11, that
that 911 call is what implements
and starts that whole process
and so.
Upgrading our system to the next
gen 911 system is absolutely
necessary. Right now, if you
call 911, there's a lot of
things that have to happen in
order for us to have your
location of your cell phone.
There's not so many things that
have to happen for Uber to know
where you are. So if we upgrade
the system.
We will get that that data we
will, we will have that real
time location information, and
it's absolutely integral to
having equity in 911 across the
state. I think 9/11 is something
that
Should we shouldn't have haves
and have nots, and so this 49
cents increase will make sure
that every community has the 911
service that they should. Hello,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Steven
Weinkopf, 911 bureau chief at
the Department of Finance and
Administration, local government
division.
I'd like to start by saying our
vision of the New Mexico 91
program is to provide a best in
class 911 system, utilizing
emergency, emerging technology
to facilitate efficient,
reliable public safety response
to best serve the communities of
New Mexico.
The Department of Finance and
administration, uh, supports
this bill.
We think that by increasing the
911 surcharge, it would allow
the state to better support the
implementation of NextGen 911
and expand.
reimbursable cost categories uh
within DFA rule to better align
with NextGen 91 technology and
the FCC's description of what is
an eligible use of 911 fees. Uh,
the FCC annual fee report notes
the state of New Mexico having
one of the narrowest scopes and
what we fund with our 911 state
surcharge.
Um, and we feel it's important
to, to increase the surcharge to
ensure sustainable funding for
all PAs regardless of size,
location, uh,
And close gaps in emergency
response service areas across
urban, rural, and tribal
communities.
Uh
We think the funding will allow
for a modernized 911 system that
will increase the situational
awareness of first responders
and provide a faster, more
accurate public safety response.
Thank you.
So to put a finer point on it,
Madam Chair and members, uh,
enhancing our 911 to the next
generation of 911 capabilities
will support voice, text, video,
and data communications,
improving accessibility and
response times. It'll implement
advanced geographic or GIS
mapping, and it'll ensure that
system resilience and redundancy
will be maintained, and you'll
see maybe possibly some
additional regionalization of
9/11 so that better redundancy
comes into play and all that.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator. So, uh, now
we're going to public comment
just by a show of hands how many
in the audience are in support
of this, if you'll count the
left side, I'll count the right.
Oh, you're all on the right
side, most of you.
1234567891 1230, 1415, 16. I've
got roughly 16 on one side and 3
on the other side, so, um,
We'll have that record uh
recorded, uh, how many folks, so
let's get 5 folks from this
side.
We'll get you 3 on this side,
and then how many online do we
have in in support?
Who would support any in
opposition.
No, OK, so we have 2 online. Is
there anybody in the audience in
opposition to this bill?
One in opposition? OK, we'll let
them speak in just a minute.
All right, so you get a minute
apiece.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members.
Uh, my name is Catherine
Crociatta, and I am a registered
lobbyist for the New Mexico
counties
we thank our sponsor, Senator
Padilla, for bringing this
critical legislation forward. I
want to be very, very brief, but
I just want to say thank you to
everyone who's put so much work
into this, and I feel like as
we're in a session now multiple
sessions where we're focusing on
public safety. You really can't
have that dialogue with also
talking about how we need to
complete our night.
At work. We urge your support.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Eric
Masters, and I'm the fire chief
for Sandoval County Fire Rescue.
I also serve as
A member of the board of the
local dispatch center in
Sandoval County, and I speak on
behalf of the Metro Fire Chiefs
Association and the fire
affiliate.
New Mexico fire chiefs strongly
support this bill.
Dispatchers are the 1st 1st
responder.
We cannot do our job, fire,
medical, law enforcement without
dispatch.
And I won't pretend to
understand what they do, because
it's a nightmare what they deal
with.
But without them, my team cannot
be efficient in the field.
We strongly support this. We
urge that you pass this so that
the dispatch centers can have
what they need so that we can do
our job in the field. Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name's Charlie
Marquez. I'm a registered
lobbyist for
Lumen,
of CenturyLink Lumen.
Um, we do support this. I, I am
working with the sponsor.
I appreciate all the work he's
put into it, all the people he's
worked with, uh, but we're
looking for some additional
changes, but at this point we do
support the legislation and
we'll continue to work with the
sponsors as we move forward with
it.
Thank you very much.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Carter Bundy with
asked me, we represent 911
telecommunicators and multiple
jurisdictions around the state.
This is one of the absolute most
brutal, difficult jobs in the
state, and as others have said,
none of the good work that our
fire, police, and other first
responders do can happen without
9/11. The idea that we can now
potentially upgrade to include
video, text, other ways of
making sure that they can do
their job best.
Their biggest nightmares are
when things go wrong.
That is the thing that haunts
our 911 telecommunicators.
This is the kind of legislation
that will enable them to do
their jobs well and save the
lives of New Mexicans, we urge
your support. Thank you and
thank you, sponsor.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Jay Santiannis,
registered lobbyist for the New
Mexico exchange carrier Group.
The group is 10 rural.
Socom and broadband companies
throughout the state.
Uh
We all realize how important it
is to have the PEs with all of
the technical um equipment they
need. It's very important,
especially in the rural areas,
uh, you know, many, many of, uh,
of your of the committee members
are from rural areas and it's
it's so important.
And uh we, we wanna thank
Senator Padilla for bringing
this forward. Uh, we support the
and uh we look.
Uh, I'm sorry.
Uh, also, I, I, I was asked to,
uh, uh.
To uh let, let the committee
know that uh uh.
T-Mobile has uh has requested.
For me to tell them, tell the
committee that they supported
us.
Madam Chair, honorable members
of the commission and sponsor.
My name is Joshuauleta. I'm the
executive director of the
Espanola Rioriba 911 Center.
I've been there for 23 years.
I've been a dispatcher all the
way up to now the executive
director, and this bill is very
important for us, um, for a
medium center, we can't function
without the surcharge. We cover
about 6000 square miles of our
beloved state. We handle
everything from Espanola to the
Colorado border, and as far west
as Navajo Lake. We cover a huge
area and we rely on technology
such as this to save lives. Uh,
dispatchers deliver
Babies over the phone. We tell
somebody how to do CPR over the
phone. Uh, the job that we do is
so important and so imperative.
And now we're relying on this
technology to find out locations
of where people are calling
from. So we request and, and ask
you very humbly if you could
support this bill. Thank you so
much.
Madam Chair, committee members,
my name is Earl Wright. I'm
actually uh
Retired I'm here as a citizen,
but I spent 30 years doing
geographic information work for
um Santa Fe County here.
One of the, this is critical
with next-gen technology coming
in, is totally changing the way.
911 function used to be an
analog table. Now it's a point
in polygon, very similar to,
again, the Uber reference, but
this is getting this
information, we've spent decades
creating this information.
This is critical to getting it
out of the first responders in a
timely manner. These next gen
uh generation systems basically.
Save North Carolina in um when
that hurricane hit and went
down.
Dispatch was able to immediately
move over to the active centers
in the state, um, it also was
critically.
Effective um in the Riodosa fire
when we had to go to the 700 MHz
radio systems for
interoperability.
So I urge your support for this.
This is really just
It's a surcharge. This isn't a
tax, I would happily pay this
for my grandchildren, my
grandmother.
I mean this is a cup of coffee.
Couple of cups of coffee a year,
so I urge you to support this.
Thank you.
Thank you so much. We have 2
people, the person in opposition
lowered their hand just for the
record, we do have two people,
Albert Flores and Tom. Um, I'm
not clear on your last name, but
I know you'll say it. So,
Albert, you're uh up first, uh,
if you will, you do have one
minute. Uh, when you have 30
seconds left, our Zoom master
will go ahead and type 30
seconds left in the chat, so
you'll see that pop up. And then
Tom, you'll be following that.
So Albert, go ahead, you've got
one minute. Thank you very much.
I do appreciate this opportunity
to speak, um, so just to
on my part, an increase in the
cell phone surcharge is gonna
help 911 dispatch centers
receive more funding for
equipment and training. It's
already been mentioned. I'm
gonna try not to repeat what
everybody else has been saying
today. So, you know, technology
is emerging and this next gen
911, um, is gonna be a big thing
and without this funding, the
911 agencies have to rely on
local funding. And um sometimes
that local funding isn't always
reliable. Sometimes it's
inconsistent, it's insufficient.
Um, this bill actually presents
a solution for steady finance.
in, um, to help us, uh, maintain
this type of uh technology. It
also does help the hardworking
911 staff in New Mexico with the
tools and training, um, they're
gonna need to excel in this next
gen 911. Um, and that, that's
all I have to say. I do
appreciate uh you all support.
Thanks so much, Albert. Tom,
you're next, if you will, please
unmute yourself. You have one
minute.
So Tom left.
Uh, but we do have noted that
his support. So at this point,
um, Senator Padilla, you can go
ahead and respond to any uh
public testimony or if you'd
like to let the committee go
ahead and ask their questions.
You're welcome to do that as
well. I think that'll be fine,
Madam Chair. I think you heard
100% unanimous support here, and
there were many others that
would have spoken. The only
thing I'll leave you with before
you go to questions is if you
can see the map that I'm holding
in front of you here, everything
that's in red has never been
fully staffed ever for the needs
that we are required for this
service.
Badly, badly need this to get
done. Thank you. Thank you,
Senator Padilla. So first I have
Senator Ramos. Madam Chair, uh,
senator, thank you for bringing
this bill in front of us today.
Uh, just have a few questions.
How does this surcharge compare
to the rest of the state or
national.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair and
Senator. So, um, national
average, the median is $1.60.
Uh, we're proposing a dollar, $1
I'm sorry, um, national average
though is $1.81 so we are 60 or
81% below, even with the
increase that we are seeking
here, and we do believe that
this amount will provide the
services that we're seeking to
implement here.
Uh, so
I, I, I think this is redundant,
but.
How, how badly or what
experiences I've seen throughout
the state on our networks and
this is gonna help?
Uh thank you, um, Madam Chair
and Senator Ramos, know
absolutely the redundancy, the
resiliency, and then it's going
to take us into sort of the next
generation of uh uh video, text,
um, other data communication
solutions which we really don't
have access to in many of the
areas of New Mexico, and this
will also drive consistency
across the state, so networks
will now suddenly be talking to
each other, uh, where they
weren't able to before based on
whatever you might have done
here locally or there locally or
whatever.
Madam Chair, senator, you know,
I had a constituent that told me
they called 911 down in the
Columbus area.
And it went over to the Mexican
side.
And the Mexican side had to call
our dispatch center uh not
dispatch center, but, uh, yeah,
our dispatch centers to dispatch
the ambulance to take care of
the emergency.
Is this going to help in these
types of instances?
I would say, uh, Madam Chair and
Senator, absolutely one of the
key components here is, is
dramatically improved GIS
locating and so that, that
should, I'm not gonna sit here
at all and and say that that's
100% going to be avoidable,
which you just described, but I
would say that we have a much
better chance.
Madam Chair, uh, senator, you
know what?
I really wouldn't have had
trouble with uh proving or
voting for the the hire of the
of the surcharge, but uh is it's
very well needed. It's, it's
something that we, we promised
our constituents that we're
going to take care of and uh we,
we need to take care of them and
this is a big step in the right
direction. Thank you for
bringing this bill. Thank you,
Senator.
Thank you, Senator Ramos, and I
still scratch my head when you
tell me that story, cause it
just seems so and but I
appreciate this effort. Senator
Worth, thank you, Madam Chair
and Senator, I just want to flag
an issue.
Uh, because there's a findings
and purpose clause here that you
are.
It's, it's existing, but you're
adding to it and section 2.
And I just will tell you that I
think there's a very good chance
on Senate floor, you'll get an
amendment to strip this.
Senator Cervantes have been
taking these out everywhere. And
I know you're trying to add
A finding about enhanced
capabilities on the bottom of
page 2.
But I just think that through
because you could lose all the
rest of this section.
Uh, he's really been trying to
clean the
The code up with these findings
and purposes, you know, we don't
ever put them in anymore. If
they're in, we strip them out
and send the judiciary.
But I think there is a chance
when he sees this. So I just
think, think that through is, is
that addition super important to
the bill because if it's not,
you may want to just keep your
findings and purposes
Leave them at the door. Leave
them at the door. That's exactly
right. I'm more than happy to, I
don't think it harms the bill at
all.
Yeah, I mean, it, I don't think
it harms at all. I rather get
out of here with a clean bill.
If I don't know what the
practice of the committee is. I
served on the committee for 9
years, and I, I think we did all
sorts of things in those times.
Yeah, so Mr. Chair, I mean, I,
you also, it's moving on to
finance, and the other thing you
could do is, is.
you get, you've got another
amendment as well rather than
have a bunch of amendments, you
could do a sub and finance and
then it just disappears
completely if you just do an
amendment, and when we open the
bill up, you're gonna see it
there. Uh, but of course, you
could say you amended it out. So
totally you're
Decision. I just, I just wanted
to flag that issue and I think,
and, and my suggestion is think
about it. I don't want to do it
on the fly because because you
could, you could do an amendment
to in finance, and just strip
that.
Change Madam Chair, Mr. Leader,
I, I, you have my word that we
will go through that and make
sure that it's clean by the time
it's, if it hits the floor.
Yeah,
that's all I have. Thank you,
Senator I appreciate your help.
Any other comments or questions
from the committee.
What is the will of the
committee on Senate Bill 137 as
amended.
Move a do passive enville 137 as
amended. Senator Sanchez, I'm
let Senator Sanchez second that.
Have you all rock paper scissors
this. All right, Rebecca, if you
will, please call the roll.
Senator Figueroa
Senator Jail.
Senator O'Malley.
Um, Senator Paul.
Senator Ramos.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator Sheer.
Senator Wirth.
Yes.
Senator Burton.
Senator Hamlin.
Yes.
And Senator Sheridan, explain
your vote before we get the
vote, Madam Chair. He cheated.
He brought my 911 person here
who probably saved my life at
least once.
I've been at it a while.
Thank you all.
All right, I'm sorry. All right,
so on a 9 to 9 to 0, um, you
have a due pass. So
congratulations, Senator
Padilla. Thank you.
All right. I think we are
looking for Senator Munoz who's
going to occupy that seat for
the next 3 bills
and he was just here.
He does not realize how fast
this committee works.
You want to do it?
No.
Gonna wait for Senator Munoz.
Yeah.
Susan, can you go find Senator
Minos?
and he's out. Well, if Shendall
were here, he'd make a tight
joke if he
said Senator Munoz walked in the
room.
Right
I know we don't want to ruin
that momentum.
I do want to extend my gratitude
to the committee for uh having
thoughtful questions, um, on
some bills, uh, on these bills
so far.
So just to give a uh foreshadow
of what's still to come. We've
got Senate Bill 143 from Senator
Munoz as amended.
Uh, they create utility
oversight fund and then increase
various penalties, motor vehicle
and boat violation penalties.
Then Vice Chair Bergman's will
be talking about the childcare
facility loan fund changes.
And
Here we go.
OK.
We have an amendment. It's not
OK, we do have an amendment for
your bill.
I met Senator Munoz for 143,
we're going in order.
143 Correct.
T
This one quickly mare utility
oversight fund is the one we're
doing first. Matt, I'm sure we
are aware of the amendment,
we're not sure that the
amendment will, we need the
amendment at this point right
now, because the PRC may have
figured out a way where we don't
have to.
That sort of change that or we
can fix it in next year. All
right, thank you. So Senator
Munoz, you can go ahead and
start with Senate Bill 143.
Thank you.
Um, Senate Bill 148 creates an
oversight, utility oversight
fund.
But it creates establishes the
fund in the state treasury.
This funds also offers
consistent fees under the
collections under specified
under New Mexico statutes.
As well as appropriations and
voluntary contributions and
investment earnings.
Balancing the funds will not
revert to the general fund at
the end of the fiscal year.
Uh, the fun does inspection and
supervisor fees.
Uh, sets the re regulations for
the utility rates or service to
0.049 of the grocer seats for
the prior calendar year and
payable at the end of each year
in April.
I'll let my expert witness go
into some more if she wants to
get into it cause.
We're gonna sit here for a while
and talk about these.
way.
Thank you, Madam Chair. My name
is Troya Corey. I'm the chief of
staff at the New Mexico Public
Regulation Commission.
Uh, this
Bill allows the public
regulation commission to use the
fees that are already collects
from the utilities that we
oversee to fund our own
operations and as you may be
aware, uh, not only are we at
the center of everything that's
happening right now, and we see
more than 400 cases each year,
but we're also seeing a whole
lot of new.
priorities given to us, I think
the last count is we've seen 30
bills that may affect us this
session alone, um, so this would
allow us to use the funds that
we are currently giving back to
the general fund to fund our,
our own operations.
Uh, it gives the commission
authority to raise that mill
assessment or that fee up to an
indexed price, so it doesn't
necessarily need to increase,
but it may increase if the
commission looks at that need
and justifies that need and
passes that need, uh, it allows
for, um, enforcement of those
fees if they're not paid, the
commission can go to court to
collect those fees and, and
force them to be paid and then
also I think
the other thing that's worth
highlighting is that it allows
the commission to set uh fees
for operational things like
filing a rape case in our uh
agency right now that fee is set
by statute at $1.
So when PNM comes in for their
rape cases, they send us a
picture of their check for $1
and then my records, uh, bureau
chief gets that says, OK, we can
accept the filing.
And we go from there. So it
allows us to raise that too, I
don't know, a rate that makes
sense, but no is no more than
the actual cost of.
Thank you, Senator Munoz. I
corrected. We do need the
amendment. The amendment makes
it uh a non-hit to the to the
general fund, so we do need that
amendment. All righty. So if
If I can, if I can go ahead and
have a member move the amendment
for discussion for Senate Bill
143.
That amendment number is
To, you should have the
amendment, it's in your book,
230779.1.
Thank you, Senator Sher, moving
the amendment for discussion.
We have a 2nd
Second from the entire half side
here.
All right, let's, uh, so, uh, if
there's no opposition, uh, to
the, I'd like to hear an
explanation. What are we doing
here? Uh, we're actually
striking it from going to the
fund to go back to the general
fund, so that it, it doesn't
have a general fund yet.
And then probably come back in
the next year and figure out how
to make that transfer just so
madam chair, this was so before
you were gonna put the fees and
the fund and then allow the PRC
to be able to correct.
Use those fees as needed, and
we're taking that provision.
Oh, correct.
Yeah
Madam Chair, Senator, what it
does is it establishes that the
amendment allows the
establishment of the fund, but
it does not direct the the fees
into this fund.
Um, it also
And that's all it does, so
there's all of the other powers
that gives the the PRC, all it
does is take away that funding
mechanism.
So with that explanation of
that, we have the, the motion
and the second, uh,
Do we have unanimous consent to
have to accept that amendment.
See no opposition? Go ahead and
mark that, all right. Uh,
anything else before we go to
public testimony, Senator Minos?
I think we're good.
All right, so, um, on this, we
are at Senate Bill 143 as
amended those in the audience,
can you buy a show of hands,
show how many are in support of
this bill.
On to
We have 2 in the audience. How
many online are in support?
None recorded, all right, in the
audience, how many are in
opposition of this bill?
Zan
Anybody online? Nobody? All
right, so the two of you that
are in support, if you don't
mind coming on up, uh, we'll
give you a minute a piece.
Good afternoon, uh, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, Mike
D'Antonio with Xcel Energy. We
serve electricity to the eastern
part of the state.
Uh, the commission has enormous
amount of work uh before it and
any bill that will provide
sustainable funding for this
commission is very important. Uh
we alone, our utility has
several cases in front of the
commission when you add PNM and
El Paso to that mix, they just
have a lot of work that is very
critical instrumental to uh both
economic development and
infrastructure building around
the state. So again, the funding
is provided by this bill is, is
a very
Supported by us. Thank you.
Thank you so much.
Good afternoon, Chair Hamblin
and members of the committee,
Sher on horse of P&M P&M stands
in support of the bill we think
the sponsor, uh, for introducing
this bill, it is an important
one. It helps increase capacity
for the PRC and we support this.
Thank you.
Thank you so much.
Again, nobody online, neither
support or opposition. OK, so
Senator Munoz, you do have um 5
minutes if you'd want to respond
to that or we can go ahead and
turn it to the committee. We'll
just go right. Any questions,
questions from the committee.
Thenner worth. Uh thank you,
Madam Chair. I, uh,
It's interesting. I, I, I paused
when I first saw this bill, uh,
because again, the PRC is
changed dramatically under its
new format.
And
You know, I would have had huge
reservations about giving the
PRC some of the authority that
we're giving the PRC in here to
just adjust things themselves,
you know, the fund issue went
away with the amendments, but
having a
Under the old PRC, I would not
have supported this bill.
And I just, and I'm, I'm
encouraged and I just want to
echo what
D'Antonio said and others have
said, I mean this.
we've created a much more
professional PRC and it's
absolutely critical that we give
them the resources to be able to
do the job, especially as you
said, Ms. Corey, when we're
giving you.
30 more bills floating around
here and it just.
And so, again, I'm, I'm
This made me pause, but again,
as I thought it through and
realizing where you are, uh,
even the, even the, the prior
version which would have had a
general fund hit. I was
interested that Senator Munoz
was bringing that in, but he
fixed, he fixed it with his
little amendment, um.
was willing to do that. So,
anyway, just some comments
again. I'm gonna support the
bill.
Man, sure, let me just clarify,
it still creates the fun. Yeah,
understood, understood, but it's
amendment struck the, the
transfer. Absolutely, ma'am
Sharon, creating the fund is
absolutely fine. We're gonna
have a bill on the floor
tomorrow that's going to create
a big fund that has no money in
it, uh, and then we got to
figure out how to get the money
in there, which is what, what
you're going to do.
Thank you, Senator Wirth.
Anybody else?
The O'Malley, no.
And
Senator Sheriffs moves to Duest.
Do we have a second?
Senator Ramos will get you on
record for that second.
All right, Rebecca, if you will,
we have a motion for
A do pass
As amended.
Senator Figueroa.
Yes
Senator had a meal. Senator
O'Malley.
Senator Paul
Senator Ramos
Senator Sanchez.
Senator.
Senator Worth.
Yes.
Bergman? Yes.
Senator Ham, yes.
10 for unanimous a 10 to 0, you
have unanimous due pass.
Congratulations, Senator Munoz,
but you're not done yet.
Oh, in order to go back this,
let me just make a reference to
the PRC. Since the PRC changes
came in place, and we have 3
appointed PRC members, the PRC
has completely changed in it's
time to loosen the reins and
give them the authority in the
funding that they need to do
that without having to come to
us every time, so thank you,
man. Thank you, Senator Munoz.
Now we're moving on.
the Senate Bill 225, the
increased various penalties.
You're welcome. Thank you,
chair, what Cenate Bill 225
increases the fine to $250 from
$50 for littering.
Um, it unauthorized graffiti or
personal real property caused by
a 1000 or less requires 150
hours of community service
instead of just 100.
And graffiti damage over $1000
requires 2200 hours of community
service, up from 160.
It also increases the improper
use of travel lanes for up to
$500 from 250.
And probably one of the most
important is is the violation of
recycling, illegal dumping, uh,
whoever knowingly engaged in
that engages in that is guilty
of a 4th degree felony, which
can carry a fine of 10,000 that
will stand for questions.
All right, so, um, do you want
your expert to speak or is, is
he there just to to make you
look good. He, he brought
bullets
and the taser
going well we'll get out of the
committee
Good afternoon, Madam Chair
members of the committee. Uh, my
name is Alex Rodriguez. I'm a
major with the Mexico State
Police, um, so, uh, I'm gonna
bring up a couple of things with
this bill, uh, touching on the
first one was littering, if
you're walking down the road and
you throw some trash on the on
the side of the road. Um,
currently you're looking at a
$50 penalty for that. If you're
Driving down that same road and
you throw the, your trash out
the window, you're looking at a
$300 citation for that. So we
take it much more seriously if
you're driving than if you're
walking, um, and it's, it ends
up being the exact same
essentially the exact some
offense uh with the uh with the
trash, um, when we're talking
about graffiti and we're talking
about uh things of that nature.
Uh, we have a major problem in
New Mexico with it. So getting
people on board with helping
clean up the things that they're
causing in the first place, we
think it'll have a major, major
impact on that.
Um, as far as the illegal
dumping, if you drive anywhere
around this beautiful state and
you get into anything off road
or you get out in some of the
fields, um, and.
I would bet money particularly
uh when you get out away from
the cities, you're gonna find
areas that you're gonna come
across mattresses and trash bags
and any number of items that
people, it's, it's way less
expensive and easier for them to
just take it out, dump it into
the field. How we respond to
those calls for service on a, on
a very regular basis. Um, we
don't have a lot of teeth in any
of this. Hey, thank you all
right, so we're going to the
audience now. Anybody in the
audience by show of hands and
support of Senate Bill 225. We
have 12.
Right. Thank you. Anybody in the
audience in opposition of Senate
Bill 225.
See none? Anybody online?
None either way. All right? So
we have our two fellows in the
audience. If you want to go
ahead and come on up. We'll give
you a minute a piece.
Mr. Bowie.
Scanlon registered lobbyist for
the United States tires.
We stand in support of this
bill. Um, we're a national trade
association that represents.
11 major tire manufacturers in
the in the United States, we
support a common goal of of
As tires enter into their end of
life. We support sustainable and
circular in its markets.
Um
Scrap tires pose a threat to
public safety and environment.
We think that increasing
penalties.
Strengthens existing enforcement
we support this bill.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
committee members. My name is
Jessie Guil, uh, office of
governor. This is a bill that um
we are very supportive of. It's
part of the governor's push
towards beautification around
the state, um, there is, you
know, the, uh, as was mentioned,
there's a differentiation
between that $50 fine currently
in the 300 if you're driving
down the road so we wanna make
sure that that's, uh, at least
more similar. Um, it also gives
NMED uh more tools to address
illegal dumping, um,
is law enforcement more tools to
do that. So we are strongly in
support of this.
Thank you so much. Anybody else
have an opportunity? Otherwise,
we will go to the committee.
Right. At this point, we have
Senator O'Malley and then
Senator Sher.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I, I'm
sorry, did you, did you also say
that there was a way for people
to do community service if they
violate this, I think you
brought that up for me. Madam
Chair, Senator, that's what
we're increasing. We're not
increasing the penalties, but
on, on community surfers.
Community service for graffiti
penalties.
And so if it's a um petty
misdemeanor.
Uh, then they would increase
service to 150 hours within 6
months.
And for damages over $1000 it
would go from 160 hours of
community service to 200 hours
within 8 months.
OK I'm sure center, so you are
saying that that's after their
chart or they they have a
A fee or or citation for the
initial.
Um
You know, violation, for
example, if they
If they're throwing something
out of the car, then you, that's
the initial citation and then
they have to pay that, but if
it's a repeat, then it's, I'm
sorry, I'm getting confused.
Wait, wait, for, for littering
is a different statute. So it,
it, if we're talking about
littering.
We're increasing it from $50 to
250, depending if you're walking
and throwing trash or in a
vehicle and throwing trash, but
under the graffiti penalties
under the piece of legislation,
we're increasing the community
service.
Portion of the find.
Or 150 hours for a petty
misdemeanor.
And that maybe I don't know.
OK, I'm sorry. Let's go back to
littering.
Right, OK, so because you,
you've kept you in the
comparison about somebody
walking and then somebody
driving and so, um.
So are you leveling out those,
that, that fine for somebody
who's walking and also somebody
who's driving.
Did I miss something here?
Uh, manager, uh, senator, um, so
it, it, it brings a much closer
together. So apparently the fine
for littering if you're driving,
so you have the uh in the uh in
the, in the motor vehicle code
uh 66 statutes of the current
fine for littering is $300 in
the, in the criminal code, the
30 statutes, uh, the, the claim
is currently $50.
Um, so that bringing it up to
bringing that $50 fine up to
$250 brings them much closer
together. OK, somebody who's
walking.
And literary.
It's 250 or something in your
yard or they drop something, you
know, throw something into the
parking lot or something of that
nature. OK. So I, I guess the
question I have is because when
we're taking people walking or
not in a car, a lot of times
you're talking about people who
don't have, you know, they're
unsheltered people.
Is this, is this also apply to?
To camps and things like that.
It, it could, uh, depending on,
um, so even with our shelter
people, they may have stuff
there that that even one of us
it looks like Larry, but if it's
their belongings and that's
their stuff and they're picking
it up and taking it with them.
No, that, that's not going to
constitute littering. It's when
they're someone passes something
out and their intention is to
leave it there.
OK, I'm, I'm just, I was
wondering about that because
we're talking about people who
can't really afford to. I mean,
citing folks who obviously
aren't able to pay anything, it
doesn't.
lot sense we keep doing that and
it doesn't really go anywhere
because obviously they can't
pay, so I was just wondering
about that.
OK, thank you.
Thank you, Senator O'Malley,
Senator Scher.
I'm, thank you.
Madam Chair. So,
There's a couple of things in
here that
The
Kind of bother me here. First,
the uh uh improper use of travel
lane. There are plenty of
four-lane roads in New Mexico,
where the right hand lane.
It's torn up, like 5:50, I think
the snow plow tore up because
it's like a line all the way
down.
Why travel in the left hand
lane?
As it doesn't destroy my car.
That now a $500 fine for not
wanting to destroy my car?
So I'm in the left hand lane
driving instead of the
right-hand lane driving, uh,
Senator, I, I think the officer
who was pulling you over in the
In the left hand lane will
realize that the right-hand lane
is pretty well tore up.
Don't think that would be
excitable violation.
Yeah, Senator Sanchez is shaking
his head like he's got one
before.
And so, uh, I think it's gonna
be up to the officer's judgment
to determine that, but mainly
that is for semis in the right
hand lane.
Um
Yeah, Madam Chervitz, to keep
the semis in the right-hand
lane, then I'm all in favor of
that, but you're gonna give me a
fine. I'm normally the fastest
guy on the road too.
Just barely under where it's a
crime.
You know 72 and a 70, you know,
that's where I am, but uh.
Uh, but this doesn't say for,
for trucks, and I know that's a
big thing, and I, and I agree, I
hate it when uh when one truck
is, that's going 62 is passing a
truck that's going 61 and it
takes 40 miles for him to get
past.
But this doesn't say that. It
just says if, if.
Bills on the road, then it's
wrong.
Uh, Madam Chair, uh, Senator,
so, um, again, um, as he, as he
explained, we, we do have a lot
of leeway and and we do side or
we give a warning to or
something like that, um, when
we, we will do the same thing if
that right lane is completely
tore up, if that makes some
sense, um, but what I can tell
you is oftentimes, um, I, I
can't tell you the number of
times that we're responding to
something that is incredibly uh
an incredibly serious call for
service, um, I could touch on,
uh, our officer that was killed,
um.
In in March last year, uh, we
were responding to a sighting of
the uh of the of the man who
ended up shooting him. Um, as
I'm trying to myself as I'm
trying to get to that location.
It, it is impossible to get the
traffic because you have two
people that set up side by side,
um.
We are trying to deter that. If
there is someone, if there is an
opening to the right on the
On the rough pavement, we have
an option, we have a way to get
around, but oftentimes when we
are responding to a call for
service, uh, for your loved ones
or for, you know, someone in a
in a in a very serious injury
crash or very serious call for
service or something that
something that that nature when
we have that New Mexico
roadblock of cars that are side
by side, that's what we start
running into issues, um, and
it's.
When, when you are in need of
help, how long do you want law
enforcement?
to
Um, and that's, that's what
we're trying to, to mitigate.
Madam Chair, I, I appreciate
that cause the side by sides
irritate me.
But this, the next one is, is
much more troublesome.
The 4th, the illegal dumping.
I agree, I don't like to see
mattresses, and I don't like to
see refrigerators out there in
the middle of nowhere.
But a 4th degree felony and a
$10,000 fine.
I believe, Madam Chair, that a
felony removes your voting
rights.
But we're gonna remove
somebody's voting rights.
Because they dumped the mattress
out there.
Senator, that that is current
law.
And this is only for tires and
illegal dumping.
Read the bill correctly.
And currently, you know, they
charge 25 bucks, I think to get
rid of your old tire and.
Knows to sell you a new one, and
so they charge you disposal fee.
A lot of people are just used
car tire salesman.
Car tires that don't qualify or
are broken down.
ending up in Senator Sanchez's
backyard.
Along the river, madam.
Madam
Baron senator
Currently
In law today,
It's a felony, you lose your
voting rights for throwing a
tire out in the desert.
if you'll refer to page 12,
section 4, like 7, right?
It isn't the criminal code is
right there.
Right?
is on line 22.
And it's determined on the
quantity in the dollar amount of
pounds that
dumped
17 is
Current language is guilty of a
4th degree felony.
Madam Chair, can you give me
that?
A 12 line 7 is section 4 where
it starts so.
Yes, Madam Chair, this is so
guilty of a misdemeanor then now
it's guilty of a 4th degree
felony.
If you go over certain.
And
5000 pounds.
And then it's 4th degree penalty
of 5000 pounds or greater.
misdemeanor for under 5000, 5000
or greater is a felony.
So.
So, Madam Chair.
Just out of curiosity.
How many tires do you have to
dump?
to 5000.
Uh, it depends if they're semi
tires, car tires, truck tires.
Or any byproduct of the entire
industry, uh.
average weight of a semi tire
probably 180 pounds, roughly.
Yeah more than 100
About 180, I'd guess, my guess.
All right.
OK, well, that, uh, that was the
one that concerned me, but so
the 5000 pounds.
Does make a little more sense
cause then you've got a lot of
OK, I was just concerned that
Going away something took away
your voting rights.
Because we've got
Other things that we refuse to
make felonies that seemed to be
much worse crimes.
That was my number one key, but
the 5000 pound one.
I might
OK. Thank you, Senator Sheriff.
Senator Jaramillo.
Thank you, Madam Chair, in rural
northern New Mexico and our land
grants, you'd be amazed on the
amount of trash and illegal
dumping happening, and the top 3
items tires are in that list of
top 3, but my only question is,
senator is what happens if
there's community service and
the illegal dumper doesn't
comply with the community
service center on the on the on
the dumping, there is no
community service, community
service is based on
Um, great, very good, I wish we
could come after those illegal
dumpers on our land gra we said,
both of you will appreciate
this. We've gone as far as even
to look through the trash where
we found uh utility bills to
find out who the person is who's
dumping we found casino gaming
cards to find out the first and
last name of the person. And the
sad news, Madam Chair, is a lot
of them are elderly people who
are paying younger.
people in the community to take
stuff to the dump for them, and
they're illegally dumping in our
member sense. No further
questions or comments. Thank
you.
Thank you, Senator Jaramillo.
Anybody else from the committee,
Senator Figueroa.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I had a
question about the page 12.
Dumping uh addition as well.
Number one says it's a
misdemeanor if it's under 5000
pounds of tire.
Retired arrived 2, if it's over
5000, it's a 4 degree felony.
Number 3, it's a 4th degree
felony if
What
What quantity of dumping and of
what stuff.
Is number 3 talking about.
Bree is just telling us it's a
4th degree felony involves
illegal dumping prohibited by
Jay in section J, which is
So section J of uh section
7413-4.
I, uh, so it pertains to, um, so
this pertains to essentially
disposal of tires, um, and uh
section J is specifically a
person shall not engage in
maintain or allow illegal, uh,
illegal dumping. So even if, if,
uh, for instance, if I own a
piece of property and I'm like,
yeah.
I know you have a tire shop,
buddy. Come on over, just toss
him back there, um, and it's,
it's, it's.
It's not necessarily something
I'm against. I'm just letting
him dump tires illegally on my
property, but uh that that
section that's 74 section is
specific to.
Too tired
I.
Disposal.
OK, madam chair and sponsor,
that's what I was trying to
clarify, did it open it up to
the refrigerator and the
mattress and all the other
things, um.
But if it's specific to tire
material.
Correct, uh 74-134 is the uh is
uh recycling in illegal dumping
Act, um, but it's, it's uh that
entire section is, is dedicated
to tires.
OK, madam chair, I think that
answers it, thank you.
Right. Thank you very much,
Senator Figueroa. Anybody else
from the committee?
Seeing none, what is the wish of
the committee?
We would do. We have do pass
from Senator Figueroa. Do we
have a second?
OK
Senator Bermans, 2nd.
All right, Rebecca, if you will
please take the role.
Senator Figueroa.
Yes.
Senator Jail. Senator O'Malley.
Senator Paul.
Senator Ramos.
Senator Sanchez, Senator Sheer.
Senator Wirth, no.
Senator Bergmann.
Yes
Man.
No.
Record shows Senator Sher
changing his vote to no.
Senator Hamlin. We have 8 yeses.
So an 8 to 2, you have a Du pass
Senator Munoz. Thank you, madam.
So now for your last bill is
Senate Bill 265 motor vehicle
and boat violation penalties
Section 2 of this increases the,
the first conviction for
reckless driving for $25 to $500
and it increases the maximum
buying from 100 to 750, and for
a second, subsequent offense or
conviction would increase it
from 50 to 750.
Um
Section 31st conviction of
careless driving, the
imprisonment of 90 days, and a
fine between $250 and $500 or
both, and this section on the
second conviction, it would go
to 5750.
Uh, with not more than.
6 months of imprisonment.
Section 4 increases the fines
for any missed in a motor
vehicle violation code from the
boat act between 25 and 300.
Ah, to between 100 and 375, it
increases the second fine for
conviction with operating
without a driver's license or an
overweight from 250 to 325, and
increases the fine or further
subsequent conviction from 500
to 575.
It increases the fine for the
2nd conviction.
Uh
For the transport of a reducible
load from 500 to 575, and
increases the fine for the 3
subsequent conviction from
11,000 to 1,075.
That Madam Chair, they're gonna
probably go through those quite
a bit and we'll and you want
anything?
We'll just stand for questions.
All right, thank you very much.
So on Senate Bill 265 by a show
of hands, is there anybody in
the audience that is in support
of this bill.
Record shows none. Anybody in
the audience in opposition of
this bill.
Let the record show none. What
about online?
Known for or against online. All
right, thank you very much. Uh,
that now goes to the committee.
Committee, do we have any
questions or comments or
concerns?
You just dazzled them.
After two other bill
presentation, Senator Munoz,
Madam Chair, you know, currently
some of these are $25. Then we
get pulled over for speeding,
it's really a joke, right? I'm
gonna pay $25 fine.
In Arizona,
Yeah
I haven't got a ticket, but
Senators crossing fingers.
You know, the fines could be up
to $200 and they even have
wasting of a finite resource to
help reduce that in some
situations. And so a $25 fine,
it really is an officer really
gonna pull someone over for $25
for going.
5 or 10 miles, the risk on I-40
is a lot worse to the officer
for what they got to do on the
interstate for who they're gonna
meet, then the $25 fine in in.
We haven't changed these or they
were reduced wind.
Adam chair members of the
committee, so the, the fines in
New Mexico have been these fines
for quite some time, um, uh,
however, uh, with a fix that
adjusted the fees that were
attached to fines, uh, that
changed July 1 of this year. Um,
those fees went to to support
things like uh like jury, jury
duty fees, um, court fees, uh,
brain injury fees, things of
that nature, when those, those
were corrected, and those were
funded separately from these
fees, the fees were removed from
the citations, um, so it left.
only the fines in the state of
New Mexico, so right, right now
the 3 big things that are
killing people on the highways
in the state of New Mexico are
impaired driving.
Excessive speed and driver and
attention. Every single person's
been in here while someone's
texting on their cell phone or
driving down the road and it's
paying attention or they drive
by someone and they're drinking
beer or cruising down the
highway, um, as it stands right
now, if you're driving on the
road and you're eating your
breakfast burrito and you throw
that wrapper out the window,
it's gonna run you again, that
$300 citation for littering. If
someone driving next to you is
drinking your beers or driving
down the road, their first
offense is going to cost them
$25 passing in and no passing
zone. Think about this as you're
coming the opposite.
direction on a curve, and you
find someone in your lane
passing another car. That is a
$25 citation at this point in
time. Chi restraint citation is
a $25 citation. If someone is
doing 100 miles an hour between
here and Albuquerque on I-25 and
a 75 mile an hour zone that is a
$65 citation, um, currently, New
Mexico is number one in the
nation for pedestrians struck
and killed in traffic incidents.
We're number one in the nation.
Uh, we have the deadliest, or
the most dangerous.
of a highway in the nation,
which is I-25 in the New Mexico
area, not Colorado and not
Wyoming, which is where I 25
travels through as well, uh, New
Mexico is number one in the
nation, um, particularly uh for
that dangerous stretch of
roadway, uh, New Mexico trails,
um, significantly behind traffic
safety, um, and again, there is,
there is no teeth, uh, when it
costs someone $25 for passing
into no passing zone, or $25 for
drinking beers as you're driving
on the road, um, it's, it's easy
to see.
Why we're dealing with some of
the issues we are. Thank you,
officer. Uh, any questions or
comments from the committee?
What is the will of the
committee? You are allowed to,
Senator Sher. We have due pass
from Senator Sher or do I have a
second?
Second from Senator Sanchez.
Rebecca, if you will please take
a vote.
Senator Figueroa.
Senator had a meal.
Senator O'Malley.
Senator Paul.
Senator Ramos.
Senator Sanchez, Senator chair.
Senator Worth
No.
Senator Bergman's? No. Senator
Hamlin. Yes.
We have 8
guess it's too much by a vote of
8 to 2, you have to do fast.
Right, next up we have Vice
Chair Bergman's on Senate Bill
175, there is a committee
substitute in your folder.
Then after Senator Bergman's,
then we just have 3 other bills
to go.
And we're doing pretty well,
committee, so thank you very
much.
Senator Gres, whenever you're
ready.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee.
Um, there is a committee
substitute which does not make
drastic changes, just rearrange
things
Um, there is a committee
substitute which does not make
drastic changes, just rearrange
the things
so.
OK. So if I can have somebody
move the committee substitute
for discussion, please.
That
moved from Senator Sheer and
Senator O'Malley, so Senator
Briman, you are free to go.
Thank you.
So Senate Bill 175 is simply a
bill that alters and expands the
uses of the childcare revolving
loan fund.
This one is housed in the New
Mexico Finance Authority, and I
have NA CEO here, Marquita
Russell me today and Shelly
Strong from the ECECD
department.
This fund was created in NMFA in
2003 with the intent of helping
childcare providers around the
state expand the business, their
business is in access with
access to small interest loans.
Since then, it has only been
funded twice, once in 2005.
And then again last year in 2024
with $1.5 million.
In the governor's budget and the
LLC's budget recommendations
this year. There's a $10 million
appropriation that we do expect
to be in House Bill 2. And so SB
175 is attempting to allow loans
from this fund to be
Offered you more.
Childcare providers as well as
offer contract for service.
Options
And to qualify for a contract
for service repayment option,
the childcare provider must meet
certain criteria which is on
page 3 and 4.
That just being located in a
childcare desert, offering
non-traditional hours of care
and some other things.
The bill also expands the loan
eligibility to employers who
wish to offer childcare for
their employees.
And this bill is important
because we have childcare
deserts across our state,
childcare providers have access
issues with capital, with
funding and capital to improve
their businesses and build them
out. And so we're hoping this
will help solve some of those
problems.
OK, at this point, do you, would
you like your experts to speak
at all? Would you like to
introduce yourselves.
You don't mind.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Marquita
Russell with the New Mexico
Finance Authority, and I would
just add to the senators, um,
introduction that this program
again created back in more than
20 years ago, received the
initial appropriation of
$250,000. And because the law as
written prohibits uh a loan of
greater than 20% of the fund
that limited our dollars to
$50,000 or loans to $50,000 a
piece, which really were very
modest expansions and.
primarily home-based childcare
centers. So we were never really
able to hit the intent of the
program, which was to um really
increase the services in
communities. The appropriation
last year opened that door and
we've now approved our first
loan, doubling the childcare
centers in Duum carry with one
loan. Um, so it just goes to
show you that a little bit of
money can go a long way and with
that, I'm happy to answer
questions.
Thank you so much.
Thank you
Good afternoon,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Shelly
Strong. I'm the general counsel
for the Early Childhood
Education and Care department.
Um, I, uh, work with Senator
Bergmans on some of this
language.
We are
Um, make some really important
updates that I have here for
questions. Great. Thank you so
much. All right, so on this, we
are looking in the audience of
those who are in support of this
committee sub for.
Senate Bill 175, so by a show of
hands if you will, 123.
OK.
Uh, anybody in the audience in
opposition of this bill.
Records showing none. What about
online?
One supporter online. So if you
will, the three of you, if you
don't mind coming up.
We'll give you one minute each
as well as the person online,
but we'll get to you after we
get the in-person testimony.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Barbara Luna Tedro, and
I am a provider in Farmington,
New Mexico, and I just like to
say that childcare is the heart
of every community. We are
economic development and we are
a small business, women and
minority businesses like my
women and minority women like
myself in your communities that
are owners who do this sometimes
thankless job day in and day
out.
When we have a heater break or
need a new roof, we can't just
go to the bank because most of
the time the banks look at us
and what our equity and its
children. Well, they don't like
to loan on children. So we have
a really hard time when it comes
for those of us that would like
to do something, grow in our
communities. We've, we wanted to
take a look at what was
available with this loan and
being able to fund it that this
is a way that you can help to
promote small business in your
communities. We are now
competing with New Mexico Pre-K.
with PED for our 3 and 4 year
olds. They get capital outlay
and they get taxpayers' dollars
to grow and expand, and we as
small businesses don't get that
opportunity. So we're looking at
this as a way to help small
businesses. We urge you to
strongly support this. Thank
you.
Thank you so much. Madam Chair,
members of the committee, my
name is Leila Wendell. I am with
the early childhood education
and care department. I'm the
division director of policy
research and Quality
initiatives. ECCD strongly
supports this bill as it
represents a vital step towards
enhancing economic development
and strengthening our
communities. This bill addresses
the critical need for childcare
providers to access capital to
build and expand their
facilities to provide high
quality, accessible and.
affordable childcare, which is
essential for working families
and thriving children.
Expanding the uses of the loans
ensures that childcare
facilities can provide a safe
and nurturing environment for
our children.
Additionally, prioritizing
providers that serve children
enrolled in the childcare
assistance program, especially
in child care deserts and during
non-traditional hours will
greatly benefit those who need
it most. Investing the childcare
infrastructure not only supports
working parents, but also
promotes early childhood
development, which is crucial
for long term.
Success. Thank you.
Thank you so much. All right, so
we do have one person online. We
have Ruth.
Uh, who is also in support,
Ruth, what will happen is, uh,
at the thirty-second mark, you
will, uh, see in your chat box
that you have 30 seconds left to
go. Um, so if you'll be able to
wrap that up, but Ruth, you have
one minute. Go ahead and unmute
yourself and uh you have to 4.
Good afternoon. Uh, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Ruth Porta. I'm the
owner of Esperanza Preschool
located in Rio Rancho. Unlike
public schools which receive
capital outlay funding for
expansion, private childcare
providers have limited access to
loans.
Back in 2016, my husband, an
army veteran, and I applied for
a small business administration
loan, which was a very complex
task that took 14 months to get
approved. In order to qualify
for the loan, my husband had to
cash out his 401k to have the
capital available for the down
payment. By 2018, we had a
beautiful facility to provide
tele childhood education
services to our community.
We see how Capirolalele funding
has helped public schools expand
New Mexico pre-K with private
providers had been left behind.
Everyone is strong, sustainable
early education system, we need
to invest in all providers, not
just one sector. Please support
SB 175. Thank you.
You get the prize today for
being exactly 59 seconds. Thank
you very much, Ruth.
Once again, anybody in
opposition.
Right, at this point, then we
will go to the committee.
Senator Sher and then Senator
Rosmos, um.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So we
have a substitute here, and you
go through what the changes are
in that substitute. Yes, and
they are not drastic, which may
be why it's hard to see them
because it's simply mostly, it's
switched C and D.
And then it also
It fixed the uh the technical
issues that were all technical
issues that were also mentioned
in the FIR.
So instead of
That one part, it, it fixed the
language where it says um as
reasonably adequate legal.
Consideration for money from the
fund, that part is fixed.
Um, and then it also describes
the on page 4.
The eligibility requirements.
At the end of page 4, that the
department and NMFA and just
determine the eligibility
eligibility requirements for the
loan. And yes, thank you. And on
page 3.
Of the substitute.
Online 21.
That was originally where there
was the five-year determination
for the contract for services
for the loan, but it also was
changed to a period of time
prescribed in the contract of
the loan.
So, um
So this is still focused on
small centers and
This can head start.
Centers apply for this loan.
Itar centers to get federal
money.
I'll let my expert answer that
first and then I might add to
it.
Um, I don't think there's any,
uh, sorry, madam chair, uh,
another chair. I don't believe
that there's any prohibition in
a Head Start, uh, applying for
this, uh, as long as they are,
uh, licensed.
That is um one of the
requirements in here. I believe
it is something that we would
consider as they had access to
federal funding, um, and given
the department priorities for
who would be eligible for the
loan and who would receive the
loan.
OK. So, so, Madam Chair, and I
appreciate that. So the priority
really is for the independent,
not hit start, not.
school district, but privately
owned.
Um, Madam Chair, uh, senator,
only private entities, so
either, um, for profit
businesses or not for profit
businesses can access the fund.
OK.
And
I see if I could add uh anyone
that qualifies also would have
to meet the criteria that start
at the end of page 3.
Madam chair and senator, was
that part of the criteria that
changed?
Madam Chair, Senator, the
criteria didn't change that part
was just rearranged, so it still
is.
That it needs to be located in a
designated childcare desert,
provides non-traditional care
hours.
And demonstrates at least 50% of
the children.
Are served that are on a
childcare assistance program.
And a few other things. OK. I'm
sure I understand that this was
just getting the alphabet in the
right order.
Yes, mostly and then fixing the
technical issues in the FIR. All
right, thank you.
Thank you, Senator Sher, Senator
Ramos.
Madam Chair, um, senator, so.
Does, does the entity have to
pay this back in any sort?
Madam sure, so the law provides
that loans may be made from the
fund and that portions of those
loans can be repaid through the
contract for services. So there
is a loan that is made, that's
the guardrails for ensuring that
they're actually doing,
providing the services they say
they'll provide. Um, it's very
similar to a program operated by
the New Mexico Finance Authority
for primary care clinics and for
behavioral health care clinics.
So annually, we enter into a
contract, the, the provider says
they'll do the following things,
and if they do that,
Then they're able to have a
portion of that loan payment
repaid by, uh, those services.
And, and Madam Chair, um,
senator.
What, um
What is the max loan that they
can.
That they can apply for.
Madam Chair of the lots, 20% of
the fund. So that, and right now
that would be about $350,000.
No other questions, ma'am. And
Madam Chair, if I could just
add, we do anticipate that the
$10 million appropriation will
be in House Bill 2 this year. So
the fund will increase to around
11.
Mill. OK. Thank you, ma'am.
Sure.
Right. Committee, any other
questions, comments?
Seeing none, what is the will of
the committee?
Senator Jaramillo and Senator
Sanchez with the 2nd. Rebecca,
if you'll please call the roll.
Senator Fiorov.
Yes. Senator Jaramillo,
Senator O'Malley.
Senator Paul.
Senator Ramos.
Senator Sanchez.
Yes.
Senator
Senator Bergman, Senator
Hamblin. Yes,
we have 10 yeses
right, with the 10 to 0, you
have unanimous due pass.
Congratulations, Senator
Bermonds.
Next up we have uh Senator
Stephanics.
Thank you, um, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. This
is uh about 152 and it is called
County Petition for Cannabis
license pause. This is a request
from one of my counties and
several other individuals to
look at the cannabis permits,
and so this bill specifically,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, allows a county.
To request a moratorium for
cannabis grow permits from RLD
for 2 years.
It allows them to get their
zoning and planning in place, it
allows them to look at their
water rights and the water
needs.
And in particular, uh Torrance
County, if you haven't been
watching the news, has been
having some challenges and their
county came together and
actually passed the resolution
regarding this.
The New Mexico Association of
Counties did their board of
directors did take a vote to
support this particular bill,
they may or may not be here
today.
With me, I have commissioner
Kevin McCall from Torrance
County.
Online, I believe Jordan Berea
is the county manager. He's
under the weather, and that's
why he's on Zoom.
So I'd like to let um Mr.
McCall, Commissioner McCall,
make his statement.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, um, I'm Kevin McCall.
I serve District 1, a two-term
commissioner at Torrance County
and and I'm here on behalf of
Torrance County, um.
We have, we've had some
challenges in the last few years
as you've if you've seen on the
news, we've had a huge influx in
permits. Currently we stand at
25, and I believe, you know,
more are in the works.
And um, so we are, we are having
troubles navigating land use and
zoning code um in Torrance
County, um, with all these
permits that are, that are being
brought forth.
Um, so we reached out this
summer to to our two senator
for, for listening, um, you
know, I, I, maybe, maybe it's.
bold to say that I think
lawmakers were asleep at the
wheel when it came to the
growing side of cannabis.
Um, and us at the county we're
we're struggling with what to do
and kind of how to regulate some
things, but um, if you want to
see a full uh county commission
chambers just uh come see one
when uh planning and zoning has
denied and then we at the county
commission have to uh
Apply uh deny or, or, or pass.
And um so we listened to our, to
our constituents and, you know,
we we're having a hard time
dealing with light pollution.
Odor control, um, and of course,
uh, just the roads and, and the
use of uh of, of our county. So.
That stand with that, I stand
for questions, but we stand in
full support of this.
Thank you, Commissioner. Would
you like your expert online to
speak as well? He's the county.
Thank you, Commissioner. Would
you like your expert online to
speak as well? OK.
Right. So, if you'll go ahead
and speak, uh unmute yourself,
please.
Uh
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, uh,
Jordan Brea, county manager for
Torrance County, um, and I, and
I do want to thank Senator
Stefaniks for this and reiterate
some of the comments that
Commissioner McCaul has made,
um, to put some context to this,
um, you know, Commissioner
McCall did mention that there's
been 25 permits issued, um, for
Torrance County. Um, when you
look at the population, um, as
well as um manufacturing
permits. There's about one
permit for every 488 county
residents, um, and there are
more applications coming in
every day.
Um, we in Torrance County have a
strong uh community uh
agricultural community, um, and,
you know, after the, the passing
of the cannabis Control Act, um,
there was an assumption that we
would see a recreational
cannabis coming in, not to the
degree in which we have, uh, and
like commissioner McCall
mentioned, um, land use, um,
and, and zoning were sort of
overwhelmed and inundated with
the amount of applications
coming in and, you know, we
would appreciate this bill being
passed and an opportunity to
take that pause, um.
To look at current land use
regulations, um, and take a
comprehensive look at our zoning
code to address some of the,
the, the negative ramifications,
um, that, that come as a result
of some of these projects. Uh,
so, um, again, that commissioner
stated Torrance County is in
full support of this, um, and I
appreciate you taking the time
to listen to this today and for
your consideration. Uh, thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you so much.
So Madam Chair, we'd go to
proponents, opponents and your
questions. All right. So we will
go to the audience first just by
a show of hands, how many folks
are in support of Senate Bill
152. We have 123. Thank you very
much. Um, anybody in the
audience in opposition.
Of the bill.
See none. OK. Online, we have
Trey Cole, who isn't supporters
or anybody else who is
registered in support.
OK, anybody in opposition? Wait.
One more in support.
OK, so we have to support any in
opposition.
I'll let you figure that out
while we're gonna go ahead and
go to the audience. So those of
you who are in support, if you
will, please come up behind the
sponsor.
You will have one minute.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Hannah Case Woods. I'm a
government relations specialist
for New Mexico counties, and as
the sponsor mentioned, we are
stand in full support of this
bill. We have heard concerns
from our counties that
Uh, surrounding the regulatory
framework for cannabis licenses
and the number of licenses that
are being issued, and this bill
would allow counties to make the
best decisions for their
communities and their natural
resources, so we urge you to
support this bill.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair,
Scott Scanlon registered
lobbyist for Schwaz and our
Greenleaf, uh, we too support
the concept of this bill, we
support this bill. Uh, we hope
that at some point, a pause be
extended to all three and and
wholesale and retail, but uh we
know that uh the water issue
especially is a is a.
Very serious and critical.
Uh, but we, uh,
Thank you, Scott.
Alright, so we have 2 online
that are in support, um, we'll
have Trey Cole first and then
Ben Leewinger second, uh, Trey,
if you will, unmute your mic.
You will have one minute at the
32nd mark, you will see in your
chat box, uh, that will give you
a thirty-second warning and, uh,
and then if you go excessively
over the one minute, uh, we will
cut your mic. But Trey, go ahead
and go. You've got one minute.
He's he's a little shy.
All right, well, I know Ben
Lellinger isn't shy. So Ben, if
you will.
That he's.
Thanks. Madam Chair, committee
members, Ben Lewin with the
Cannabis chamber, and we support
this bill. The cannabis
Regulation Act passed in special
session in 2021, the final
version that failed to get off
the Senate floor in regular
session, had a component that
permitted, depending on market
demand, the regulation and
licensing department to pause
issuing new licenses.
Unfortunately, this piece was
stripped as the bill moved into
the special, enabling
legislation in every single
other state that took an open
market approach to cannabis
licensing had some sort of
provision in their bill, and the
canvas regulation.
not having that component
remains one of the few major
missteps in how New Mexico
legalized cannabis. To be clear,
we have a lot to celebrate,
including one of the most
diverse group of owner operators
compared to any other states.
However, the fact is that we
probably have too many licensed
operators in New Mexico right
now. There's retail saturation
in most urban areas and were
likely overproducing cannabis to
a significant degree. Cannabis
businesses are not only
competing with each other, but
competing with an unregulated
industry that is still very much
alive and well. While the open
model is how equity was built
into the DNA of our cannabis
industry, which supply that is
outpacing demand and the fact
that cannabis cannot cross state
lines. There is no place for
overproduction to go except into
the illicit industry. One of the
hallmarks of our CRA is that
counties cannot opt out of the
cannabis industry completely,
but that they have a lot of
flexibility in terms.
All right, then we, uh, we, we
cut you off, but we got the
gist.
Uh, thank you so much. Um, and
so at this point, we're gonna go
ahead and go to the committee.
Uh, we have Senator O'Malley.
And then Senator Ramos.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I, I
appreciate this. I think this,
this, uh, bill to enable
counties to make that decision.
Um, because they should have
local control over there, um,
you know, they're their codes,
they're they're building codes
and all their other codes, the
planning, and so, um, I support
that, um.
You know, uh
Albuquerque in the North Valley
in particular, Long Forth Street
is one of those areas that are
saturated with retail.
Um, outlets and you just
You know, and then there's other
areas where you're going through
and you can really smell. I
mean, people have complained
about it. They've complained
about the smell and it's like,
well, you know, I guess too bad,
I mean, that's basically what's
happening.
So I would hope that um you
know, I mean that's something to
consider to enable counties also
to do a pause on, on retail
licensing as well.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator O'Malley.
Senator Ramos, Madam chair of
Senator, thank you for bringing
this bill. I, I really think
there's a lot more regulation
that needs to take place. When I
was here in 2019, 2020, I
believe in 20, there was a bill
that was introduced with no
regulation. We had one with
regulation, um, that we're
trying to get through and it
just uh it just got thrown by
the wayside then when I left,
uh, in 2000, I think it was 20
or 22 they're talking about
there was a bill passed with
regulation and that's what
happens. And there's no
regulation, this exact same
thing happens to your county and
my county and everyone's county
here in New Mexico, it seems
like, so, you know, shame on,
on, on that bill being passed
the way it was and shame that
there was even a special session
to pass a bad bill. So hopefully
in the future we learn from this
and we can uh get together and
and uh.
Create some proper regulation
for, for this industry.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Ramos.
Senator Jaramillo.
Thank you, Madam Chair, as a
former county commissioner,
Senator Stephanics, I see how
this bill works because we know
the dynamics of our county and
our districts, um, we have some
stockmen and ranchers who were
concerned with water rights, and
so I can see how this is gonna
be beneficial for rural New
Mexico counties such as Eriba,
so thank you for bringing this
bill forward.
Senator. Uh, thank you,
Madam Chair. Um, I just want to
push back a little bit on this
being a bad bill. Uh, this took
a heroic effort to pass, and
again, the concept, I think is
Mr. Lellinger said.
Was to start a whole new
industry.
Was it a perfect bill?
Absolutely not. I think the
challenge is when you're
Late night at the end of a
session, and then you're in a
special session and there are
trolley carts full of different
amendments coming through. We
ended up with something that
should have had the amendment. I
mean, the amendment got
stripped. That's the problem,
and, and that, that clearly
should have gone on, but again,
I support the, the bill. I voted
for the bill, and I think we
need to work on.
shaping the bill, but I just
don't wanna leave it on the
record that it was a bad bill.
Thanks, Mr. Chair, Madam Chair,
sorry.
That's all right, that happens
too.
People confuse me for senator
had a meal. Any other questions
or comments.
Senator Figueroa, Madam Chair,
I, I imagine the sponsored in
the FIR there's concern about no
criteria, and I'm wondering if,
uh, you're gonna be considering
adding some criteria for the
division to use to make the
decision yes or no, um.
Because they need a little
guidance, I think it's incumbent
on us to lay that out so they
can hold a line, um.
Madam Chair. Madam Chair,
Senator, uh, my vision was that
there was no criteria. If a
county came forward and
petitioned for a two-year
moratorium, they would be
granted the two-year moratorium.
It is uh assumed uh here in the
language of the FIR that there
would be criteria.
So I think that that would be
flushed out as if this bill goes
forward.
Madam Chan sponsor, then I
wonder about the wording shall
render a decision there, it
sounds like your intent is to
have no decision.
So, Madam Chair, Senator, um, if
the
Um
RLD, the division indicated that
uh it was denied, the petition
was denied, we would probably
have to look to an appeal
process. Uh, Madam Chair, I did
share this bill with the with
the governor's office, the 4th
floor prior to the session, and
we had some fruitful
discussions, but no, um,
embracement or denial, uh, they
didn't support or oppose.
And maybe they'll start coming
and posing or supporting.
Thanks, Madam Chair. Thank you,
sponsor.
Thank you so much, Senator
Figueroa. Anybody else on the
committee saying no more
discussion, uh, what is the will
of the committee?
Senator Sanchez with a pass, I
have a 2nd, 2 from Senator
Figueroa. Rebecca, if you will
please take the role.
Senator Figueroa.
Senator had a meal.
Senator O'Malley.
Senator Paul.
Senator Ramos. Senator Sanchez.
Senator Sheriff.
Senator Wirth
Yes. Bergman.
Yes, Senator Hamba. Yes.
We have 10 yeses, and 0 nos.
So 10 to 0, you have a due pass.
Congratulations, Senator. Thank
you very much, Madam Chair and
members of the committee.
All righty. So I'm gonna give
this over to the vice chair, um,
Whenever you're ready, madam
chair.
So weird. First time I've been
on this side of the mic this
time around. So thank you very
much, Madam Chair and Committee,
uh, Senate Bill 267 really
addresses issues of um making it
fair for our locally run
apartment complexes, landlords.
We are fully aware.
Of the issues that face those
experiencing homelessness, and
this is one of those things that
contributes to it, but we know
that our communities thrive when
everyone is housed. However,
rent prices are at a historic
high and excessive fees that
have been tacked on to rental
agreements are preventing those
most vulnerable from getting
their own apartments or homes.
The problem here is that SB 267
is an effort to remove the
arbitrary and I wanna, I wanna
stress arbitrary junk fees that
renters are forced to pay if
they want to get into an
apartment or home. This bill
creates a fairer rental market
for New Mexicans rather than
profiting off of their hard
earned income while they try to
secure housing.
What this bill does is it
ensures transparency and making
sure that landlords must clearly
disclose all fees associated
with rental agreements upfront.
We will talk about how some of
those fees and you'll understand
why this transparency is needed.
Tenants also must be notified of
any fee changes during the
course of the lease. This also
assists in regulating fees by
allowing landlords to charge a
screening fee, security deposit,
and late fees.
It also caps tenant screening
fees at $50 rather than the
average of 5 of $100 and
increases accountability and
efficiency for landlords and
tenants.
And this is also where tenants
can reuse their certified screen
reports. What's happening is
that landlords, if somebody is
looking for an apartment or, or
and they're going to different
apartments, they have to pay
this fee every single time to
get this certified screen
report, um, and this will allow
them to use it for multiple
applications, therefore reducing
their costs if they are looking
for multiple apartments or homes
looking for the best deals,
looking for neighborhoods, uh,
that they feel safe and
comfortable in and so on. And
then this also capsulate fees
for nonpayment at 5% of the
delinquent base rate. Um, ul
what this bill does is it
protects consumers from
predatory fees, especially from
those mortgage companies that
are from outside our state that
are profiting off of our
residents. This promotes
economic stability, preserving,
uh, it preserves affordable
housing and prevents
homelessness, and ultimately the
rental junk fees exploit our
renters and preying on those
with limited financial resources
and at this point, um, I'd like
to introduce my expert is Rachel
Biggs, who is the chief strategy
officer at Albuquerque Health
Care for the Homeless. Also on
Zoom.
We should have uh Serge
Martinez, uh, Elizabeth Ellis
from the New Mexico Center for
Housing Law. And so at this
point, I would like to give my
expert an opportunity to say a
few words and then we can go
ahead and go to public comment
if you'd like, Madam Chair.
Good evening, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. Thank
you so much for the time this
evening, um, I will just add
that I believe we all want to
live in communities where people
can access safe and affordable
housing and do that readily and
quickly, and this is a
relatively easy solution to a
large housing crisis. It won't
solve all of our problems, but
this is something that we can do
right now and I've been hearing
from a lot of people that we
want immediate solutions and
this is a a relatively quick
solution that we can institute
to ensure that people are able
to access.
housing faster.
We want to make sure that
everyone regardless of their
income stage in life, health
status can access housing. We
also believe that this is a
public safety approach. This is
a priority of the public safety
coalition. There are 11
organizations that have
supported access to housing as a
key strategy to address public
safety. We are safer and our
communities are safer when we
are all housed.
And we believe this is also a
key strategy to address housing
availability and affordability
I'm really excited to see some
of the responses from state
agencies that are in support of
this as well as a key strategy
and tactic, um, and I'll just
add a little bit to what we are
seeing as a service providers,
we are seeing fees increasing,
especially when it comes to
accessing housing, and that's
why we wanted to focus on that
piece, um, upwards of $100 for
application fees, but also we're
seeing holding fees
Admin fees, and these fees are
largely non-refundable, um, and
are creating a lot of barriers
for people to access housing and
stay housed. And with that, I'll
answer any questions. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair, and at this point we are
welcome to go to.
Public testimony if you'd like.
Did you want your experts on
Zoom to now, they'll, they're
here just for uh reference if we
need. OK. Thank you. Thank you.
by a show of hands, how many
people in the committee room are
in support?
OK, I count 15, and how many in
support online.
Another any in opposition in the
room?
Count 1
And any opposition online.
You.
So do we want to do?
8
8 people.
Total
So with the 1st 8 in support
like to line up.
And then you'll have one minute
each.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair. I'm
James Freeman. I'm an advocate
for the homeless in Albuquerque.
I'm here today to speak in
support of MB SB 267. I
experienced homelessness in
Albuquerque myself in 2016 and
2017. I utilized the housing
voucher in 27, 2017 and 2018. I
understand firsthand the
challenges of securing an
apartment while unhoused
landlords and property managers
use ever increasing fees to
prevent homeless individuals
from renting their properties
despite the lack of
evidence showing that those on
housing vouchers are more
likely.
To cause are less likely to
cause significant damage to
those apartments. I urge this
committee to pass 267 and help
bring economic stability to our
vulnerable population, passing
this bill will provide immediate
relief to reduce the barrier for
people facing homelessness.
Thank you.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Mone Silva
and I'm the executive director
of the New Mexico Coalition in
Homelessness, and we stand
strongly in support of SB 267.
Homelessness in New Mexico has
surged over the past 5 years,
and our current data indicates
that we will follow the same
alarming trend this year.
The coalition operates multiple
homelessness prevention programs
across the state.
And witnessing firsthand how
undisclosed, arbitrary, and
excessive fees are being
unfairly added to move in cost.
These financial barriers
disproportionately affect New
Mexico's lowest and most
marginalized tenants, preventing
them from securing stable and
affordable housing. Your support
of SB 267 will help break down
financial barriers. We strongly
support um the committee to
support 267. Thank you.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, my name is Arturo
Castillo and I'm the director of
equity and culture at
Conservation Voters New Mexico.
There's no secret that we are
currently living in a climate
crisis and those who experience
the worst of its impacts most
immediately are people without
housing or shelter.
Anything we can do to prevent
more people from experiencing
homelessness.
is a step towards protecting
more people from the climate
catastrophes happening around us
on an almost daily basis.
For that reason, conservation
voters stands in strong support
of this legislation. Thank you.
Madam Chair, um, and members of
the committee. Thank you for
hearing us. Uh, my name is
Karina Lopez. I'm the executive
director of the Interfaith
Community Shelter at Pete's
Place.
Our agency is a low barrier
shelter, but one of the things
we pride ourselves on is helping
people secure permanent housing.
Um, there are many challenges in
that effort and um hidden fees,
arbitrary fees are one of the
big ones we run up against when
trying to help individuals, um,
and as a parent of a college
student to college students,
it's also a personal challenge
for our young people who are
trying to rent for the first
time. So this affects different
populations, families, not just
and how low income, so I urge
you to please support this bill.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Kara and
I'm speaking on behalf of
Ecuador in New Mexico in support
of Senate Bill 267. I believe
this bill is crucial for
protecting tenants and insure
fair housing in New Mexico. The
cost of housing has increased in
the past few years and
additional rent expenses such as
the predictable fees are putting
a burden on residents.
These fees are arbitrary and
often unpredictable, and they
make it even harder for people
to be able to afford rent.
Members of the LGBTQ community
are exponentially more likely to
experience homelessness, and
young people are more likely to
be disowned and have to find
affordable housing without their
families's help. Supporting this
bill would not just help the
queer community, but everyone in
New Mexico, including low income
families, and it would help
prevent homelessness.
I've personally been burdened by
administrative fees that had me
choose between food and being
able to pay my rent in full.
As a queer person, being able to
have secure housing was
essential to my well-being, but
it was complicated on several
occasions due to these fees.
A to supporten a bill to 167 to
help all New Mexicans afford
housing. Thank you for your
time.
Madam Chair, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, my
name is Winter Torres and I am
the founder and CEO of New
Mexico Eviction Prevention and
diversion. Uh, we are one of the
groups of the aforementioned
Public Safety Coalition, and we
work on eviction every day. We
have seen that these fees and
let me say, they're just
endlessly creative. So, um, for
one complex in Albuquerque, if
you want to take out your own
trash, you can, but you still
have to pay the trash concierge
fee. So there's just no way
out of it. I myself had to pay a
$100 fee per month in order to
go month to month, which is the
default in um in the law, and we
are also seeing in court, um,
they're wrapping these fees in
and they're calling them rent
and so they're, they're.
Getting to the court, basically,
um, and we see this pushing
folks out into homelessness, we
need to be working on all ends
of the housing continuum, and
that includes eviction, which is
a
Chair and members of committee.
My name is Kat Sanchez. I'm the
policy director for Bold
Futures. We are a statewide
organization by and for black
indigenous women and people of
color.
And when we do policy work, we
center community leaders, not
just from urban areas, but from
rural as well. And what we've
heard time and again, is people
are getting nickel and dimed out
of being able to have safe and
affordable housing. We urge a
due pass. Thank you.
Hi, my name is Amy England. I'm
with uh Amador Health Center in
Las Cruces, where many of our
clientele are um
Unhoused people experiencing
homelessness and also the very
lowest income who uh are at risk
of becoming homeless.
And uh many of these people
As they're trying to get into
housing may take months to save
up.
The several $1000 it takes for
uh first and last month's rent
security deposit.
And even a couple of $100 of
surprise fees at least signing
is enough to continue the cycle.
And send them back into starting
that process.
With all new application fees,
so we
Thank you, and we'll go to 2
more online in support.
Terry Storch, you'll have one
minute and then after that,
Kurt.
Rager
Terry, you have one minute.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair and
committee members. Uh, my name
is Terry Storch, and I speak as
a community member and as a
landlord of nearly 30 years in
favor of SB 267. I've read the
bill front to back, numerous
times. And there's nothing in it
that should cause opposition
from any ethical, rational,
fair, and businesslike landlord.
When my husband and I were
landlords, we would call the
prospective tenants references,
and then would give the tenant a
copy of the uniform, owner
resident in relations, uniform
owner resident relations Act. We
would ask her first, last
month's rent, and a damage
deposit. We did not do a
background or credit check and
needed no other fees or
provisions in the rental
contract to make us feel secure
and compensated. Under this
bill, landlords can still charge
for screening with a reasonable
exceptions noted. Fairness to
renters must be safeguarded in
this era of housing shortages.
From the perspective and
speaking from the
perspective of a landlord, this
bill establishes some key
fairness provisions and causes
no disadvantages to landlords.
Please pass SB 267. Thank you.
Thank you, Kurt. You have one
minute.
Good good evening, Madam Chair
and members of the committee.
This is Kirk Rager, director of
Lutheran Advocacy Ministry of
Mexico, Lutheran advocacy also
represents the position of the
New Mexico Conference of
Churches. I'm here to speak in
favor of FP 267, the interest of
time, I'll simply say that could
occur with the comments made by
Senator Hamblin and the bill's
expert witness and those
speaking before me with the
magnitude of our current housing
and homelessness crisis, we must
take every opportunity to remove
barriers to keep the Mexicans
from getting into.
housing or pushing them out in
this bill is an important one.
The positive outcomes of SB 267
make it low hanging fruit,
please grab it. Lutheran
advocates ministry and the New
Mexico conference of churches
urge your support for this bill,
and thank you for the
opportunity to share our
position this evening and for
your service, this session.
And Madam Chair, I believe
there's one more person that
came online and support before
we go to opposition.
It's Nicole Martinez.
I don't have that on the list
from the Zoom operators, but is
there a Nicole Martinez?
Yes. OK. Nicole, you have one
minute.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Nicole Martinez. I work with the
unhoused population at the Massa
Valley community of Hope in Las
Cruces. According to a January
study released by Pew Median
Rents in New Mexico increased by
60% from October 2017 to October
24, more than 27%.
For the rest of the nation. In
addition to the rise in rents,
hundreds of units once available
to us have been swept up by out
of state corporations that have
tacked on burdensome junk fees,
making it even harder for
federal and state vouchers to be
used to help get people indoors.
One company bought up at least 7
apartment complexes where we now
see a $100 holding fee, even if
we can get a deposit to the
landlord in 20 minutes, a $150
administrative fee and numerous
credit checks and pet fees.
In order to effectively and
rapidly rehouse people and
provide more consumer protection
for housing. We need junk fees
to be eliminated. Please support
this bill, SB 267. Thank you.
Thank you. And now we'll go to
opposition.
We have one in the room.
And then there are 2 online.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name's Randy
Trainer. I'm the um registered
lobbyist for the um apartment
Association of New Mexico, um,
first off, I'd just like to say
that we're not too far apart on
this, we, we get the disclosure
part and the transparency part
of this bill. We think there are
some things we could do to
improve it.
I just want to note that in
2021, there was a major rewrite
of the owner resident relations
Act that the apartment
association drove.
And uh that bill, unfortunately
died in Senate Judiciary
Committee. It was not the fault
of the apartment association and
died for other reasons.
We stood by our word. The reason
I mention this is that for two
reasons, one is that, uh, I
think we've shown the
willingness to work with other
people to resolve these issues,
and 2, I would just like to note
that there are 5 or 6 bills
currently in the legislature
dealing with the owner resident
relations Act. This bill is a 30
year old bill.
And I think it's time that we
seriously consider a rewrite of
that, and um and finally, I
would just like to close with
the thought that
Our housing problem is the
housing supply problem.
Thank you very much.
Thank you. Online we have Alan.
You have one minute.
Um, Madam Chair and committee,
my name is Alan Lisek and I'm
the executive director of the
apartment Association in New
Mexico. While we completely
agree with the transparency as
Randy just said, we do have some
concerns with the language in
this bill. Uh, first, the word
fee is not clearly defined in
this bill. The bill also
requires written notices for
fees and written receipts, which
is really not consistent in a
digital age. This also requires
a manager or owner to hold onto
a screening fee. Therefore, it
would really have to be cash or
check only and almost nobody
keeps cash for.
reasons on site, and very few
runners carry around a
checkbook. This complicates the
screening process for renters
and owners under certain
circumstances, the screening fee
must be returned by mail,
destroyed or available for
pickup. Once again, this doesn't
really make sense in a digital
world unless the intent really
is for cash or check only. Um,
as mentioned, this also does
allow a tenant to bring their
own credit and background check,
but it doesn't specify from
where or what the info would
include, you know, there's not a
bank or credit card company.
your mortgage company and so on
that would allow you to do this.
So respectfully, we oppose this
bill as written. Thank you.
Thank you. Next up we have Jean.
advance?
Go ahead.
Vance and I'm an attorney
practicing in this area, um, and
also general counsel for the
Department association. So some
of my technical points would be
the same as Mr. Sacks, um, there
are the concept is, is, is not
something that is objectionable,
but we need to clear some things
up. We keep talking about junk
fees, but there's no definition
in this bill of a junk fee. And
what's a junk fee and what is
legitimately
something that a tenant pays for
to get extra above and beyond
what some what others get, such
as a parking space where they
want it or some other service.
Um, we, there needs to be some
kind of a definition about what
a, a junk fee is, and that's
kind of basic to the to the
entire bill. Um, the other thing
of course is is bringing your
own credit report. How does the
owner even check out if that's a
credit report without running
their own credit report. So
we're kind of in a circle with
that one, and I would just urge,
as Mr. Traynor talked about that
we maybe work together and, and
see if we can get some better
solutions. Thank you.
Thank you.
And I'm sure you have 5 minutes
to respond to I appreciate that.
I, I would like to clarify a
couple of things. Um, you know,
when we're talking about uh
access to housing. Yes, we are
talking about a housing supply,
but we're also talking about
joblessness, we're talking about
cost of living, we're talking
about a number of things that
can impact somebody, whether or
not they have access to uh a
home or an apartment. Um, there
was a comment about the digital
age, uh, you know, when folks
are spending $150 to $300 on an
administrative fee. So we,
we're, we're not saying just
junk fees, we're actually
identify.
those fees. Administrative fee
$150 to $300 account managing
fee, $6.50 a month.
Uh, application fees can go
anywhere from 35 to $150 per
applicant a month, uh, and then
an apartment holding deposit,
which is $100 to $200 which
doesn't guarantee that you get
an apartment. And so if you're
looking for 3 different
apartments because you're trying
to find the best, the best cost,
the best situation for you, you
have to pay $100 to $200 each
time with no guarantee that you
actually get that apartment, um,
you know, we're not addressing
all of the ongoing tenancy fees.
Um, what we're doing is
We are going specifically on
these fees were also uh the
transparency issue is also
giving our local apartment
owners and landlords an
opportunity to see what these
out of state corporations are
charging. They can't compete
because they don't know what's
being charged by other
companies.
And so this is really leveling
that playing field, but also not
putting in these extraneous fees
that are keeping people from
having access to homes or
apartments. And when we're
talking about the overall issue
of homelessness and people not
having access to it. This is one
of those things I often say is
I'll finish up, I often say when
we're looking at an issue, we
look at it as like the tire of a
bicycle. You've got the issue
here in the middle and then
you've got all of the different
elements around it that are the
spokes of the tire. If we look
at one issue, we are doing a
disservice to our members and to
the people who are
constituents and residents of
the state by looking at just one
spoke, we have to look at all of
these different things and I
feel that those are the issues
that we're addressing in this
session. One of those is the
financial barriers for people to
have access to rentals, uh,
either rental apartments or
homes. And so at this point,
Madam Chair, I'm, I'm, uh, I'm
fine with, um, with the public
testimony if we wanted to go to
the committee.
Thank you.
Commit, are there any questions,
Senator O'Malley?
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um
This is not a rent control bill.
OK. So, as a landlord, I could
just tack these fees on and I
could say that's the rent.
And I could get all those fees
that I wanted tucked into that
rent.
I want to make sure that it's
not a rent control.
And
And this is, this is the reason
why. This is, you know, whether,
you know, someone mentioned
there was, we have a high
housing crisis and we do, and
that's why there's so many bills
and so much money that's going
to be appropriated for
affordable housing, and
typically when you do affordable
housing, it's subsidized the
public.
Dollars go into housing so that
you can have rent control.
Uh, for whatever period of time,
depending on your, your
development agreement with, with
the developer. It could be 30
years or it could be permanent,
um,
But money goes into that
project, so that you can have
that kind of rent control or,
or, uh, so that folks have some
stability.
But when you're talking about
the private sector or the
private rent, I am very
concerned about that because I
consider that a property right.
I have rental units. I have the
right to rent, quite frankly, I
can just decide what the red
would be if I, if I want to look
at the market. You mentioned,
you know, we could find out what
other people are, are selling
now, quite frankly,
I, I don't charge market. I
think it's more important to
have people in there that take
care of it, and so I'm not, you
know, I don't feel like I'm
abusing that issue, but I also
feel like because uh there's no
subsidy in there, it's private.
I don't, uh, you know, I own it.
I think it's a private right,
it's a property right, so.
So I think that, you know, in
terms of fees.
I think it's also, it needs to
be clear what we were talking
about in terms of peace, but
when we talk about
Homelessness and, and yes, it
has to do with the cost of
housing.
That's why we're trying to build
more housing.
Uh, we have a, uh, uh, it's a
somerset as someone mentioned,
we don't have enough housing.
Um, I know that the market's
building housing too, and that
helps to to to have competitive
situation out there, but um,
So
So what, let's just look at
something here, and that's item,
that's number 2, and that's item
10, which says applicant means a
person who makes a request to
rent a dwelling unit to an owner
and who agrees to act as a
guarantee or co-signer.
So I guess my question is, an
applicant makes uh houses
available. Somebody's approaches
the landlord and says, I would
like to rent this dwelling unit.
And um they they have they
agreed to be a guarantee or
co-signer.
So what does that mean? Does
that mean that that the landlord
is required to accept that
application, uh, I'm just a
little concerned about this, and
as someone who's developed
affordable housing, I understand
the concerns. I mean, I'm a big
supporter of affordable housing.
And again, when I see, when I
talk about affordable housing,
it's a housing that is
subsidized, that has a term
associated with it to make sure
it's long-term affordable, and,
and it's really
We we decided we define who it's
affordable to and HUD makes
those decisions about, you know,
80% or below the median income.
We look, we look at all that
criteria so that we have
certainty, so I, I'm just a
little concerned about going to
the private market with these
kinds of things. Thank you,
ma'am. Sure.
Madam Chair, I'll let my um
expert address that.
Madam Chair and Senator
O'Malley, thank you so much for
your comments. I would like to
address what I think might be
some confusion about the fees. I
know a lot of comments were
about ongoing tenancy fees, and
I think you're concerned about
us regulating those types of
fees and telling landlords what
they can charge monthly, um, is
actually a little bit of a
misunderstanding, uh, because of
the comments. But what this bill
is trying to regulate and why we
don't have a definition of junk
fees in the bill is because
we're not trying to regulate all
of those junk fees actually,
people were talking about.
Some of the troublesome fees
that are are challenged for
people, but we're trying to
address the transparency of
those fees. So just like when
you're shopping for an airline
ticket or Ticketmaster, and you
see the total cost of what that
ticket will cost you before you
press, I'm gonna buy this.
That's the piece that we're
trying to address with this. The
one thing that we're trying to
regulate in terms of fees and
you might still have a concern
about this, so we can, um, if
this is still a concern, we want
to regulate the, the holding
fee, the admin fee, any.
associated with accessing that
unit that is not a screening
fee. So we're OK with the, the
tenant screening fee that makes
a lot of sense. It costs the
landlord money to do that
background check. That's uh
identified in the bill. Um, we
did not go into defining a junk
fee because we're not trying to
regulate junk fees as it is. We
are trying to regulate the
upfront fees to getting into
housing, um, that's
Clearly defined here when we
talk about what fees are
permissible. So the fees that
are permissible to access
housing is that application fee
up to $50 for screening, um, and
then the security deposit first
and last month, we're not
changing anything else in
landlord tenant law. It's solely
to get into housing, um, the
ongoing tenancy fees are
definitely an issue. I know
there's a lot of um national
community advocates, the
National Consumer Law Center has
given us guidance that we should
get rid of all application fees,
all ongoing tenancy fees. We
felt like that was a.
step too far and we wanted to
first address the access to
housing and make sure people are
able to um know what they're
getting into when they're
signing up for a lease, but then
also access housing a little bit
quicker, um, really concerned
about the admin fees, the
holding fees that are
non-refundable.
Madam Chair, if I may continue.
I think though that
The
The folks feel like this is
going to all of a sudden make
housing affordable.
And it's not, because we still
have the market, and it's gonna
dictate what the rents are.
So that's my concern. It's, I, I
agree with everything you're
saying that we are the, the, the
rents that are being charged
now, um, that is what people
have a problem or something
happens in the family where
somebody loses their job,
they're very vulnerable, and
that means they could lose the
house. That makes a situation
where they're where they become
homeless.
So, um, again, uh, I know
there's some bills out there for
millions of dollars for housing,
uh, this, this kind of money,
this money would go to those
projects that would, would make
those rents stable, you know, I
think that's really important,
so thank you. Thank you, Senator
Sher. Um, thank you, Madam
Chair.
You know, so yesterday I talked
about collection agencies today,
I'm gonna talk about.
reports because I do that, also
own property.
So
You're starting to embarrass me.
I know too much about too many
things, but, uh, but we've
already talked about what is a
junk fee, and since that it it
seems to me it's totally
arbitrary, it seems to me that
that just opens up the door for
an attorney to sue me because
he's going to come in and say,
Ah, you know, that was
arbitrary.
That doesn't make it affordable.
All it does is make an attorney
rich.
And make housing less
affordable.
And
Since it's arbitrary, there's.
You can't do it.
All, all you're doing is is
employing more attorneys.
Um
Credit reports
Today or 25 bucks.
It's a couple 50 bucks, probably
less than 50 bucks.
But that's not what they were 10
years ago.
not what they were 5 years ago.
And so in here we don't have any
room for inflation.
OK
Um
And so while 50 may be OK for a
credit report, if you want to do
a criminal background check,
that's more.
And it depends, uh.
I don't do criminal background
checks, uh.
But
But I can see in some
neighborhoods where that might
be a good idea.
So now the $50 doesn't cover
what needs to be done.
Um, and why does that need to be
done? Because I don't want
anybody destroying my.
My house, I certainly don't want
a drug operation going on in
there, and then the feds seized
my house.
But I still owe the bank for the
house.
That's not fair. We talked about
fair.
My dad
And it doesn't make housing more
affordable, it makes it worse.
The one thing that really got me
though was the full disclosure
of all terms.
That tells me that we have to
put the entire contract up.
Which is, you know, it's one
thing, as you said, OK, so you
go on Priceline and da da da da,
but that's
That's not all the terms.
Not the entire contract.
And yet I believe that when you
say all the terms.
That means the entire contract.
That don't make any sense.
OK.
Um
But as an owner, I want
occupants. I'm not trying to
drive people off. I want my, I
want my places.
Occupied
How I make money. I don't make
money on empty place.
OK
Um
But I also want them occupied
with good occupants.
OK. People that
Not only can pay but will pay.
There are people that can pay
that don't.
There are people that struggle
to pay, but, but do they try,
they, so I want people that can
pay.
And will pay
And so you get that from history
or background.
Um
But the
The last part of this that I
really want to touch on.
My first year here.
Representative Patty Lindstrom
and I both brand new legislators
who've known each other for
almost all of our entire lives.
We're tasked with
With psychiatrist and
psychologist.
Licensing
Neither one of us are
psychiatrist or psychologist,
and I don't even know the
difference.
Frankly
But what happened there is after
a lot of
Everybody being upset, I think
it was in this very same room,
in fact.
We made chairs, we made them sit
around that table, and the two
of us left.
When y'all have a deal,
Come get us.
And then we'll, and then we'll
work out how the words are and
make sure that the.
The, uh, language is right in
the bill.
It took them days.
But both of them wanted
something, it took him days to
come up with that.
In the meantime, I got to catch
up with Patty, who I hadn't seen
in a long time, even though we'd
known each other most of our
life.
I think that's what needs to
happen here. There were people
working on this from
The apartment association,
other, you know, people that
rent houses or whatever.
And for whatever reason, that
got all sidetracked.
Bring them in.
Sit with them.
OK, what can we do to make this
make sense, because they want
their places occupied as well,
but they don't want them
destroyed. They certainly don't
want the feds coming in season
their apartment building because
there's drug deals going on in
there, so sit with them and talk
about it, cause I think there's
room.
I know this room.
You don't have to make
The small
people, I mean, I'm not an out
of state corporation that owns
30 apartment buildings.
Own houses.
So
I think there's a giant
difference between the people
that own houses.
In the out of state
corporations.
Even the out of state
corporations and us can and make
sure we're not, we're doing the
right thing.
I do want to make sure that
we're not.
I can't say that multiple
syllabic word cause I can't
remember what it is.
Conflating
Homelessness with with apartment
rental or home rental.
The
The real reason we don't have
enough housing right now.
It's because we have so many
regulations and laws and
stumbling blocks. They're
getting in our way of being able
to build houses.
Build apartments. It's just
expensive.
And it starts from burning down
our forests if we manage our
forest right, we'd have 2 by 4
if you had 2 x 4s in New Mexico,
you'd have houses.
cheaper houses anyway, cause you
have lumber instead of hauling
it in from Canada.
That makes it unaffordable, just
right there.
Insurance costs.
Because of various things, make
it unaffordable just right there
having to add an EV charger to
every house that doesn't have an
EV.
Makes it more affordable, like
unaffordable, like.
$25,000 more.
If we want to have more housing
and
And we do need more housing,
know about that.
We need to move these other
barriers.
A lot of barriers that are
making that happen.
And it's not junk fees.
Especially since we don't know
what junk fees are. So honestly,
Madam Chair and senator.
In insincerity.
I would ask you to sit with the
with the other side.
And come back with a substitute
bill.
And you're the chair, you can
schedule it as quickly as you
want.
But, but I think that once that
done, you probably get a
unanimous vote.
Today we have a contentious bill
that I don't think has to be.
So with, with that, I, I, I'm
serious about that.
So, thank you, ma'am.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Senator. Um, you know, one of
the things and and I agree with
you on some things that, you
know, the housing issue is is is
very challenging and I, I, I do
want to be fully transparent
that for 4 years I was the chair
of the board of directors for
the Mosi Valley Community of
Hope. And one of their ways of
addressing, um.
Lack of housing is uh at the
moment, they're building a 50
unit apartment complex on the
campus of the community of Hope.
Um, you know, this is also one
of those that is, uh, in some
cases, there's the camp that is
transitional housing, the 50
unit apartment complex will help
people, um, and there is an
agency that is overseeing that.
Um, however, we're also not
wanting to punish homeowners,
and I would like to to let uh my
expert witness address that
issue that you and also Senator
O'Malley have brought up because
uh there are some, I think, uh
things that need to be kind of
uplifted in that conversation.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Senator, I really appreciate
your comments and I do agree
with a lot of what you're
saying, um, I wanna address the,
the issue about punishing our,
our smaller landlords and folks
that are contributing to our
landscape of affordable housing.
What we're seeing, um, in the
data is that it's not our
smaller mom and pop landlords
that are charging these fees,
and again, we're not talking
about the ongoing tenancy fees,
the junk fees. We're talking
about the
to get into housing and um I've
heard from a lot of landlords
that are smaller a lot and we
heard one comment this evening
too, and you might not be
charging those as well.
I know we're all charging
application fees and screening
fees, and we're OK with that
again, that's part of this
legislation, but it's the the
admin fees, the holding fees. We
really want to level the playing
field for our.
Our homegrown landlords here in
New Mexico.
It's better for everyone when we
can see the true cost of housing
for everyone. So if a small mom
and pop doesn't know what a
larger corporation is charging
because those fees are hidden.
It's hard for them to compete
because it may seem like that
unit is affordable, but not to
your unit.
Or 2, it may seem like it is
affordable to your unit, but
then when that person gets into
the tendency, they didn't
realize some of the undisclosed
fees, and it actually is.
Less affordable, and then you
lost out on maybe a really great
tenant for your unit. And so
we're looking at a way to level
the playing field for folks that
are here that have the smaller
properties. I think we even
heard from some folks in
opposition that they're largely
OK with a lot of what's in the
bill. Um, I think.
Some of the confusion around
the, the junk fees that we're
not trying to regulate those
ongoing tenancy fees. That's
fair. I know the, the landlord
tenant law, um, sometimes it's
hard to dig into and understand,
but hopefully it's clear and I
think it was clear in the fiscal
impact report and some of the
analysis that we saw with this
bill is trying to address is
really those excessive fees,
the, the time that it takes for
someone to go through the
application process, not
necessarily the, um, the ongoing
cost of that unit, we agree that
the, you should be able to.
charge whatever the market can
bear and the market works itself
out in that way. Um, and so
that, that's a, a really good
point and I we're not trying to
address total rent costs, we're
not trying to regulate how much
an ongoing tendency would cost.
We're trying to regulate what it
costs to get into that unit or
simply to apply for the unit,
even if it might not be
available.
Yeah.
Thank you, Senator Ramos. Uh,
Madam Chair, Senator, um, is
there any other states that have
a similar bill?
I'm sure I'll let my expert
respond.
Madam Chair and senator, yes,
there are 13 other states that
have bills that look at
different forms of regulating
late uh regulating fees in
general. Some states regulate
all fees that in Massachusetts,
you're not allowed to charge an
application fee, for example,
some states, um, just regulate
those ongoing tenancy fees,
which we are not doing. Some
states regulate the application
fee similar to what we, we are
proposing with this bill. So
there are 13 other states that
that do this.
Madam Senator, um, we have
affordable housing problems.
homelessness throughout the
state of New Mexico, and that's,
that's always tough for all of
us because we hear about
everywhere we go.
Um, but supply and demand always
takes over.
And I agree with a lot of the
comments that Senator O'Malley
made.
Um
Also, Senator Sheer.
Um
But it seems like this problem
is more in the urban areas.
You know, um, in the rural
areas, we don't have this type
of um that I can see.
Um, and is there anything in
this bill that would stop a
landlord from getting these fees
and just putting it into the
rent.
Madam Chair and senator, no,
cause we're not regulating the
types of fees that they can
charge and and adding it to the
rent, what we're trying to
accomplish is that you would
know the true cost of the
rental, so that transparency
piece and and that's madam
chair, um, senator, and that's
my point. I mean, if, if they do
away with these fees, all they
have to do is turn around and
put it into the actual.
Um
It's supply and demand, and not
only that, but since they're the
big corporation.
And they applied these these
into that rent, then it's gonna
drive up costs for everybody
because usually a smaller
landlords look and see what the
what the rate is throughout our
area.
Madam Chair and Senator, that's
exactly the point, and I, I
agree with you and I think what
we're already seeing is that
rents are increasing in the
market.
People can charge whatever the
market will bear. We're not
talking about rent control, um,
and
Because of this, I think you are
exactly getting to the point
that we want to be able to
compare costs across different
landlords. And so if you don't
know the true cost, it's really
hard for a smaller mom and pop
if you're in a rural area and
you don't have access to good
information about what's
happening in the market. You're
at a disadvantage and so we want
to create some more transparency
so that people can compete
across the market and across New
Mexico. Yes, people could add
more fees into their tenancy.
Yes, people can raise their
rents, and if the market can
bear that, they, they should do
that.
They can do that and that's
what's happening across New
Mexico. We've seen rents
increase 60%. I agree this is
not going to address our
affordable housing issues. We're
talking about addressing an
issue of access to housing
getting into housing, um.
We heard this argument with a
source of income discrimination
legislation in Albuquerque, and
we were told that rents would go
up and people would pull out of
the market and people did not
pull out of the market, um, and
I think what.
We want to be able to know is
what what is truly happening. We
want to have the data, the
information, and I think that
advantages are smaller, uh,
landlords here in New Mexico.
And we've heard that from our,
our smaller landlords.
Thank you, ma'am, sir.
Thank you for a second time,
Senator O'Malley, did you? Yes,
I did want to make a comment
because I just wanted, did you,
I just wanted to respond to um
Senator, um, she's um comment
about, um, you know, the
regulatory.
That that's one of the reasons
that housing isn't getting
built. All you have to do is go
out to, you know, that, you
know, go to our Albuquerque and
Sorios, and there's, I don't
know, hundreds of apartments
that are getting built.
Those are, I don't know if
they're affordable housing
projects or not, I, they're,
they're, uh,
There's a lot of them, right? So
there's a market still for
apartments, and I think that the
developers are seeing that there
is and there they're basically
building a lot of housing.
There's uh several apartment
complexes that are going up
around um uptown in Albuquerque,
city of Albuquerque's got like
10 projects that, that, of
course, they're looking for
funding so that they can fill
the gap, um, and of course, you
know, I have to admit that that
cost of construction has gone
up. It's gone up quite
substantially, so that's also
a challenge.
Um, but I don't think it's the
regulator, I don't think that's
what's going on, uh, obviously
when you're, when a city is
involved or a county is involved
in building housing, they have
to build to the highest standard
that's required. And so they're
gonna build that standard and
it's good because that, you have
a high quality project that way.
Um, there's a project going up
my house, we, we actually
changed the zoning along the
corridor to allow for higher
density. Uh, there was a lot of
pushback about that. That's just
along the quarter. There's
another issue that we're dealing
with because we don't want to
see apartment complex in the
middle of a R1 zone. I mean,
that's probably very common, but
I think that, so there's a 60
unit affordable housing projects
going uh just basically across
the street. So we support those
kinds of projects, and I think
that, that, you know,
So, uh,
So I guess what I'm saying is I
don't think the regulations are
getting in the way of the
private sector and also the
nonprofit sector and the public
sector to build housing, so I'm
glad to see that there's all
this activity going on, I think
that's gonna help, you know,
with the supply issue, um, and
so, you know, I don't have an
issue with transparency. I, you
know, obviously important that
people, you know, know what
they're getting into contract
fees, etc. I don't have an issue
with that. I was just kind of
concerned because it's almost
like
If we do the, if we support this
bill and all of a sudden it's
gonna sort of, you know, deal
with the issues of, of
affordability, of of
homelessness and we really don't
have any control over the rents
in the private sector. So that's
basically was my concern. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator Paul.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Senator,
I won't, uh, uh, I had several
concerns uh similar to uh
Senator O'Malley and Senator
Sher, um, but I'll be a little
more targeted and just with the
questions that I've got, um, I'm
a, you know, owner of some small
residential rentals as well, and
some of these things I think
are, are ambiguous at this
point, and so that makes it
tough for me to think that, you
know, we're talking about mom
and pop owners across the state.
Well, how are they going to
know? I think there needs to be
some.
more clarification to some of
these things, uh, Senator
Scherer had pointed out in
Section 2, the new material
that's talking about all terms
of a rental agreement or to be
published in a listing.
I would agree with him. Does
that mean the terms of the
entire rental agreement, lease
agreement that the owners
looking to have somebody signed
has to be published, and where
does that have to be published?
Are we talking about only
listings that are online.
Or for the mom and pop owner
that puts a for rent yard sign
up or they have to now staple a
rental agreement to that, um.
Adam, sure, I'm gonna let my
Madam Chair and Senator, great
question. Um, this is to ensure
that before a tenant pays the
application fee that they would
see those fees, and so the terms
is in relation to the fees.
It's, it's not all terms of the
lease. I can have a Serge
Martinez, Professor Martinez
addressed that from a legal
aspect too, if he, if he is able
to.
Not, I, I would say that the,
um, the intent of this is that
those fees are disclosed upfront
before the person spends the
money on the application fees.
OK. I mean, it's, it's just a
little confusing to me cause the
section reads an owner shall
disclose two applicants, all
terms of a rental agreement.
Doesn't specify anything about
These
Senator, what page are you on?
Thank you.
Yes, uh,
Madam Sharon Senator. So this
section here.
It specifies that including the
base rent that will be assessed
and description of all fees or
charges that will be assessed
during the residency, which
shall be itemized and readily
identifiable in the listing. So
that is meant to describe.
What we're referring to in terms
of terms. OK. Thank you.
then just another question that
I had that, you know, had been
echoed by several that were in
opposition to this.
They rarely do you find that you
can take, you know, a background
or a credit check from one, you
know, that's issued in one place
and have it be valid in another,
and I find that, you know, with
technology these days, I mean,
you can get on Adobe Acrobat and
you can draft up any type of
document that will, that I, that
you want.
I
I have an issue with
Allowing somebody to bring me a
credit check that may or may not
be valid, how do I authenticate
that?
Madam chair and Senator, great
question. I think we have this,
I would have the same question
then for how we deal with
references, how we deal with
employment history. I think you
could do the same thing there,
and that's part of current law
and what we do as landlords to
check them.
Good question.
Thank you.
Oh
I think that answers all my
questions. Thank you, Senator.
Thank you, Chair.
Is there anyone else?
Senator Figueroas.
Thank you, Madam Chair, I think,
um,
This bill reads to me pretty
much like a false advertising,
um,
And transparency bill, right?
It's
It's put all the fees up front.
Publicly, so people know what
they're getting into. It's a no
surprise billing kind of bill,
which we outlawed in medical
practice, not that many years
ago. So all of those pieces is
even sounds like everyone agrees
on those parts from the various
constituencies and stakeholders
who spoke.
The part that seems to be
causing confusion is.
The upfront.
And that is, it's a confusion of
terms. We're using the word fees
like it means all of these
things, and we need to
differentiate, and you use the
term the ongoing tenancy fees.
The monthly fees, that's.
Added into rent, but that's what
we want to make public, so
people can see what the total
cost can be.
The turkey part of the one time
fees that happen in the
application process and
how you make those transparent
or how you control those or
limit those seems to be the
other part of this bill, and
personally, I'm, I'm OK with
both of them. There have been
great comments, Madam Chair,
about clearing up language about
Bringing it into the digital age
on some of these references, um,
and things that could be in here
to make it better, and I think
the right people to work with
are probably in the room here
already, so I hope that happens.
Um, but I wanted to clarify,
Madam Madam Chair, and make sure
I understood the two separate
parts of this bill.
The transparency, no false
advertising, no surprise billing
piece, and then the upfront
obstacles to renters getting
into the building.
My concern, Madam chair with,
what I'm seeing, and I don't
know if you can concur, is, um,
in places in my district, those
kinds of one time upfront fees
are being used to select out
different kinds of people that
are going to be accepted for
rent in ways that would normally
be prescribed as illegal.
Um, and, and we want to prohibit
that. I don't think anybody here
wants that happening.
Um, if you'd like to comment,
feel free. I just wanted to
clarify the understanding of the
bill.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
senator. I agree with you. That
was a good summary of the bill.
Thank you for clarifying that,
um, and I, I, I will add in
terms of the language.
We put in the bill that aside
from a screening fee, shall not
charge other fees to process an
application. So this is the, the
section around the definition of
the fees, instead of trying to
define every type of fee that
could possibly come about. We
wanted it to be very specific to
entrance into housing and at
application, so that's screening
fee and that you shall not
charge other fees to process an
application. And I think we
could have gone down the route
of identifying every type of fee
that might.
come up, but I don't think that
makes a lot of sense and would
probably be more confusing.
Madam chair, I completely agree
and want you name the fee and
prohibit the fee, it'll just get
a new name.
So that doesn't work, but if we
call it the entrance fees, maybe
to at least clarify in our
conversation, um.
There was also some conversation
about defining what constitutes
an acceptable credit report and
that probably also Madam Chair
needs clarification, but there
are so many elements to this
bill that
Need to move forward. I am happy
to support it.
Thank you, Senator She.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair.
I just want to ask, Madam Chair.
If you're amenable,
Just pulling this bill today, no
vote at all. Working with the
other side and bringing it back
next week.
I, I think that solves a lot of
Our, our concerns, and it would
be better, frankly, if we had a
unanimous vote instead of party
line vote again.
Senator, I appreciate that um
that concern about that. Um, I
do wanna like inform the
committee that this will be
going to the judiciary and so we
will have those conversations in
judiciary, and I'm sure.
Well, Madam Chair.
OK
But you still need to work with
the advocates before it gets
there, because we'll have the
same fight only probably worse
on the floor.
If we can't
Settle it. You want to settle it
there. I think that's a much
harder place to settle it,
frankly, but because, well,
I don't know they have
attorneys. um.
But if it gets there.
I just
To my recommendation is that we.
Fix it
With the advocate, the other
side.
Sure, is there no other
discussion. I, I, I would like
to, quite frankly, work and I'm
happy to work with others too.
to get the language just
clearer. I think there's just
too much ambigu ambiguity in the
bill, and so my understanding is
if, if I could move to table it
and we could get this hopefully
done, and then we could move it
on. I think it needs to be
cleared up, so I make the motion
to table and I'm not gonna just
let it sit there. I want to work
with the advocates to, to get
things.
No, that's not what I hear.
Yeah, if there's a motion table,
it's not debatable, so we'll
take a roll call vote.
Vote, if you vote yes, then the
bill is tabled and if you vote
no, Bill is not tabled and we're
back on the bill.
Madam Chair, may I have
clarification. My understanding
is not dead.
OK, I don't want to kill the
bill. OK, all right, all right.
I
OK, call the roll, please.
Is there a second for the table
link?
Sure.
Senator Figueroa noted.
Senator had a meal. No.
Senator O'Malley, yes.
Senator Paul.
Senator Ramos.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator share.
Senator Wirth
Senator Bergmann's.
So
Senator Hamblin.
We have 5 no's and 5 yeses.
Oh.
Oh, say that that's a title on
tabling, so that fails. So we
have senator Wirth.
To pass motion.
Is there a second?
And her home meal.
Will you please?
Senator Figueroa.
Yes.
Senator Harra, yes.
Senator O'Malley, no.
Senator Paul
Senator Ramos
Senator Sanchez.
Senator Sheer.
Senator, Senator Bergmann's.
Yes.
Senator Hamblin.
We have 5 yeses and 5 nos. So
with a yebo
bill is in limbo. Madam Chair, I
move it to pass with no
recommendation.
Is there a second?
OK, we're on a
Motion for a due.
Station we call the role.
I'm sure it's a debatable
motion, so I think there's a
question about that, it's good
we can have the discussion. I
think that's fair, given new
members.
Senator share, would you like
to?
Um
So
Madam Chair
table means that it doesn't go
anywhere, do pass means it moves
on to the floor, but do pass
with no or no recommendation.
Means that on the committee
report, it says without
recommendation.
But the committee report still
makes it to the floor. The bill
still moves on to the next
committee.
Uh, without
What both of us are concerned
about, that it be fixed.
And, and so I think that's for
everybody's edification, that's
what it means. No recommendation
still means it's moving on down
the line.
And the
Wording on the committee report.
It says without recommendation.
doesn't mean anything to
anybody, nobody outside this
room even knows what it means.
Half the people on the floor
don't know what it means.
So
That's, uh, that's what it is.
So, again, from where I am,
Madam Chair.
Please work and fix it, and then
we'll pass it Monday.
Tuesday, whatever. And so
that's.
That's what it means.
So I here.
If I could just explain the
rationale for my no
recommendation and what I was, I
don't ever explain my vote, but
I was going to here.
And again, I'm, I'm kind of
channeling Senator Cervantes and
I'm, I'm the one who sits on the
Senate Judiciary Committee and
I've had a bunch of bills in the
Senate Conservation Committee
with a ton of legal issues, and
he's like, this is not the place
to rewrite those bills. My
concern, this bill's, I was
gonna say, you you're gonna need
to sit down and you're gonna
have to do a whole bunch of
heavy lift.
To get it to a place where it's
gonna get through the Senate
Judiciary Committee. My concern
is if you're going to sit down,
do a whole bunch of heavy lift
to get it through this
committee.
And there's gonna be a whole
another lift there and maybe
that's what needs to happen.
That is the way the process can
work.
But it would seem like.
You know, doing that work,
potentially bringing in an
analyst from judiciary to let
them know where you are.
And again, it's early, so it
could go either way, and I, and
I appreciate what Senator
Scherer is saying, but again,
that's the reason.
I was supporting moving it to
the next step, because again,
we're not the judiciary
Committee and I, and I've got a
lot of the same Senator Paul's
question is.
But on about the confusion of
that language and it needs to be
cleaned up for sure.
Madam Chair and senators, thank
you very much, and I do
appreciate and bring you a bill
that that won't give you as much
heartburn as it is right now.
the
Senator O'Malley, thank you. I
just want to thank you for
explaining this, cause, uh, you
know, that, and that makes
sense, um, Mr. Leader, uh, that
we, you know, we're, I think
you're the only attorney here. I
don't know.
Um, and so to get it to the
judiciary, I think that's
probably the important thing to
do, so I will support that
motion. Thank you.
Anyone else?
With no other comments, please
call the roll for the new pass
motion without recommendation.
Senator Figueroa.
Senator had a meal. Senator
O'Malley, Senator Paul.
Senator Ramos, Senator Sanchez.
Senator Sheriff.
Senator Wirth.
Senator Bergmann's.
Senator Hamblin.
Yes, and
to
OK.
Go ahead. Thank you. No, I, I
appreciate the thoughtful
conversations, um, and, and the
request to clarify that
information. And so I do want to
commit to those of you that have
concerns about that, that I will
keep you updated on those
conversations and the
clarifications of those terms as
we work together with um all
parties that are going to be
affected by this because I, I, I
do think that we all see the
merits of this, and I'll
understand the impacts of this,
but I also appreciate um if
there are any of the flags that
are popping up that
That that caused concern for
you, so I do want to commit that
to this committee, um, that I
will be doing that and updating
you probably more than you want.
So thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you. Thank you, Senator Sanchez,
do you wanna explain? Thank you,
Madam Chair, and you answered my
question, it's very hard to vote
yes on that, but I trust in you
and
We want all the updates we can
get. Thank you.
Thank you. And I, and I do feel
that we've, we've been able to
build that, even though Senator
Sheer may not.
Um, I certainly do, Madam Chair,
and I appreciate the
conversation. So thank you very
much.
Thank you finally it was a 7 to
3.
Go ahead. Thank you. What was
the vote again? 7 to 37 to 3.
Thank you very much, Madam Chair
and committee.
All right, Senator Brantly, last
but not least, um, this is a
bill that we will hold because
this is an opportunity to be
considered for a tax package if
there's deemed uh uh capacity
for that. So you're welcome to
go ahead and start
and
and I do hope you consider it
before you as the New Mexico
rail infrastructure tax credit.
To summarize the real very
briefly, it provides a 50%
corporate tax credit on the cost
to maintain and replace
existing.
roads Limited at $5000 per mile.
And the second component is a
50% tax credit for all new rail
construction and improvements.
That's a million dollars per
project capped at $6 million but
considered that on the high end
of that tax credit, a $6 million
credit would have meant that the
rail lines had already in the
ground, put $12 million
investment in.
Just to even qualify for that.
Uh, this is certainly not a
handout by any means, but it is
an incentive to encourage
economic development, especially
in our rural and remote areas of
New Mexico.
This bill you have seen before,
it was originally champion, uh,
by my friend, uh, Senator Sy
Hemphill and myself that same
year had uh introduced and
passed the rural ombudsman and
together had identified some
leading priorities that we
thought rule New Mexico would
benefit from.
It has since received the
endorsement of the rural
Economic Development Interim
Committee, we've seen great
presentations on the benefit
that this would have uh to areas
like the industrial park of
Santa Teresa, some of the mining
areas and industry, tribal lands
have expressed the need to
extend rail lines into their
areas and so it really is an
incentive for any of our state
that is just willing to go the
extra mile to bring commerce to
market. Um, I'd like to
introduce my friends here, Ryan
and and Jeff with the railroads.
allow them to quickly introduce
themselves and we'll stand for
questions.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Jeff Van Scheke with
the Southwestern Railroad, just
a couple of quick thoughts on
this. I've been in the rail
industry for almost 20 years and
when I first started in old
railroad guy told me that it's
our job as railroad owners to
steward these railroads as best
as we possibly can while we have
them. De railroads in Demi and
in 2020, we knew that five years
prior, it was one of the most
unsafe railroads in the country,
and we've put a lot of effort
into stewarding that.
Um, appropriately so that
In 100 years from now, it'll.
Um, the sad fact is New Mexico
has lost over 500 miles of track
in the last century. This bill
reversed, hopefully I think
without the support.
A lot of small roads are going
to lose opportunities to
Have their customers expand
their infrastructure or bring to
grow the economy.
I've worked with a lot of other
states on programs like this and
What we find is twofold one,
programs like this.
dramatically boost investment
and economic development, and 2,
the return on the credit.
I thank you all. Thank you so
much. Uh, good evening, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
my name's Ryan Pey with
Mickelson and Company work with
uh Short lines in New Mexico and
also across the country helping
finance rail infrastructure
improvements and facilitating
economic development projects.
I, I know you're all tired. I
know some of you have seen this
bill before and um at the end,
you're gonna need to make some
decisions on what the state
invests in and what's what ends
up in the tax package, and I can
tell you from the
Short line industries'
perspective and the customers
they serve.
This is a good bill.
This, this drives investment,
it's very specific on what the
investment is, it's in the
infrastructure that's going to
go in the ground and last going
to provide tremendous public
benefit in the sense that it's
gonna boost safety.
It's going to create jobs, and
it's gonna take trucks off the
highway.
But at the same time, work with,
work with industry to, to drive
commerce. Um, the economic
impact on, on programs like this
is significant, um, there's 12
states that have implemented
similar type programs on
average, they see a 40 to 60%
jump in uh investment in rail
infrastructure, once these
programs are put into place, um,
a prime example would be the
state of Oklahoma, and they did
a program in 2006, at the time,
the state spent $4 million a
year.
on rail infrastructure
investment for short lines and
economic development. Last year
they spent somewhere north of 25
million. So it, it is a proven
model if you look at what's
happening at the border plex of
the Santa Teresa railroad, one
of the, one of the key
components of this bill is it
provides an industrial
development tax credit.
The off ramp to connect from the
rail network to an industrial
park or a customer is $3 million
a mile. And a lot of times that
is the gating factor on whether
a project happens or not in the
state or somewhere else. And so
we, we ask your strong support
of this. It it's it's gonna help
the short lines, but more
importantly, it's gonna help the
customers they serve, and it's
gonna help rural New Mexico. So
happy to answer any questions,
appreciate your time.
Thank you so much, uh, just by a
show of hands, is there anybody
in the audience in support of
this bill?
123. OK, anybody in opposition?
So not anybody online?
Going online. All right. So, um,
I'm gonna let you come up and
you've got a minute a piece.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Tony Tru.
I'm the registered lobbyist for
Freeport.
Uh, mining company that's
largest employer in southwest
New Mexico, and the largest.
Copper producer in New Mexico,
uh, this, uh, we employ about
1100 employees and about 300
contractors at this.
operations, we have an operation
in Chino and one at Tyrone.
This bill is is real critical to
us in that this rail line is the
one that supplies.
Brings in uh uh supplies to our
operations and takes out our
products, supplies.
Such as uh fuel such as uh
acids, such as uh steel balls
for our, our meals.
Such as uh uh mining equipment,
and it takes uh out our product
which is our concentrate.
I appreciate the senator
bringing this forward as uh it's
real critical for operations
down in southwest New Mexico.
Appreciate your support of it.
Chair members of the committee,
Robert Romero, registered
lobbyist for BNSF Railroad,
these short lines are our
partners and help us to move
move products across.
Madam Chair members of the
committee, my name is TJ
Trurilo. I'm a registered
lobbyist for the town of Silver
City and Grant County in
southwest of Mexico, uh, in
addition to this bill really
helping our largest employer
being Freeport. We view it as
being an economic development
opportunity for the Southwest
area, uh, as, as the presenters
discussed short line rail
development is.
Very expensive, and this would
be an important economic
development opportunity for that
area.
Thank you very much.
All right. Thank you so much.
Uh, at this point, uh, we go to,
uh, comments and questions from
the committee, Senator Ramos.
Madam Chair and Senator, thank
you for bringing this bill in
front of us today. Um, seeing
the growth in Santa Teresa,
Santa Teresa Port. I'm sure this
is going to be a real big asset
for us down in southwest New
Mexico, being that we also have
the Lescombe Saint Clair winery
that ships, uh, uh, through
railroad through all over the
United States and New Mexico. I
think it's, it's just something
that's gonna very a benefit
Southwest of Mexico in that
aspect. Also, umport McMorran,
if we can get
copper out to uh make sure that
we keep costs down for the EV
cars and everything else we're
trying to do with solar. I think
it's just gonna benefit everyone
so thanks for bringing this bill
and I don't have any questions,
just want to make the comment.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator Ramos. Senator
Sanchez. Thank you, Madam Chair
and Senator for bringing this, I
echo what uh Senator Ramos said,
I, I don't have any questions, I
just appreciate you bringing the
bill in the rural areas that I
represent, this will be a great
thing for economic development
and for the stuff that goes on
in our my counties that I
represent.
Uh, railroad, you know, any
growth in the railroad is more
jobs, more job economic
development.
It's jobs all the way around, I
I I support it 100%, so thank
you, Senator for bringing it,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator Sanchez.
Anything else from the
committee?
We're not voting on this. Nice
try.
All right now,
um, so you were probably one of
the quickest bills to go through
our committee tonight. So thank
you very much. Um, at this
point, so we're gonna hold that
and we're going to put that into
the list of bills to be
considered, should we have
capacity for a tax package, so
we'll keep you updated. Thank
you very much. Thank you
everybody for coming committee.
Um, I would like to thank our
analyst Lisa Kathleen, John, and
Monica committee, we went
through a big ambitious, uh,
agenda today and our, our
analysts are doing their best to
keep up.
with us, so thank you all very
much. We are adjourned.
