Just for
To be consistent or the tax.
Ah!
Bills. We hear him and we hold
him and we will consider them as
part of the tax package and so
forth. So just so that
We're not taking action on any
of the the
The tax credits and
Bills and so forth. So
With that we will go ahead and
have the clerk called the role
Thanks.
Here.
Signature Adamia.
Senator Lopez
Senator Sanchez.
Senator Smitty's Senator Tom and
Senator worth
Senator Hamblin, Senator Shindo.
We have for corn.
Good. All right, So before we
get started, I'd like to
recognize or former chair of the
What was then the Senate. Uh
Corporations Committee
Committee.
Senator. Thank you for being
here.
So with that we'll go ahead and
call on Senator Tollman Senate
Bill 315.
Senator Tallman. If we can hear
the top 10 reasons why we should
not hold your bill.
So you want to. You want to
So you wanna you wanna start
off? Just kidding.
Go ahead.
Well, thank you, Mr Chairman,
members of the committee.
Very pleased to present the
House Bill 315.
I'm sorry. Senate bills already
cleared the house.
Is that
Certainly cleared the house
built two different number, but
it cleared the house.
No.
Another example where it wasn't
kept informed.
Anyway, this, uh
Still crazy. A tax credit for
purchase of least
Purchase release An electric
vehicles plug in how I do it
like
Hybrid electric vehicles or fuel
cell.
And also provides
Tax credit for charging units.
So there's three categories that
are covered number one new and
used electorate.
New and used hybrid.
And doing use fuel cell number
two. It it covers purchases and
leases of at least three years
and number three.
It covers home and commercial
scale.
Chargers.
Mr Chair. The
Just sauce. The credits are
transferable as well as
refundable.
So they're refundable from the
standpoint if
Hello, income persons.
Tax liability is less than the
credit and you'll get a cash.
Check for the difference.
And also the they're also
transferable.
And that the transfer the credit
is directly made.
To the dealer.
So why? Why are we doing this?
Well, because I could give you
10 reasons why electric cars are
Heard have such
Yes. So many benefits.
And but
One of the primary reasons that
is that
Transportation emissions are the
second largest source of
greenhouse.
Yes, Emissions in the New
Mexico.
So we have one of the worst
hotspots of pollution.
In the United States.
Down in the southeast corner,
and you know we have robust
Laws governing robust gas and
oil regulations.
Governing the industry down
there. But guess what?
We may have robust
Regulations, but we don't have
robust
Enforcement.
According to a recent report
from the unit. New Mexico
Environment Department states
that would take 6.5 years to
inspect all air quality permit
teas and 2.5 years to inspect on
groundwater.
Quality permit East. Just
another reason why we need
electric so
The
The
Secretary of Environmental
Department was quoted as saying
With this text tax credit,
Mexicans will soon have greater
consumer choice as new and used
clean vehicles will become even
more.
Affordable.
So
The credit, Mr Chair.
Is it starts out
And, um, 20 January of this
year.
And for the first three years
January 23 calendar You're 2425
and 26 $3000 for a new
E. V s 2000 for plug ins 1500
for used and $1000 for
previously
Uh, owned plug ins.
And then it
Mr Khouri gradually decreases.
Over the next three years. 2027
2028
And in 2029 ends in this summer
of 31 2029.
Gradually decreases.
Rates. I just told you that's
all the final year 2029. It's
only $960 for new $640 for plug
in $480 for you, Stevie.
And, uh, $320 for used plug in
So there is also, as I said, is
tax credit for charging units.
That's a $400 for the purchase
and installation.
Of a
Level two Charger.
Um
Which
Would take about anywhere from
48 hours to charge your car.
Overnight. Most you see and
garages
Sympathy technology keeps
improving so that probably
within
Within 4 to 5 years will be even
faster.
Mr Care. There's a $25,000
credit.
The purchase.
And installation of commercial
scale direct current charges.
Obviously, there would be used
at commercial establishments and
And large, multi
Um, multiple unit apartment
complexes in a can cost up to a
quarter of a million dollars in
credit. Is that so?
That Mr Chair is the
The thrust of the of the bill,
and, uh
I would now like to, um
Very capable.
And long serving.
Secretary of tax and Road for
additional comments. Good
afternoon, Mr Chair members of
the committee. It's pleasure to
be here with you again. I'm
Stephanie Chardon Clark,
Secretary of the Taxation and
Revenue Department. Also here
today. Sydney lineman She is the
deputy secretary of the
Environment Department. If we
have any questions about
technology of these vehicles or
anything like that,
So I think the sponsor did a
wonderful job covering the
overview of the credits. I'll
just add, um, that the bill
contains identical credits for
the personal income tax and the
corporate income tax. The
thought there is that under the
personal income tax if an LLC or
partnership can take advantage
of this credit, so should
corporations. They're just it's
just a different formation of
business. But the credits are
limited to one credit per
taxpayer per year.
And so what We've tried to do
there is contained the fiscal
impact and not allow larger
business to use multiple credits
to generate a whole fleet of
vehicles that will better target
the fiscal impact to smaller
businesses. If they choose to
use this, they can just just by
one. I'll add to that. I
anticipate there could be
questions about the phase down
of the credit. The bill does
not.
Contain an aggregate credit cap.
We didn't want any taxpayers to
end up in the same boat as we've
recently heard about what this
solar tax credit where we've
reached the cap, and then some
every year, and taxpayers are
frequently denied the credit.
Um, what we did instead is we
targeted that in any given year,
any given fiscal year, the cost
of the credit would never exceed
more than 45 Million general
fund impact.
And so that is, is the phase
down phases down after those
first three years to be 74% of
the full credit amount in tax
year 27 49% in tax year 28 32%
in tax Year 29. And so it's
happening is the estimate of the
number of electric vehicles and
plug in hybrids to be purchased
goes up each year, so the amount
of the credit comes down to
target of $45 million impact.
That's that was what was behind
the design of that.
And, um, you know, I think we
really put a lot of thought to
into the features of the credit
that make it most usable for the
lowest income to Mexicans. We
certainly want to make sure that
this puts electric and plug in
hybrid vehicles within their
reach. So this is the first bill
of this type that new Mexico is
considered that has a credit for
used vehicles and making it both
refundable and transferable.
also do a lot to make sure that
lower income to Mexicans can
benefit.
Refundable, of course, means
that if you receive the credit,
it can take your tax liability.
Negative. You won't you'll still
get the full benefit of the
credit, Even if you have a low
tax liability and transferable
is intended to mean that
purchaser of umbilical can sell
their credit to either their
dealership or some other credit
broker and get the immediate
benefit of the credit rather
than having to wait until next
April, when they file their tax
return and get the benefit of
that credit.
So that potentially the credit
can be used to help with a down
payment or or to offset those
closing costs. And with that, Mr
Chair, I'll stand for questions.
Thank you, madam Chair.
Before we go to, uh, Committee
will go out to the audience.
Anybody here in support of
Senate Bill 315. Guys can please
stand and give you guys a minute
to make your remarks. You need a
mike? Uh, not so much for us
here, but the folks that are
listening
Great. Thank you so much much
Mr Chair, members of the
committee and to the sponsors we
at the Sierra Club are very
supportive of this piece of
legislation. We're excited to
see it with a credit for new
vehicles for used vehicles for
plug in hybrids, but I also want
to congratulate the entire
legislative body because in
2019 you pass the transportation
electrification Bill.
Which means that a lot of
utilities are actually making
plans before the public
regulation Commission for
Electric vacation when you go on
to dot's website to show you
where Chargers are, there's more
every day 735 Chargers all
around the state, Mexican
families like mine.
Really need help getting into
these cars, combining the
federal credit with local
credit, plus possibly utility
credits can make a really big
difference. Thank you so much
for your consideration.
Hmm.
Hello, madam Sharing members of
the committee committee. My name
is Gina Morales and I'm with JD
Bullington Government relations.
The city of Santa Fest support
this bill.
Thank you.
Good afternoon chair. Members of
the committee. I'm Anna Linden
Weller. I am the policy director
for the Energy, Minerals and
Natural Resources Department,
which is the certified for the
proposed credit. And, um we are
in very much in support of this
bill. We're very excited to put
that program together. Um, and
basically, I'm also here for
questions about the
certification portion. If you so
have them.
Thanks.
Mr Chair. Members of the
committee. I'm Charles Good
marker, appearing today on
behalf of both sweep Southwest
Energy Efficiency Project and
NRDC Natural Resources Defense
Council. We strongly urge your
support for this bill and
incorporation into your final
tax package, especially like the
provisions that make TVs
available to many more lower
income skins. Both the
The because moving in that
direction can make those charges
available. But all the used
vehicle credits thank you very
much.
Mr Chairman, members of the
committee. My name is Jim
Desjardin. I represent the
Renewable Energy Industries
Association of New Mexico. We're
in the early stages of, um
combustion engine vehicles to
electric vehicles are less
costly to maintain. There's half
of moving parts. Um, the energy
is less expensive. The quiet,
smooth
And as an owner of an E V, I can
tell you their joy to drive.
However, they are
In many instances, more
expensive, so we need this tax
credit to accelerate the
adoption of electric vehicles.
We really appreciate that this
bill applies to use vehicles
that the credit can be
transferred at the time of sale.
And there's a significant tax
credit for fast charges. Thank
you very much. We are support.
Thank you. Anybody in opposition
Senate Bill 315.
You know, none. Do we have
anybody online that signed up?
Are they on?
Alright. Well, uh, we want to
the committee for questions.
We're we're we're just holding
any questions.
We're not part of any any
clarifying questions, not just
hold on Senator Allman. Thank
you.
Excellent job. No questions.
Thank you. Mhm. Oh,
Did you?
Alright, Senator Tallman. We're
holding the bill. So that's
going into the tax package. Next
up, Senator Shen does and Senate
Bill 316. This is
The second of four bills that we
will hold that will be rolled
into the tax pick it
Most of these bills that were
holding Thank you.
Dinner. Shindo whenever you're
ready, all right, Thank you,
madam Chair members of the
committee Centerville, 316, the
advanced manufacturing equipment
tax credit.
Um
Senate Bill 316 is a companion
to the federal events
Manufacturing production tax
credit created in section 45 x
of the Federal Inflation
Reduction Act.
The new federal credit
incentivizes production and sale
of solar and wind components.
inverters qualifying battery
components and applicable
critical minerals.
State P I T and C I T credits
will give New Mexico a
competitive advantage by
offsetting the cost to
equipment.
Uh, to equip facilities to
produce those products during
their construction phase before
the federal credit is available
from the sale of the products.
The credit is the lesser of 20%
of equipment costs or 25 million
per project.
The credit and includes a
clawback that will take effect
at the facility that received
this credit seizes operations
for 180 consecutive days within
two years of claiming the credit
We estimate not more than one
large qualifying project for
year, but likely less. So, with
that, I'm gonna turn it over to
the sector, phony things that I
may have missed.
Uh or add to it.
Thank you, Chairman, Kendo vice
chair and members of the
committee. I don't have much to
add Just that we stand ready to
implement this and really to
emphasize that the point of this
state credit is really to be a
companion to the section 45 X
federal credit. That credit is
on production, so a company has
to go all the way through
building and equipping a
facility to get to the point of
production. This credit is
designed to incentivize earlier
and to help offset the
Quick mint in capital investment
costs of those companies.
And with that I would stand for
questions. And, um Mark Roper is
here from a D D.
Thank you, madam. Vice chair
members of the committee on Mark
Roper, acting Secretary for
economic development.
And, uh,
I'll just grab the main thing
this is going to do from New
Mexico is give us a competitive
advantage.
Against the other 47 continuous
states that will be competing
against for this on shoring and
re shoring of activity.
But it's going to that is
happening and will continue to
happen.
Over the next few years due to
the inflation reduction Act, so
it it is in
Necessary for us to be in this
position to gain this
competitive advantage and get
these types of industries to New
Mexico, which will be
complimentary to our overall
goals from both the climate
standpoint and a carbon
reduction standpoint.
All right. Thank you very much.
At this point, we'll go ahead
and go to the audience. Is there
anybody in the audience that is
in support of this bill? Please
raise your hand?
Okay, so we've just got go
ahead. And if you line up the
microphone is right there.
Does this work? Okay. Done this
enough. Camilla. No on off! Um,
thank you, madam Chair, Mr Chair
members of the committee. This
is a common sense Tax credit
that builds on the 45 X federal
credit and is a great incentive
for bringing new renewable
industry to New Mexico and the
Sierra Club's 35,000. Members
and supporters support this,
bill. Thank you.
My name is Gina Morales with JD
Bullington Government relations
and the city of San Office
support this bill.
Thank you. Anybody in the
audience in opposition of this
bill?
Right. See none. Anybody online
and support of this bill.
Anybody in law online in
opposition of this stuff?
All right. Thank you very much.
Now it goes to the committee.
Any questions or comments from
the committee.
Senator Peter Worth, you're
touching your microphone first,
So I'm gonna give it to you.
Thank you, madam. Just one
question about the
Fiscal impact. It's a $25
million.
Project costs. I just just
clarify that a little bit
Absolutely met him Vice chair
and Senator worth this one is
arguably and evidently difficult
to assess the impact of the F I.
R.
Estimates 15 million in FY, 27
and 25 million in FY 28. The 25
Million impact in the out year
is really just
I guesstimate based on the per
project cap, And so, um, you
know, we've we've discussed with
the Economic Development
Department and the governor's
office and others that
You know, we expect these large
projects to be very few and far
between, Um we'd be very excited
if there were one in the life of
this credit that maxed out the
credit at 25 million. There may
be smaller, but it really is a
big capital investment to
qualified for the 45 X credit
and therefore the state credit.
I don't know if Mark Roper wants
to add
Madam vice chair. Members of the
committee Senator Worth
As I justified our leaders in
the house, I would be the most
ecstatic economic development
secretary if we got one of these
a year, um so
I realistically they're they're
they're going to be large
projects.
Uh and
I don't see more than one a
year. In fact, I'd be ecstatic
if we even got one ear.
So, Madam chair. Just You know
what? I'm we're trying to size
this tax package, and it sounds
sounds like having a
$25 million kind of ceiling on
this is not a problem just to
prevent the scenario where you
hit the home run and have
assumed we could probably back
in special session if that
happened, but again, just trying
to size this up.
If it was capped, or is that
going to be an issue?
Um, Madam Chair members of the
Committee Senator worth
We have this conversation
earlier today, and we would be
comfortable with an aggregate
cap for the life of this 250
million, which would in effect
be 25 million a year.
We would be reluctant to
hamstring ourselves and the $25
million on a fiscal year basis,
but we would be comfortable with
the $250 million aggregate.
Madam chair, But so would that
mean that if you had a $250
million project that qualified
New Year one
Madam chair members of the
committee Senator Worth the Per
Project cap is 25 million
Perfect, so one project could
not get there.
So 10 projects one each year for
25 million and we hit the home
run.
Great. Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Worth Senator
Smitty's and then Senator Brent
Thank you, madam Chair.
I'm not in favor of this is I've
said before, Um
I do not support using
Energy, sparse sources for
energy.
Dense, um, uses
Um, such as using solar and wind
power cars and lights in our
energy, dense lifestyle for
humans.
I love solar for
Gate in the middle of nowhere.
It opens really slow, and it
closes like that.
Um And you know for for those of
you in the room that
Revolutionists, and I believe
there's probably many of you if
you believe
Life is the
You know, the source of life is
the chance combination of non
living things than you believe.
Over billions of years that
living organisms have competed
for energy and become energy
efficient.
And I'd urge you to look out at
what has supposedly evolved.
What kind of living organisms
use sunlight for their energy.
Things like trees and grass
things that don't
Have big energy. Um
Or a sudden energy expenditures
and move like cars and airplanes
and
And all the H vax and all the
things that we want to use these
things for
Um, by the way, Trees also store
energy. Okay, we have a storage
problem.
Let's let's go up to something
that does move but doesn't move
very fast like a cow.
What do cows eat?
Well, generally, they gonna
graze on grass once again, a
fairly more dense than sunlight.
But but you know, it's still an
energy, sparse diet, and they
don't move quickly. Let's go up
to a cheetah. Finally.
Okay?
She does move very, very
quickly.
They discharged their energy
very, very quickly. What do they
eat? They eat about £6 of meat
per day, and they start with the
most nutrient dense part of the
animal, the liver and the heart.
So this type of the the whole
mindset.
Of using energy, sparse sources
for energy, dense discharges and
uses is going to destroy our
planet. It is way way less
energy efficient.
Then what we're doing now, and
of course, I would like to shift
towards more energy, but we
cannot be gathering energy, spar
sources and using them for
energy. Dense uses that the way
people are using them.
In our present lifestyle.
Thank you, madam Chair.
All right. Thank you, Senator
Hmm. Mr Chairman.
Hmm.
I'm sorry. It was a little bit
late.
Yeah.
Illnesses.
But
Could you
Help me understand what advanced
energy
Equipment is
I've always heard of it as other
madam base chair members of the
committee, Senator, Senator
Brandt.
Mark. You can use the handheld
mic. If it makes it easier, so
you don't tweak your neck or you
can just pick that one up.
Okay, Um
Advanced energy equipment tax
credit is simply a title.
This would be equipment used to
manufacture.
The items that would qualify for
45 X under the inflation
Reduction Act as as applied by
the federal government.
What? We're what we're saying
here is that if you are building
a manufacturing facility that
qualifies for the 45 X
production tax credit
We will, in turn provide you
with a income tax credit in the
state of New Mexico equal to 20%
of your capital investment in
equipment.
For the purpose of producing
that material.
Or $25 million, whichever is
less.
This would be any manufacturing
equipment that would be utilized
to make that item that which it
or produce the the, uh, the
material qualified under the 45
backs of the inflation reduction
Act. Mr Chairman, Madam Chair,
Senator.
I have not read act. I'm sure
it's probably millions of pages
long because that's what the
federal government seems to
So what are we talking about?
I'm just saying, it's whatever
is covered under that I I
usually don't like supporting
things that we just say Oh,
well, do whatever the government
says that.
Madam madam based chair members
of the committee, Senator
Brandt. Uh, Fair question and
thank you for that.
It is. It is specifically for
items related to solar.
To win manufacturing battery
storage as well as the
components. Uh, and precious
materials necessary to create
those things.
So it could be the money now or
finding of those precious metals
necessary to build the
batteries.
And the items and equipment
necessary to build solar panels.
Wind turbans, etcetera.
So, Mr
Madam chair.
So used to having a big Mr
Chair. Sorry in here.
I wasn't a I wasn't gonna say
that.
Yes.
Hmm.
Just for those of you who
weren't here last night.
Apologies you are, And that's
okay. I like that. When you do
that. My apologies, Senator
Brandt.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, and
for the record, neither am I
just still take you.
Ah!
I'm sorry that the madam chair
and I have a great relationship
and we love to joke back and
forth. And one of these days
we're gonna get back to our air
supply stuff. But you know,
we're just waiting for that, Um,
madam chair.
Um, Senator, so I know that
alright, Least I've been told
that on the Navajo tribe, There
are a lot of rare earth
minerals. I mean, like a bunch
like maybe even the most.
Prolific field.
In the world.
And so if they decided since
We decided because of our
stupidity that they can't do the
coal anymore.
If they decided they wanted to
harvest those railroads.
Minerals. Would that qualify for
this?
Adam Base chair members of the
committee, Senator Brandt if it
is on that list, such as
lithium, magnesium, yes.
It would qualify.
Madam Chairperson, Senator, I'm
pretty sure that rare earth
minerals are required to make
solar panels as well as our
cell phones and tablets. Madam
Vice chair members of the
committee Center, Brett, You're
absolutely correct.
So, so that would be something
that they would be allowed to
do. My concern comes in
And I think
I won't be as eloquent and going
to the whole evolution needs.
Um, but survival of the fittest
is supposed to be something.
We're not. You know, if you
believe in that we shouldn't
really be subsidizing anything
because it should be survival of
the fittest, right?
But that was for yesterday too,
didn't I? Anyway?
Sorry, madam Chair When I'm
sick, I get a little loopy.
Um
So one of my concerns is, you
know we had this solar
manufacturing plant that was
going to come into Rio Rancho in
my district. It was going to be
huge.
If you listen to trump it was
going to be huge, Huge.
Big big
And before it could even start
even though he gave him Bunches
of money.
It went bankrupt.
And we've seen that several
times.
So what are we gonna do to make
sure
That we don't give them $25
million and then they don't even
put a shovel in the ground, let
alone come in chair and Senator
Brandt. One of the features of
this credit didn't talk about in
the presentation was a clawback
provisions. Um, they're
basically if, uh, company will
become pre certified B
department and that will just
basically entail coming in and
documenting and demonstrating
that the widgets they're going
to produce will be eligible for
the federal production credit.
So they get pre certified, then
they go build the facility
equipped the facility and get to
the point of production.
Once they start producing if
they do not stay in production
for two years, any credit that
they had received from the state
would be clawed back and do back
to the state.
So they have to remain in
production for at least two
years and and the thinking
behind. That is really that if
they get to all the way to the
point of production, they've
already incurred all this
capital investment there now
very motivated to continue
production to basically live out
the J curve of their, um their
business and and so really a
clawback.
Thank you, Madam Chair and Madam
Secretary. I appreciate that.
But Clawbacks don't work too
good when the company because
once they go through bankruptcy,
there's not in the club back.
So they don't They just don't
work out that great.
When when the company goes
bankrupt, And so that's a
concern of mine because we have
not seen
Whole lot of solar man or even
wind manufacturing.
Be successful in the United
States because China undercuts
us every level when it comes to
that stuff.
So
Madam chair and and Senator
Brandt. Let me add to that.
Uh, this credit cannot be
applied for until after you have
begun production.
So you'll
You'll earn up to 20% credit for
your equipment, but you actually
go for final approval of the
certification from the Energy
Minerals Department when you've
actually gotten to the point of
opening your doors, and it's a
little bit. Thank you, Madam
Chair, Madam secretary That
helps a lot because that helps
me understand that they would
have to actually put the
investment in start the
production line. Um
You know all that stuff before
they would even be able to get
any of this because we have seen
from
Prior experience again, you
know, prior experience doesn't
always predict future results,
but it does 99% of the time.
And so you know, you have to be
careful about where we're again.
This is taxpayer dollars.
This is my neighbor's money.
This is my wife's money.
That's the way I look at
taxpayer dollars. So you know,
we have to be careful about what
we invested on and make sure
it's on things that are going to
work. I do agree with Dr
Sneed's. I don't think solar and
wind are the future like
everyone else does.
Um, we see European countries
that are going away from it
because it's just not reliable
enough.
And they're going back to
nuclear
Um, honestly, uh, we really need
to get over this phobia of
nuclear in the United States.
Because nuclear is the most
reliable the cheapest.
And cleanest energy you can get
And we could also do the Gavin
Newsom thing where we do an
amendment that says natural gas
is also clean energy because
that also
You have a Newsome did that in
California. If you don't know,
he put that
Natural gas is clean energy
because they could not qualify
and meet their clean energy
production requirements without
allowing natural gas to be part
of that. So you know, we we need
to quit trying to push an agenda
which is exactly what I think
we're doing here.
Um and we need to go to actually
what makes sense. And what is
common sense. Thank you, madam
Chair.
That's all I have.
Thank you, Senator Brandt.
Anybody else on the committee?
All right. Thank you very much.
This is one that we're going to
hold. So thank you very much,
Senator.
And secretary and interim
secretary. Senator. How to Me.
Oh, you are next.
Good job. Let's do one more
transition back in
No, that's right.
That's a testimonial. I'll take
Thank you very much. Alright.
Senator had to me. Oh, you are
in Senate Bill 282 Electricity
generation. Text sunset. Thank
you, madam Chairwoman. Senate
Bill 282 removes an automatic
expiration date or a sunset in
Section seven. Dash for Dash 10
Dash E three s a 1978 that
permits are in electric energy
generators.
Jesus single sales factor in
calculating the amount of
corporate income tax now
currently in New Mexico. The law
allows manufacturers and certain
headquarter companies to elect a
single sales factor or an S s F
appointment formula in computing
their corporate tax income tax.
And so in 2019, madam
chairwoman, HB six added quote,
operating a computer process
facility, Unquote as an activity
qualifying for the single sales
factor election with no sunset,
but eliminate eliminated the
ability of independent power
producers to elect a single
sales factor in 2020 HB 326
reinstated the single sales
factor election.
For Indian power producers were
imposed as sunset date of
January. 1st 2024, now madam
chairwoman, It's important to
note that that only applies to
independent power producers.
In January of 2024 that sunset
of the election for independent
power producers that will
negatively impact owners and
developers of renewable energy
generation such as wind and
solar right here in New Mexico
now, allowing the single sales
factor election to sunset is
contrary to the goals of the
Energy transition Act.
Independent power producers,
Madam chairwoman are critical to
achieving the state's 2019
energy transition Act goals and
mistakes. Economic development
of leveraging New Mexico's
exceptional wind and solar
potential to attract investment
and create jobs, especially in
rural New Mexico. Now I have two
expert witnesses with me.
And one is joining us via Zoom.
That's Angela Peto and right
next to me, is Heather O. V
Egas. And so right now, Madam
Chairwoman, if you're okay with
like Angela to make a few
comments in regards to the bill,
All right, thank you very much.
Can you go ahead and let Angela
through on the zoom place and
Angela? I see that your hand is
raised. If you'd like to go
ahead and a new yourself, we'd
like to hear your words.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Um,
Chairman Sando and members of
the Committee for the
opportunity to speak in support
of SB 282.
My name is Angela Potala. I'm a
tax consultant with modest eight
associates appearing here today
on behalf of my former employer,
Nextera Energy, a world leader
and went and solar, energy
generation and energy storage
and enter West Energy Alliance,
Mexico based Trade Association
representing utility scale
renewable energy developers and
manufacturers.
Um, you've heard already a
little bit about the technical
application of the methods of
apportioning income to New
Mexico, and I'm happy to answer
any technical questions on the
difference in those methods. Um
If there are any, I don't want
to belabor the point. But single
sales factors and economic
development tool that increases
the competitiveness of entities
are allowed to adopt that by
removing the tax penalty
associated with including
property and payroll in the
apportionment factor. What I
mean by that is that the
inclusion of property and
payroll in the apportionment
factor increases the share of a
multistate entity's earnings
that are subject to tax in the
state.
So as the entity creates jobs
and invest new capital in New
Mexico, the higher the
investment in job creation, the
greater the share of that
multistate company's income that
gets taxed, thus allowing the
industry to use the single sales
factor eliminates that
disincentive to invest
independent power producers have
built almost all of New Mexico's
renewable energy facilities. 95%
of New Mexico's renewable energy
generation, from wind and solar
is owned by independent.
Renewable power producers.
Yet the single sales factor
election sunset only for those
independent power producers and
not any of the other industries
that are allowed to adopt it.
Singling out independent power
producers in this manner will
negatively impact some owners
and developers of renewable
energy and conveys the message
that New Mexico is inconsistent
business and tax policies as it
relates to reaching its energy
goals under the Energy
transition Act.
With that. I'd like to take a
moment to address the fiscal
impact report for the bill.
Could I hate to interrupt you if
you if you could make that a
summary just because we still
have several bills going and,
um, and we'd certainly like to
get to those you mind just
making just summarizing what
you're gonna say.
Yes, I'd like to address the
fiscal impact report for HB 118,
which is the identical bill in
the house to this bill, um and
has a pretty significant
financial or fiscal impact
associated with it, And I won't
go into detail, but I will say
that we have identified We
disagree with the assessment and
we have found
Ah, several errors and
inconsistencies in the
discussion of the impact and I'm
happy to answer more questions
on that. But we do significantly
or strongly disagree with the
fiscal impact in the
All right. Thank you so much
Senator to ask for your support
and thank the sponsor and
Senator worth for his support,
and I'm happy to take any
questions.
A woman without will entertain
any questions. All right, first
and foremost, Thank you very
much. Are there those in the
audience who are in support of
this bill? I show hand. Okay.
Anybody in the audience and
opposition of this bill?
Alright, let's just take four in
support, Then we'll go to
online. If you can check that
out Foreign support if you will.
I don't please behind. Senator
how to me. Oh,
And while they're lining up, do
we have anybody online?
All right, Go ahead. Thank you,
madam Chair members of the kid
in Committee this year club
stands in support of this bill.
We understand the implications
of looking at single factor, um,
tax payment generally, but in
this case would like the solar
and renewables industry to be
treated the same as other
manufacturers and not have the
sunset. Thank you.
Good evening, Mr Chair, Madam
Chair. Thank you for the
opportunity to speak. My name is
Ricky Lee Chavez. I'm appearing
today on behalf of my client,
Inner West Energy Alliance in
the West Energy Alliance is the
Regional Trade Association for
utility scale renewables
headquartered right here in New
Mexico. We do represent over 40
companies that are dedicated to
bringing renewable
Um, projects to New Mexico. We
stand in strong support of this
piece of legislation. We
appreciate the work of Senator
Ha Romeo and our member company,
Nextera. We just want to
highlight for the company that
there would be no change in the
current election of single sales
factor by independent power
producers, and there would be no
reduction in state revenues.
State revenues from the revenues
through the sunset date of this
piece of legislation.
Thank you for hearing us, and we
appreciate you and encourage
your support. Good afternoon, Mr
Chairman and members of the
committee. My name is Marco
Gonzales and I rise today in
support of this measure on
behalf of both pattern, energy
and energy, two of the largest
renewable energy producers in
New Mexico pattern energy is
building the largest just
renewable energy project
anywhere in this hemisphere and
in New Mexico.
With a capital investment at
over $11 billion and also about
just about 5000 megawatts of
power. Um, in energy is building
that's a 500 miles of
transmission line in energy is
building about a 400 mile
transmission line from Union
County to San Juan County at a
cost of about $2 billion.
With the promise of more
renewable energy investment.
This is an important piece that
has incentivized companies like
pattern and invention to come to
New Mexico and the Legislature.
Incentivized these companies who
come here with good policies
like the Energy transition Act,
and this put this this
particular statute.
So we ask that you not turn your
back on those good policies. Um
and we ask that you continue to
incentivize renewable energy to
come to New Mexico. We thank the
sponsor for bringing it forward.
Um, and appreciate that so much,
Mr Chairman and members of the
committee. Thank you, Marco.
We're gonna take one more here
in the audience. Jim did garden.
We know that we have that on the
record. We do have one person
online.
If they can get ready, they're
not. I'll call on them in just a
moment, but go ahead.
Thank you, Madam Chair. My name
is an crane Romig and I'm
working for Southwestern Power
Group and MMR group to out of
state companies developing
renewable transmission and
generation projects in New
Mexico.
We are defined as a manufacturer
and stand in support of this
bill. It's simply maintains the
status quo by eliminating the
sunset provisions encouraging
out of state companies to do
business in New Mexico. We don't
want it to go away and think
it's good for the state good for
the environment and good for the
economy.
Right. Thank you so much. Um, I
see Kerry online carry go ahead
and amuse yourself.
Hello, madam Chair and members
of the committee carry Robin
Bruner, registered lobbyist with
advanced Energy United, which is
the only industry association in
the United States that
represents the full range of
advanced energy technology from
services. Um both grid scale and
distributed. We do support this
legislation. We think the parity
with other manufacturers is
important to keep. And we urge
your support. Thanks.
Thank you so much Carry alright.
Anything from the committee
Senator Wirth. Thank you, madam
chair. I appreciate
This bill and think that this is
how we have to deal with single
sales is on a industry by
industry.
And this particular language
kind of came out.
In some of the tax discussions
way back when the sunset I was
involved in that putting it back
on to come in and see kind of
how it was working. Obviously,
it is working and we need to
have it here. I will, Though,
Senator respectfully disagree
with something that you're
experts said, Uh Pedro, which is
he was basically saying the
single sales works for everyone.
Ah, it does not. We have a whole
string of different industries
that if they went to single
sales would be significantly
hurt because it is property
payroll and sales and it just
varies. So there are winners and
losers And the reason Madam
chair I bring this up as I think
we're gonna need to have a
conversation if, in fact, the
House bill that comes over has a
blanket single sales.
Um
As a whole string of industries
showing up wanting carve outs.
Basically, they didn't want to.
They wanted to stay with three
factor because it was better for
them or they wanted to do some
tweak to it, And initially we
ended up putting one carve out
into the omnibus tax package for
some telecommunications folks,
and then I
After that just got vetoed. We
heard from oil and gas. We heard
from railroads. I think Senator
Sanchez, you've got a railroad
and your district that would be
impacted if we went to single
sales and so
This is how we should do Single
sales is on a case by case
basis, and I just think there's
a real problem with doing a
blanket across the board. Single
sales. That's something we can
all talk about when, if the
House package comes over with
that in it, Um so again, I
support this. And I appreciate
senator harm milieu, bringing
this in
We? We needed to have this
discussion here in the tax and
the Senate side because again
this bill, as I understand it
was not put on the house side
because there's a blanket single
sales that did get put in and so
again. We need to have that
option and I think that's a
discussion will probably have
when we wrap up the the Senate
amendments, so I just wanted to
flag that, but
Obviously, this is
Status quo.
So and it's somewhat
You know, having an F I R when
you're
Undoing something basically,
states. We're going to stay
where we are, If we take away
the sunset
Certainly, if we undid it, then
it would change the formula
apportionment in the state might
get some money. But here
clearly, it's it's working, and
it's and it's a whole string of
industries that are impacted, so
I just wanted to have that
discussion because I do think
this is something we need to be.
We're going to be dealing with
this and I do not support across
the board single sales. I think
that's going to result in a
train wreck of industries
wanting exemptions and
It's just we we tried that it
didn't work last year, and so
again. I want to just flag that.
That's why this is here. This is
an example of how we should do
it, which is on an industry by
industry to see if it makes
sense and understand the impact.
So thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, senator words, Senator
Brandt.
Thank you, madam Chair and
senator. And if you don't know
this, you might yield to your
expert up here sooner worth, I
guess I'm trying to figure out
The
What would the difference be in
the effect if we went back to
the modus
If we if we allow
Madam Chair. Uh, Senator Brand.
This is better to Vegas with
exterior energy.
Uh, it's this bill is a status
quo Bill.
Another words, It's a status quo
to be able to elect
Whether you use single sales
factor in your apportionment and
calculation of corporate income
tax or whether you use the
triple factor, so right now, the
up to January 1st 2024
companies like ours, who elect
the single sales factor
election.
What very likely continue to do
that and those companies for
whatever reason who elected not
to use the single sales factor
and use the triple factor.
What very likely continue to do
that, too. So again, it's a it's
a
It's a bill that maintains the
status quote. Um, I wouldn't. I
wouldn't expect much of a
difference is significant
difference in in fiscal
revenues.
Uh huh.
So this allowed right now you're
allowed to choose
Basically which tax
Avenue.
Simple pedestrian explanation.
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator. Yes.
uh, up to January 1st 2024.
That's when the senses when the
ability to do so the election.
That's right. That's when it's
sunset. Yes, sir. It's already
sunset. It
Yes, sir.
Um
And the reason we put sunsets on
his like, Southworth said, so we
can come back and actually look
at it.
I have not been given any
Evidence.
You know, the
Worth said. It's obvious well,
maybe to him.
But I'm not being given any
evidence that this helped
Anything.
Um, When I look at this, it's
power generation, so it's not
just
20 energy, right? It's any power
generation Is that correct?
Madam Chair, Senator. The think
as as a
The other witness mentioned, uh,
in the world of the independent
power producers in the state
about 95%.
Of the renewable energy that's
produced here is produced by a
people. So there is a portion
and I'm not sure who that is
exactly. Um, but
Most of that is the former. The
lion's share of that is since
renewable energy can't really be
done.
From now until morning.
I guess the wind doesn't blow
pretty much 24 hours ago, always
said Chicago was the windy city.
But
You know, so wind energy can go
almost 24 hours a day, but solar
can't done for
What are we using in New Mexico
to generate the power that we're
using from sundown to sunup?
Madam Chair, Senator. That's an
excellent question. Um
The, uh this bill would apply to
a number of companies.
Uh, that are investing billions
of dollars into the state.
For the purpose of meeting its
energy transition.
Act goals.
The reason when when the state
embarked on on that path, it was
very clear that you would have
to remake how you did energy.
You would need more
transmission. You would need
more solar
You would need more wind
facilities. You would need more
battery storage.
You would need a lot of that.
Um, and in fact, Battery storage
helps firm
Your solar resource beyond when
the sun goes down.
Uh,
In order to support that.
This election of single sales
factor allowed created an
environment that was conducive
to billions of dollars of
investment to the state.
And so, uh,
Not having that election is
actually contrary to to the
progress that needs to be made
to get there.
Um, your question about what
happens at night. I have to tell
you that you have expert
planners in your in your utility
groups that do procurement and
they know exactly what the
characteristics are of
everything that's in their
portfolio.
To make sure that the might stay
on 24 7 transmissions are part
of that to being able to access
different types of resources in
different parts of the southwest
and different parts of your own
state. Uh, In other words, they
are invested in putting together
a portfolio of resources.
That will give you 24 hour
reliable power.
We are partner in that in
building the resources that goes
into those portfolios.
Mr Chairman.
Senator right?
Pedestrian again.
Because this is not at all my
In other words, you buy it from
To get from dark to
Like
You buy energy from
Producers from out of state.
It also looks like Yeah. Thank
you, Madam Chair. I just very
quickly We don't buy power from
out of state.
We produce power in state.
Okay, and we build energy
storage and state.
And in some of
The companies that would be able
to use the selection as well.
Uh, they would They build
transmission to move power in
both directions as needed.
In some cases, too.
Move.
Some of the resources that are
here in this state.
When power in particular is the
one that comes to mind. Um, my
colleague from, um, spoke
eloquently about the economic
development.
Goals of of of the state and how
that company is building a very,
very large
Piece of infrastructure to
actually provide the Southwest
region with wind power from the
state.
So that's that's about as much
as I think.
Yeah, I'm not sure I answered
your question, but we don't
Nextera Energy does not import
power into the safe.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Senator, I'm used to it.
It's it's It's more of just talk
around. Um so, uh,
What
By the way, I'm waiting for the
day when someone says to me or
anyone else up here. That's the
dumbest question I've ever
heard. I want someone to do
that. I don't care if it's even
to me. That is the dumbest
question I've ever heard. So I'm
just waiting for that day
because, like everyone always
says, Oh, that's a great
question, and I'm sitting there
going. No, it's not. That's the
stupidest thing I've ever heard
anyone say.
But I just I just want a
presenter to say that just once,
so you can even do it to me. Get
a real kick out of that. Thank
you for the record. I'm not
going to do that. Okay, Madam
Chair I'm done Told you get a
little loopy when I'm up. That's
all right. We'll feed you and
better.
Thank you. Anybody else from the
committee?
Right at this point. Thank you,
Senator Adamu. Although you are
keeping the seat warm for I know
Senator Brantley, who will be
after this bill. But you've got
one more. Bill. You've got the
Senate Bill 170 for the Calf
Canyon Fire.
Also, you're welcome to start on
that and I'll give that back to
you. Thank you, madam Chairwoman
And so nearly two years ago, the
largest wildfire in the state's
history ravaged over 3000 acres
of northern New Mexico.
Displacing nortenos their
livestock destroying their
ranches, just trying their homes
and their land.
Affecting our culture and our
way of life. The federal
government has created a $4
billion fund to attempt to make
these victims Hall and admitted
their negligence.
So I do have a substitute Bill.
Madam Chairwoman. If you can
move that, so we can discuss
that Bill.
Hmm.
All right, Mr. Chair, I moved to
the Senate tax, Business and
Transportation Committee,
Substitute percent of Bill 174.
Madam chair pass on 174 and a
pass on the substitute for
Senate Bill 174 more discussion.
Thank you.
Point of order.
We're supposed to have these two
the committee head of time.
They delivered to you yesterday.
They're supposed to be so our
analysts can actually look at
them.
Significant change. It's a
significant change in the fact
that it will help local and
county government by keeping
their grt in place. The original
bill talked about giving a tax
credit to fire victims by giving
them all of the tax G R T back
on attorney fees that would have
heard our local government this
change in the bill ensures that
the Grt stays in place for local
and for, you know, it's a pallet
E.
And counties with the tax rebate
from the state. That was what we
established committee.
Up to you, Mr Chairman, but
Any time we have a significant
change to the bill, or analysts
are supposed to get it out of
time that they can do in an
hour.
So, Mr Chair.
Alright. I actually don't think
this is a significant change.
He's just he's just narrowing.
He's taking the concept is the
same or just taking the local
peace and not applying the
exemption to the local piece. So
it really is just
Pfeiffer, Kating.
To so that as a senator says, so
we don't impact
You know the local governments
that are also quite frankly, The
reason your deals explain that
they suffered as well based on
the fire, So why would we take
away their share? I think that's
what that's what this does.
Thank you. And I just, you know,
for future that we're at least
giving our analyst a few hours
to rebounding committee. I know
we're getting towards the end
and it gets a little tougher but
We can try to get those
committee subs Maybe even
Have them delivered to the
secretary and the animals pull.
So that they can make sure they
get them. This is the first time
I've seen it.
So we now are we discussing the
substitute?
That was a great point. Senator
Brett Thank you, Mr Chairman,
Madam Chairwoman. The substitute
bill changes the original
version.
Which was going to deduct all of
the grocery seat tax and
attorney fees related to the
Hermits Peak. Calf Canyon fire
upon hearing from local
government leaders that became
clear that there were deep
concerns about the original bill
and its impact on local
governments. Grt revenues. Now
this substitute ensures that the
county and municipal government
Are held harmless and that only
the state portion of the G R T s
subject to a new tax credit.
That credit is capped at $10
million
The substitute percent of Bill
174 will put money back into the
pockets of calf Canyon fire
victims who desperately need it.
By creating this credit, Madam
chairwoman, we will ensure that
the victims are fairly and fully
compensated for the trauma they
suffered as a result of the
federal government negligence
and with that
Madam Chair, Mr. Chair. I'll
stand for questions. Great.
Thank you. So, uh,
Go out to the audience. Anybody
here in support of Senate Bill
174.
This can come on up, and, uh
We can testimony.
Um
Mr Chairman, members of the
committee money, Miss Scott
Scanlon. Registered lobbyists
for Singleton Shriver and and I
would like to. Well, we support
the bill. Um, but I'd like to
just give a quick example of
Let's say that a victim gets I'm
going to use small numbers and
round numbers. Uh, because it's
easier for me. Um $100,000.
Uh, settlement from the federal
government.
Um, the federal government. Um,
when they passed that bill
capped attorney's fees at 20%
$20,000, so the victim now gets
$80,000, but they have to pay
gross receipts tax on that
$20,000. So let's just say it's
8% again, Rob and and so $1600
this bill.
Would allow those victims.
To file for a tax credit.
And get the state portion back.
So approximately point of the
bill is we want to get as much
money that these victims are due
into their pocket. So with that
we stand in strong support of
this bill. Thank you, Mr
Chairman and members. Mr
Chairman, members of Committee.
My name is Brian Cullen and I
represent
About 1000 victims of the Hermit
Speak Calf Canyon Fire. I work
with Singleton Tribe Ram that
Mexico managing partner
My partners and I have thought
many of hours about how we could
maximize the recovery to make
these communities in these
citizens of New Mexico Hall.
For the trauma that they've been
through.
This particular bill that is
being carried by Senator Had
Emilio is one way where we
identified, uh, to be able to
help maximize that recovery.
We knew that the state is not in
the business of my colleague
Antonio Roybal Mac, I think
called it a disaster
capitalization or disaster
capitalism.
And that the state shouldn't be
the unintended beneficiary, uh
of tax revenue.
Because of the harm and the
trauma that northern New Mexico
went through.
The original. The original idea
that was carried by the senator
was to wave 100% of the tax
implications on attorney's fees,
which is typically at about 8%.
The county leaders. Some
citizens in the communities were
concerned that those 1% tax
revenues, of course three seats
that would normally go to the
counties.
That that would be material to
them and that they would oppose
this bill if they were going to
lose that 1%.
In the end, we agreed to the
substitute bill that only waved
the state's gross receipts tax
and that will be given back to
the clients into the victims of
Herman speaking half canyon
after they fill out the proper
forms for a tax credit and send
it into the state of New Mexico
captain. It's all of $10
million, which we believe far
exceeds any amount that will be
necessary to make those folks
hole.
Thank you, Mr Chairman, member
of the committee and senator
hearty meal for carrying Thank
you.
And
Thank you. Thank you, Mr
Chairman. Members of the
committee. My name is Antonio
Roy Ball. Mac, and I represent
like Mr Cologne. Hundreds of
people in this this fire.
Um, and what has occurred. I'm a
longtime member of Mora County.
I was born and raised in Mara
until I left to start my law
firm in Albuquerque and have
since returned to have a firm
there as well as in Las Vegas,
New Mexico. I think this bill
sends a strong message to
victims of disasters that the
state is not going to capitalize
on those disasters and anything
that's coming to them. It also
supports the local tax revenue
that
Um, these communities may need
to work towards their rebuild. I
think it's important to be able
to share with the communities
that that this should not be
taxed. It's also important to
note that the communities as
well as the state of New Mexico
have their own claims and the
hermit peak calf Canyon claims
process and they have you have
your own lawyers in your own
litigation moving forward.
So if the state did feel on any
level that they were damaged,
the state can go after those
damages and not have to seek
them through tax revenue. So
thank you, Mr Chairman and look
forward to moving this forward.
Good evening. My name is Manny
Crispin Junior, and I'm, the
founder of the Coalition for
Fire Fund Fairness.
And I just wanna thank you all
for bringing this forward. Um,
the trauma inflicted by the
hermit Speak Calf Canyon
Wildfire's gonna forever impact
the small communities, Um, in
which I'm from San Miguel
County.
Moron tells counties where the
fire ravaged a big portion of
our state, um the file. The
fires also had a major impact
across New Mexico.
Because many of our family my
family, our families, our
friends are victims, the victims
of the fire are still being
burdened by the prolonged
suffering because claims
submitted by FEMA have not been
paid and the mismanagement of
hermit speak of canyons.
Claim office continues to slow
the process.
That is why I'm here. That is
why the coalition for Fire Fund
Fairness is fighting. Um we've
been diligently fighting for the
victims, ensuring that all
Claims process is fair and
transparent. And while we
continue to hold FEMA
accountable, it's important that
we recognize how state laws will
impact the victims once their
claims are paid.
That's why so send a bill 174 is
so important, it provides
additional relief to victims and
makes them whole again after
they've navigated the arduous
federal claims process through
FEMA.
Victims should not be expected
to foot the bill for the federal
government's negligence and
their liabilities after they
caused
The biggest fire in our state
history.
Um, the coalition for Fire Fund
Fairness believes that are
Community deserves a fair and
transparent process. And, um,
that is why we have this bill
forward. We thank you all the
state elected officials who have
spoken out about the
mismanagement of the FEMA claims
office. And we thank everyone
here today for putting forward
SB 174.
To provide additional relief for
victims again, please
Help us pass this bill. I am a
victim. Thank you.
Thank you. Um, anybody lying?
We wanna We'll go ahead and
allow this one.
Go ahead.
Hi. My name is Lucy Frost. And
I'm here representing myself and
my partner Mike Dibble were
calling in from Texas because we
no longer have a home in Maura.
Um we lost a lot of things, some
things that can never be
replaced. Um, but we're
suffering a lot less than some
of our neighbors because there's
no amount of money that would
truly make some of our neighbors
with the communities of
The hundreds and hundreds of
years of history that they have
To be made whole.
However, this bill SB 174, as I
understand it will help us and
all the other fire victims come
closer to being made whole. So I
do ask you to support this bill.
Thank you. Thank you.
With that, Uh,
Anybody in opposition of Senate
Bill 174.
We'll go to the committee.
Senator Gregg's.
Thank you.
I don't I don't know whether
this is getting it or not. But
thank you. Thank you guys for
being here and thank all the
comments. That was a
That was a devastating event
and, you know last year
Last year, we ran a bill Senate
Bill 21, which was
Which is I believe
It was helpful.
To to Maybe not having an event
like that Start again and and
hopefully it will be helpful for
me from now on, but
I'm I wanted to talk a little
bit about the way grocery
receipts tax works.
And grocery seats tax are paid
by the business.
They don't have to pass.
I just just want everybody to
understand that is the way it
works.
But it's also the way it works
it. Businesses do pass it on.
Almost in every in every
instance.
And I think what we've got here
is a way that would genuinely
held
Y'all and I'm I'm willing to,
you know, to support the bill,
but I used I just want everybody
to understand. I don't know that
anybody is being altruistic out
here.
Uh, H. It's a deal where, uh,
business owners have an
obligation.
To pay the tax to the state and
that is in this entrance. It's
the attorneys. They have the
obligation to pay that to the to
the state.
Uh, they can, And as I said,
they can in most everybody does
always pass the G r T. O M.
The obligation That's the
difference in G R T and sales
tax sales tax are paid by the
consumer.
Gross receipts tax or paid by
the business owner.
That's the distinction.
But I'm I'm happy to support
this. I just It just gives me
kind of a, you know, an
interesting time to talk about
the way it works.
To show everybody understands.
The overall situation. So
listen, Senator Thank you for
bringing forward. I'm certainly
hopeful we can get as much money
in the hands of these
individuals as we possibly
Thank you. Senator Gregg.
Senator Brian. Thank you.
Mr Chairman you back as chair.
Kind of
Um, but, uh
Senator. I will support the
bill. But I do want to say a few
things. First of all.
Um
I'm pretty sure. Yeah, I I heard
a couple attorneys say the state
shouldn't make money.
Off of other people's suffering.
But guess who is making money
off other people's suffering?
Those same attorneys.
Let's just be honest taken. Who
knows what kind of cut
Out of it, and and it's honestly
and I don't blame attorneys for
doing that. You you got to get
paid for your work.
But it's absolutely ridiculous.
That people are having to hire
attorneys.
To get this money. It's
ridiculous.
I mean,
Good Lord.
Where is the federal government?
Where is FEMA?
Why aren't they here? Answering
to us for not paying these
victims what they owe them.
And where's our attorney
general?
I like and white, he filed a
lawsuit against the federal
government for not paying these
victims what they owe them.
Let's just call a spade a spade.
The federal government refuses
to manage the forest properly.
And they burn down the forest.
And burned all these people out,
and I'm sorry for every victim
up and they need to pay for it.
And they need to quit dragging
their dad gum feet.
It's B s
I'm sick of it.
Federal government.
Needs to quit singing, sending
down an organization that
doesn't know they're a whole
from a hole in the ground.
That won't provide people with
what they deserve.
From the catastrophe that they
caused.
Their negligence in both
managing the forest.
And then starting fires in our
windiest season and the heck
What's wrong with these people?
And you try to type. Frankly, I
think
That is the previous age who
have not taking a stand.
For the people in those areas
and they should be suing the
federal government in federal
court.
We're not making sure that those
victims
Are being paid for the losses
that they suffered.
We have people have left the
state Texas now.
We have an analyst in our
analyst home.
Up there for generations.
Wiped out.
They weren't even allowed to go
in there and do anything on
their own.
Federal government is the one
there's the full weight for
weight being asked to do
something about it What we ought
to be doing.
Is stepping in with the billions
of dollars we have an L hole and
then suing the federal
government to recover that
money. That's what we should.
Because they've had
And I know you feel just as
angry as I feel about this
issue.
And I don't even live.
We, as Mexico Legislature will
be passing a bill requiring our
We, as Mexico Legislature will
be passing a bill requiring are
represented in a lawsuit against
the federal government. That's
what we should be doing.
Thank you. Senator Brent Senator
speaks
Thank you, Mr Chair, and thank
you, Senator. I agree with my
colleague. You know, Somehow the
federal government figured out
how to send
Pretty much all of us, you know
checks during Covid. I mean, why
can't they just send checks to
people? Why? Why did that, But I
do have a question on the 10
Million cap. Um, is that gonna
be a first come first serve or
how? You know we've we've talked
about tax credits that sometimes
just run out. We've had them
come in this committee this year
and and people have made an
investment. And then there's
nothing there. So could we talk
about that? Please?
If you don't mind, Mr Chairman,
Askey smelters to come up and
help me with this part of the
question. Thank you, Senator.
Senator in in the case of this
credit, and in the case just for
the public. Can you introduce
yourself? Absolutely is my
interests chief economist of the
Legislative Finance Committee,
Accu would be formed if the cap
is reached in any given year and
whoever was next in line becomes
first in line in the next year.
Okay?
Um, so Mr Chair Center so that
it is basically the first
comfort service whenever the
claims were filed. I mean, how
do they line up in that queue?
Mr Chair that That's right. It
would be first. Come in That
sense. Um
But it's also a carry forward
provisions. So theoretically,
you would still be able to
eventually claimed the full
amount of the credit if you
weren't safe, first in line in a
given year.
Okay. And so, Mr Chair, Senator,
So if the if the 10 million runs
out, then
Then you're saying
And you haven't got the money
and it's capped out. You're
you're saying that there's still
An opportunity in the next But
you're just gonna have to Maybe
just wait a little longer. Is
that how it works?
Um, Mr Mr Chair and Center,
Right? That doesn't sound bad to
me. I just propose I just
wonder, you know.
A lot of times I know this is
the way in healthcare you people
that have means and people that
have connections can navigate
systems better than people who
don't have those networks. And
so I would offer a
Constructive.
Thought.
Of
Why don't
Why don't we address that issue
here Or could we could we
actually prioritize?
People that have lower
Maybe lower assets.
Maybe they don't claim you know,
dividends and investments on
there.
Income tax returns lower, maybe
just lower
Adjusted gross income. I mean,
you could pick your the
economist. So anyway, you get
what I'm saying, right? Um And
so maybe it would be pretty cool
to amend this bill to to shift
people forward in in the queue.
Uh, based on a more limited
means. I think that
Would would be good if that's if
it's legal. I mean, maybe it's a
conflict with some other law or
something, but, um, but I would
love to see that if possible,
because time is money right time
is money.
Um, we all
You know, we all use money
right? There's a time value of
money, right? And so, um, I
would just maybe, I don't know.
I mean, maybe I should ask you
is that is that something that
has come up in the discussions?
Is it something that is
workable? Or is it not workable?
What do you think?
Mr Chairman. That's something we
could look into. I don't know if
we could really start to
prioritize people based on their
income and based on their
assets. I don't know. I don't
know if I can do that, but I'll
look into it if you don't mind.
Okay. Sure, sure. Yeah, And once
again, it it sounds Mr Chair,
Senator. It sounds like
Just because this I wouldn't
normally suggest something like
this, but because it was an
injury that was, you know,
occurred to alcohol, Whole group
of people by the federal
government that just kind of
Um you know, I I It just would
maybe make sense in this
situation. If it doesn't. I
don't fault you for it. I think
I mean, that's great that you
can keep
You know, eventually get your
money. That's great. I just want
to make sure we don't
I mean, I'd love to see that. Q
And I'd love to study it. You
know, as the comments I just
curious, you know, what are we
gonna see a demographic pattern
there? I kind of think we will.
But anyway, maybe we could talk
about that in a couple of years
or something. So thank you,
mister.
Thank you.
Senator work just just quick
crime, and I appreciate the
discussion about the
Federal government's
responsibility for this. I think
all of us are
Frustrated by that I do want to
commend Senator Harmony. Oh, for
Coming up with a solution here
in this substitute that
addresses the local government
concern.
Again. I think it's kind of a
Win win. The local governments
need that revenue and they
deserve that revenue. Quite
frankly, they've been all
impacted just the same way you
know, in different It's not the
same way but in different ways
because of the impact to the
individuals who live in that
community, So I think that's a
huge positive I do again. 10.
It's frustrating that we're in a
situation where
You do have to have lawyers that
are out there doing that work,
But I commend those lawyers.
Thank goodness they're they're
doing that work to make this
Recovery possible. It's again I
get the fact that it's
frustrating to have that happen,
but without them being there,
we'd have an even a bigger
mess is my take on this, and so,
um again. I'm one of the lawyers
in my practice who passes along
gross receipts tax, so that
definitely happens. Um, and this
is a way to
Again.
Take that piece off the table
and and I think it's a good
solution. So again Appreciate
what you've done here and kind
of found the right balance with
this with this package, and I do
think Senator Schmidt's brings
up a good point about the cap
and and having carried
A number of these over the
years. The sustainable building
tax credit is one that gets used
up and it rolls over and it just
it builds up and we've got to
come back and tweak it. And I
think we may well be looking at
this again. Um
Maybe you would have to come
back as an expert witness for
senator Harmony on a year to
look at it again, but but I
think it's a It's a valid point
about how that gets applied.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you. So this is
thank you.
We're going to hold onto this.
So move on to the next item on
our agenda. Senate Bill 28.
Senator.
Diamond Brantley.
Okay, Senator. Good evening, Mr
Chairman. Members of the
committee. We are here today
presenting a bill that you're
familiar with The short line
Bill made the short list last
year and then got really
railroaded at the end Derailed.
I guess I should say at the end
of last session, and so we are
before you with the bill that
you are familiar with, only
we've come back.
Bigger and better because
there's been lots of discussion
in the interim of the importance
of this bill. It comes before
you now with the referral from
the Economic and Roll
Development Policy Committee and
a number of additional sponsors
who identified that this this
tax infrastructure credit will
help areas including
representative Montoya, who's
has an interest with the Navajo
Nations.
And Joseph Cervantes State
senator who was representing the
border complex industrial
industry industry down there at
the Senate Teresa border.
Quickly brief you on what we're
looking at, Uh, Senate Bill 28
authorizes the tech tax credit
for certain railroad
infrastructure investments in
New Mexico. There are just over
250 miles of rail operated by
the short line railroads.
example in my district would be
100 miles of railroad owned by
Southwest Railroad that connects
the copper mines in Hurley.
To the Tyrone and Tyrone to the
national big freight lines to
move it out. These local and
regional short line railroads
like the Southwestern railroad
paint essential role in our
state by serving hundreds of
customers to summarize there are
two separate components of this
bill. One would be a 50% state
income tax credit.
On cost to maintain or replaced
existing rail tracks that's
limited to 5000 per mile in New
Mexico and these improvements on
existing railroads would be
capped at 1.3 million. The
second part is a 50% state
income tax credit for new rail
construction and related
improvements.
Aimed at expanding and
incentivizing new custom. These
new railroad expansions would
have a cap of $1 million per
project with a 5 million total
annual limit. I would like to
refer to both my co sponsor from
the House representative Rod
Montoya and our expert
witnesses. We have T J.
Trujillo. We have Ryan Pity and
Jeff van shock both of the short
line railroad.
Good evening, Mr Chair. Members
of the committee. My name is
Ryan PT with Mickelson and
company and we helped short line
railroads across the state of
New Mexico finance, rail
infrastructure and economic
development projects. This is a
good bill. This is a good bill
for rural New Mexico, and it's
specifically designed to help
accelerate and boost rail
infrastructure investments for
these short lines.
For the ultimate benefit of the
customers that they serve, um,
carrying a variety of different
commodities will also help
promote economic development
opportunities.
There are 10 states that have
implemented similar types of
programs like this, so there is
a track record of success. The
theme here is it's It's It's
very capital intensive to
maintain and improve track. It's
even more expensive if you're
going to try to build an off
ramp or a spur to get to a
customer. So this program is not
a handout. It requires the
railroads to spend their own
money first and put it into the
ground in New Mexico before
earning a tax credit.
As the senator mentioned,
there's two buckets one to
improve the track and want to
connect industrial parks and
customer's perspective is $3
million a mile if you're going
to build a spur off to connect
with a customer or an industrial
park, so it's extremely
important from an economic
development sense and connecting
customers to grow the economy
And so we appreciate your
support and urge your
Holding of the bill and
including it in the tax package,
The benefits for the state will
be significant. Thank you. Thank
you.
Welcome represented Montoya. You
wanna go ahead, make a
statement.
Yes. Thank you, Mr Chair. First
time to be on this side of the
building this session.
Um
This, uh this tax credit would
be very beneficial for an effort
that's taking place in San Juan
County right now as well.
And that is, um Navajo nation is
working right now on trying to
get a it would be called a short
line rail, but it literally it
would be a spur about 100 miles
into San Juan County onto the
naval reservation near
Ah, the nappy farms. Um, there
has been several years of
Work by the Navajo Nation.
Uh, Navajo agricultural products
industries and the four corners
economic development.
Uh, in San Juan County.
Um, if you look at a map across
America, there was this huge.
Infrastructure desert where
there is no interstate. There is
no rail and there is no
commercial air and that runs
right through the Navajo nation
in San Juan County, so this is
something that could be taken
advantage of, and the Navajo
Nation has endorsed this bill
and is looking forward to
Uh, in the future, it's going to
take the state and the federal
government to also join in. But
if that happened, developers of
that rail shoreline would be
able to take advantage of this
in helping what would be a huge
boon. Thank you for having me
here today.
Thank you, representative.
I will go out to the audience or
anybody here. Support of Senate
Bill 28.
Right?
How is that better?
20 to start over again.
No. Ah!
Time's up anyway.
And anything that we could do
with this tax credit to help him
maintenance what they are doing
right now before and maintenance
or in expansion would certainly
be a beneficial for Freeport
McMoRan so we stand in full
support.
Members of the committee. My
name is Jeff Van Check role of
southwestern New Mexico and we
support this during the interim,
so
Um, this bill would do
tremendous things for our
Right. Anybody here in
opposition of Senate Bill 28.
See. None will go to committee
questions. Do we have
Okay, go ahead.
Go ahead.
Can you hear me?
Yes, we can so we can go ahead
and, uh
Testimony. Two minutes. Thank
you very much. My name is Ross
Lane. I'm here today
representing the Arizona Eastern
Railroad, and we transport a
variety of commodities,
including minerals, essential
for a daily lives across Arizona
and New Mexico without our
shippers or without our services
Shippers be forced to file
alternative modes of
transportation.
I'll be it not as efficient, not
as environmentally friendly.
This bill would. We're certainly
supportive of this bill, which
would help us upgrade our
infrastructure at a pace that's
otherwise not possible. I just
want to thank the sponsor of
this bill and thank you for
allowing me to speak.
Thank you.
Go ahead.
Uh, good afternoon chair by
chair committee members.
My name is Diliberto Moreno's
work for idle Horse resources, a
short line railroad in Santa
Teresa, New Mexico.
I'm here to support Bill 28 that
supports New Mexico Rural
infrastructure Bill Bill 28 will
help us to bring more business
to Santa Teresa, New Mexico,
like the two business that we
got last year, one is actually a
tank farm.
That was the start Construction
on March 2023 and complete their
construction on October 2023.
These guys have
120 tanks now 24 full high by 14
diameter and can hold up to £3
million of pepper match. These
direct investment is going to be
close to 30 million is going to
30 million is gonna create 30
direct jobs in the region, the
second one company that we
anchored last year as a process
packaging onions. They're gonna
invest around 30 million as
well.
And building is under
construction and will be
completed the third quarter of
2024.
Please help us to continue with
the success stories in the
region. I have an active
pipeline companies that I'm
trying to bring to the region
and built 28 can make a huge
difference.
Please.
For Bill 28 appreciate your
attention. Thank you very much.
Thank you.
Go ahead.
Mr Chairman, members of the
committee. My name is Chelsea,
Canada, and I'm, the director of
public policy at the New Mexico
Chamber of Commerce. The state
chamber believes real is
critical infrastructure
essential for economic growth
and prosperity. Our research
report driving New Mexico's
future identified the
infrastructure is one of the key
pillars that drives economic
competitiveness.
Railroads keep New Mexico
businesses connected to the
national freight network,
providing safe and real
affordable freight service for
producers, manufacturers and
farmers in New Mexico. We
believe this tool will help
improve and expand rail
infrastructure, it is essential
to encourage increased
investment. Thank you.
Thank you.
That it
Okay?
Okay, Now we're gonna, um,
Committee for questions as
Senator Hamlin. Thank you. Mr
Chair mines more of a comment
rather than a question. I do
want to go ahead and verify that
both of the issues that the
representative and senator
talking about our issues that
were endorsed by the economic
room. We had a very lively
conversation when we were down
in southern New Mexico about
rail lines and, um you know, I
still cannot get the image of
what
Is not happening on the Navajo
Reservation because of the lack
of rail lines there. Um, I still
have that image in my mind. And
I think I shared that with you
in the hallway the other day.
And so, um, very excited that
they there's a continued the
committee for Committee
considering any further
questions from
The committee if none will hold
on and consider as part of the
package, So thank you.
Okay, so we're gonna go? Uh,
I'm gonna jump to Senator
Gregg's SB 64 since trying to
get through that.
Text. Uh
It was first and then we'll
Come back up to center Bill 45,
a
You hear me, Benny? Uh, yes, I
can, but
Move the mic closer over to you,
Senator Gregg.
Thank you, Mr Chair and members
of the committee. We
We saw version actually saw this
exact bill right? This year's
It's Bill 64.
Sam Bill 64 provides and
exclusion to the oil and gas
severance tax for operators of
stripper wells, who complete a
production compliance project.
This project will allow these
ions with the new order and gas
rules, and there's upgrade in
the equipment will measurably
help emissions from these wells.
The bill only only applies to
certain operators those who
produce less than a day.
That's roughly 13,000 oil wells.
That are in the state in 28% of
the stripper wells are produced
by these small operators, 12% of
the state Land Office managers
about 6300 active wells.
With 60% classified as stripper.
Loss of this production will
negatively impact
Revenue for education in the
Land Grant permanent fund.
The state land office and not
assume this production will be
approximately 275 comma annual
cost for the I. R. S about 4.3
Million and again That's not
from the General fund.
There's a couple of things I
wanted to mention in the IR it
mentions. Uh, particularly this
will incentivize these guys and
actually, I think it would
courage. I don't think
incentivizes encourage them to
Bring these wells into
compliance instead of either
plug them.
Or leave.
So
Mr Chair and members of the
committee I have with me today.
Matt Thompson.
Ah to provide
Other help and maybe make some
statements about what he sees in
the bill.
So, Mr Cherif. He may thank you,
Matt. Introduce yourself.
Hi. Chairman members Matt
Thompson. Come be our consulting
and, uh, I got the privilege of
helping Senator Gregg's with
this bill last session and I'm
back again to discuss it with
you. Um, I I think it's really
important that we talk about the
positive effect that this would
have been bringing these wells
into compliance.
To help meet the ozone precursor
rule. The methane waste rule and
basically that 98% gas capture
from the governor's executive
order. These wells are are
stripper wells. There's um,
about 275 operators. As Senator,
Gregg said.
It's 3 to 5% of our annual
production comes from these
wells. If we can help these
wells come into compliance, it
will have a measurable effect on
our emissions. Um, forever at
about $70 a barrel.
For every barrel that one of
these stripper wells produce.
It's $1000 a year.
Um, in a in a text exclusion.
So we're not talking about much.
There's a 10 year cap. So if a
stripper well, the average
triple makes about 2.5 barrels a
year.
So we're looking at between
2025.
I doubt I'm sorry. I'm sorry.
Yeah. 22 2.5 barrels a day.
So we're looking at about 2
20,000 to 20 to 20,000 to
$25,000 a year for 10 years, Um
That's about the cost of
compliance for this rule,
according to the
Mr Chairman, members of the
committee. Uh, you know, with
with that we will will stand for
questions. Uh, the thing is you
As you look at at this small
wells, we can make them
Help us
That's what you kind of
important wing she once we go
through this if we want to
expand this to maybe more
operating
Because Mr Chairman again as I
as I mentioned with the state
land office, uh, these wells are
in formations that are roughly
about 5000.
They're in spray Berry or
Bone springs formation. Some of
those are definition bone
springs. It's in other things.
But
It's important that we can sugar
There's option because when you
look at those deeper wells,
maybe we assume
That that formations everywhere.
Mr Chairman Members Committee is
not
It's not And while we while we
have this opportunity, we ought
to keep these wells producing
and stripper wells historically.
Will produce these low numbers
for years and years and years.
So Mr Chairman with that will
will certainly stand for
questions.
Okay. Thank you. Well, let's go
out to the audience. Anybody
here in support of Senate Bill
64.
Go ahead and take the mike.
Matt. Can you hand them the
mike? Thank you.
Mr Chair. Members of the
committee. Um, my name is Jim
Winchester. I'm the executive
director of the Independent
Petroleum Association of New
Mexico. Just a couple of
clarifications on the bill. This
was not apply to large
multinational oil and gas
operators. Only small producers
like the ones that I am proud to
represent right now under the
state's new ozone precursor
rule, hundreds of small
producers currently faced the
dilemma of prematurely shutting
in still productive, albeit
lower, producing.
Wells because of the cost of
required upgrades simply too
high. Meanwhile, New Mexico
stands to lose millions of
dollars in state revenue with
still extractable oil and gas
resources being cut off. Do the
do the forced premature shut ins
of these wells. So what this
bill does essentially is it
provides a lifeline to the small
independent producers and keeps
those low producing wells as you
heard running into Mexico.
Um, it helps cover the cost of
equipment upgrades, but it is
only paid back to the operator
after he or she makes the
investment and his payback on
future oil production.
In other words, the operator
takes all the risk. It's a win
win across the board the state
wins by collecting revenues on
the extended life of the well
small operators win by staying
in business and stretching the
life of those wells and, most
importantly, the environment
wins as these newly refurbished
low producing wells come into
compliance with the new ozone
precursor rule.
So for that reason we do stand
in support surgery. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr Chair and members
of the committee. I'm Ashley
Wagner, the vice president of
government affairs for the New
Mexico Oil and Gas Association.
Mexico has made great strides in
recent years through the
development of methane rules
that improve air quality and
regulations that better
protected ground and surface
water.
In addition, advancements in
technology have allowed for
wells to produce more
efficiently and with greater
longevity.
The combination of regulation
and technology ensures that
we're increasing environmental
protections and still
contributing to our economic
base.
SB 64 will benefit the state by
improving environmental
protections and extending the
beneficial life of the existing
wells. We urge you to please
support this bill. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr Chairman, Members
of the committee Mike Miller
Premium Basin Petroleum
Association, not to be
redundant, but, um, this is an
important bill that helps these
small producers state in
business and not have to abandon
these wells prematurely.
It. It will
Come back to pay for itself.
By keeping these wells in
production. Thank you.
Thank you.
Okay? Anybody in opposition of
Senate Bill
64
Nobody in line.
Okay. Alright. Well, now go to
Committee for
Questions, right. Whoa! Hold on.
Identified those
Um
Senator, What's and, uh, what is
the average cost of upgrading?
You know it. Well, what's do we
I was trying to look in there if
I are willing, Mr Chairman
members it's about. So what
We're talking about the
production compliance project is
a long word. It's basically
replacing valves, flanges and
adding a vapor recovery unit.
Um Wells that are constructed
today have all of that. But
we're talking about wells that
are 40 50 60 years old that were
constructed under a different
regulatory requirement regime.
So as um
As these marginal wells or
stripper wells have got to have
aged. We've changed the
regulatory requirements because
we know more about what we need
to do to protect the environment
now, so we have to go in and
change all of that. All of that
old steel, basically, and it's
anywhere from 25 to $40,000.
This would be kept. Most of
these worlds are very low
producing.
It's captain 10 years or
payback. So if it's a if it's a
little bit on the higher end,
producing marginal, well of,
say, 78 barrels a day, it might
it might pay for itself in in in
in six or seven years, But if
it's a very low producing well,
it would probably hit the 10
year maximum where it would get
maybe $20,000 total to pay 50%
of the upgrade cost, but that's
better than nothing on it. Well,
that might have 60 to $65,000
gross a year.
And then you've got 30 to 1535
to 50% in taxes, royalties and
expenses. You've got 10 to 15%
in maintenance. So you're
looking at that. I mean, that's
what they mean by marginal.
well. They were marginally
economic.
That does not mean that they're
dying Wells. Some of these
marginal wells
The formation has balanced the
pressures of balance. So the
natural drive to push the oil or
the gas to the well bore is
gone, but it can be it can
remain in that state for decades
and as much as 80% of the oil
can still be in place, so and
it's much more environmentally
friendly to try to recover that
on using technology than to
drill a brand new well.
So that's why we we pushed to
keep them running. We want to
bring them up to the river
environmental regulatory
standards that we have now and
we want to benefit the
environment because it is a
large chunk of wells. There were
a lot of very shallow wells
drilled.
4050 years ago. So those are the
ones it's a. It's a good, stable
wage, and we're trying to keep
that production in place.
Appreciate appreciate.
There are no further questions.
Thank you, Senator.
What's up?
What's that?
Yeah. Yeah. Okay, Let's move on
to, uh,
Bill 135, a
Yes.
We have an amendment.
Yes, Uh
Really substitute for Senate
Bill 135, a
Thank you, Mr Chair members of
the committee. We can make this
short or long. This is in 2019.
We passed the step therapy Bill.
With the support of this
particular committee, and it did
pass because it takes care of
individuals who need specialized
medications. We are coming
forward today with an amendment
to the step therapy bill.
That takes care of cancer and
immunological diseases to allow
them to be on the drugs they are
on.
For at least five years or
whenever their healthcare
provider decides that it would
not be appropriate.
That is what the
Amendment basically says
That's the last committee. We
were asked to consult.
With practicing physicians and
with the insurance companies
about this, bill, uh, dead
center Ivey Soto consulted with
the insurance companies. I
consulted with the practicing
physicians and some of the
language in here are is what
physicians recommended Putting
in
To the bill.
So, um, I would stand for my co
sponsors to say a few words.
Senator German Um, senators,
This is
You're
She's probably a bill. You're a
little surprised to see me as
one of the spots I hear from so
many of my constituents and so
many people that are having so
much difficulty getting the
medication that they need.
That their doctor has told them
they need and they're having to
jump through all these hoops.
To get medication that they need
right now.
And especially when we're
dealing with with situations
like cancer.
And some of the other really
horrible diseases that are out
there. Patients need to be able
to get the medication they
deserve. Fortunately,
I'm one of the blessed ones, and
I wouldn't have said that here.
Six or seven years ago.
But I go through the V A
And there are very few things I
have to get Preauthorization
for.
I asked to go to the Mayo
Clinic and they turned me down
for that one. That's about it.
So, um, other than that, I
really never have to get
preauthorization. My doctor had
wants me on it.
He gets me on it.
That doesn't happen in the
civilian world.
It doesn't happen for you.
If you get sick, you're gonna
have to jump through a bunch of
hoops through your medical
insurance to get the medication
that you deserve.
This bill is trying to deal with
those issues, especially for
those who have very serious
illnesses. Thank you. Thank you,
Senator.
Mr Members of the Committee.
Thank you very much. Uh, for
here in this book tonight. This
bill is about the sacred
relationship between the medical
provider and the patient.
Uh um.
Several years ago. I needed to
get a specialized drug.
And, um
I was initially Bill died. I was
given a list by my
Previously benefit manager.
Uh, company as to what would be
required in order from number
nine. Thanks on that list.
I did every single one of the
nine things.
We re submitted. I was then
denied.
Again and I called them and I
said
I don't understand.
And they said, Well, if you read
further down in the letter
You'll see at the bottom of the
letter. It says there might be
other things that will be
required of you.
I said.
I'm sorry. You gave me a list of
nine specific things to do, and
I did the ninth specific things.
I don't understand.
And finally, the lady said to me
And I quote
If we told patients what they
really needed to do.
To be approved. They would just
I want to repeat that again,
sir.
If we told patients
What they really needed to do to
be approved.
They would just do it.
That's what she told me.
And so
Now.
So I frankly, I just I just I
just had a complete meltdown at
that time at that point in the
parking lot.
Uh and and the
You know it is
What do these things Where?
where you have doctors were
prescribing.
Treatments to their patients.
And then you have folks
somewhere else interfering in
that relationship.
Interfering in that relationship
and saying
No.
Now.
They'll tell you it's about
patient health, except it's not
about patient health because
they're not saying you can't
prescribe. They're saying we
won't pay for it.
Won't pay for it.
Paid for it on your own. There's
no problem at all. This isn't
about patient health for, say.
It's about
Um
A few days ago, I was
Blessed to receive an award from
the Diabetes Association.
In New Mexico. We have the
Lowest copay is in the country.
We have $25 copay.
Or insulin. The rest of the
country has
$35. That's because three years
before the rest country went to
$35. I was asked with carrying a
bill.
And I negotiated the $25 okay
and part of what we did when we
did that was we set up preferred
formulary or medically necessary
alternative.
And the medically necessary
alternative.
That we're talking about then.
That's precisely what we're
talking about here in terms of
these drugs, medically necessary
alternative.
Um
Now you have you have in front
of you. A amendment.
This bill, and it's a It's a
moment that we that we spent the
last few days negotiated with
several of the local plans to
remove the amendment for
discussion.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr Chairman and the
and so what we've done in and
negotiated with the local
plants.
Uh, center step phonics reached
out to some of the medical
professionals.
Uh, well, I talked to some of
the local plans.
As well. Some of the national
folks were in town.
And, um
And and so what? We instead of
for the life of the patient, we
are
Change of that language to for
no less than the duration of the
therapeutic effect of the of the
drug.
Again, though that keeps the
relationship once someone has
been approved that keeps that
relationship.
Between the medical provider and
the patient.
Because particularly you have a
chronic condition, doing an
annual
Roth doesn't make any sense.
It's a chronic condition.
And if you and as long as the
drug as as a continued
therapeutic effect, you
shouldn't have to continue to go
through all of this.
Ah!
We are allowing, in addition to
generic biosimilars and
interchangeable biologics.
Those are couple other classes
similar to generics.
Uh, we've had a dive them enough
molecular
Uh, compounds that make up all
of these.
Ah!
The
And and so with this, I think I
think we've gotten to a point of
some satisfaction that
With some of the local plans.
That effect New Mexico.
Uh, the national folks are still
not happy, but the opposition. I
don't think you'll be hearing
but the, um
So so I really do appreciate the
fact that they've been willing
to sit down and talk to us.
We've We've moved as much as we
can on this. We also did strike
behavioral health condition.
So that we're limiting it to
cancer and
Our immune diseases in terms of
the of the of the conditions
that would bypass step therapy.
Uh, and the reason why we're
doing that.
Okay?
And the reason why we're doing
that is just because of the
range of drugs.
Dealing, uh, that we would
require a little bit more study.
I think to do to include
April with that, Mr Chairman.
Thank you. All right. Thank you.
Sponsor.
Alright. Okay. So at this time
you make the amendments or so
no, I think that what we need to
do is roll it into a new
committee sub. We don't We don't
do amendments to substitutes so
we can we can adopt it and then
we'll just make sure that it
goes out as a committee sub
witness incorporated into it. I
mean, what? What you have as a
committee for the last
committee.
Okay, so it's just
Okay?
So okay, so I thought I thought
it was. Yeah. Not products.
Taxes service, correct. It
suspects um, who were good? So
Yeah, so we can we can just
adopt a member. If if this is
the only amendment, and that's
So okay, so I thought I thought
it was. Yeah. Not products.
Taxes service, correct. It
suspects um, who were good? So,
Yeah, so we can we can just
adopt a member. If if this is
the only amendment and that
probably So you moved it for
discussion Purposes. Just leave
it as
Okay?
I'll move the amendment to put
it on, okay?
Second Senator Gregg's. Anybody
in opposition of the
Proposed amendment.
You know you would amend the
bill. So okay, so we'll go to
the audience. Anybody here
Supportive? Uh,
Senate Bill 135 as amended.
If you guys can
Yes, Mr.
Give you a couple of minutes
each, please. Or less. Mr Chair
members of the committee. I'm
Superintendent of Insurance.
Alice Kane.
Senate Bill 135 removes barriers
to care and allows patients
access to medications that are
found to be medically necessary
by their treating healthcare
provider.
In addition, once a patient has
already gone through the
necessary steps to get approved
for a medication that their
medical care provider says they
need further interruptions we
feel are not appropriate.
Oh, it's I thanks the sponsors
for including OS I and
discussions regarding technical
changes and urges passage of
this bill is amended.
Thank you.
Afternoon. Good evening. Good
evening. I'm sorry.
Um, I am. But I'm Tim Jennings
from Roswell, New Mexico. I'm
here as a private citizen. My
wife and I spent sponsored the
high risk health insurance pool
bill, and it has a lot of real
fixes in there for
pharmaceuticals.
I get counselor, countless
people telling me of this
problem that they cannot that
they said. You got to go back to
your doctor and get a re
referral or for a different
medicine and in southern New
Mexico and on the east side of
the state. We don't have
doctors.
And we can't even get doctors in
Albuquerque. We go to Texas for
everything.
You can't just go back to your
doctor, and this is something as
the sponsors of the high risk
health insurance pool.
Pharmaceutical was one of our
biggest options options. We had
our problems We had. Uh, this is
a huge problem in the rural
areas and and you just We don't
have doctors, period, So I hope
you would pass this. This is a
God's Saving Bill. Thank you.
Good evening, Mr Chairman and
members of the committee my day
to talk to you guys about the
fact that I have severe plaque
psoriasis.
And I have had it for a year and
then
On a daily basis. Um, I really
want to thank the spot because I
was able to get access to as a
lobbyist for 18 years on behalf
of your constituents because
they might not have access to
the medication they need. This
legislation will provide them
access and this will save lives
as the good senator and mayor
said earlier. I also want to
thank 16 sponsors.
Both chambers both sides of the
aisle I haven't seen about
Thank you for paying attention.
Thank you.
Mr. Chairman of the committee,
Larry Veranda, registered
lobbyists. We were in the
position. We had concerns with
this bill, so we appreciate the
sponsors working with us to help
us address those concerns to
make it workable. So, although
we don't necessarily stand in
support will neutron the
legislation? We think it will
work.
And so again, we appreciate the
process and trying to make
things better for our patients
in New Mexico. Thank you, Mr
Chairman.
All right, you know?
Okay. All right. Thank you. Will
anybody in opposition?
You guys want to come up and
write testimony.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Members of
the committee. My name is
Jonathan Broxton. I'm with the
Pharmaceutical Care Management
Association. We are the National
Association International guy
representing pharmacy benefit
managers. And we, uh, we rise in
respectful opposition to this
bill. The fact of the matter is
that prior authorization and
step therapy are not only cost
containment measures, but they
are also patients say we
appreciate
The work that was done. It does
not This bill in the crowd from
the risk that prior
authorization can help prevent
Adverse reactions that you can
help physicians that are
overworked. Get a second opinion
with the latest in medical
research, so the risen
respectful opposition. We know
that if we worked on this over
the interim, we could have come
to a great bill.
Good evening, Mr Chairman,
Benefits manager hunters and
taking the time to is better,
But we think we're still not
quite there. I
Do also believe we can get
there. We have the concerns with
safety and quite frankly with
cost, and that's not necessarily
a cost to the health plan, but
it costs to the premium payers
Cost of the plan. Sponsors. Um
We talked about unintended
consequences here quite a bit.
And I think once we see it
coming, it doesn't become quite
an unintended consequence, but
an unfortunate consequence and
really some of the unfortunate
consequences. We see. Should
this bill move forward are on
the safety side. Uh, you know,
when you look at especially the
conditions that we're talking
about here cancer and, um, you
know, they're, uh
I mean, auto immune. Thank you,
Senator. Auto immune diseases.
You are often have people that
have serious health concerns,
and they see multiple doctors.
One of the things that the
umbrella of utilization
management, which includes step
therapy, and prior
authorization does is it allows
a second look at those
conditions and across the whole
spectrum of a patient's
condition. You know, oftentimes,
a patient will show up with
their bag of meds when they go
to the doctor. If they forget
one or two, The doctor doesn't
know they exist because they're
seeing three or four different
doctors and oncologists
hematologist.
Is there.
Primary care, so that is still
takes us to a fairly scary place
when we come to this. Thank you,
And we're also concerned with
the cost of the F I R l use
myself as an example. I'm
retired under P E r A. I guess
this last year, our pension went
up a half percent. Health
insurance went up 5%. So we are
concerned with the costs. We
feel like that.
We often talk about winners and
losers here. And with this bill,
we see that the premium payers
and the plan sponsors we keep
getting more for less with
health coverage. Thank you very
much.
Thank you.
We also are grateful for the
discussion and we know that
we're gonna be talking about
this more in the future,
frankly, because there's
something we talked about, and
we thought we solved in 2018. If
you would call. Um there was a
bill The bill out of the same
folks in the rooms talking about
this. The concern we have is we
think that there were making
some progress. Our concern is
the safety side. I can tell you
from a family example. I won't
go into specifics.
From the family example of
multiple conditions from
multiple physicians. When it
came to the call. It was you
have a severe potential for drug
interactions and caught by
anybody until that they used
this program actually to change
election. We don't talk about
those things a lot around here
because it doesn't right. That's
not what someone's up here
complaining about.
We understand the system is not
perfect has steps by which the
the superintendent insurance has
tools to be able to take care of
the other problems, and so we
look forward to continue working
to the interim. Even when this
passes, probably we look forward
to working into the interim with
you all to Mr Chair members of
the committee. My name is Brent
Moore. I am a registered
lobbyist for America's health
insurance plans.
It's a National Trade
Association, and we stand in
respectful opposition to the
bill. I will say this. I deeply
appreciate the efforts that
Senator Ivey Soto and senators
to phonics have made in terms of
trying to reach some type of
compromise language, but we
still have concerns with the
bill, and I would say in the
first instance
Health plans and the members
that are in New Mexico clearly
hear the frustrations that are
there with prior authorization
and step therapy.
Even though there are those
frustrations. We believe that
step therapy and prior
authorization still are
valuable, useful tools they
provide for patient safety they
provide for ways to try to
control costs and an environment
where drug prices,
Pharmaceutical prices are out of
control. And we would like to
I tried to ensure patient safety
by using these methods. We
believe that the bill as it
relates to cancer and
autoimmune and remove removing
step therapy, and prior
authorization is a really
dangerous direction to go from a
policy perspective. There will
be no, um adherence to
guidelines or or health plans
being in the position.
Of trying to provide adhering.
That's we believe a dangerous
place to be. I would tell you
the current law exception
request it also provides for
expedited review. We believe
them, but I acknowledge Senator
Ivey Soto phonics have worked to
try to meet us. We're
Great. So this time we'll go to
committee for
Questions.
Mr Chair.
Senator Hamlin. Thank you, Mr
Chair and thank you sponsors for
bringing this forward. Um
You know, I think I think the
reason for this bill is that it
addresses a problem with the
system of health care in
general. Uh, last year, On the
first day of the session, I
slipped on ice and tore my
meniscus and wound up
thankfully, because of my doctor
was able to get an M r I x ray
as well when we knew darn well,
I didn't have anything broken.
We knew that an MRI would cover
that. And yet that I get an X
ray.
And I grew up with a single mom
who is a nurse who taught me how
to ask questions. I have a skill
set that not a lot of being able
to ask questions and not leave.
The thing that concerns me is
that this is putting profit over
people and prohibiting them from
having access to medication, but
would also concerns me and some
of the of the conversations that
have been happening is that
Much less being able to
understand how they need to
manage their health care.
And so, um
This is concerning for me that,
uh, we have people you know, as
she's got the ability to ask
those questions, I think of
people in my district and
district 38, and we're all
southern New Mexico that are
just starving for healthcare
period.
Much less being able to navigate
the system.
And so I share.
Cute Senator Tollman.
Oh, thank you. Thank you, Mr
Chair and
Thank you, senator for bringing
forth this important. I just
have two statements. One
In my world.
Insurance companies wouldn't
exist. We don't need them.
Necessary middleman.
And we're living in an upside
down world where you have to go.
Getting insurance clerk to
decide whether or not you're
going to get a drug, and that's
your doctor. Ridiculous. Thank
you.
Anybody else? If not well, it's
pleasure. The committee motion
for Do pass by a Senator Hamlin
has amended
Second by Senator Sanchez.
Please call the roll. Apologies
committee, So no, no, no, it's
the amended
Yes, Senator Brand.
Send it to Greeks. Yes, Senator
had a meal. Yes, Senator Turner
Lopez excused. Senator Sanchez.
Was that a yes?
Yes.
Senator Schmitt. Days? Yes.
Senator Worth
Hamblin.
Senator Shindo? Yes, we have
eight years to pass 8 to 0.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Members
of the committee. Thank you.
Thank you.
Alrighty so we'll move on to
center Bill 40. 45 minutes.
This one.
Senator whenever you're ready.
Thank you. Mr Chairman. Thanks
for hearing us tonight. I, um
come before you with one word.
Broadband. Um, probably sick of
me Chairman over here with this
stuff.
But as you know, we did enact
the office of Broadband access
and expansion. We came up and
did some cleanup last year, the
office is doing wonders. Jumping
through hoops on fire. Mr
Chairman and members of the
committee. We are literally at
the moment. Um, you know about
two were standing
Very close to receiving 670 cold
broadband by making some of the
changes that are in the
legislation that we have here
today. Um I, uh, the bill does
five things, Mr Chairman, but I
do have an amendment, which I
can introduce the bill first and
then go to the amendment.
Yeah, It's Yeah.
How about if I just tell you a
little bit about what we're
doing? And then we'll go to the
amendment. Thank you, sir. OK,
So, essentially, I have the
acting director of the Office of
Broadband access and expansion
through Loveless. He's done
wonders in this area, as well as
other parts of state government
He agreed to take on this
challenge from, um Miss Schlegel
are former director and he
hasn't missed a beat. So he'll
say a few words here in just a
moment. But there are five
things that this legislation
does.
It moves the state education
network program and people in
its entirety over to the office
of Broadband access and
expansion. Second, it adds an
exemption to the procurement
code for broadband on multi year
professional service contracts.
Third and adds to it Adds state
to wireless consumer advanced
infrastructure to the wireless.
Consumer Advanced Infrastructure
Act, and then it clean cleans up
the short title. It updates
short titles to Officer
Broadband Access and Expansion
Act and connecting Mexico Act,
and it transfers ownership of
assets from the office of
Broadband access and expansion
from do it to obey.
And what the amendment does. Mr
Chairman is it? Um, we
referenced We had two things
that we did wrong here on Page
one of the bill. Um online 11.
We referenced the wrong act, The
Tax Administration act with the
amendment does is it inserts the
word severance, severance tax
bonding and then act and read
reads, it reads going forward.
The second thing that the
amendment does is we were not
comfortable with and I think
we've done enough work on pole
attachments, Mr Chairman, and
so, um, we we take pole
attachments out of this
legislation altogether. We did
have some some pretty excellent
feedback from a number of
fronts. We're going to continue
to work on that, ideally, in the
next couple of years to get that
done, so on Page one, we do
strike lines 17.
Um and 18 through the semicolon
and then on page If you go over
the pages, I think it's page 33.
Finally get myself essentially
what it does is it strikes
anything related to pole
attachments all the way through
which were addressed all the way
to page 33 line 11 so it takes
pole attachments out of this
completely and brought pretty
much I hope that's what you hear
today, but it brought the
industry um you know, to support
this and then we also had to
make some other changes on that.
On page 43.
Which changed sections section
12 to 11 in section 13 to 12 and
then we had to strike the word
power somewhere here on page 49.
Over on, Let's see line 17.
So that's that's essentially
what the amendment does to the
five point Mr Chair, Senators.
Thank you very much for the
opportunity here. Just want to
briefly say that. Please
introduce yourself. Sure.
Loveless, acting director of the
Office of Broadband Access and
Expansion, just wanted to think
the New Mexico Exchange carrier
group and the New Mexico
Electric Electric Co op
Association for the work that
was already done.
And they continue to work that
we're going to do on the pole
attachments and being able to
get to the amendment.
Additionally, I'd like to just
think the work from the PSF to
director and their legal counsel
for the work that and support
that they are providing on
bringing the state education
network team over to the office
of Broadband and supporting this
legislation. These five things
are critical to make sure that
deployment of broadband has done
efficiently.
And getting into the most rural
communities across the state.
And I'm gonna just try and keep
this brief. So that way we can.
Thank you.
Thank you.
I'll move the amendment MOTION.
CLOSE MOVED. Amendment
Second by Senator Gregg's any
opposition to the amendment
none.
Thank you, Mr Bill
Thank you. Alrighty. So at this
time, we'll go today. Audience.
Uh, anybody here? Support of
Senate Bill 45 as amended.
Okay. So we can get maybe
If you guys a minute, each
curious, Kari Carrie's got the
clock, so we better start.
Good evening, Mr Chair.
I believe it's on
We talk.
Just gotta get it close to here.
Mr. Chair members, Iris Romero,
Director of Public School
Facilities Authority were in
full support of this bill, and I
want to differ over to my
colleague, Legal counsel Mona
Romero. I mean, Mona Martinez,
who has been spearheading the
partnership between PSF A and
oh, boy.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr Chair
and members of the committee for
the past year. Psf A and O by
have been working under an
interim governmental agreement
that we initiated and we believe
that oh, by is better suited for
handling the technical issues
related to broadband broadband
has become very sophisticated
and complex. And while the PSF a
Has been handling broadband
issues for a significant period
of time. Our expertise lies in
the areas of school construction
and maintenance, and we want to
continue in that vein. Thank
you.
Thank you.
Mr Chair members of the
committee. I'm Cameron Graham.
I'm a volunteer advocate with
AARP, New Mexico and it's
241,000 members.
Ah, this we support this bill.
It will. The changes that are
being made made one more step in
making broadband available
throughout the state. And as you
know, we have a real problem
with broadband in the state and
in particular in rural areas
where we have a great deal of
members.
And for the reasons that you've
already heard, these changes
will enhance the ability to, uh,
to get universal broadband
available in the state. We want
to thank the sponsor once again
for another piece of legislation
that is moving this important
project forward for the state.
Thank you very much.
Mr Chairman, members of the
committee Robert Romero,
registered lobbyists for a kid
Carson Electric Co op Kit Carson
has 13,000 broadband customers.
We represent five school
districts, six municipalities
and to pueblos with the with the
amendment on the pole
attachments. We are support this
bill.
Scott Scanlon, registered
lobbyists for Comcast. Um, we
support this bill. We think
Senator Padilla for working with
us. We think the broadband
office for their continuing
efforts to expand this program
throughout the state of New
Mexico. We support the bill.
Thank you.
Good evening, Senator Shindo
members of the committee. My
name is Norman NATO, um, with
veterans and military family
Caucus. We're here to express
our support for Senate Bill 45.
I'm personally I'm here to try
to share with you the importance
of online.
Broadband access.
For mental health care. I'm a
disabled veteran who has lived
in New Mexico just over a year.
If the online help. I have
gotten therapy, I've gotten
working secular VCI, it would
run over 4.5 months in each of
those sessions I've been in in
each of the groups have been in.
There have been numerous
veterans who couldn't maintain a
connection who couldn't
establish and maintain a
connection.
And those of us who were in the
group.
It was like being stuck in a
lifeboat, unable to help your
shipmates.
Um, I would ask you respectfully
to please consider rural
broadband access a very tangible
if not the most tangible suicide
prevention measure, you see,
come across your desk this year.
Thank you very much. And if I
can answer any questions, I'd be
honored to try. My name is
Michael Plant Enberg with tag
New Mexico and big bite, and I
just want to thank the sponsor
and the broadband office for
continued work on the broadband
expansion across the state.
Thank you. All right, so now
we'll go. Anybody
Go ahead, Tamara.
Good evening. I'm actually
substituting for tomorrow. Good
evening, Mr Chair and committee
members.
My name is Misty will attack I
am I represent resound networks.
Excuse me and rural broadband
companies serving seven states,
including the state of New
Mexico. We stand in support of
SB 45 and ask that you please
pass this important legislation
so that companies like ours can
be more efficient and timely in
our mission to this permission
to deliver best in class, Get
ready broadband networks to
rural New Mexicans. Thank you.
Thank you.
Can you hear us?
Yes.
Yes.
Oh, yes, you're you're muted.
There we go.
Go ahead. Okay. Sorry about
that. I thought it was a muted
um, Mr Chair and members of the
committee. Good evening. My name
is Scott Lopez. I am the vice
president of business
development and government.
Government affairs at Kelly
Cable Live in New Mexico. I'm
also a registered lobbyist,
native New Mexican and veteran.
We support SB 45. Kelly Cable of
New Mexico is a homegrown
utility contractor with more
than 30 years of experience, we
probably employ more than 260
New Mexicans.
Working in five offices,
including Albuquerque, Santa Fe,
last Vegas, Farmington AnAnd at
Las Cruces. We engineered,
designed and build broadband
networks and projects for rural
urban and tribal tribal clients
were also a co founder of the
New Mexico Broadband summit that
had more than 320 attendees this
past December at Sandia Resort
and Casino.
We know Mexico is in the very
early stages of a once in a
lifetime broadband build out
that will last for at least 10
Years over a billion dollars has
been allocated to broadband in
our state. These complex
projects it this part this
complex projects are going to
happen, and they must be
successful for people to improve
their way of life. We believe
that media and acting director
Loveless have drafted and
negotiated in good faith, a bill
that allows for economies of
scale, responsible growth and
thoughtful engagement for all
new Mexicans.
Thank you, Mr Chair and
committee members.
Thank you.
Go ahead.
Mr Chair members of the
committee. My name is
Mr Chair members of the
committee. My name is Chelsea,
Canada, and I'm, the director of
public policy at the New Mexico
Chamber of Commerce. The state
chamber supports this bill and
applaud the sponsors effort to
bring more and better broadband
to New Mexico, finding ways to
increase broadband access in the
state and remove the barriers
holding us back has been a top
priority for the chamber for a
long time, and we appreciate
Senator Padilla's steadfast
leadership on this issue for
many years. We appreciate how he
continues to work with industry
to ensure that we get more
private.
Investment in New Mexico, and
this piece of legislation is
just another piece of the
puzzle. Thank you.
Thank you.
All right.
This time. Anybody in opposition
of
Senate Bill 45 8.
Mr Chairman, members of the
committee. My name is T. J
Trujillo, and I'm, a registered
lobbyist for the New Mexico Rule
Electric Cooperative
Association.
We represent 15 of the 16
electric cooperatives in New
Mexico.
All due respect to the good
sponsor, uh, in the office of
Broadband.
We oppose SB 45 in its current
written form.
We believe that there are still
some substantive procedural
issues are process issues and
clarity, uh, to work through at
this point.
We're happy to continue to work
in a collaborative process. We
appreciate the pole attachments
being being taken out, but
unfortunately, we don't think
we're quite there yet again.
Thank you to the sponsors for
sponsor for working with this
and again we urge you to thank
you, Mr Chairman, Committee
members. My name is Robert
Castillo. I am the CEO of
Continental Divide Energy and
telecommunications cooperative.
We are a member of the statewide
organization. We've expanded
into the broadband business. Oh,
56 years ago. Uh, our service
territory is from just west of
Albuquerque, all the way to the
Arizona corridor.
Uh, all the way to the Arizona
border on the I 40 corridor.
So we again respectfully oppose
this bill. We think it's moving
just too fast.
We've talked to the people
involved in trying to get this
advanced. There are some good
things. There are other things
that need to be discussed at
greater length. So
If we can please have that time
and it's not that we're opposed.
It's not that we're
procrastinators.
Like I said, we've been in the
business and we want to
continue, but we want to get it
done right and pull attachments
is key. So we did appreciate the
fact that they took that out of
this bill this time, but there
are other similar issues that
need more time. Thank you.
Okay?
Alright. Anybody on line?
For the opposition's, You know,
we'll go to committee for
questions.
Senator. Mr Chairman, Mr
Chairman, Senator Minds. It's
just a comment, so I was
contacted by my to rural
Electric co ops in Real Reba
County. M s Mountain Electric Co
op serves the majority of the
county with normal, which is our
northern Rio Reba Electric
serves them northern person of
our county, and they opposed the
bill as written.
And if it happens to pass out of
committee Senator, would you be
willing to sit with me to talk
to you about some of the issues
that my rural
Kind of continental. Divide it
right that.
What I
Cooperatives are interested in
Thank you. Thank you, Mr because
Thank you. Thank you, Mr
Chairman. Thank you. Turn me
off.
Senator Brent
Okay, That's a debatable so
we'll call the roll.
Khadimiya.
No.
Uh huh.
Before I vote. No, I'm in the
same situation with Amos My
electric co op.
And so if this thing passes, you
know, surely want to
Have their concerns and other co
ops address.
So emotion fails.
So we're back on the bill.
Have a question, Senator Griggs.
Thank you, Mr Chairman and
Senator. It's It's more of a
kind of a procedural thing that
I'm gonna ask you about. And I'm
I'm on Page four.
Where you talk about the
director of the office.
Has the is authorized to certify
up to $10 million of proceeds of
supplemental severance tax bonds
for physical year fiscal year.
Uh and then.
Senator Rodrigues recently had
Senate Bill
217, which talks about the
maximum amount of
Supplemental severance tax bonds
that can be issue
So how does I mean? This is new
material that you have your
saying that
The director is authorized to
Certify a certain amount.
But that certain amount I don't
know is in the amount that
The
The state Board of Finances can
issue because I'm guessing they
can issue this large amount and
we decided to fight over.
Somehow. What? Who gets what out
of that? But I don't know that
Senator. So, Mr Chair and
senator because you guys can
explain that to me, so I'll feel
more comfortable.
Mr. Chair, Senator. Thank you
for the question. So this is an
existing $10 million bucket of
severance tax bonding authority
that comes from the P s F A and
they go to the PSC OC, the
public school capital. A
committee to certify the need
for that that money and again
this is us looking to bring the
entire program across.
Directly from PSF, a to the
office of broadband access and
expansion. And so this is an
existing bucket that the
certification still needs to
happen, So we do have the
connecting Mexico Council and,
uh they're an advisory council.
The director is the decision
maker. In this case, we've made
it. So the decision maker so
lines here right? And so that's
where the $10 Million for
severance tax bonds
certification happens and the
the You know, the program
basically comes straight across
that way.
Mr Chairman, Senator expert. You
know that That's certainly gave
me more. Uh, it it what you're
telling me basically is
It's already in a shined amount
within the
Bigger amount. So this isn't
this isn't a new deal that's
going to have to take
Chair Senator that is absolutely
correct, and without that
funding being brought across in
the authority, we would not be
able to fund the state education
network projects.
Thank you, Mr Sharing sanction.
Thank you.
What else and lists Pleasure
Senator worth just to comment
before we vote, Um
You know, I don't completely
understand what the issues are
either.
And I think we don't have time
to hold this up.
Given where we are, but
You know if this is going to
You know if this is gonna move
forward all the way through the
process.
You know, this needs to be
addressed. I didn't know kick
Carson is okay with it So, but
that's one out of all the rest
of the co option. I just think
You know, you're gonna have a
huge challenge on the floor of
all the co ops continue to
oppose this, So I just think
Senator heard a meal.
And then Senator Tollman. So, Mr
Chairman, just so you know, in
the portion of the county,
you're going to be taking over
from me is where Nora is. And so
I would suggest that you and I
sit with Senator Padilla if this
bill passes forward with both
Chemists, Electric co op and the
northern Rio Arriba Electric Co
op so that we can hear both of
their concerns and address them
if the bill does move forward.
Just to comment. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Tollman.
Thank you, Mr Chair, and thank
you, senator for bringing this
forward.
I noticed that Senator that
Comcast
Voice their, uh
Support of this bill.
So surprised moving into the
rural areas now on it.
You have no idea, So I was
always in the oppression, they
could only make money in urban
areas.
I was surprised why they're
moving in the rural areas.
What's changed? I should ask
them.
Yes. You see that, and not you?
Not me.
You don't have the same
question. Alright? I just find
it very surprising. Some
sometimes drastically must have
changed anyway. That's all I
have. Thank you, Mr
Because
Thank you, Senator
Okay, So we have a motion for
Passport, No recommend.
I can do every second. Okay.
Alright, so called the row
Has no wreck.
And that you had a meal? Yes,
with the conversations.
Your word. Yes, yes.
What? What is the vote? Yes,
okay.
All right. Thank you. All right,
so
Thank you.
Already you
So we'll move on to the Senate
Bill 176 as amended.
Senator Estes.
So much, Mr Chairman, This is
Central 176, and it's a some
That's actually a year late. I
first
So they're they're going to
close up shop this July 1st
2024, So I urge
Has it done this bill? Um what?
Since the bills before us? We
got a message on a couple other
things.
We are the Yeah. Let it come.
We also want to modernize the
added, uh kickboxing, martial
arts, martial arts and sports
entertainment wrestling.
And we also Mr Chairman, members
on page 12.
What we want to do is codify and
state statute the weight classes
for boxing.
And declaring a champion in each
weight class.
Great. So first we go out to the
audience. Anybody here in
support of Senate Bill 176 as
amended.
Hmm.
Anybody home line. Anybody in
opposition?
Yeah. Silicon Masters cares.
Okay, so nobody owns them, so
we'll go to the committee for
questions, Senator Brent
See, I just do it.
Now we're all getting this
doesn't pass. Thank you, Brent.
Well, as you know, many boards
and commissions have a center.
The Sunset Act. For whatever
reason this
Wasn't included in the final
lift this sunset or else and
those boxing matches that no
rules, no oversight.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr
Chairman, Senator Brandt. Well,
I mean boxing modernized and
weight classes so that you don't
have. There's also, uh people
not trying their best.
Given the and then safety
measures German and Senator so
this only applies to boxing.
Thank you, Mr Chairman, Senator
Brent. The word boxing is a
commission. Um, has a group
Um, I did, too. Yeah.
Um, I did, too.
Oh, yes, Yes. So we're done,
Okay, said there's only applies
to boxing credit
everything in we want the
statute to martial arts
kickboxing and sports
entertainment wrestling.
Okay, So, Mr Chairman, those
Uh, unarmed combat.
Sports. We want to modernize the
statute while we're are we sure
that this was an oversight and
not just something that when
they did that bill
Just extend all the sunsets.
They just need.
Because I'm pretty sure
That anyone that's involved in
those sports are going to follow
the national rules.
Of the organization. Otherwise,
it's not gonna count.
Towards the moving up towards
them getting to you know the
what they all are working
towards that national title.
As we know, but
Um, although I will not tell
Holly that, um, but
Are we sure that this really
needs a commission run by the
state having fees? More
government over, you know more
government watching out for
I mean, what do they really
watching out for?
These guys are gonna ring
beating each other up. Let them
Why do we care?
Thank you. Thank you, Mr
Minister, and I think we found a
no. That's a great question.
Every state has an athletic
commission.
Which was back in the day, every
state comes up with his own
rules that are then honored and
sanctioned by these other, you
know, national this, um
I agree that the fees and the
promotional fees and the
registration assessed on
The folks that stuff needs to
change is going to try to work
this say this. These things are
not they get ER T is waived, but
they got to pay all these fees.
these fees and fees and fees.
Also
We could be the mm, a country
but yet big fight promotions.
Don't come to New Mexico one. We
don't have a
Are largely but also we need to
modernize the need to build
trust with national
organizations, national
promoters so that they can. It's
paramount to grow this this
industry and allow any of those
organizations.
Saying, We really gotta pass
this in New Mexico. We gotta
expand all this in New Mexico,
so we'll come there. None of
them are here.
In fact, no one cared.
There was no one carrying on
either side. And to me that
tells me we don't need to be
involved in this. This is many
councils that the governor let's
all these members to that. Then
we have two floor.
Half the time. We don't even
know what the hell the council
does. Excuse my language. Sorry.
We don't even know what they do.
But yet we're voting to confirm
people that we don't know who
they are.
That's just the facts. Maybe
it's time that we roll back red
tape.
And that these organizations
these again, you're gonna have
to fight according to a certain
set of rules disagree, And if
they cared, they'd be here then
the organization. Um we're
supposed to review the sunset.
Good, good counsel. This is
number don't need to keep so
that occasionally we can, you
know, actually sacrifice
Occasionally we can get rid of
something always seem to do up
here is add more and more
bureaucracy and more and more
red tape. We never get rid of
anything because we're afraid to
get rid of anything because this
might happen, But no one was
here to say this is going to
happen if we get rid of this.
So I highly doubt it will happen
because no one was here
advocating for this.
I'm sorry, Mr German, but in all
seriousness
I don't think
Thank you Any other questions
from Senator Wirth? Thank you,
Mr Just a question about the
fee, So I want to understand. So
this is a so we gave. I think
that the Governor Richardson,
this was a gross receipts
exemption.
Which is one of the ones we
often cited as the many
different carve out to the base,
and that's this was done for
that. But
You indicate center. You
indicated this They don't get
General fund so that this this
this entity is operated based on
the fees that they receive. Is
that correct? Mr Chairman, I do
want to modernize
All the folks that are involved
in legitimizing that
Contest.
Still
At least twice a year.
But I'm sure they're all so just
Mr Chair on Page eight.
Ah, this is the increases in the
fees. So these fees go into that
fund.
That you just reference is that
correct Leader
So, Mr Chair, I do think you
know your desire to figure out
if this is going to continue.
Figuring out how to get it a
Kind of General fund stream of
funding is is a good direction
to go. I just
It gets concerning when we're
doing all this. These fee based
Funding is really what's
happening here is shocked that
other than
And then deal with the general.
And so basically, Mr Chair if we
just wanna understand this, the
sunset applies to the whole
agency goes away. We do this,
not just the
And and Mr Chair. I realized
that Senator brand think such a
good idea and it might be, but I
just want to understand without
this agency.
Where it would literally be no
rules.
And maybe a great public afraid.
But if you but if it's in a
private location
There would be no crime to 10
year old slug it out with no
headgear, and there would be no
crime.
Mr Chair. I think that answers
my question. Thank you.
Okay. Senator Gregg's
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you,
Senator. So, So you're saying we
could go back without this? We
go back to bare knuckle boxing
Knuckle boxing is under
Under mixed marshall boxing and
novels.
And
And Mr Mr Chairman, Senator, one
of the things I like when I read
stuff like this, and I look at
their
Their definitions.
And we talked about a
professional mixed martial
artist means an individual
compete for money prizes or
purses who teaches, pursued or
assist in the practice of mixed
martial art.
But we don't say anything about
what makes martial arts. Yeah,
Senator Briggs. That's you're
absolutely correct. That
That was modeled after the We
don't define boxing, but I think
that there's a statutory
construction you go with the
West part.
Okay?
And that song.
Yeah.
Yeah, and we share them.
I'm sorry, Senator. They're
giving you such fits, but the
the deal? I mean, I guess when
you when you look at that
If you if you really want to
talk about
This staff. We ought to define
what it is.
Uh, so it's clear because you're
sitting your
Who knows Right Right now they
could be doing mixed martial
arts, but it could be anything.
Because you don't have a
definition what it is, and this
guy's doing whatever you're
doing, and that's mixed martial
arts.
You know, it's it's kind of like
saying, you know, golfers, a guy
who goes out and plays golf.
What do you call?
I mean, that's to me. I I know.
You know, I think I think I'm
actually not on the same side as
my
My friend right over here.
Senator Brand is
But
Uh, yeah, I think it needs more
stuff.
If you really want to do
What you're trying to do,
Senator, So thank you, senator
and invention.
We're halfway there, so I I
think instead of having you
know, Conference Committee, we
should just have bare knuckle.
Competition.
What do you guys think?
Yeah. Alrighty. Don't have
anybody else on the list? Uh, we
have emotion for
Okay, So, uh, senator words
heard Senator Sanchez do pass
there so
I moved to pass. Okay, whatever
emotion for do past so I sent it
to work. You have a second
Senator Hamlin.
Please record. I'm not a sports
lesbian, and I don't really
care. But come on. Oh, yeah. No
fair knuckles
already. Go ahead, Call the room
clerk.
Senator Brandt.
Book.
We're after 830. We don't
explain votes.
Yes.
Hmm.
Senator? Yes.
Senator work? Yes, Senator.
Handle? Yes.
Right. Most impasses, Senator
Brent, please explain your vote.
Just want to say that I'm from
the government and I'm here to
help scariest words in history.
All right. Thank you, Uh, last
Bill Senate Bill 199.
Honest senator.
Mhm neighbor.
Hey, Dave.
We'll have a demonstration by
the mayor and the senator, Mr
Chairman, That was the stupidest
question
Finally. Yeah,
alright.
Right. Okay. Finally got that He
finally got it finally would
have been asking for for years.
Thank you, Senator.
And it just was fulfilled.
Remember? Take note time.
They
Senator Nyberg. Go ahead,
present. Your bill. Thank you,
Mr Chairman and Committee, uh,
to remind the committee that the
real fight is going to be
tomorrow night about seven
o'clock at a gym. No. Thursday
night in seven o'clock at the
gym.
At on scenarios, um, before you
as Senate Bill 199.
And I'm pleased to have to my
left president of our Roswell,
Chavez County Economic
Development Corporation.
Michael, spiritual to and to his
left the mayor of the city of
Roswell, a name known to most of
you, Mayor Tim Jennings.
And they're here to help me out.
But, uh
We have a very exciting
opportunity that has fallen in
our lap.
And because of the work of these
two gentlemen, and a number of
others in our community.
We have the potential of having
Probably the second largest
event that will draw tourists
from around the globe to New
Mexico may not equal the
Albuquerque balloon Fiesta, but,
uh, it'll be a lot of folks. In
fact, it will be in the 80,000.
Person range coming in from all
over the world.
And that's the Reno air races.
In
September of 2025.
A Reno air races.
We'll have to hold their event
someplace other than Reno, where
it's held its event for over 50
years.
And as a result
They have looked for a number of
communities to host that event.
And as I understand it, Roswell
Made the shortlist and now they
may tell you that we're even on
a shorter list of maybe two
communities.
They want to come to Roswell.
If we can do some things, and we
have to be prepared for it.
Within a year's time. And while
we have an air facility that can
host it
There's a number of other things
that they will need to have in
place in order to be a good
host.
And so we're happy to discuss
those things. But this bill is
an appropriation bill for $10
million.
To assist the city in
Developing and providing that
infrastructure that will be
necessary to be the host of the
Reno air races. And with that,
turn it over to my my
Uh, experts for any further
comment here.
The Reno air show is, uh,
Is the largest air show and the
only real air races that we have
in the country and
They've been going for 59 years
and
They put out a deal we had They
had all kinds of people apply.
And we're really almost down to
three people. They haven't we
know where we are because our
airport is an unbelievable place
Number one. It's 5500 acres.
Of of space.
The when you look at that,
that's plenty of space. We have
a large area.
Out there where the Racists can
be held.
And we said I sent a whole crew
there from with security people,
safety people, everybody they've
already approved our safety
plan. What we came back so there
were no changes needed in that,
But we sent a whole crew from
Roswell to evaluate this. This
is such a big proposal, and they
spent there and they went to the
whole air show.
And they did everything they
were there every day. They went
through everything.
And we can do this and we set
this up because this is it falls
at a perfect time of the year
for us. It's falls right after
Labor Day and in our area to
accommodate that many people
we've had the state has gone
through and done Mr Survey of
everywhere around us within 100,
Miles, we can accommodate all
the people of the 80,000 people
that do come to this.
I there. There are seven classes
of racing but our our facilities
that we have in Roswell are
perfect.
Their air race area that they
have is in the floodplain.
And the flood commissioner will
not allow anybody to building
that because he's a real jerk
that it's okay. He's he's He's
on board on this candy is l will
give you free seating at her
ranch because it's going to go
right over her head. And but and
and But we go all around, and we
took all we've had three visits
from the people here. We've had
all
President that seven racing
groups here.
And
They have
They they love. Our facilities
are air control tower.
Is one of the most advanced they
have. It was built in 97 and the
director of Our center teaches
other air air traffic control
people how to work. We are
perfect in everything. We we
have. Roswell is the perfect
place to have this and Ah yeah,
because you guys, it's late and
I can tell you when you look
three other places that we know
are pretty closest, Um Casper,
Wyoming and then Pueblo,
Colorado and us.
Casper and Pueblo. Both have one
thing that causes them a great
problem. That's their bio
mountain range.
And any time the air goes over
that mountain has an updraft and
you have a downdraft. What comes
with that is hell.
And the hail destroys airplanes.
And we're gonna have all these
airplanes sitting out, so that's
one reason that we have it. And
then the other is we have the
absolute perfect place. It's
over Ranch land and farm land,
and it is absolutely perfect.
Okay. And this is my spiritual
He was the head of our bunch.
That's
Ran through and valuable people.
Good evening, Mr Chairman,
members of the Committee of
My kids free to, uh
Senator Gregg's and I, uh
Neighbors down the street and
Alamogordo.
And I'll share with you that the
biggest reason
That the races are moving after
59 years. By the way, there's
only two years that didn't race.
911 and Covid.
So for 59 years they've raised
and they're being forced out of
Reno because of development.
They've told us repeatedly and
in Roswell that if they can make
decisions on how how they feel
about a community they choose us
today.
But it's a business decision.
It costs money to make a big,
big movement like that, Mr
Chairman.
And they are anxious to get
moving. The the anticipate, uh,
an air show this year in Reno,
the last one there. They've
scheduled by the way, the
airshow component is in addition
to the races. It's a filler for
the races if you will, but as an
example
This year in Reno, they'll have
the U. S. Navy Blue Angels.
And the Canadian stone birds and
some units U. S Air Force a 15
demos next year in 2025 is when
the intent on having the air
Force A 15 demos next year in
2025 is when the intent on
having the airshow and the races
in the new location.
Mayor Jennings is absolutely
correct. Mr Chairman, members of
the committee, we have the right
place.
Yeah. Not only the landmass
Yeah. Not only the land, mass
air space and we have a region
of communities and suddenly
Mexico that really care. We
visited all our neighboring
cities from Artemisia to reduce.
So, uh, Carlsbad and so on, and
they all they all know the
impact this will have
For a New Mexico, the University
of Nevada, Mr Chairman did a
economic impact study.
In 2019 their economic impact.
Was over $100 million.
In one year.
$100 million.
The crowd they have been in 19
was nearly 70,000 race They just
had this year. I'm sorry. No,
it's exciting because it could
do so much. Okay. Okay. So, um,
Mr Chairman Members Committee, I
stand for your questions.
Thank you. Thank you again.
Thank you, Senator. Mr Mayor was
go up to the audience. If we've
done any here, anybody here in
support of Senate Bill 199.
Hey, it's raising your hand.
Good enough, or you want to say
something?
Okay. Alright. Anybody on
Nobody. Anybody here in
opposition.
See none any questions from the
committee, sir?
Thank you, Senator Sanchez. Yes,
Uh,
Senator Mr. Chair. One question
last year, Senator Munoz
appropriately going to help with
this as well. And if you guys
applied for any of that money on
that it took to put an l shaped
piece on part of our runway so
we can fill two or three air
tankers at a time.
To fight fires in the Mexico
And that's exactly the purpose
of what we spent all that money
on. Yes, we could have used all
that money for this. But you
know, at the time I'm a
firefighter, and I've been on
fires and you know, fire cheap
and I've been on forest fires. I
know what they do. I know the
shape of our forces. We need
tanker bases and rosin. They can
go in and fill up and rosel and
be gone.
Before they can get into
Albuquerque and Park and fill up
Thank you for that, And I just
want to make sure that you did
apply for that money and got
that If we could use any of that
towards it, I'm for it. Million
dollars to build that. L 600
that's all. I have. Great. Thank
you, Uh, Senator Tollman
question.
Yes, Thank you.
You said that was as if
You don't believe I have a
question.
Well, anyway. You well, thanks.
Thank you, Mr Chair and thank
you for bringing this. This is
interesting. So how many days is
this event? God, Mr Chairman.
Uh, center the it goes on that
the races itself is about seven
days. But it's a good 10 to 14
days and also in June. They have
training they have pilot re
certification.
So they'll come and bring every
bad one back in and retrain them
in the middle of the year.
Thank you for that answer. I'm
sure you said you had enough.
Hotel rooms within 80 miles. Did
you say it was that included
Lubbock?
Um, Mr Chairman. Uh, Senator. It
does not include low VOC
includes New Mexico and the
beauty of it is, it's right
after Labor Day and then
Ruidoso. The horrors, horse
races are done and guess what's
gearing up New Mexico. The Bloom
Fiesta. It's right sandwich in
between, and then come in and
enjoy all of a sudden, new
Mexico all of the Mexico in that
time of year.
Oh, thank you for that answer,
and so people
Would drive. If the seven day
event people have drive back and
forth, be driving 100 and 60
miles round trip because you
said, some people will be
staying as far as 80 miles away.
Mr Chairman, Senator. As a
matter of fact, a lot of them
drive RVs and part of the
strategy is creating RV spots
for these folks. When we went in
September, the races they had
well over 100 people, just an
RV. It's kind of like NASCAR.
They're bringing a lot of RVs
and a lot of trailers in and and
that brings more economic
activity. Obviously.
So we'll see a lot of folks
drive in and their shuttle
service even to to read also
already so we'll see that
occurring naturally as a result
of the award. Should we choose
to get him? Thank you. And good
luck and
I hope you have a successful
events are going to have to do a
lot of work.
This is coming September, right?
Following you.
So September 24 25 25, Okay.
Thank you Wish you the best of
luck. That's all I have,
Senator. Thank you, Senator.
Senator hearty meal.
Just a real quick comment. Mr
Chairman when most Alamos
National Laboratory was looking
at an RV park to host our house,
our craft workforce, you might
want to just take this into
consideration. Most people who
have an RV asked for three
things reliable Internet to
connect to home to a washer and
dryer, and so they wanted a
laundry facility and close
proximity to a liquor store.
The those were the three things
from everyone we heard. So when
you're building this RV park
take that into consideration.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Senator Gregg's.
Mr Chairman, I'd be just can't
resist this just just
I'm just sure glad that we
changed liquor laws a couple of
years ago.
Mr Chair and and Center.
Jennings. I am it did. It's
done. It's opened a lotta made a
lot of people mad at banks and
stuff, but other than that, it
was all right.
We are working real heavily with
her in conjunction with our
college, so they have some
washing machines, facilities and
things and we're working with
the college on on this and for
activities and everything that
they can do and are Roswell
campus has been really good. We
have an airframe mechanics
program and everything they're
training pilots. We have
We have. Those guys couldn't
believe what we had available
for them to use. It was it was
because we're it's a big
partnership.
You know the county, the city.
We're all in it.
Right, Senator Brent
German. I think it's great.
their loss. Hopefully it's our
game because the military left
And
I think it's great to put it to
use you put it to use in some
ways. I think that's actually an
area that we can invest more
money and actually bring a lot
of growth to Roswell by fixing
up some of those aircraft
hangars by doing a lot of those
things. I think we would
actually invest a little bit of
money into Roswell.
That that
Area around
The airport would explode and
growth. You've got companies
that would love to come there.
You paint them.
You've got the the college there
that's working on teaching
aircraft mechanics. I mean,
there are so much in Roswell
when it comes around that
airport. They actually train
helicopter pilots. They're
bringing helicopter crews in
So there's a ton of stuff and
I'm being told to wrap it up.
Um, I think you should be asking
for 100 million. Um, but good
luck in finance and I would move
to pass.
Senator Sanchez second and I was
going to do it. Okay. Yeah. You
know, somebody wrapped, uh,
Senator Brent from it got to
mention that Roswell aliens,
aliens
so much there. That's where they
landed was on the airport. I'm
not everybody's space.
Yeah.
Okay. Alrighty. So we have a
motion for do pass by Senator
Brent second. By Senator
Sanchez Color role. I gotta get
to bed. Yes, ma'am. Senator
Gregg's Yes. You had a meal.
Yes.
Senator Schmitt. He's excused,
Senator Tallman Yes, Senator
Worth excused.
Senator Hamblin. Yes, Senator
Shindo? Yes. Have eight yeses
thinkers. Great. Alright, Thank
you. Thank all of you for
staying over staff. Thank you
for your patience and stamina
and be with us and so you do to
support our committee. Thank
you, Mr Mayor.
