Thank all you need here last
time this committee met.
Was really this room myself
thank you for and so Services.
The table like the the committee
is that is working the readings
and stuff the actor of the
State.
For.
So with that go ahead and the.
Thank you Senator Brandt up
would you start with a net three
productions and we'll just start
over to my far right.
And have yourselves introduced
to the the committee and also to
the public that's the.
Join us.
Was to all.
Please.
Thank you Mr chair
senator Daschle Senator
Representative see below
McKinley Sikora in Valencia.
And.
Right to be back in the in
person
this was a good Committee last
year I really loved and learned
a lot with all the people that
are on it so it's good to be
back it's even better to be back
in person.
Thank you Mr.
You.
Thank you Mr chairman Ron Griggs
I'm from Alamogordo or
Representative parts of Dona Ana
Katie in Otero county at least
right now
the committee is a.
Is is really enjoyable I think
for for me and and I hope for
for rent a lot we can learn a
lot a lot of good opportunities
to do some stuff which that's
good for New Mexico and I look
forward to participating this
year thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman Sir Craig
Brandt I am the Republican whip
and I represent Senator forty
which is in Santa Fe County that
is really just the town of Rio
Rancho
so it's good to be here are are
usually.
This committee I to start with
your last session and.
It's good to not be on public
affairs anymore.
It's.
Thank you Mr chair Peter Wirth
Senate district twenty five in
Santa Fe.
Senator Leo Hermio representing
Senate district five which
includes portions of Los Alamos
Rio Arriba Sandoval and Santa Fe
counties.
Good afternoon everyone so.
Senate Bill common Senate
district eighteen.
So
The portion of northeast by my
new district goals from across
the street from panel on.
South the west to loan us across
the street from the
international district.
So we're glad to be here is a
good committee and look for
today's discussion thank you Mr
chair you.
Good afternoon everyone Senator
Martin Hickey I represent the
twentieth district which is a
long the
Sandia mountains east side of
Albuquerque and I too am glad to
be back on this committee I
learned a lot from my colleagues
last year really appreciated all
the input and look forward to
the wisdom we're gonna generate
this year thank you.
Thank you Mr chair my name is
senator Kerry him when I
representative district thirty
eight in southern New Mexico
which includes part of Los
crucis proper but also much of
our farming communities our
rural communities of somebody
you know and the ski day and
follow
during the day I am the CEO and
president of the Las Cruces
green chamber of commerce
talking about the importance of
our local economies as the
backbone of our communities and
so it is always an honor to
serve on this committee and be
able to bring that voice to this
thank you Mr chair.
Thank you share and then joined
us virtually is our ranking
member of the Senator Kernan are
you on.
Yes can you hear me yes we can.
Okay well I am sorry that I'm
not there in person and
appreciated the opportunity just
to introduce myself and look
forward to the meeting today and
we'll see you all back next week
for sure thank you very much
thank you and then the for
staff.
I'm laying Renfro and US
committee secretary for.
T. B. T. C..
I'm trying to learn that I it
was much easier to say corpse.
and Senator Shendo knows how to
spell that one.
And I'm I live in have grown up
here in Santa Fe so I'm a
native.
I'm Beatrice for verifying the
legislative analyst for.
seventy Thomson members of some
operator for yes.
Honorable chairman and
distinguished members of the
committee my name is iris give
it life been with the
legislative
for the legislature here all of
regarded tendon can
whatever I don't do windows or
bathrooms but
I've been here for ten years
later so I this is the first
time Senator is being committee
and several other committees.
And this is not my first rodeo.
I thank you thank you I believe
or command Alyssa Michael if you
are you guys on.
Hi
can you hear me yes we can.
Hi my name is the I'm a Canadian
families and this is my first
year so I think what they're
working with you all thank you.
Thank you.
You and
you have a just for the members
of Michael got his booster shot
you came and visited he wasn't
feeling well so he was gonna go
home and he said that he might
if I don't wake up of the field
tomorrow and so forth so Michael
Morgan who's been a committee
analyst with this the committee
in the past is now doing this
again so we're looking forward
to that.
So with that Committee members
to introduction to everybody
staff thank you again
just system quick items for
housekeeping purposes you know
will have the same a twenty four
hour amendment rule.
so that new vision amendments to
the bills but will revisit that
you know as we you know.
Get get deal Tencent closer and
things are moving a little
quicker and so forth.
Mr chairman of.
On the one your to about twenty
four hours on them as a result
of the large veterans it
substantive changes resulting in
the amount of so if you're
changing the word from and to
work.
Because of the type leads will.
If the risk.
You know what we we I think it
was more substances about
remember from our last committee
you know if it's it's
essentially sometimes things
just a bill stakes solicitors
typos
and as long as of the group that
we have done with the writing it
seems like.
But if it's a substance use of
the phone yeah no I think I know
for committee secretaries health
facility right on on the fly
okay yep.
that we know that was a question
about food but we normally you
know hard to get past dinner
time so of that's probably not
going to be a a big issue but if
there is a we'll probably just
have the same rules as you know.
Having food if we need to in and
take it back to work and then go
ahead.
the government the the rules say
we can't do in the committee
room so if we do need to get
food will take a break and go
find a space and then come back.
Okay.
Anything else the name and the
whole thing so I'm not.
Okay any other questions of of
what senator Wirth there
You know what we got a whole.
Full of different tax proposals
are rolling through and I
appreciated last year the way we
handle those to to do the
hearing and then figure out
really what the capacity is to
do some of those things so we
don't just.
You know take on each one of
brought forward so I hope that
we you know as we move forward.
Kind of a consistent and that
way because again I I do think
this is.
The power of this committee is
put together you know proposals
that all that are really working
and maybe that a number of these
get put together as we've done
in the past so just just throw
that out there for consideration
I appreciate that and I think
the the work well the last time
you know with the on this tax
package that we put together so
We have a we won't be here in a
a tax bill probably until
Thursday so additional direction
of we'll probably go to look at
what the capacity to talk to the
chairman of Senate finance as
well.
Hello and
That the most likely with all
the tax and all of bills are
coming in that we were here in
and not vote on them and then
the see you know what what the
capacity is and and how we want
to pack bill for Senator Corman.
Thank you Mr chair I think
Center were so it is an
excellent one.
So for instance would literally
be everything.
Tax bill of today's.
Senate bill thirty which
included a packager that.
This is the distribution of
state of Texas right.
So does that literally every tax
bill.
But to say that again.
It is literally a tax.
It does include a redacted the
package that we put together to
be some exceptions don't know
what there will be some that
that we can look at the
termination on that they could
be stand alone.
Thank you thank you Mr your.
Any other questions from the
committee.
If not we will now go.
Entertain the Senate bill
thirty.
Thank you Mr our meal thank you
Mr chairman and members of the
committee I have over before you
get started so so the folks are
on on the webcast of Senator
Tallman of pooled his a Senate
Bill of and that'll be rolled
over to a Thursday so just for
the folks that were have maybe
have tuned in for that specific
information we're here to on
Thursday so Senator thank you Mr
chairman and members of the
committee I have to admit that
it's different sitting in front
of you rather than seeing you in
a zoom boxing Committee and so I
appreciate to be here with you
in person that we did see a
version of Senate bill thirty
last full session what this bill
does is it provides that revenue
from county regional transit
gross receipts taxes will not be
going to the county anymore and
then re distributed to the
regional transit district what
this bill does is it eliminates
counties or municipalities from
taking the G. R. T. first and
then sending it back to the R.
T. D. there's no
harm to any counties or
municipalities with this bill it
just removes them as the pass
through entity now it's
important to state that the
benefit of this bill would be
that we can then start to in
creating interest once the money
if passed when the G. R. T.
comes to the agency
initially the checks that
setting path was created in two
thousand four when the agency
was formed as a form of
protection seventeen years later
with outstanding audits we've
seen that this is a mature
agency that can now handle
getting the gross receipts tax
and with me today Mister chair
of the ISM are three expert
witnesses have Anthony more
tomorrow Peter Dreier and Scott
Scanlon and I'm ready to take
questions or hear comments from
those here in the from the
audience of the committee room
and the as of.
We
are also.
Your question here to help me
answer questions if need be all
right so this.
Committee.
Hi this is.
Years chairman and and etcetera
research bring this bill and we
had we had some comments on this
last the time Senator you look
at those.
So literally all of all of those
cut out the middle man
I think there were some delays
issues in the past and make sure
that those don't happen anymore
so the money comes directly to
of the.
The card is lost with lots of
the regional transit
to build Senator I have to ask
the county where that money is
why are we on the is that as of
our Mister chairman Senator
that's correct it doesn't change
anything as far as anyone budget
it although there was one change
in here that I did see
where the current law requires
three percent and you make that
work requires.
A lot of that so and I I think
it's going down the white was
required in the past they may
not need three percent to the
administrative so there's no
reason to take a three percent.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator thank you.
Griggs thank you Mr chairman and
senator Free State the the bring
it back and I guess you know you
go through the the comments you
know the TRD is concerned about
the the change from shall to may
for whatever reason
and then they are you know they
make a bunch of COVID in that
that how much is going to cost.
To do have you and down head
anymore discussion to to
determine how it can work better
for them my main is it seems
right your proposal should work.
Change year on or portion change
their cost but TRD comes in and
says it is going to cost them
some of you know some pretty
good size numbers to do this so
Mr chair and and senator what.
What is the driver right there
and and how can we actually
better operate you know they say
that as a suggestion as to at
the back where the they talk
about that if regional transfer
having problems
that the counties in the
district work together to ensure
smooth transfer show Mr chairman
center would you comment on that
a little bit can you give us an
idea.
Why how we can can take care of
TRD is concerned Mister chairman
Senator I did see that in the
analysis that we received today
and I would defer to my expert
witness Peter Dreier wire Peter
are you there and you can help
and jump in on this.
Peter if you can accept the
panelists rule you can then
speak on behalf of the bill as
an expert witness.
Can you hear me we can hear you
Peter.
Okay.
we did look at the TRD analysis
I'm not certain how they come up
with our analysis we can't speak
for them we see it as a very
straight for simple bill where
the money just flows directly to
the R. T. D. instead of the
counties so I'm not certain how
they came up with those
conclusions about the costs
would certainly be happy to work
with them to try to mitigate
costs what we already work with
our county members.
Meeting for the answer to do we
have to work on members of your
re the
tiles we work we work together
very well so I don't think
there's any friction present we
just wanted to streamline the
flow of the money
I'm not certain why TRD believes
that this is going to have a
administrative costs they have
to speak about.
Chair and and senator and Mr
weir
I don't I don't know why you
that's kind of why I am asking
the you know the question to to
see if there's some.
You know I don't guess anybody
from TRD is here or on on zoom I
don't expect that to to state
their and I don't really know
which is in opposition H. more
just concerned about how they
would work
and Mr chair Senator army or
workers is going next.
I believe the next from here I
can't remember which committee
it goes to next but I can find
that for you now.
Is going to financial.
I have had a may be maybe the
thing to do is to see if if you
can get some some responses to
that when it goes to for most
finance so you explain what
those what those issues are in
and I don't you know I mean.
If you know the may in the shelf
kind of puts the burden on them
to make that decision it looks
like instead of just telling
them that that got to do it but
I don't I don't know County
interesting deals because as
Mister Dwyer says it looks like
issues pretty straight forward
in in changing this over to but
Mr chairman I mean I'll be I'll
be happy to support your bill
here I if you'll just let me
know that you will address those
concerns before gives to finance
or at least have answer to TRDs
question Mister chairman Senator
thank you for that I took note
of that and I definitely would.
Thank you Mr thank you.
you know I I I guess a.
Of of the goat before went to
the questions by the committee
if there anybody on the assume
any public member that would
like to
speak on this bill.
Stephanie do we have anybody.
Okay already okay I also did you
form a the secretary of
department transportation that
we're having technical
difficulties he can get on
because he was on the palace but
I told that he would present you
know on the department
transportation the after this
bill and so forth so who will be
a coming on board.
So Senator of thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
mail thank you for bringing this
forward I too was.
Perplexed not so much by the
fact that this is going to cost
them some money to do it that
that there is so many paragraphs
here addressing that issue
and I I come to wanted
administrative services division
estimate eighty staff workload
hours at a cost of three point
two thousand.
Isn't that very kind of typical
for them to do in their day to
day work and then this is not a
big issues they think.
Mister chairman Senator I would
have to agree with you yes.
Thank you very much thank you Mr
chairman.
Yes Senator Hamblen we've
Senator twelve thank you Mr
chair thank you senator had me
in mind more of a COVID just
recognizing all the important
work that the regional transit
districts due to our record to
for rural communities I
appreciate this they have of
limited but as well but they're
serving a great amount of people
when they're transportation
issues that are at hand so I
appreciate your I know the south
central district in southern New
Mexico certainly appreciate this
as well thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator and I'm not know if you
look at the RTG we called the
blue bus in northern New Mexico
serves as a lifeline for
residents who don't have
transportation takes them to the
local clinics also takes
students to the school bus drop
off points both Rio Arriba
county who had to Los Alamos
County for school use the school
bus and served a major component
of transportation for rural New
Mexicans in northern New Mexico
and so thank you so much for
that comment Senator.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman who do
pass okay for we were wrong I
guess the other thing that did
have a question on the as it
goes forward is why this
the the the change impose it all
of the three percent
administrative fee from a
mandatory fee to discretionary
fee.
Thank you for that question in a
we're talking about that today
and so I wanted to for again to
my expert witness Peter you
there.
Yes.
The question is about the three
percent admin fee that we talked
about today you want to reset
your question please Mr chairman
though it's just so why this SB
thirty change the thirty percent
administrative fee from the
mandatory fee to discretionary
fee.
And I'll defer to my experts
with us.
What I can say is that there's
been you know recent litigation
about fees assessed by TRD
that's been resolved I think
that local governments and and
taxed Revver working together to
work collaboratively now than in
the task litigation relating to
is the City of Albuquerque K.
for they were arguments about
the way that that costs were
tabulated taxes without a it
really didn't late fees but no
one disputed to my knowledge the
legitimacy in the ability of the
state to assess fees for its
administrative costs if they
want to make the discretionary
because they don't feel that
three percent is representative
of the actual costs that's
certainly the Prague in the
state and it doesn't affect
Well it does affect our bottom
line as it would for all local
governments but we're not
opposed to it and and whether if
it's discretionary with a state
person that's perfectly fine
with us.
Okay.
Okay.
Senator Representative for a
second time Mr Burciaga that.
Some of I also generally around
the.
The fire or.
With them so all those costs to
implement.
the already distributing this
money I don't know just adding
so also send a check to.
having these others eight or
nine so there's five counties
and out of the five counties for
get the G. R. T. that's and re
directed to the our TV.
So I guess they would just have
to me seems like a pretty
simple.
program change to total of how
much money you would send a
check to.
I I really wish that with the
putting this and this is such a
huge deal they would have had
someone here.
seems a little responsible not
to.
and then the the three percent.
Again you're just taking that
from being a mandatory
requirement.
Do they do it or not is up to
them if they need that three
percent to handle the cost it
seems like they would keep that
in place.
If they don't needed to handle
the cost.
Because of this make a profit
from it.
Is up to them whether they want
to continue to do that or not.
You take take from as a shelter
may.
Is there recision no one else's
correct so I'm just really
confused.
By the F. I. R. it would be
great if the.
TRD with the reach out explained
that
And we see this in the past
As legislators for some of the
around awhile where the F. R.
District correct.
and my guess would be that this
one is one of those that's just
and correct.
So
search all in our.
Are you the motion and the.
Josh second I just want to bring
that up so we.
As dollars that comes from
knowing that it concerns me that
there are dresses Mister
chairman Senator thank you for
the comment.
Senator thank you Mr chair also
I just I think you should.
As it moves forward it would
seem to me that you might want
that Lancs then maybe charge a
an administrative fee of up to
three percent.
If they want to charge one
percent it should just be three
percent are not right so there's
just some flexibility that.
This should be put in there so I
I don't think we can make that
apply because I want to I mean
again this is usually does when
you visit with I think that
might be helpful change perfect
thank you for that Mr chair
thank you senator Wirth.
Right so there's no further
question we.
this is to have a motion and a
second later.
Okay so flame to grow.
Senator Brandt yes Senator
Griggs.
Senator Hickey yes Senator had a
meal yes Senator Kernan.
Yes thank you Senator sentence
yes Senator Tallman yes Senator
Wirth yes Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Shendo yes ten all right
have a the best for big thank
you Mr chairman and so I'd like
to ask any of you to take your
local R. T. D. transportation I
plan to write the blue blast one
of the days during the session
from Espanola to the capital and
document it be a Facebook the
watch me go Facebook provided
thank you so much for your
support and I'll be looking into
the language change and I'll be
also reaching out to your do
thank you so much Mr chairman
what were you looking for
yourself the with a test email
of these great all right thank
you Senator and then the this is
a secretary of DOTD Markle
Santa.
Yes.
Here are a it could see a.
Thank you you look great on that
big screen in black.
Mr chairman sherry my screen and
as requested I put together a
short presentation about ten
slides are so
I know you requests just to kind
of give a financial update on
the D. O. T. and then I'll be
happy to answer any questions
that the committee had so just
let me know if you can see my
screen and if so when would
likely to get started okay Mr
secretary yes we can see the
screen if you can speak up a
little bit more.
Appreciate that.
Some of us are getting older
every year.
All right Mister chairman
Senator.
yes.
Okay so Mister chairman just
wanted to let you know over the
next ten minutes or so what I'll
be talking to you about a little
bit about the state investments
that the legislature and the
governor have invested in of our
infrastructure to over the last
three years the new bill which
is a bipartisan infrastructure
law the transportation bill that
Congress passed and how that
will affect New Mexico some of
the challenges that we see now
with the DOT they're impacting
projects and probably future
projects and then just share
with you some quick numbers on
the overall budget so just a
quick presentation and like I
said I'll be happy to answer any
questions that you have
afterwards
I've been fortunate Mr chairman
to have been with the department
now for over twenty three years
and I've been through a lot of
ups and downs but I'll tell you
what I've never seen anything
like the investment that's been
made over the last three years
into our roads and highways just
to give you an example going
back to two thousand eight two
thousand eighteen when you look
at any extra money or surplus
money to come over to the DOT
over those ten years it's been a
little bit less than a hundred
million total there just wasn't
a lot of surplus money and
therefore there wasn't a lot of
opportunity to invest in our
roads and highways however when
you go back to the twenty
nineteen session which was my
first session as cabinet
secretary we the first year that
was already tripled with the
three hundred twenty five
million investment in general
fund money in twenty twenty even
though it was a pandemic here we
were provided an additional
hundred and thirty five million
last year during the the regular
session we're provided three
hundred million in general fund
and another three hundred and
two million in bonding authority
which we've already done and
then this last special session
and happen in December we were
provide.
At a hundred and seventy two
point five million in our home
money and of course we're under
negotiations now with all of you
what on the house side and
Senate side as to what
investments with any surplus
money will be made during this
session so when you look at that
it's a total of one point two
billion in addition to our
regular budget over the last
three years which is twelve
times as much as we received in
the previous ten so I really
want to staff created a I
appreciate that everyone
recognizes investing in
infrastructure is a great way to
build our economy and and as you
know we have a tremendous amount
of knees out in every part of
our state I'm happy to say that
one of our goals is to not let
this money stated somewhere in
our coffers and so a hundred
percent of that one point two
billion is assigned to a project
in just about seventy percent of
that money is already spent
wearing covered in an active
project going on right now so
these are all things that
continue to move forward over
the next year or a year or two
and make sure that that money
that's being put out on to the
rules and put out into the
economy and not sitting in our
bank account which I think is
good news for everybody.
I think the other part of this
major investment out of this one
point two billion is that a lot
of time money comes only for D.
O. T. however a lot of that
money about twenty five percent
of it is gone to directly to the
local governments are cities
counties and tribal governments
just to give you an example the
previous three years twenty
sixteen to twenty eighteen there
was seventy million dollars
going to the locals a lot of
that through the local
government road fund which has a
seventy five twenty five match
so communities are having to
come up with that twenty five
percent matching it was kind of
really putting some of our
smaller and more rural
communities in a disadvantage
because a lot of them were able
to come up with that match well
over the last three years
through a couple bills that were
passed the investment is been in
just coming out now to three
hundred million so we private
triple the amount of money
that's going directly to locals
and I know we always concerned
about that you know cliff and
we're no longer have surpluses
were the state is hurting for
money that I know a lot of us
have seen those highs and lows
but moving forward regardless
through the motor vehicle excise
tax the local money will go from
twenty three million dollars a
year or so to sixty five million
dollars a year so regardless of
surplus locals will continue to
get bigger investment almost
triple of what they're getting
now and I think that's good news
for our local governments in
addition to that that extra
money that's going to them
there's only a five percent
match is made on the line he's
here for our local communities
to be able to match that and
there is a provision for a
hardship waiver so that there is
a small community suffering hard
times able actually we can waive
that five percent and funding
project a hundred percent with
the money that's provided in
addition to like I mentioned
before one of our goals is to
make sure that we don't sit on
this money all of these local
money to three hundred million
we have.
Contracts with our local
communities for projects has
been assigned to a project
contract is done and they're
ready to either start work where
they're already in work and in
some cases some of those
projects are already complete so
I'm happy to report on that a
hundred percent of that money is
already assigned in in in the
local town this point.
Moving on to the federal bill
act that just passed a few
months ago I think you probably
heard that New Mexico will
receive anymore and I say
anymore because this is just the
formula funding of three point
seven billion dollars over the
next five years I would just
want to say have you got to that
is we what we we were already
receiving over two million but
the delta is significant the
change in the increases
significant so three point seven
billion over the next five years
most of the time that those type
of this type of legislation is
just for roads and highways and
bridges however we've seen a
significant investment that will
be made in electric vehicle
charging stations a lot of that
money is for broadband water
projects transit money directly
going to our local airports
money for climb in and for the
first time that I've been around
some money going to our locals
and I think the important thing
that I want to mention here Mr
Chairman is because of the
investment that New Mexico's
maintenance last for years and
those numbers are shared with
you we've already been gearing
up for this the locals have
already been doing much better
and being prepared at having
projects right echo shelf ready
and so I think in New Mexico
more than any other state for
the most part is really ready to
receive this money because of
the investment that the state
has made and wrapping up and
capacity we had to build for
that one point two billion
dollars as I talked about
earlier.
No I mentioned the three point
seven billion is the minimum
amount there will be billions
and billions of dollars in
discretionary grant money it'll
be up to both the state and the
local level to put together very
strong grant applications so
that we can compete for that
discretionary money with the
other fifty four states and
territories I will tell you that
I felt confident that we should
do pretty well because over the
last eighteen months we've been
able to six here these three
grant opportunities for projects
the first one was about eighteen
months ago which is a twelve
point five million grand to help
support the U. S. to eighty five
project down in Carlsbad about a
year ago students receive twenty
five million dollars for the
interchange there at I. twenty
five just south of the Facebook
the city actually was awarded
that directly but because the
DOT was able to plant some match
money that was kind of what got
that grant applications has to
finish line to very appreciative
of the communication that we
have with the mayor and his
staff to make sure that we're
able to sell that project to the
federal government and we're
able to work together to get
that approved and then the last
thing was a few weeks ago it was
announced that we awarded
another twenty five million from
a grand we applied for for the
Shiprock to the Arizona state
line US sixty four project New
Mexico the the Max you can get
on these requests is twenty five
million I'm happy to say that
New Mexico was the only state in
the scene of the full amount of
twenty five million so I think
we're very well situated with
our grant program and with the
grant writers in the system that
we've been using to be able to
access that billions and
billions of dollars that will be
available in discretionary
grants.
Wanted to share with you I'm
very pleased that we're we're
getting closer Mr chairman to
the department being out of debt
and I want to share our payments
with you over the last couple
years we're working we have
worked in one situation and are
currently in the middle of it
now in refinancing some bonds
that'll given the department
about ten million dollars in
savings we're trying to
refinance the ones are eligible
because of the historic low
interest rates and so every
chance we get it we're trying to
do that but as you see on the
far right corner of those our
current debt payments so in FY
twenty two this year we're going
to be paying about a hundred and
sixty eight million dollar
payment next year a hundred and
seventy five and the following
year a hundred and ninety four I
think the good news lines of
twenty twenty five and beyond
when really we're going to see a
another a reduced payment going
down to a hundred eleven million
so moving forward from twenty
twenty five and have at least
right around eighty million
dollars in I don't want to call
in extra money but money that
we're not going to be sending
or pain and death and one of the
things I'm proud of is we have
not extended alright that since
I've been here and we're really
looking forward to that FY
thirty one payment in thirty two
payment works only nine and
seven million and in FY thirty
three the department will be out
of debt for the first time in
probably about thirty five years
and so there's good news on the
horizon when you when you
combine the fact that our debt
payments will be lower in and
the new federal bill and
increase money that New Mexico
we'll see I think our department
is is really in a good position
moving forward.
So what are these challenges its
greatest out all this money and
all this investment and all the
supporters like Intel you
projects are now is you know
getting a lot more expensive the
rising labor costs I'm told by
contractors if they used to be
high be able to hire laborers
around fourteen to fifteen
dollars an hour with the budget
now the starting labor Nibert in
New Mexico is in the start
somewhere around twenty or north
of twenty dollars an hour just
all we can do to pull people in
and get them interested in
working in the construction
field this see that cost gets
passed on to the projects which
makes projects more expensive in
addition to the new inflation
we're seeing a pretty big rise
in material losses it comes to
steal an aggregate and some of
the other supporting material
that you need to do a project
and it started off at five to
fifteen percent increase but now
it's anywhere from twenty to
forty to fifty percent increase
in some of these material costs
that are really increasing the
cost of the project the good
news is those first two years we
receive money from you back in
twenty nineteen and twenty
twenty most of those projects
already in place are completed
and so it hasn't impacted those
projects with the money received
last three years we're starting
to see those costs go up based
on that six hundred million from
last year.
The other thing that's a little
bit out of our control is a
supply chain issues it has
impacted construction of course
we have had projects ready to go
but we're waiting on project to
get delivered so that they can
start materials other things
that is just not available or on
two four sometimes six or eight
weeks backlogs of waiting to get
this deal order rebar or
whatever it is that we need to
get this project moving forward
and so the supply chain issues
our mission nationwide of
certainly impacting construction
here in New Mexico I think the
workforce is another issue I
don't think there's any industry
that is not impacted by this is
just trying to find people to
work whether you're in the
restaurant business for the
construction business we all
need employees and we're
starting to try and pull people
right out of college right out
of high school if they're not
going to call college and get
them interested in the
engineering or construction
field so working hard at
recruiting but certainly well it
just doesn't seem like there's
enough people to fill some of
the the very important positions
that we have in order for us to
be fully staffed and the last
thing I'll mention in this is
something we do have control
over that is sometimes we're our
own worst enemies when we set up
your audit
the process is a long process is
that we don't need to and so
we've really been working with
industry to try and reduce
everywhere we can a process that
doesn't compromise quality the
can help speed up the process
and provide more flexibility and
we've had some very good
successes in that area I'm
working with industry to do
that.
Moving forward Mr chairman I did
want to mention one thing a
couple things regarding our
audit last year we had a lot of
findings this year we had two
very minor an audit findings not
even relating to finance one is
we have to ensure projects into
a federal database and I guess
we weren't doing what we're
doing now and the other ones had
to do with a couple gas receipts
that we're not we could not
locate to provide to the
auditors so with all this new
money that we right now have a
an operating budget is just over
one point one billion dollars
then you add in the the one
point two billion in additional
funding that you provided us
with all this new money and with
COVID and impacting people
working at home and other things
we've still been able to
maintain the integrity of our
financials and I am very happy
with the audit results we've had
the last two years very clean
audit in a very positive
experience for the department
and really has maintained our
credibility and receiving this
money both at the state and the
federal level.
this is a mention of the I'm not
gonna go through all of these
but there's some particular
people that I really think
reporter for legislators to know
and that is George got is our
local government director first
time we've had an appointed
position as at any age on
responsibility I really want to
do everything I can to help
support local governments these
last three years plus with this
new bill federal bill coming up
on the internet support to make
sure they can access and manage
that money our broadband and our
CIO with the department is
handling all of our broadband
issues is chairman of October
starting to include con do it in
a lot of our projects and it's
really important that we do
outreach to not only local
communities to the private
sector to make sure that they
have an interest in Lane conduit
well we're in a project it's
really the state wants mentality
and so Jeremy is a lead on that
and then of course all of the
money that the federal level
along with ten million that was
supplied in house bill two
special session is coming to the
DOT and we're putting together a
statewide implement
implementation plan so that we
can have any of the stations no
less than every fifty miles for
connectivity and the person
that's ten million mandatory
full this is an executive
director out of the office as a
secretary.
So the two things that we are
really working on is getting
projects ready so that when this
discretionary money does become
available their shelf projects
are rated grow they're ready to
put the shovel in the ground so
we've been working hard on that
we've been successful these last
several years and having
projects ready and then of
course we want to continue to
spend the money in a quality way
for not only shelf ready ready
but still for the projects in
all of our communities and
trying to be equitable statewide
not focusing on just in urban
areas but also paying attention
to our rural folks and the
importance of them having a good
transportation system regardless
of where you are in our state.
So Mister chairman I appreciate
the opportunity in front of you
today I really appreciate the
support you in the committee has
given to the O. T. over the last
several years and always really
and I'm happy to answer any
questions I did want to say that
if you want to know where our
focus is and projects in the
projects that were listed in
house bill two in the special
session is a good place to start
there's a few more projects that
we submitted to LFC that we
added to that list for example
Pacelle global content something
that is a priority for us at
this point New Mexico for in the
by pass has been added as a
priority as has no Gail canyon
bridge and the overall
administration there and into
account so we're continue to add
to that priority list and I'm
happy to share that with you if
you like but I think we have a
good representation statewide of
where our priorities are so
Mister chairman I'd be happy to
answer any questions.
Okay I think thank you Mr
secretary for the presentation
of members of the committee of
Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Santa appreciate the your
presentation to us with the
infrastructure funds coming in
from the federal government the
how do you see those being used
to to deal with some of the road
issues we have and we have a lot
of road issues as well as
bridges and dams excuse my
language but how do you see this
those funds being used for those
things.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Brandt
we will follow our priority
this.
One of the things about the bill
Graham as it does come in the
same way as all of our money
other money doesn't so there's a
very clear process for how we
prioritize those which is
through the state process this
year just for road will receive
an additional about eighty four
million for bridges about forty
five additional.
Million dollars and so we have
this priority list and those are
done by pavement condition by
bridge condition by potential
economic development
by safety and so we'll continue
to follow that priority list in
order to get that money spent.
Thank you for saying that the
other thing that I've I've
talked about several times and I
just want to keep reading.
Bringing up is the condition of
our rest stops rest areas you
know one of the things we're
trying to do to diversify the
economy in our state his is
tourism.
and it's hard to get people to
come and see our state when
arrest officer three four shake.
I know you've been working on
that and swimming encouraging
you to continue to invest in
those
The the main roads especially
twenty five and forty should
come in or state those rest
areas need to be pristine so
that when people come in they
get a good.
Good first impression of our
state.
Thank you for for the work
you've done that I just want her
to keep doing it.
A district thank you senator
Senator public.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Secretary for being here and.
Providing us a very concise.
Summary of of the transportation
department
I was just curious he said you
mentioned twenty five million
dollar project allows Los Lunas
is widening of
I twenty five who's going to
build similar changes.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator yeah it's we have been
funding in the last procreation
is going back to twenty nineteen
the Los Lunas
I don't want to call the by pass
but it's from New Mexico six all
the way goes through town
goes by the correctional
facility and will end up
connecting to a brand new
interchange just south of
Facebook so the project itself
is about a hundred million in
order to try and help get to
that hundred million we've been
using the combination of state
funding and some federal funding
and that twenty five million
that we received was to help get
us to that hundred million I
think we're just about ten
million dollars short now and I
think we'll be able to cover
that but that'll get dismissed
Act that project that they've
been working on for about
fifteen years.
Thank you Mr secretary it.
Mr chair
so they hear you correct a
hundred million dollars.
To for this for a one
interchanges I misunderstand
you.
Mr chairman and senator it's
it's includes the interchange
but it's also the connective
itty from the interchange going
all the way through town and to
listen.
So thank thank you.
I just want to reinforce with Mr
chair.
And secretary I just want to
reinforce what Senator Brandt
said about the
Beautifying some of our
exchanges specially in the.
Hello Kirk area hello some of
them I know you're gonna be of
reconstructing of Montgomery and
the.
Gibson.
So I'm sure you have it that
time beautify those
interchanges.
But I guess I get several people
that.
Contact me several times here
and say you know is anything you
can say can do to unify some of
the other exchanges interchanges
in that city.
In order to make a good first
impression people were trying
to.
Get to relocate to Albuquerque's
any plans for it to do that.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator we don't have any
specifics beautification plans I
want to mention that right now
this is under negotiation but
right now there's twenty million
dollars
in a if you want to call it
capital outlay to improve our
rest areas so that's still under
negotiation but that twenty
million dollars yeah this most
of the way to where we want to
be with our rest areas as far as
you to find interchanges as we
do the project we try and
include landscaping and some
other things in those but that
I'm aware of we don't have any
specific project is for
landscaping outside of of
another major project.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Secretary just one quick comment
you had.
The third had jury filters is
name up on the screen a moment
ago.
I used to do with him when he
was with the NVDs.
He owes very good at helping
resolve problems.
with the constituents who had
problems with the in the days so
you're you're lucky to have him.
Thank you thanks again for being
here.
Mr secretary of thank you Mr
chair.
That's all I have thank you.
I don't believe we have any
other questions a Mr secretary
just a.
Quickly went when you mention
that three point seven billion
dollars it's coming from the
federal government over the next
five years the spoke about
requests.
Right after that.
Those projects won't be applying
to that fund is requests.
Will or will be a disclosure I
that secretary.
yeah Mr chairman that we make
sure I understand your question
right so that three point seven
billion is is coming to us in
the form of a formula funding so
that's the minimum within the
gate so based on our vehicle
miles traveled our population
how many road miles we have
every state gets a minimum
amount so then in addition to
the three point seven billion
there's other pots of money for
discretionary grants so there
might be ten billion dollars for
rural grant program and then
state would have to apply all
the state would be competing for
that ten million dollars so we
don't exactly know how much
we're going to get from that
it's it's a competitive process
with that anymore we're gonna do
no worse than the formula
funding which is the three point
seven billion.
Okay okay thank you for that
clarification secretary so that
three point seven billion will
be coming to the state is that
goes to the legislature for
appropriation or does it go
straight to the DOT.
Mr Chairman right now it is
being this year's money is part
of our budget and so it is going
through the appropriation
process so the extra money that
were already receiving this year
and and it's been like that for
quite a while where any federal
money goes through the process
and it's included in our budget
our budget is a little bit
different it's his house bill
three as in all and then that
gets rolled into house bill two
but we've always had our federal
money as part of that budget
that you see in the long.
Okay thank you I believe we have
a question from Senator Sanchez.
Thank you Mr chair more of a
COVID I you know it I know it's
here at the end and I just want
to think of Secretary Santa with
all the construction we have
their own I. forty in my area
whenever I called in whenever he
was get on a plane one day as a
staff member called me you know
we took care of the situation
thank you for all you do for us
thank you for what you do for my
area just really appreciate just
want to thank you today for that
you're you and your staff they
reach out at any time to get
back to you at any hour of the
night and he was on it that real
big issues on I. forty then the
traffic would be backed up for
five six hours of the time and
they are on it we you know we
got to taking care of and moving
smoothly and all those projects
and are coming to a close and
are done so I'm so thank you
again sectors on the oil.
Right thank you senator of
senator this really quick
because I appreciate Senator
Sanchez what you're saying about
the responsiveness and have
experienced the same thing we
had a situation here on five
twenty five it'll take us trail
where they did some repaving and
they didn't put down the turn
lanes it was really dangerous as
people were merging in
and basically so I constituent
of mine reached out on Twitter
Senate right to the staff and
just like that they had it
marked as in pain and again it's
just that's the kind of
responsiveness it's greatly
appreciated I've worked with.
With secretary Santa for many
years before he was in this
position again I think he is an
exemplary state employee were
very lucky to have a.
Great thank you so
Secretary thank you for your
presentation thank you for using
your staff please convey that
message to the entire staff of
this committee's appreciation
all the work you do your
responsiveness and we look
forward to driving on new roads
here in the next the over the
next few years and so forth so
with that of thank you Mr
secretary.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee
appreciate all the all the nice
comments anything I can do I'll
do whatever I can thank you very
much.
Okay great so that of.
Well recognize so we've got to
recognize our surgeon on staff.
The removal Mr.
There is now.
And then the.
