Or insurance related business in
the state the fees relate to
things such as applications
examinations statutory form
filings at cetera in twenty
twenty at the behest of LFC and
DFA OS II reviewed its fee
structure it compared its the
schedule with those of
surrounding states and as a
result of that re review it
proposes to adjust just fees the
fees that are included in house
bill two forty eight AM where a
currency in New Mexico is
similar to the fee charged for
the same action and surrounding
states just I did not seek a fee
increase and with that if I may
Mister chair turn it over to the
superintendent.
Of course of attendance till.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee I want to thank you
for considering this the bill
that you have in front of years
changed from their original
version to the amendments in the
house which removed any fee
increases at all one individual
brokers agents producers or.
so the bill that you have in
front of you.
Directly speaks to the charges
that the insurers would have to
pay.
I want to let the committee know
too that we shared the
comparison with the rupees with
all the other states with all
the insurers.
And there wasn't a singer
objection from the insurance
community honorees fees and in
the house we've had no
opposition to the species here
it will generate a total of
about four million dollars a
little over two million which
will go to the general fund a
little over a million and a half
to the fire protection fund the
balance to some brighter
statutorily created entities
such as the Kerry ten.
Answer a question for members of
the committee would have again I
want to make the point that
these fees are not imposed on
individuals and certainly not on
individual brokers agents are
producers.
Okay thank you Representative
Chandler.
I we're happy to answer any
questions of the committee Mr
chair okay thank you at this
time we'll go to the public.
Our house bill two forty eight
as amended we do not have any
members of the public register
in advance to speak in
opposition if you wish to speak
on this bill please raise your
hand.
Thank you know hands we will go
to JD Bullington who registered
to speak in favor.
Thank you Mr Chairman can you
hear me.
Yes.
At this fantastic thank you Mr
chairman this is JD bowing to
registered lobbyists for the
independent insurance agents of
New Mexico and as
superintendent.
Russell all has stated there is
no opposition from this sector
of the insurance community we
had a little bit of heartburn
when the bill was originally
introduced but we've had great
conversations with the
superintendent of insurance and.
We are now fully second warning
we are not fully supporting
house bill two forty eight.
Thank you very much there and
the other members of the public
with us here today wishing to
speak in support of this bill
please raise your hands now.
Thank you very much that
concludes public comment is.
Mr Epstein.
I am doctor hi doctor marketing
and the CEO and president to
help New Mexico commercial
health insurer here in New
Mexico we to concur it is a very
fair and reasonable bill and we
support superintendent holes
support of this legislation as
well thank you.
Thank you very much are there
any of the members of the public
wishing to speak in support
please raise your right.
And with that that concludes
public comment at this time.
Thank you we'll go to a
committee members any questions.
The committee.
Seeing them Mr chairman I'll
move it to pass.
Second in the past by Senator
Padilla second by Senator how to
Hotmail of lane of the so called
role.
Senator Brandt.
No.
Senator Griggs.
Senator Hamblen.
Yes.
Senator Hickey yes Senator how
to meal yes Senator Kernan.
Yes it okay Senator and yes.
Senator common.
Senator Wirth.
Senator Padilla yes Senator
Shendo yes.
You have one six six in the
affirmative one in the negative
and three excuse thank I just
landed to get my vote know what
is it senator Tom yes okay thank
you.
Okay do present Representative
Chandler all right thank you
have a good evening take care
guys thank you.
Moving on to the house bill two
thirty five insurance co changes
Representative Lujan.
Hello.
Mr chair committee.
Ready to address the committee
go ahead Representative bill.
Thank you Mr chair and members
I'm pleased to present the
judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill two thirty five
you today house bill two three
five works to clean up some of
the insurance comes language and
put in place for provisions that
will help the superintendent of
insurance to regulate.
Representative Lee and to
support support his efforts to
make sure consumers are well
served by financially sound
insurance companies incompetent
turns professional the office of
the superintendent of insurance
has worked cooperatively with
insurers to modernize insurance
code with this bill yes is it
balances the interests of the
insurers the economic vitality
of the states and the protection
of our citizens for example the
bill provides insurers consumers
and the side the opportunity to
participate in less expensive
more efficient E. commerce right
allowing electronic delivery of
documents and information it
creates consistency among
definition requirements and
ensures compliance with federal
laws and it cleans up errors in
grammar syntax reference and
citation.
With that Mr chair I stand for
question my expert witness to
the superintendent Mr till.
Okay so Mister till we would be
available for questions or you
want to make any comments.
Would you like to make a comment
at this time.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee really appreciate your
consideration of this bill.
It is in my mind the
uncontroversial and what
important piece of legislation
because the insurance code which
is some of you will know is
really a complex monster and
there are things in that code
today that still refer to the
insurance department of the PRC
there are it has provisions that
are no longer consistent what
the state audit act or the
procurement
act provisions
it makes references of things
that we do not do.
This is really an attempt to
also let us update and move
electronically where we can.
I am shocked and have been jobs
since I got there by the amount
of paper.
That comes into our office this
bill will help us are
diminish that and the
significant.
There's nothing here that should
be controversial to you.
It's one of the few bills that
I've seen come out of the house
Judiciary Committee on a
unanimous vote.
And so are your your
consideration I would be happy
to answer any questions that
you.
Okay thank you Mr told.
But this time will of go to the
public.
For house bill two thirty five
if you wish to speak in
opposition please raise your
hand.
House bill two thirty five for
those speaking in favor first
off we have Linda Siegel.
I'm all right all.
While also.
Mr chairman members of the
committee Marlys shows
registered lobbyists for Blue
Cross blue shield in New Mexico
we are in support of house bill
two thirty I would like to show
our appreciation to the sponsor
superintendent pol and OSI's
willingness to listen to our
concerns throughout the drafting
process thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you very much next up we
have market state and.
Mr chair members of the
committee and Dr markets being
beyond president to help New
Mexico we are in full support of
this bill and we appreciate the
provisions of that act for
efficiency and reduce friction
and interfaces with OSI for
carriers as well as consumers we
appreciate and hope that your
support this legislation as well
thank you.
Thank you very much next up we
have John Anderson.
JD bowling.
Members of the committee JD
Bullington speaking once again
as a registered lobbyist for the
independent insurance agents of
New Mexico this legislation
provides superintendent Russell
told the authority he needs to
balance the interests of
consumers and also the insurance
industry we urge you to please
pass this legislation thank you.
Thank you very much at this time
if you wish to speak in support
of house bill two thirty five
please raise your hand.
Thank you very much.
Comment on this time.
Thank you we'll go to the.
The committee for for questions
I have Senator Brandt the
Senator Padilla.
Mr Chairman representative of
thank you I do have a few
questions on the committee sub.
Page three we're we're giving a
bunch of new.
Risk to the insurance
superintendent under.
The emergency situation I think
that's what that saying yeah
there's the public health
emergency response act can you
explain what those powers are
and why we need to give those to
the superintendent.
Thank you Mr thank you senator
Yes that that is the
okay point that it's making and
I'm gonna have superintendent
respond to you on that one Mr
superintendent.
Senator Brandt it's good to see
you again
your question is are very
relevant one and what happened.
Years
and years ago.
Reply zero one comment started
and the attorneys looked at what
authority we had to take a
virgin see actions
Our attorneys and the governor's
attorneys concluded we didn't
have its press number cincy
Authority language in the code
there is very very broad
language several others on this
committee or where but we were
strongly encouraged to put some
language in we discussed this at
great length with all the
insurers to make sure that we
didn't authorize the or
subsequent superintendents take
action to work directly tied to
the emergency order and we also
put in the substitute and you'll
see there on page three and four
that
It can only be used for certain
kinds of things cannot in any
way be retroactive and the
superintendent doesn't have the
authority to extend.
Emergency body beyond the time
of the governor's declaration.
No thank you Mr chairman and.
The server Gen I appreciate that
the problem is
we may have put yours is being
time limited but the governor's
as a.
As we have seen
so in that you have grace
periods for payment of insurance
premiums.
so who's gonna pay those that.
Mister chairman Senator Brandt
we're experiences best year was
that the insurance industry was
just incredibly Cooper.
You for going.
Payments for those who have been
adversely affected by COVID.
In giving people extended
periods of time.
In the case of auto insurers and
small business insurers we were
able to get them to go back in
and reduce the insurance
premiums and the give credits to
people so that's the kind of
thing that we do I do want to
emphasize that there is no.
independent authority for a
superintendent to declare an
emergency and I think that's
important to.
Okay.
Struggles to return I appreciate
that
And you mentioned all the things
you were able to do.
I remember getting deductions
and refunds and all kinds of
things off my auto insurance
policy.
you did that without us having
to give you any authority to do
it.
my concern it has been my
concern I have brought it up
several times on the Senate
floor so all the senators in
here probably sick and tired of
hearing it.
Is how we continue as a
legislature to give away our
forty.
We're just we you know I tell
you by the end of this year we
should even show up here
anymore.
Once we are forty for
everything.
We're just given all the
executive let the executive
right state and so that's my
concern with the nothing against
you personally or anything like
that
you know there's there's no
checks and balances in our
system currently and now we want
to put another department in
that can do you know pretty much
you know.
I suspension of images of
compliance with statute rule or
contract.
And all all the all you have to
do to get that is the governor
has to.
Sign in order.
I mean that's just that's a
struggle for me that's a stretch
for me.
I I do not believe that the
executive should have the amount
of power has currently.
And I definitely don't support
giving the executive more power
by shifting this over to you so.
So I I have concerns about that
section that was added in I
believe.
From the committee sub.
I don't think that was the
original session of your bill
was a Representative.
Mr chair and senator I think
that that is the important part
of this bill.
And I think it just to reiterate
that
the story is only available time
interpretation of the state of
emergency and that's were the
superintendents speaking from.
You know it is only for the
duration of the state of
emergency I think it's I think
it's appropriate.
Thank you Mr Chairman
representative the the problem
is the state of emergency has no
end date.
This the state of emergency has
no limitations.
as long as there's one case in
the country this the governor
can continue this state of
emergency quote unquote
even though we have remedies
even though we have things in
place that can mitigate it which
is what the law says.
Of our spring court is ruled the
governor has ultimate authority
on this.
and so that's what concerns me.
is that we've tied the authority
of the superintendent to the
same authority as the governor
and we have a no checks and
balances on the authority of the
governor.
Where we put checks and balances
in the law the Supreme Court has
a it completely ignored them and
so that's where my concern comes
and has nothing to do with.
You as well to do with your bill
has nothing to do with the
superintendent.
I just I'm very concerned about
our the legislature continuing
to giveaway Authority we just
that on the Senate floor a few
minutes ago.
Where we gave away more of our
legislative authority but this
time we did it the IV so you
know we just continue to give
away all of our authority is
legislature and pretty soon we
don't even need to be here and
we have people talking about
making a full time
professionals.
Why.
We just keep signing everything
what.
Anyway thank you Mr chairman I
Armstrong that section of the
bill but all continue to listen
us I see there's a lot more
hands on thank you.
Thank you Senator Padilla than I
have Senator Hickey and Senator
Kernan.
Okay thank you Mr chairman and
thank you Representative it's a
very comprehensive build it
seems like there's been a lot of
a lot of work here thank you
superintendent I had similar
questions along the line of
Senator brands maybe a little
different twist to them so
change the channel little bit
I'm asking some other questions
then and Representative if you
want to ask the superintendent
or if you want to answer this
one when you went through this
process around the clean up and
and all that stuff that just
seems like it's way overdue work
that should have done should
have happened about a decade ago
Representative Mr superintendent
whoever you'd like to have it
Sir.
Yes Sir yes Senator absolutely
we have our we have laws in
place that we need to have the
language in place for it and
that's what this bill does we
have language that we still you.
It could be updated
Something I don't wish to stay
language is still use that was
once used and was acceptable and
cost but now is the.
Is been updated recently
responsible for that if the
superintendent would like to act
that gladly accept.
That's true Mister chairman
Senator Padilla
we really have tried to.
Not and then a bunch of new
provisions are in the store
we're just really trying to
modernize the code and enable us
to take advantage of technology.
I appreciate that Mr Chairman
representative and and Mr
superintendent I was I was very
happy when we found here well it
and provide you will know you
but you and and and you decide
to take on this role thank you
for doing it much like when I
reform to the New Mexico
telecommunications act back in
two thousand seventeen we have
modernized virtual communication
lessons before the internet came
along is.
There's a lot of work to be done
there took me three years to get
that done so the fact that
you've made this comprehensive
change of these very good I did
have a couple of questions on
the emergency powers section so
full stop we can talk about that
a little bit when you put that
together did you look at what's
going on in other states of
similar size the nature
composition rural purses versus
metropolitan and we're in we're
frontier state whole state but I
would but if you look at other
jurisdictions when you started
putting that that together.
Thank you.
Total please.
Mr chairman and Senator Padilla
absolutely not but it probably
won't surprise you Madam all the
jurisdictions your.
There is a.
Superintendents usually call
commissioners with incredible
one bridled Authority which we
did not want to pursue of course
and there's some where.
branch point.
Everything requires an action by
the legislature state Washington
the good example of that
But we we tried to do a middle
ground and I and if I could.
Let me explain why I think this
language is important we are
very fortunate that we have.
Both good and cooperative
insurance companies in the state
but we're we're is what we were
scared of.
The new our state insurance
company was to come to our New
Mexico which we always encourage
that and we were to make these
requests.
Because of our merchants say.
Thank you very well because
without the statutory authority
that's in this bill that could
very well say sorry Charlie
we're not gonna do any of these
things
we're not gonna
be part of the insurance family
we're gonna.
Aggressively cancel policies on
people who don't pay we're not
going to get ready for veterans.
Because that statutory authority
did not exist.
So what as we drafted this
language we did our very much in
part with the insurance
industry.
Some health insurers here but
more importantly and more
aggressively all the property
and casualty insurance companies
who want to make sure we didn't
hamper their business I think
all of them would testify to
you.
That there weren't very pleased
with the way we handle things
over this past year but at the
end of the day if anyone had
challenged us we would not have
been what they been able to
withstand.
I really love to hear that Mr
Chairman representative can
superintendent because we're not
here all the time we're not you
know we're talking about you
know came up with Senator branch
line of questioning as well and
how we handle this legislative
process I have a couple of ideas
to but we're just not here all
the time and I I think we do
hire professionals to do this
work for us and I'm I'm I'm
feeling a lot better that you
chose to take the time to take a
stab at this and you know
obviously I think so Mister
superintendent.
Six months already my mentors at
twelve months already I
remember.
If you're a the Mr chairman.
January one of twenty twenty
okay well.
Baptism by fire I called best.
that that's that's really good
to hear so with with regard to
the stuff that you still have to
come to the legislature for can
you give us the highlights maybe
the big three.
Senator the three main things.
Yeah the three main things that
you're going to still have to
come back to the legislature I'm
gonna try to I hope that we're
gonna hear because I scanned the
bill very quickly.
Phone book were built or
constructed but but I understand
why but but I hope that we're
going to talk about three things
that make others feel
comfortable you know with how
you drafted.
Right again I'll defer to
superintendent to on this.
Mr chairman and senator I
appreciate that question okay we
will at some point
Because of the effort to to
required bring you a
streamlining bill there would
stop all the limited all the
duplication.
For example in the amendment to.
Health insurance provision there
are four sections of the
insurance co that have to be
amended and that's part of the
reason these bills are so all.
we think that could be
consolidated into a single unit
that's one
the second thing is I think
there are more explicit
Number protections that should
be put in place we've been very
aggressive about that but we are
limited by what's in the law.
And third
One of the things we're trying
to figure out is what role
should we play with the provider
community if at all.
When we find.
Riders who for example or
charging for COVID tests even
though both federal and state
law says you cannot charge for
COVID yes.
We also and we explain it to the
provider we send the materials.
But if you were to provide if
you were to look at our
insurance code you would find
such authority rested.
We go through the insurance
companies to the fullest extent
we can.
But I.
We're encouraging the
legislature go look at the
question of who has that
responsibility earlier just TKM
on Medicaid managed care
organizations but they don't
have authority with anybody else
and they don't really have.
Rider discipline.
The licensing functions.
Don't for well for the kinds of
things that I'm talking about so
we're to deliberate over that
with our partners in other state
agencies and see what we can
come up with in the way of a
solution.
Are you at the end of the day.
Those should not be sure what to
do should not be a executive
decisions should really be a
legislative session.
I appreciate that Mr chairman
and I really did want to go
Representative through those
three items because I I did want
to you know demonstrate for the
rest of the committee members
there's a ton of things here
that you still need to work with
us on they don't are just left
to the superintendent whoever
that person may be so I I know
we have others that have
questions I just wanted to make
that that noted I also want to
thank Representative for taking
on such a large task I think
this didn't look like it was
easy the it's it looked like it
was very hard and hard to
understand
The last thing that all ask is
from a philosophical standpoint
Mr chairman and and
Representative and this is for
the superintendent where are we
what what are your thoughts
where are we with you know
ensuring all of our people here
in New Mexico what else do we
need to be doing and and did you
did you maybe make any treat any
moves here that are going to
help us in that direction.
Chairman and senator Byrd deal
only in the sense that this
enables us to streamline our
business and our work more
efficiently of all of our.
Orders in constituencies there
is a bill that's in the Senate
finance committee house bill one
twenty two it would create the
state affordability fund to
help.
Buy down premiums and more
importantly out of pocket costs.
For people buying health
insurance it also has a
provision in that for expressly
helping small businesses we
think we have a.
There's something we could do
and we could have a strong role
in reducing the cost of
insurance for small businesses
but we need statutory authority
to do that.
I appreciate that and I I I
didn't want to hit you with a
philosophical but I really
appreciate you doing that that's
that's very helpful to me I will
tell you my son I have twins
many of the members here met
them at different times when
they were small medium and large
a really big big tall man now
one of his name is Erin he's
getting his masters in may and
he's worked for the past two
years on Monday mornings he and
his co workers hop on a bus and
the drive all over to small
little towns all over the smoky
mountains are really are smoky
mountains not just a song and
and they land in these towns and
the people that have never had
health care coverage or health
care professionals in their
towns ever they meet with them
they get on the bus the examine
them through a nurse and I see a
doctor real quick and then at
the end the last step is to talk
to my son and his co worker and
it's very fascinating because
they bring health care to those
little towns that have never
happened before but then they're
also feeding the information
that they're hearing the
legislature over there in
Tennessee to to understand what
changes they need to make
concise open market collecting
and cataloging and bring all
that information to the
legislature so we can help you
to continue to ensure people
here in New Mexico otherwise
we're never going to quite get
out of this hole you know that
we're in from the healthcare
standpoint so thank you Mr
chairman I'm very very happy
with the work that you're doing
thank you.
Thank you are Senator Hickey.
Thank you Mr chair and Mr chair
and Representative Lujan and
superintendent just a couple of
small questions
one is I see in the FIR referral
there is a discussion of the
advertising
and that cleaned up some of the
issues the.
Having having worked with the
OSI in the past there was not
always a lot of clarity about
what was permissible what was
not permissible and I've looked
through the bill and maybe I'm
missing something here and I'm
not finding what specifically
and advertising that is being
addressed in this new
regulation.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Senator Wirth and we had some
discussion to this as we're
working to this bill and I think
we we have we change that
language in a minute
after superintendent to go over
that because the new there was
an.
Good discussion and some
what we ended up with in the
bill Mr superintendent.
Mr chairman and senator Hickey.
Or as senator Dr drive taking I
don't.
For rural.
Right respond resting could be
Martin but here AT Senator I
guess Senator well the
Representative Lujan is right on
the money we did have lots of
discussions.
And frankly most of the draft
provisions that we have proposed
have been pulled out of the bill
because we didn't want our
unintentionally do harm to the
ability of the of national
insurance company the launch
advertising campaigns we want to
decide to not make are their
products available.
Because you had to go through
the New Mexico offices
superintendent chair to get
approval on their ads are you
know that's.
But we didn't think was our
rural and quite honestly after
weeks of negotiation we just
decided to pull
the proposed provisions there is
is you know there are existing
regulations on advertising that
we follow and we actually have
had very few problems our
biggest problem is the group
that we cannot get at and that
is the.
The fly by night companies up
the border fight insurance
companies that are national or
international nature these are
the guys who pop up.
Medicare enrollment time they
offer products that are approved
by anybody they send out all
kinds of.
Material it's fraudulent.
Last year there was a particular
company that sent out flyers in
the mail to all kinds of people
letting them know is there their
last chance to sign up for
tribal courts through is no such
thing as trump Kerr.
these are so called lead
generators got a phone call then
they farm it out to all the.
Other insurance companies too
much so.
I don't know how with the
Interstate Commerce provisions
we can get at some of those
we've taken on water to have
some success.
Support the insurance companies
are very good about compliant
with the existing rules we added
one new provisions under that
said if you're offering any kind
of value added product.
To your existing plans you have
to give us notice of that so the
Hey we know what's going on in
the market place and be able to
get calls from consumers that we
can respond with some degree of.
Thank you
Mr superintendent of Mr chairman
and Representative Lujan and
superintendent
one other question is short term
insurance.
Is that addressed in this bill
or is that essentially
prohibited and the state as I
believe it was when I was last
familiar there was some at I
never get quite figure out
exactly what was the oil.
Mr chairman and senator.
The HSD regulatory relief before
my time adopted rules that
really prohibit
the marketing of the short term
plans by saying they have to
meet all the ACA requirements in
the short term plans don't want
offer.
Health insurance that meets
those requirements so we
essentially have none of them in
this business
I think the need for then
disappears even more with the
open enrollment periods and
extended open enrollment parents
The New Mexico health insurance
exchange.
so thank you for that Mr
superintendent Representative
Lujan Mr chairman and
Representative Lujan and well
it's it's very good to hear that
there are no loopholes that
would allow them to continue
because I know they were trying
to sell
a year ago and really misleading
people
and then also have you one
question is F. as in one last
question is
I see that you you're dealing
with
coverage of what are preventive
services and will your will that
coverage involved as a
preventive services task force
and however that's implemented
nationally will you have the
space to be able to create that
prevention as well.
Without having to have separate
law here in New Mexico our
chairman and senator the answer
your question is yes our rules
basically say whatever the US
preventive health services or
passport or Dr new preventive
measure what part of Mexico.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative Lujan and
superintendents all I have I
having lived in these
regulations and the groups and
some of the arcane and also the
massive amounts of paperwork
from twelve until eighteen
really appreciate to funny
appreciate your taking this on
making it very common sense an
approaching it the way you yes
process to bring everyone in the
table and have now what we what
is common sense and that will
service very well for the future
so I want to congratulate the
representative for hearing the
bill and we'll do the department
for putting it all together
thank you Mr chairman and some
thank you Senator.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
so I have one question I want to
go back to the representative
just for clarification.
Your original bill did include
understand it was and then that
that was placed on it that tied
the superintendent to the
governor's public health order
was that that was an amendment
in my correct so the original
bill did or did not include that
portion Mr chair Senator so what
is in this bill now it we we've
created at the expense of the
right.
get rules or issue orders to
ensure access to insurance and
the stability of insurance
markets in emergency in this and
at the substance yet we're
talking about but the authority
is only available upon the
invocation of the of the of the
state emergency under the all
hazard emergency management act
or the public health emergency
response act by the government
so thank you but I'm just Mr
Chairman representative in your
original bill not to substitute
in the original bill was that
portion.
Providing for that authority in
the original bill.
Mr chair Senator Senator I
believe so but I will double
check with superintendents.
Okay thank you very much so I
listed superintendent told.
Mister chairman Senator Kernan
yes it's it's been and every
version of the bill including
act all right.
So.
Thank you and in many times as
substitutes I did get better but
just want to make sure that that
was that was the intent from the
very beginning in addition to
all cleanup which I totally
support was the addition of that
extra forty tied to the governor
and I'm gonna go along the same
track is Senator Brandt and I
will tell you I'm looking at the
members of this committee and I
will tell you I was here in two
thousand three when we pass that
legislation and in my view that
was probably one of the.
One of the worst pieces of
legislation I've ever support.
Because we did not consider.
And in time.
In that that was a failure on
the part of the legislature to
not put an end date on that.
And I believe under the
circumstances we've been through
this year that the legislature
we come in special session we
can do something in thirty
minutes and be out of here.
So that's not an issue we can
always come back in.
But the fact that we did not do
that was a terrible mistake.
And I think over the year we
probably would have come back
and allow that extension that it
would have been eight eight
Representative group of people
from across the state making
decisions that should never be
left up to one individual and I
will tell you
members of this committee.
This is going to be another the
state to tie in some certainly
not against superintendent
because I will tell you I have
the greatest respect for this
superintendent but we may not
always have the superintendent
just like when we passed the
bill in two thousand three given
the authority to the governor we
have a different governor right
now and I think we always have
to remember down the road.
That we may or may not have the
best person in the position.
But not to have an end date it's
a terrible mistake impact time
this authority to that order
with no end date I'm telling you
it is another terrible decision
that we would make its
legislators.
And so I can't support the bill
for that reason I could separate
out your story Mr superintendent
Mr chair to give you temporary
forty even up to six months even
to a year.
But within in date of some sort.
Because if we do not do that and
we cannot re sent but we allow
for the governor with regard to
public health order it will
never in.
And so I'm I'm just telling you
I have been there I have value
for that and it was the biggest
mistake I have ever met in this
legislature.
Going forward I do have some
questions
I know your property and
casualty insurance producers and
providers at well do you think
Mister chair Mister
superintendent could those
companies
survive.
Certainly they did they did work
with with you they did.
Reduced premiums.
But but I'm not sure how long
they could do that in in real
time going forward is it are
they still doing that today with
regard to reduce premiums we
know people weren't on the road
they didn't have any expense
there were no graphics things
things of that sort so how long
do you think those companies
could indoor the kind of
reductions that would be given
with regard to this authority
I'm glad it worked with you I
think that's great.
Thank you senator
The superintendent.
Mr chairman and senator thank
you for the question.
I'm afraid the answer is not a
single answer it's gonna really
depend on the current company
with very large companies.
are continuing to work with
people some of the smaller ones.
You know because we didn't miss
your formal order.
In order to do that.
they they have moved past that
stage and they're expecting
people to pay premiums and all
the rest of the.
I don't have and wouldn't use
the authority to tell them a
year later that you have to keep
doing this forever.
The more than on reasonable.
We are however getting ready to
do
another effort with the auto
insurers to reduce your offer
either reduce premiums are offer
some kind of credits and rebates
because traffic statistics are
still way way down.
Accidents thankfully are way way
down and most of them have more
than adequate reserves to do
some kind of rebate those
rebates part time limit.
Some of the other insurance like
for small businesses.
I do not believe they're
offering goes I do not believe
that continue to offer those
discounts all year round but
they certainly did for the first
five.
Thank you if there was a
voluntary on their part and I'm
very appreciative of what they
do.
Well and and Mr chairman and and
Representative and Mr
superintendent I think we are
very fortunate to have the
opportunity to do that I don't
disagree and even to give you
that authority or any
superintendent for a limited
period of time I would totally
agree with that because I do
think
there there so it was
opportunity for them
to be able to find does it does
add column.
With regard to to the medical
course the NCOs.
Their end of the state controls
so that that's not concerning
Excuse me is state
You know I'm sure that that
there's a lot of the forty that
state has over the and CEO so I
don't think about that too much
when you talk about not being
able to charge for the comment
at testing and I was very
appreciative that because House
tested pretty regularly I
thought it was important to do
that but at what point we need
to determine that that maybe
we're we've got a little bit too
far maybe it's not necessary to
get tested and to do that at no
cost would there be educator
meditation I mean can you say
that now that okay now we're
coming through this thing and so
we shouldn't that prohibit them
from charging for that yes.
Thank.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Senator I think that that that
needs to be a lot more to.
As I as I see things moving
ahead and more discussions on
that but.
Will defer to the
superintendents you have any
other information to act on that
but
We're in there we are seeing the
note lowering rates right now
but I think that that involves
others in the discussion but I
will defer to
the superintendent.
Thank you.
Chairman Senator Kernan hello
again a good question but at
this point it's out of the
state's hands the.
The federal government has said
that it's going to continue
this.
State of emergency at the
federal level through the
calendar year.
So as long as that is the case
under the law that was passed
last year cares Act.
There cannot be any charging for
the comment yes.
So thank you Mr Chairman
representative superintendent
told and and
so once the federal government
determines that
there would be no charge what
the state would you have the
authority to continue to direct
insurance companies.
To not charge if this bill
passes or if it doesn't pass do
you still have that authority.
Mr chairman.
Senator Kernan and that is yes.
Okay well.
I will in my questions there I
do I do have great concern about
tying the authority the
superintendent to the governor's
public health worker for the
reasons that stated that there
is no end time I I really could
support this bill if you had
authority and four year even and
then we would come back and make
a determination but I think to
repeat the mistake that was made
in two thousand three is is just
a it's just not good policy and
before I close I do want to say
how much I do appreciate the
superintendent I don't think
people realize what a great job
he has done not just
over this last year but that he
has been you have done a super
job I want to thank you for your
work on on the other issue of
from the medical malpractice I
read your entire report and I
just want to tell you I thought
it was out standing so I'm with
that Mr chair out in my
questions and thank you very
much.
Thank you Senator Griggs.
Thank you Mr chair and and
Representative and I've you know
these those are all valid
concerns both my bye to Senate
colleagues are brought up but
I'm I have a specific question
on the.
Change to
section to have K..
Which is the you know the.
Rushing the emergency powers
staff.
And I I believe I've got several
copies here and I've I think it
stayed pretty much the same and
all of them but it it talks
about upon the invocation of the
state of more state of emergency
by the governor the secretary or
the superintendent present to
we're talking about is a
superintendent.
Can take such actions necessary
to maintain affordable access to
insurance and health care.
And I guess Mr.
Representative and and Mr
superintendent.
Hello how are you going to.
Maintain access to affordable
health care I mean I might can
see insurance but I I don't
understand that the health care
alright so
Representative and mission for
intended you could explain that
to me I would appreciate it.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator yes I think that's
that's a really important piece
here that we keep coming
circling back to and that's why.
We have to alright this
provision in this this piece of
legislation.
And it goes back and tries to
what we just experienced you
This pandemic.
The food in place and I think
that is why it is I knew that I
this bill and it gives that the
doctor on you make sure.
He's working to that we have
these provisions of it we can
act on this this is that you
just have superintendent.
Specifically to your question
about with the health care
expenses.
Thank you.
Mr chairman and senator Griggs.
It has to be read in the context
of the insurance code so this is
making reference to the health
care provisions in the insurance
code so when it says we can take
action on health care what it
what it really means is we would
just be deal with property and
casualty insurance issues we're
dealing with health insurance
issues that.
We don't have to as you rightly
noted we don't have any direct
authority over the delivery of
health care and we don't want.
But we do have authority over
each health insurance company.
And our Mr chairman and
Representative in in
superintendent at and that's the
way I read it I don't I did I
you have.
You have inserted
The way you you view it into the
the actual language which was
you know you're talking about
pursuant to the provisions of of
something right.
And our and Mr Mr chair
representative
and she pretended I I really
believe if.
If you want to say what year
what you just said I think we
really got amended to include
those those for five different
words as you as you stated so
we're we're clear even though in
in your mind you're clear.
In this instance you know we say
and health care and and as you
mentioned you don't have any you
don't have any.
State so over the delivery of
health care and matched it just
to me I mean it just if it had
just a little bit pursuant to
whatever.
Is the right sensible
terminology I I think I would
like that that she which you
think.
Mr chair Senator I think at the.
Language in places I mean
current responsibilities of
what's the superintendents.
Can I cannot do it is.
Relevant to what you're asking I
think that that should be.
Because.
What the superintendents that
have we don't have offices not
have oversight over health care.
I'm a little confused about here
you want to amend that but.
Thank you.
And and Mr chairman and and
Representative all I'm I'm
saying you need to say what you
may and I don't I don't I don't
know that that's clear or at
least is certainly not clear to
me
and.
I I appreciate the comments that
the the superintendent maybe
because he he made he makes the
distinction.
But the language in the bill
doesn't make that distinction.
And that's the you know that's
the concern that that I have
with it and I don't want you I
mean I may not I may not support
the bill regardless because of
the other stuff we talked about
but if the bill if the bill
passes I certainly wanted to say
what it what it means I'm not
gonna I'm not gonna run through
it and start trying to then you
find out your I want you to know
that I just this particular I
just jumped right out at me
because it says access to
insurers and health care and the
superintendent of insurance that
have anything to do with health
care it might be you know it's a
simple amendment to strike it
but I don't think that's what
you want I either I thank you
you know you want to do what it
what authority he has but.
The trouble with our staff is
when you write it and you say
this or that.
When you can add just the stuff
to it that clarifies it I think
that's the better the better
approach show
I would like to ask the
superintendent Representative if
he feels like there's a.
There's an amendment chair or or
not and then we can and we can
vote on it and say.
Show that I mean my guys might
not want the amendment either
show.
Find out thank you chairman
thank you senator I think that
that.
I think that that is that that
is something we could we could
discuss but
I I don't see it as a problem as
it is written myself.
The gentleman
Griggs
Thank.
All the people we deal with they
read these kinds of things in
the context of the insurance
code.
In the insurance code reference
to Health Care really has to do
with health insurance I don't
think it's a problem and I don't
think it will.
Right misunderstanding.
I also would encourage you to
look at page three of the
substitute.
Thirteen fifteen and Mr Mr chair
and I don't think I've got that
right in front of me I've got
the I've got the bill without
amendment should contact so if
you is it.
Which section is as you've been
Mr printed.
Number section two.
Yes.
Section two which is where we
are.
Section to where we are right
now talking about the the the
language issue so whereabouts in
section two are you Mr chair
project.
Which paragraph A. B. C. B..
Yes it.
Number number eleven I believe
on page three.
No one is Mr chairman and
members of the.
The committee and Senator Griggs
the what we did the substitute
took out the words health care.
That's all thank you can't you
won't find them in section two.
And and Mr chair in that
Representative and superintended
if it's not there then you know
we're kind of having a
discussion that the dead man too
much and I have I'm.
I I'm happy to I'm happy with
that if that's not in there I
just don't have the I don't have
the substitute in front of me so
so rigs that that section to you
because I'm reading it and I do
you know where you were getting
health care I will I would
appreciate it Mr chair it says
under that section is upon the
order based upon the application
of the state of emergency under
the all has Emergency Management
Act order public health
emergency response act by the
governor take those actions
necessary to ensure access to
insurance and the stability of
insurance markets turned
emergency.
And and Mr chair and
representative and Mr Byrne
tenant that's way better and and
I am really appreciative of the
chair reading that because they
had a great job and I'm.
I'm I'm glad to know that it's
not there because to me that was
that was confusing and and with
that Mr chair representative I
don't have any other other
questions thank you very much.
Thank you thank you senator.
Thank you of.
Senator Hickey yes I move a do
pass motion for I don't see
under the hand so we have a
motion for to pass thank you
second by Senator Padilla.
Lane Buckley Socorro.
Senator Brandt no Senator
Griggs.
After all of that now.
Hamblen yes.
Gate yes Senator Hotmail thanks.
Senator Kernan.
Senator Sanchez no.
Senator common.
Senator Tallman.
Yes.
Thank you Senator Wirth yes.
Senator Padilla.
Yes Representative permission to
take our jackets off Mr
chairman.
You can take your child as well.
Shendo.
Yes.
Do you have a seven four seven
in the affirmative for in the
negative and no one is X.
absent.
With just a Representative
Lujan.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members really appreciate this
thank you.
Chairman.
Thank you senator Representative
all will be well to House Bill.
Eighty two as amended do we have
a Representative Serrato tool
and I just this.
Mr Chairman I'm here.
They are go ahead in the explain
your bill thank you Mr chairman
and thank you to the committee
for having me on HB eighty two
as amended the historically
underutilized businesses
opportunity act creates the help
certification for businesses
owned by people of color and
women it all for women hi allows
the state to offer business
supporting nonprofits the chance
provide training to these hubs
as they bid for state contracts
are purchasing and it creates a
searchable database these
businesses businesses and
collects data on our state
contracting with pops it is not
paid setasides it's not does not
create additional points it did
pass with bipartisan support out
of the house and simply enables
us to collect the data we need
so we can make informed
decisions ensuring our state
dollars are being used to spur
economic growth rate here at
homes in the communities where
you know it's most affected in
that are function for population
with that I'd love to ask if
it's alright have my co sponsor
representative my just to say a
few words.
Representative my just one
minute I'm just kidding I I
object to the Senator
Representative sorry I mean
roshi Representative my Estes
being able to speak this
committee ever.
That case I'll take thirty
seconds chairman.
Thank you.
Thirty minutes.
Prada Prada this bill it's a it
passed the house in two thousand
seventeen sixty three zero
passed the house in two thousand
nineteen sixty four zero it
passed this is the of the
formulation of this wonderful
committee Senate corporations
twice both those two years.
This year we have a tremendous
buy in from the GS the secretary
of the the the person in charge
of procurement we've gone over
the language several times and
and I worked on it to this day I
we think that this is a
fantastic idea we've learned it
from our sister state in Texas
which their hub there how
distinction in the state of
Texas is twenty five years I
have ours and last year it kept
over two billion dollars in the
state of Texas going to female
and minority owned businesses
and we could do the same here in
New Mexico thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you Representative
Mr chairman if I may I also do a
three witnesses but if if I
could potentially live just have
the secretary can authorities of
the General Services departments
if you were to that's alright
that's fine the secretary go
ahead.
Mr chairman members members of
the committee thank you for the
opportunity I just want to thank
the both representatives
sponsors of the bill especially
with working with GST we work
with them over the last couple
years and it's a bill that we
feel that we could fully
administer and embrace going
forward so with that Mr Chairman
I'm happy to answer any
questions I also have my state
purchasing director market in on
available if there's any
questions directly related to
the procurement process.
Thank you.
Mr chairman we stand for
questions thank you we'll go to
the public at this point.
Our house bill eighty two as
amended we did not have any
members of the public register
in advance to speak in
opposition if you wish to speak
in opposition please raise your
hand now.
Speaking in favor of the bill
first we have Jason Weaks.
Thank you Mr chair
representative images weeks
registered lobbyist for the
Albuquerque Hispanic chamber of
commerce we've been working on
this bill for quite some time at
the chamber really want to thank
Representative my ask the
secretary to use Mr Hayden and
Representative Serrato for
taking it up again this year
this bill has has been seen in
this committee before and has
been passed out in in a similar
version the version we have for
you is actually much improved I
think you know it does leveraged
private industry to help
qualified individual companies
as Hobbes and we really think
the data collection portion of
this bill is critical you as to
what we're doing and and how
with historically underutilized
businesses and local businesses
thank you.
Thank you members if there are
any other members of the public
who wish to speak in support of
house bill eighty two as amended
please raise your hands now.
Thank you very much public
comment at this time.
Thank you so that would go to
committee Senator Padilla.
Thank you Mr chairman I I rise
in full support of this
legislation I think it's a.
I've been hard work represented
by this is not our chairman my
sister is not a tremendous
amount of work on this over the
years and it just seems to me
like you know we see this
working all over the country
different formats in different
forms and I think what is landed
here this time is is the better
parts of all of that.
That's great I'm so happy to see
us secretary of these just to
see you first of all but also to
see you in support and and Mr
eight as well and I'm so happy
to hear that that really gives
me a ton of confidence there and
then of course the chamber these
gonna chamber the only question
that I I have is just really
around the data becomes how does
it directly become actionable
once you have it start seeing
the data representatives.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator for the question you
know we've we've asked that the
agencies increased include goals
they're not penalized they don't
have these goals there really in
trouble so they can begin
setting on to see if they're
able to those efforts and then
really took to me and all of my
co sponsors because well I think
this is the information we need
moving forward to make sure that
we're
the money is going back into
communities that need it.
Thank you.
Representative Maestas wanted
that'll or.
You Mr chairman etcetera but I
just for the folks who are here
in this for the first time it's
It doesn't even come close to
the Texas version of there is no
of points awarded there is no
set of size there is no
penalties there is no
Of anything that we just want to
keep stats be aware those those
stats and make make decisions
based on that perfect
information.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
that representatives and so that
that the data versus the goals
and then there's a report and
then we see information where is
it published in how to get
communicated out to the business
community and out to the to the
state legislatures are.
Thank you Mr Senator I'm gonna
go to hand it over to secretary
or tease because it is under GST
to collect all that data.
Sure thank you Mr chairman
Senator how how GSD envisions it
is that agencies would miss
portal similar to our in state
out of state contract reporting
four agencies report directly to
the state purchasing division
basically contracts are awarded
to businesses with that we are
our vision is that will provide
a report to the LFC so similar
to how we do with our in state
out of state reporting and we're
also going to play pay place
this report on our state
purchasing home page within the
GST websites.
Excellent I'm just so happy to
hear all of this and I do stand
in full support thank you Mr
chairman and others I think that
others are questions.
Thank you Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Representative.
Representatives sorry.
The the over here we usually
just have one you know that you
I understand that the that mo
just has to have a stringers and
every.
so the.
If you guys don't know mo and I
are good friends so we we like
to to hit back and forth to each
other
help me understand I I I was
really thrown off by
historically underutilized
businesses I thought maybe it
was like businesses in a
historical downtown community or
something like that and then the
the definition has just kind of
throw me for a loop probably out
with that thank you Mr thank you
Mr chairman thank you senator
you know actually hand this to
my cosponsoring this because I
think he has a lot of the data
that can help with that and
information with that comes
from.
Thank you Mr Chairman asserts
that the of hello was senator
Senator Brandt the
would come from up that the
federal term it's a federal term
in the small business small
business association part of the
federal government historically
underutilized business
businesses but we did find them
on the top of page two.
and we define them as having
fifty or fifty or less
employees.
Well annual income not five
million dollars.
And that more than fifty percent
of the business is owned by a
woman our prisons of color.
Or combination thereof.
Okay thank you Mr chairman
Representative so so is the
so is that all in the the
federal definition of that
program is that why we specify
that so specifically there
or is that really left up to the
states to decide what that
means.
Mr Chairman Senator Brandt no
that's not the federal
definition the Feds use the term
historically underutilized
businesses.
and I think they fit the
definition in terms of more than
fifty percent female or person
of color owned during a fifty
million dollars in the fifty
employees and the resident
requirement as all of us.
Access
You know where this idea came
from.
I think it's similar in terms of
a female or money or minority
owned but the the size is
different in every state yes
thank you and that that that
helps me a lot to understand
kind of where that came from is
funded through the federal
government Mr chairman
Representative us.
Mr chairman and senator us so we
do we did have an update on the
floor amendment that we worked
out with the tax and revenue
department so that we're able to
collect a lot of that data
directly from the federal
government that would be helpful
in that way and we've worked
with GSD and with taxed revenue
about the costs that would be so
if you'd like more rationing of
happy that the secretary speech
that more but I think that's
that is correct it puts a
question is that right.
Mr Mr this I was wondering Mr
Chairman representative of more
of it.
Also there is earning money tied
to this program to where if
someone's gonna be paid for
providing this assistance in
losses just nonprofits that do
it because they're non profits
is is there like a federal grant
that comes in to help provide
for those who help these
businesses all I see Mr Mr
chairman and senator if I may
and then having management
because once or so the qualified
nonprofits that'll be
facilitating that process will
be able to set up some of that
cost in that way so that they're
they're because what it will be
outlined here is that they will
be kind of led into the process
and and for those those in those
companies but then also just as
the secretary mentioned you know
there are there pieces to this
that are already we're already
able to use the technology and
and what we've already been
doing with other purchasing
programs that we have within GST
as well.
And if I may Mister chairman
center but they know that it
does nothing to do with the
federal government or federal
funding we're merely through
taxed Rav and.
Identifying these businesses
certifying them as a New Mexico
high business and then the
secretary at I think you
mentioned will be put on a
website so that these big out of
state contractors can seek out
local businesses in
subcontracting so it's a way to
let market forces get
procurement money back in New
Mexico and build up these
smaller businesses that may not
have the relationships with
these big out of state
companies.
Okay Mister chairman so.
Representative so it's it's
really kind of a a way to flag
these businesses to hopefully
bring some some business to them
that's right.
All right can can you go over a
little bit maybe secretary or
tease this might be better for
you on the information sharing
that was mentioned for the taxes
hi what what kind of information
are we sharing who we share it
with.
If I may go ahead go ahead sorry
I'm sorry secretary L. means I'm
sorry Mr Chairman Senator Browne
I think that's an excellent
question so all of the tax
related information is going to
be Spain impacts and
Representative what taxed rebel
do is find a certification for
these businesses that will then
be transmitted to GST for our
our posting and then when
agencies actually contract with
the hot Business bill also
report that contract to GST so
there's not gonna be any type of
information sharing you know
outside of the packs and Revenue
Department as far as income
level etcetera.
Thank you Mr Chairman
representative you don't know
how much that makes me happy.
Those are your I actually almost
feel the bill earlier this year
that the that wasn't the case
but we did get that area fixed
the tax revenue department needs
to keep tax information no one
else needs to happen.
And so we have too much you know
identity theft to be sharing
that information anywhere else
so I really appreciate that
answer thank you very much I
thank you guys for the bill I'm
gonna continue to listen I did
think it was a little bit
interesting center
Representative Maestas that you
didn't mention the vote in the
house this year.
Your reserve and I don't have it
on my scratch I I think it was
near unanimous no no was it not
this time chairman and chairman
of that are by May was fifty two
to fifteen bipartisan support
thank you thank you I was just
I'm always pulling up what they
can he always does that to me so
thank you very much have a good
one thank you Senator Tallman
then I have Senator Hotmail.
Thank you Mr chair and the good
afternoon members of the
committee of.
A couple years ago
Secretary Ortiz and his chief
purchasing agent helped me
And act Senate bill eighty eight
which made some changes to the
procurement code so this
question is the.
Directed to the secretary
secretary RT's.
Did we include anything similar
to what we're trying to do here
and that the code.
That is so are you are you
already collecting some of this
type of information.
Mr chairman senator Tom and I'm
happy to so first of all yes
Senate bill eighty eight had a
reporting requirement in the
bill that you Sanchez signed by
the governor which required all
agencies to report the total
number of in state and out of
state contracts to the GST first
time ever that we are able to
collect this information and at
the end of fiscal year twenty
with all agencies reported we
had a sixty six percent of all
contracts reported going to
companies that had a resident
residents are typically or
otherwise a resident company so
for the first time ever we
finally had that data which I
consider if you will the
benchmark or at least the
baseline I should say of where
we're at and hopefully with the
with the a bill like this bill
would enable more contracting
dollars to go to New Mexico
businesses so yes thanks to your
your leadership in that
legislation we're able to
provide collect that type of
data Mister chairman Senator
AUMENT.
Thank you Secretary of for that
answer I want to thank the
sponsors of this bill for for
bringing forward thank you.
Thank you Senator how to meal.
Mr Chairman hello Representative
is just one question I think
this is a great bill and just
want to insure that the L. G. B.
T. Q. owned businesses fall
under the minority category.
Thank you so much as a chairman
and and senator not this time we
have a described really and you
can see it under section we have
this guy by physically people of
color on a we outline those
different groups that were being
however in the future I would
love to work with you on
something like that I think that
would be an invaluable to be
honest thank you Mr chairman and
Representative I'll take you up
on that offer I'd love to work
with you to thank you no other
questions Mr chairman.
Thank you.
Thank you Representative hi I've
heard this build up for the
third time now and so hopefully
the third time's a charm so I
don't see any other
Hands up.
We do passed motion for the past
four Senator Padilla Senator
Hamblen seconds Senator Hamblen
second lane can you a place to
grow.
Your Brett.
Senator Griggs.
Yes.
Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Hickey yes Senator how to meal
yes Senator Kernan yes senator
Sanchez yes Senator Tallman.
Senator Tallman.
Senator Wirth yes Senator
Brandt.
Yes ma'am.
Tallman yes.
Senator Padilla yes Senator
Shendo yes you have eleven in
the affirmative Senator no one
excuse.
You guys ever do pass a
representative thank you.
Okay now we'll move on to
Senator Morial to senator
Clemente thank you Mr and the
good afternoon.
Here at home.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you.
Good afternoon again everyone.
This is a memorial urging
Congress to establish a national
infrastructure bank.
As you all know our
infrastructure a.
What is
the other modern gesture by
countries
you've seen firsthand that the
condition of our infrastructure
Sir isn't to other modern
industrialized.
Countries.
On site civil engineers status
recent report to the United
states receive a grade of D.
plus regarding the current state
of infrastructure.
more than four and a half
trillion dollars would be needed
to restore the nation's
infrastructure.
The report the civil engineers
report also stated that New
Mexico's thirty percent of New
Mexico roads are in poor
condition and each driver in the
state spends nearly.
Six hundred dollars annually in
car repairs that there was that
article several days ago to that
effect in the emitting journal
six point five percent of our
bridges are rated structurally
deficient hundred sixty seven
dams are rated high hazard.
The cost to bring drinking water
to the state of good repair New
Mexico's overseas a billion
dollars twenty five percent of
New Mexico students lack
internet service.
The national infrastructure bank
could help finance much of the
infrastructure of New Mexico in
partnership with state and local
governments.
The.
Infrastructure bank is modelled
on previous banks which helped
build our infrastructure going
back to president George
Washington James Madison Abraham
Lincoln and FDR.
Congress is introduced a.
H. R. six four two two which
will create a national
infrastructure bank it would
require no new federal spending
and be capitalized by re
purposing existing treasury
debt.
And if.
The bank would right I anywhere
from.
Fifteen to twenty five million
jobs.
And that is a lot of the the
a lot of popular support
bipartisan support.
For this is.
And the.
This is also being sold as a way
to
China and other countries which
have deployed.
Public investment not only to
boost their growth but to build
influence in the world I've been
I've been to China twice
nineteen ninety six two thousand
I was blown away by their
infrastructure unbelievable what
what what they've done with
infrastructure.
as I said there's bipartisan
support for this much of our
infrastructure is nearing at the
the.
Useful life
useful design life.
And the.
Which is why we need this so
much money in New Mexico there
is about three billion dollars
of deferred maintenance.
So we we we we collected our
infrastructure first far too
long and we watched a.
Other countries continue to
invest.
And the move ahead of the United
States so.
with that.
Mr chair was stand for questions
and I appreciate your support
and consideration of the Samara
thank you thank you the staff
will go to the public for a.
Our Senate memorial two we did
not have any members of the
public register in advance to
speak in opposition if you wish
to speak in opposition please
raise your hands now.
And with that we will go to
those who wish to speak in favor
beginning without FAQ internet.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
and and before this subcommittee
to testify on behalf of R. S. M.
to think right yes
the.
I'm a macro economist I work for
twenty five years at the
International Monetary Fund and
my contribution to helping to
design this bill before Congress
which was introduced last year
is to assess what the impact of
this bill would be not only on
rebuilding our infrastructure on
and getting
Security issues but but also to
have a a bona fide way to.
A jumpstart the American economy
to the to the state of New
Mexico this would contribute
some thirty billion dollars of
new infrastructure and higher of
two hundred eighty five thousand
new workers and there is a
program in the bill similar to
your hope program to make sure
that the the the business is
that are constructing this thank
you very much next up we have
Stewart Rosen blacked.
And.
Thank you Mr chairman Shendo and
members of the committee Mandall
marker and I'm
executive director of the
alliance for local economic
prosperity which is New Mexico's
public bank think tank I speak
in support of Senate memorial
two especially as it will
support the rebuilding of our
aging fragile infrastructure and
also add jobs
For short term and long term
projects in our research and.
Our reserves in the alliance on
a public bank identified
significant infrastructure needs
in the state as mentioned about
three billion dollars in unmet
needs however that was and all
of that those were only
including the top five projects
in each of the cities and
counties
In those capital outlay projects
have been impacted by
the pandemic and pulling some of
those monies away so thank you
very much there are any other
members of the public who wish
to speak in support of Senate
memorial two please raise your
hand now.
We will begin with Alain seldom.
Thank you I appreciate you
hearing this bill my name is the
leading Solomon I am the board
chair for the alliance for local
economic prosperity I speak
tonight as an individual
resident of New Mexico here for
thirty years and hearing Senator
Tallman statistics is both a an
alarming picture for New Mexico
and it is also an incredible
opportunity I hope you will
support the national
infrastructure bank because
I was in New Mexico so much
thank you.
Thank you very much and saying
no more hands that concludes
public comment at this time.
Okay thank you I will go to the
committee for questions.
C. open Senator Brandt then
Senator Griggs.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
this kind of relates over
Senator when I start well before
today and so.
Yeah we have a huge
infrastructure needs in our
state
But every time we seem to pile
up some money to fix it we blow
it on building a trainer.
Send a rocket to space.
Over billion dollars that should
have been used for our roads our
bridges we wasted so
I I don't know why we need to go
to the federal government we
just need to spend our money
we're supposed to be spent and
that's on our infrastructure we
have tons of money this year.
And yet a lot of one time money
this year we could be putting
lots of that money.
Into our roads into our
infrastructure well instead
we're gonna put it to recurring
expenses and try to figure out
what we're gonna do next year
so I'm I guess I'm not sure why
we need to go to the federal
government on this can you help
me with that.
The.
Thank you for that thank you Mr
thank you for the question we
need to three the reason that we
need to go the federal
government because even if we
spend every.
Donor of the our excess money
and every up and all of our.
R. one time money it still
wouldn't to address all of our
needs.
Mister chairman Senator it might
not in one year but I I will
tell you if you back up to win
the answer souls came in the
office a user's name and thing
to the agency sitting on there
smiling.
But if you use with the two of
us came in the office and would
be and Shendo and Griggs we all
came in at the same time and all
of that extra money and put it
in our infrastructure we've been
pretty darn good shape to the.
but instead we squandered a lot
of the now I will tell you the
two big squandering things the
road runner and the rocket to
know where none of us have
anything to do with so I will
not put the blame on us but the
I guess but you know we have to
start somewhere.
Taking the extra money there was
a big push that I was part of
the two years ago.
About five hundred million
dollars that we're looking at
taking inputting directly into
our roads and.
We couldn't get the support to
do it there because everyone of
their own little projects so
we've got a lot of big things we
could do we have a lot of big
projects we could do that would
really help with our
infrastructure.
but instead we throw the little
things in our little pet
projects when we don't get done
what really needs to be done to
the state and now we want to
reach out and asked us to do it
and I I really struggle with
that.
Thank you.
Well thank thank you Mr chairman
thank you for that your question
but it's really up.
A national responsibility when
they built the.
The very canal which was a
transformational project that.
That opened up see a west.
The New York it most of it all
of it went through New York
state New York state and finance
that to fit the national
government finance it because
they had a national impact these
this program will have a
national impact so I think it's
that's one reason why we should
the national government stepping
in to up to provide this kind of
the transformational the project
because it's going to have a
national impact.
Thank you Mr chairman sure you
don't really have any.
And that I'm seeing any specific
projects you talk about thirty
percent of New Mexico roads are
in poor condition
now I I might agree with you
that part of the interstate is
the federal government's.
Responsibility.
Well they are state roads in our
local roads are
Creaking water infrastructure I
don't know if that's the rule or
not.
the internet service you know
how I don't understand how
that's a federal responsibility
it sounds more like a state
responsibility maybe on the
tribal lands that might be more
of a federal responsibility in
conjunction with tribal lands
and tribal Tanami to work with
them and get that done on on
tribal lands of the anyway I
guess we just have to agree to
disagree on that but like I said
I think that we have wasted a
lot of opportunities over the
last nine years we've had
several times where we have had
a lot of extra money and instead
of taking those one time monies
and making investments in our
infrastructure we've just
ballooned our budget to work
we're never gonna be able to
keep up with the well we do have
an opportunity to keep up with
it but I will not still that
thunder from Senator Griggs I
will let him cover that thank
you.
Okay all right thank you right
now is your time.
Okay thank you Mr chairman and
and senator Tom and
can I ask you and just a few
questions about your bill or
you're more.
Well thank you I don't think I
have the ability to say no.
Well I have Mister chairman
Senator I I think you could say
no but I don't I just think we
try anyway.
On page on page three you talk
about the board and I I guess
this is already laid out but
you're saying that the boards
composed of mainly engineer and
infrastructure experts.
It seems is a bank it seems
kinda interesting that you know
the majority the board would be
engineers.
I mean is that Mr chair Senator
is that.
What you've gotten from the
federal government or that you
said through their gonna be.
I didn't to.
I did also this Mr Chairman
etcetera I can offer this
myself.
That relied on the a lot of
other people I don't see what
what.
It.
Mr chair Senator it's at the
bottom of the page three line
twenty three oh I see at work
that will be composed of mainly
engineers and well I have a.
An expert witness the bailable
to answer question miss tardy
can you help me out with this
question sure thank you very
much so your you are correct
this is absolutely likely a bank
but the bank which lends to a
business often times has
expertise in the bank that
understands the business and so
we want to make sure that the
very best infrastructure of
projects are land by the bank
and executed so that they have
the full economic and
infrastructure impact if they
can possibly have and that's why
we have war
membership on the board to
represent engineering all
expertise than we would have
state and all financial
the financial
expertise this public and
investment banks on Wall Street
for example.
And Mr chair Senator an expert I
you know I just found that would
be somewhat interesting that you
know which is mainly engineers
and I I supposed that there are
going to be financial people but
again is that it is a bank and
normally what you have is
financial people that manage the
bank and then have the advisors
or or show that help them with
particular project so I I just
found that an interesting way to
work that and I I hold if this
thing does come to pass that
they will be.
You know frankly there will be
People of all shortage because
there's a lot of money in this
deal and you are you certainly
want to spent wisely and and
correctly
I'd like to pass on to the
Senator that as I was reading
the memorial.
This is this is a pretty well
written or more often times we
she memorials dealing with
certain subjects or dealing with
subjects and then they think
they add a bunch of flowers the
staff that is a is.
Is most of its political in
nature and promotion political
agenda this one doesn't there's
a good job in laying things out
except I would say that on page
four line seventeen through page
I lying to you really did me.
I mean it's staff the gist is
conjecture while it may be it
may be right it's still just
conjecture and it just add
language to the memorial that.
Really.
Really didn't help the memorial
items but the Mr chair Senator
an expert that's that's me
looking at it from my
perspective I I will tell you as
Senator Brandt mentioned I gave
the Senate the the solution the
other day on how we can handle
our roads and our early
childhood issues in almost any
other we want and that's with a
fifteen billion dollars a year
payment from the federal
government to store spent
nuclear fuel rods in southeast
New Mexico.
so with that I will I will pass
on but to I do believe that I'm
gonna pass on I'm still going to
stay here but the Mr chair
Senator members of the committee
an expert thank you for a for
list into that but I do believe
that this is one of the better
memorials I've seen written
and in my time in the Senate.
Well thank you Mr chairman thank
you sent thank you Senator for
your kind remarks about the
turmoil and not a flowery person
all right Senator Padilla.
Mr Chairman
you know I did want to just
remind everybody Senator
chairman Senator Brandt Senator
Griggs.
Senator Griggs does have forty
five days on all of us by the
way you got your forty five days
before all of us but that being
said I just wanted to compliment
senator Tom and also because
there was no nonsense to this
memorial I mean it was really
right to the point at all the
important data but but again
you're you're not asking us to
put this thing together you're
asking us to urge the yeah and I
don't want that to be lost in
the little flower units of
Senator comments outlook on life
we think it's very important
that you know we we have that
one point do you have any data
on on New Mexico I'm told that
it's could be upwards of four
billion dollars to bring this
the the infrastructure here in
New Mexico if you have any
recent data on that we did have
that press conference a couple
weeks ago but I remember that
the numbers three Mr chair and
senator three billion.
For deferred maintenance.
Deferred maintenance that's not
you know bring everything up to
code.
We talk and that Mister chairman
Senator talking about a new
construction new construction
roads thanks you name it Mr
chair Senator I I.
I have a defective three billion
for deferred maintenance but I
don't have the the the estimate
for new construction.
I just want to thank the senator
Mr chairman for being you know
we're not proactive on that we
find ourselves to pay three
billion dollar bill but he's
he's beginning this very uphill
battle this up fight and and you
know I just want to thank you
for that and then in terms of
you know the questions around
you know what aboard would look
like or what the money would go
to whatever are you partnering
with any other legislators
around the country I know that
you are the international man of
mystery and I know that you know
a lot of legislators around the
country because you're different
rules that you had a you know
your career building series
which are you partnering with
others to pull this together
yeah well all right.
There's seventeen other of state
legislatures of past Mr chair
Senator seventeen other
legislatures around the country
have a.
Have a enacted similar a
memorials urging the and that
that figure that maybe more
because I figured maybe several
months old I because I know
there are very is an
organization is very actively
working with state legislatures
around the country by expert
witness may have a more up to
date of figure this is to the
number of state legislatures who
act as well as well so yes sorry
thank you very much senator
Clemente all yes we do have more
update today list we have about
twenty state legislatures and
also city governments and county
governments which have
introduced resolutions very
similar to this one they've been
passed in about four different
states are just last week we
were actually talking on the
phone to all of senator Susan
Collins office when we got a
text message that the Maine
legislature had passed a similar
resolution both the state and
the house and as of this city
government and the national
association counties has also
endorsed this proposal what what
what we're seeing is that
there's a lot of need at the
state level for infrastructure
that has not been finance this
banking cover and that's our
with the endorsements are coming
from.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
and senator and and and expert
witness I just you know I hope
that you know maybe when you
present this bill on the floor
Senator you come up with the to
bring us the top ten list of the
top ten reasons why we should do
this I'm hoping the top of that
list is is safety and then maybe
the next item is economic
development and then the next
item after that is is you know
you know forward thinking what
have you so that the very very
complimentary to sender calling
for make sure that this thing
happens for us thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you of Senator Griggs your
hand is still up are you.
Thank you Mr now I'm I didn't
take it back okay thank you
I don't see any other hands what
is the pleasure of the
committee.
That's the best way Senator
Padilla.
Thomas Sekhemre Thomond.
Lehner coral.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Griggs.
Yes and explain my vote.
Senator Hamblen yes.
Senator Hickey yes Senator how
to meal yes Senator Kernan yes.
Senator Sanchez.
Yes.
Senator Tallman yes Senator
Wirth.
Senator Padilla.
Yes.
Senator Shendo.
Yes.
Are you have.
In the affirmative.
One negative and use.
So you have to pass Senator you
have to pass thanks thank you Mr
chairman thank you members of
the.
Committee for your support thank
you so no will to Senate bill
one thirteen as amended Senator
souls.
Thank you.
Senate bill one thirteen as
amended is what it basically
what it does is all new home
construction in New Mexico needs
to be up for lack of a better
term pre wired for photovoltaic
systems and board the B. cars
the amendment that was added to
it we originally acquired
photovoltaic systems and very
quickly the industry at all
photovoltaic systems are not
wired the same in the walls and
so we changed it to where in the
walls needs to be one inch
conduit so that yeah
photovoltaic systems are put on
it's very easy to pull that
through the walls of the reason
we're doing it it's much easier
it's much cheaper to do while
the home is being constructed
rather than to retrofit
afterwards it also maintains the
integrity of the deciding that
you don't have to put con do it
on the outsides of the hold up
for electric vehicles estimates
are that of fifty percent of
the.
Are sold in the country by
twenty thirty are going to be
electric vehicles of this
requires that you put at least
two of the large capacity
receptacles in the garage for
charging of electric vehicles
the reason for to is so that a
contractor doesn't but why the
and and then use it for the
dryer and not have one available
for the electors.
Of the estimates on the total
cost to do this on the
construction that you all are
under five hundred dollars but
this then stepped up the home so
or is the installation on
photovoltaics and for electric
vehicle charging if it's done
initially.
Thank you do you have any other
expert witnesses or anybody else
at the your it I'm the expert on
this one okay already so at this
point we'll go to the public for
a.
Senate bill one thirteen as
amended we've not had any
members of the public register
in advance to speak in
opposition if you wish to speak
in opposition please raise your
hand now.
being no hands we will go to
those who registered to speak in
favor beginning with Jim
Desjardins.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee R. J. M. D. chair
Schardin and I'm the executive
director of the renewable energy
industry association of New
Mexico we're known as we
And we are we strongly support
this bill we think it's a great
idea to help hold pre wired.
Four wheel drive vehicles it's
just a logical way to build a
home in this state in error so
we're not and we appreciate the
committee and.
Thank you very much next up we
have blue get it'll.
Yes good afternoon good evening
Mr chair members of the
committee these get around with
the Sierra Club yoga the
chapter.
If you're standing in support
along with thirty five thousand
members across the state of New
Mexico we're strongly support
this this bill this is a great
initiative as a homeowner I can
tell you that I wish this is
something that would have been
available when I'm away from it
but we have a a new bill that
we've lived in for six years and
it's something I was would have
been available so I think you
know there should be more pre
for people to go solar I think
choose electric vehicle so
please support this bill thank
you.
Thank you very much next that we
have Abbas Akhil.
Mr chair I just strongly support
this bill I think this is a very
sensible solution to new homes
in rate and accommodate solar as
they install it after the Holy
Spirit thank you so much I'm
putting support of this bill.
Representative.
Thank you Sir Sen honor to be
here.
Thank you very much there any
other members of the public who
wish to speak in support of
Senate bill one thirteen as
amended please raise your hand.
With that public comment at this
time.
J. a we're back in the.
Committee questions Senator
Hamblen.
You Mr chair and this committee
this is actually just more of a
committee of understanding the
housing market and renewable
energy options it's certainly
much more appealing selling
point and homes when it for for
those folks who want to add
those things to their homes that
it it's it's that it's already
there and so I'm glad that that
this is here it's really when it
comes down to the return on
investment I think it's greater
if it's under five hundred
dollars like you said Senator
souls so I'm just to I'm happy
that you're bringing this
forward and and I think it will
be good thank you Mr.
To.
I don't see any other Senator
Griggs.
Senator break you thank you Mr
chairman and senator shells are
are FIR notes that the.
He is expected to incorporate
new around the international
code council which provisions
which we're gonna do pretty much
the same thing show I guess if
that is indeed going to happen
why is it we think we need to
put this in long verses.
In all the other.
Is that we we have Mr chair
Senator.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
that has not happened yet and if
it does I did see is just fine.
Thank you Mr Mr chair Senator
but I mean I know that is what
they're saying they're gonna DO
and CO changes happen annually
normally and
You know they say they're going
to do it I believe they're going
to do it I don't know that we
need we need this particular
legislation at this time I don't
I don't actually know that we
need this type of legislation.
Change the construction industry
division is charged with
generating proper purpose of for
our communities are and I I just
don't know that I she bears
Senator show up I don't believe
all of supported but I think I
know that it's coming regardless
of whether your bill orders
through our elderly and I just I
think I you know I appreciate
some of the comments and those
comments have been directed at
accomplishing this goal which
stands to be accomplished.
Regardless of this bill so thank
you Mr president or Mr president
Mr chair and senator.
Senator Brandt.
Mr chairman I think that the
server groups covered thank you.
Yes I I just as many bills this
is a chairman souls has brought
on Federal photovoltaics I'm
just hoping that he will be able
to put the word photovoltaic ten
times in this presentation on
the floor this bill gets through
thank you.
All
right no problem I'll make sure
to remember that if we get it to
the floor.
Well that was actually Senator
Padilla but thank you the I'm
sorry I'm wondering if you can
retrofit his airplane to useful
that.
Help.
Be careful what you ask for
Senator because I'm actually
looking at that the potential
retrofitting fire being electric
is that a gas and then I'll just
put the photovoltaics by on that
Hey your beside it.
Okay great so I don't see any
there
hands uh Senator Sanchez.
Mr chair Senator just look at
the bill and I did see it is
there.
Is this gonna be for every new
construction or this only in new
subdivisions are in the rural
area as well.
Mr chair.
Mr chair Senator it would be for
all new construction within the
state of New Mexico for
residential.
Mr chair Senator wise are not an
option for the people that are
not in the city that might not
ever have an electric car.
to opt out of the.
Mr chairman and senator electric
cars are coming they're going to
be there photovoltaics on the
the roots are especially useful
if you are not in the city areas
out and so it just makes sense
to do it when the how old is
being constructed rather than
trying to retrofit it it's a
relatively low cost to do that
and as a Senator Hamblen
indicated of the the return on
investment when you go to sell
your home is already greater
than what the cost is what it
is.
Thank you senator and Mr chair
and I love to be there on the
day you do your solo flight
there on the when your plane's
electric.
That's all Mr chair okay I don't
see any other hands up so what
is the pleasure of the
committee.
Would you pass a motion for the
past based on one second.
Second by Senator Tallman Elena
please coral.
Senator Brandt.
Your muted no thank you.
Right now.
Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Hickey yes Senator had a meal
yes Senator Kernan no senator
Sanchez no.
Senator Clemente.
Yes Senator Wirth.
Senator Padilla yes.
Senator Shendo yes.
You've got six affirmative for
the negative and one excused.
It was a pleasure being with you
thank you.
So what we're gonna hold over a
Senate bill three ninety two so
we'll move to the house bill one
of seven Thompson.
Representative for you very
little.
I am Senator let me let me shut
down my others their real quick
Mr Chairman which one are we
rolling over I don't see three
ninety to imagine that maybe I
think it's up that it updated
Jan the didn't have it so I have
the old one.
Not to.
All.
I'm sorry Mr chair I'm dressed
trying to listen in on the.
On that the house floor at the
same time so I'm thank you for
hearing this bill house bill one
oh seven is a bill that are been
around for a while and what the
goal of the bill is is to try to
protect local pharmacies I'm
what has happened in a lot of
help.
And a lot of health insurance is
and it happened to me in
November where you get a letter
from your insurer that said you
can no longer go to your local
pharmacist you must get mail
order for your your typical
daily pharmaceuticals and
there's several reasons why that
is problematic Mr chair members
of the committee
the first one being we are
during election time we heard
all about the mail issues that
we're still hearing network
Christmas cards are taking a
month to get across town and
those kinds of things.
I'm there are people who are
homeless who have.
Chronic medical issues and need
to get their prescriptions and
can you imagine trying to get a
prescription mailed to you when
you are living in a park or
something along those lines and
there are many very expensive
treatment protocols that are
that come through the mail
things for like hepatitis C. I'm
not sure what the cost of both
are think they're down around
forty thousand dollars for
treatment but if you miss one
tells you start over so if the
if it doesn't come in the mail
when it's supposed to we've
basically flashed forty thousand
dollars down the drain.
and then there's the issue Mr
chair and members of the weather
some drugs some medications have
to be refrigerated things like
in someone so if you work or you
happen to be out of town in your
in someone gets left on your
porch in July when you get home
it's going to be no good and
that's going to be another waste
and then we also have porch
pirates who will steal packages
on the on
at mail boxes and that's another
issue and then I think this this
one to me is the most important
Mr chair is that
Some in particularly in rural
communities the pharmacist may
be the only connection to any
kind of health care and we had a
member in our house a few years
ago who was quite elderly and
became quite ill and luckily he
was using his local pharmacy and
he went in there and the
pharmacist looked at him and
said something is not right with
you and they together they went
through with medication and they
said this light so when you're
dealing with a mail order
pharmacy and no one has eyes on
I have heard of people who who
have cell phones with equipment
and they're trying to get in to
speak to a pharmacist about
maybe a drug interaction or
something that's happening and
the minutes on their cell phones
ran out while they were on hold
so those Mr chair of those are a
lot of the some of the reasons
that this bill is is so
important and essentially all
this bill does is tell insurers
that if there is a local
pharmacy that can meet the same
price no doubt no different no
breaks no nothing if a local
pharmacy can provide the same
quantity of medication for the
same price they have to be
allowed the out the right to do
so and it has to be I mean it it
can be like a CVS or Walgreens
but it can't be another mail
order pharmacy and another issue
with this Mr chair is that with
these mail order pharmacies
pretty much every dollar is
going out of state we do not
have any large pharmaceutical
warehouses that do mail order in
New Mexico and so essentially
that is the bill Mr chair is
that that insurance companies
must allow a patient to use
their local pharmacy if that
local pharmacy can meet the
price of the mail order and I do
have an expert and I'm not sure
if if you can promote her it is
free at Briana Aaron's.
And she may have a couple of
comments.
Thank you Mister chair and
members of the committee thank
you so much for having me here
this evening to speak my name is
Breanna here and I'm currently
the director pharmacy for
nonprofit health center with
locations all across New Mexico
I'm awful pharmacist I've been a
community pharmacists for the
past twelve years and I've seen
patient access to much needed
medications restricted by their
health plan PBM just like
Representative pump that I have
had patience run out of minutes
on their cell phone I have had
patients where I've had to help
coordinate delivery of their
medication because they don't
have stable housing they don't
have a permanent physical
address where their medication
in the mail to you I'm not only
that in those type of situations
our community pharmacists all
across the state they're really
well positioned to assist with
the sort of.
You know I usual or rare
circumstances but also they are
well positioned to assist with
other things that are really
important to patients like you
know their language reading
physical dexterity can even open
their prescription bottle
a lot of patients needing
assistance with vision and
hearing and while the pharmacist
and mail order pharmacies there
there bailable by phone to
counsel patients but many
patients really rely on that
face to face connection that
they have with their community
pharmacists and so.
The other issue that we have
seen unfortunately in there's a
lot of specialty medications
that have to come through the
mail because that's what they're
PVM for their health plan
required and some of these
medication there for conditions
that are really sensitive so
unfortunately you know we had
patients that have had their
health information
Revealed because of their
medication with Mr Leverton from
maybe their HIV status was
revealed to individuals that
Asians have been and it wasn't
protected
and I know that the the out of
state mail order pharmacies they
have to meet rigorous quality
standards just like all of our
other pharmacies do but you know
mistakes still happen and
there's a lot of patients that
are really anxious about stuff
like that and would just really
prefer to be able to pick up
their medication either sell
after local pharmacy and so.
The last thing I just want to
say is that many patients don't
have issues with mail order
pharmacy at all they continue to
use out of state mail order
pharmacy basically at their
primary way to receive
medication and this bill will
not prevent the patient from
using the pharmacy they will
still be able to use the mail
order pharmacies this bill is hi
the math exited and you know all
these patients are going to be
leaving the mail order services
so therefore it's not going to
jeopardize any fading health
plans may be receiving
in fact I think as we've seen
with the COVID pound that then
make mail order here is on the
right and many people are really
comfortable using mail order but
for many of our most vulnerable
populations in New Mexico I
requiring them to use mail order
pharmacy is absolutely a barrier
to care I pharmacies have seen
that we you wasted medication
poor health outcomes I
definitely an increase use of
medical resources and.
Eighty one of seven allows the
community pharmacists that are
able to accept the terms
conditions and requirements of
the health plan to fill
medication for the patient and
remove the barriers to care so
thank you so much Mr chairman
members of the committee that's
actually all I have evening.
Mr chair we will stand for
questions okay before we go to
the committee for questions I
will go to the public for.
For H. one R. seven as amended
we have Patrick Clark to speak
in opposition.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee at block speaking on
behalf of prime therapeutics the
FIR house bill one of seven
noted the bill creates a
conflict between the interests
of community pharmacies
consumers and health plans this
bill would certainly benefit
community pharmacies but the
cost of all consumers and help
plants and ideal world the
Legislature craft public policy
without regard to financial
considerations but that isn't
reality the Sanchez said this
bill will increase health
insurance costs because brick
and mortar pharmacies to accept
the same reimbursement rates
mail order pharmacies if the
bill only dealt with respect
that would cost that would
possibly be true but it also
deals with copays look at the FY
are to see the concerns of GST
yes I A. and retiree health care
already they all estimate a
multi million dollar impact of
equalizing copays trust these
agencies in their analyses they
are the subject matter experts
there's a reason why they have
not revised bill analysis I have
also Representative but by
encouraging you all to look at
the language from Senate Bill
for fifteen and twenty nineteen
this bill already mandated
parity between.
Thank you very much there and
the other members of the public
who wish to speak in opposition
to house bill one of seven as
amended please raise your hands
now.
This Chairman this brand for.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I'm keep Gardner
the rest lobbyist for cigna
express scripts I want to start
by just clarify a few things
first I received a similar
letter to what the
Representative is talking about
because I'm insured through the
Albuquerque public schools in
the letter actually doesn't
prohibit you from getting your
prescriptions through a local
pharmacist what it does is
encourage you and talk about the
cost savings you can get if you
use mail order or if you use an
in network pharmacy and in fact
at the bottom of the letter it
says for all network pharmacies.
Is this weblink I would be happy
to share that with the committee
I also think it's important to
point out that express scripts
employs a hundred seventy five
pharmacists and other
individuals in New Mexico we do
have an individuals working in
New Mexico this bill would take
away from them as well we have
twenty four seven pharmacists
were available to answer
people's questions we serve New
Mexicans in New Mexico health
plan to save you as the
Legislature money thank you Mr
chairman yes it is poses.
Thank you very much next up we
have a grant more.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
members of the committee my name
is Brent Moore I'm registered
lobbyists for America's health
insurance plans and we stand in
opposition to house bill one of
seven it's no secret that mail
order saves money and as you
well know the price of of
pharmaceuticals keeps going up
and up and up mail order is a
key way for us to try to control
costs of delivering drugs to our
members and you will note that
the cost savings show up in the
FIR you can look to it and see
if there's clearly an impact.
And what I would note is that in
the bill what it says is that.
All plans have to use
participating pharmacies if they
can beat the price what I would
note is you know physician group
practices are required to take
on any willing doctors and
hospitals aren't obligated to
take in any willing physician or
nurse this really limits our
ability to try to contract with
people and try to control costs
to benefit our.
Thank you very much next step
where we had Lujan M. Mendez
Harper.
Good evening chairman Shendo
members of the committee my name
is legion amend this Harper a
pharmacist with prime
therapeutics a PBM owned in part
by Blue Cross blue shield of New
Mexico
I see appear before you went to
respectfully oppose house bill
one oh seven mail order pharmacy
parity was addressed in two
thousand nineteen the Senate
bill for fifteen it was a huge
piece of PM legislation followed
by OSI rulemaking that was
enacted in March first of this
year that's that legislation
says that PBMs must allow retail
pharmacies to mail prescriptions
Larry service this ancillary
service late which was
negotiated extensively turret to
permit local pharmacies to mail
medicines to meet their patient
needs but to not require them to
become accredited mail or
specialty pharmacies one
requirement of mail and
specialty accreditation is
testing packaging to maintain
temperature sensitive medicines
throughout the shipping process
well that's the normal course of
business for mail and specialty
pharmacies would be overly
burdensome for local pharmacies.
Thank you very much that we have
Regina Stivers.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee and Regina Stivers
director state affairs for
pharmaceutical care management
association I'm here to
respectfully oppose house bill
one of seven the fiscal impact
report on house bill one oh
seven estimates enactment of the
bill will increase costs to
state agencies between two and a
half and seven and a half
million dollars annually and
does not include commercial
insurers in the report actually
states the following it appears
as if the interest of community
pharmacies of consumers and of
the health plans especially.
Programs are in conflict with
the issues addressed by this
bill goes on to say if it's
enacted the community pharmacies
will benefit the consumers
health plans are both will have
higher LA's as a result also the
public school insurance
authority and the retiree health
care authority also weighed in
we appreciate New Mexico
legislature for attempting to
decrease help decrease the cost
of prescription drugs but this
legislation and set costing
consumers thank.
Thank you very much.
Mr chairman and support please
raise your hand.
Mr Chairman.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
members of the committee Marla
Schultz registered lobbyists for
Blue Cross blue shield of New
Mexico the cross the shield
recognizes the critical role
that community pharmacies play
in our health care delivery
system to that end we work
extensively with the community
pharmacies and PBMs in twenty
nineteen to pass Senate bill for
fifteen to have copayment parity
between mail order in community
pharmacies means insurers will
likely abandon incentives to use
mail order pharmacies which have
demonstrated the ability to
deliver medicines and services
at a cost savings to plans like
Nipsey at and retiree health
care thirty many mail order
pharmacy incentives will raise
prescription drug benefit costs
and will result in increased
premiums Mr Chairman BlueCross
BlueShield members are given the
opportunity to actively decide
what pharmacy to use retail and
or mail order we believe that
flexibility in plants is an
important component to
containing costs by allowing
you.
Thank you very much announcers
who wish to speak in favor for
staff we have sherry docks and.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee my name is sherry dots
and and I am a volunteer
advocate for A. A. R. P. E. R.
A. R. P. New Mexico shares the
concerns as stated by
Representative Thompson but I
personally prefer the community
pharmacy because I have had
experience with contributions on
prescriptions that were
prescribed for me and caught by
my pharmacists to work it out
with my physician I have
receipt of pharmaceuticals both
ways and I prefer the personal
touch and knowing that they know
my history thirty second
restrictions I thank you for of
a hearing of HB one of seven and
I encourage you to pass it thank
you very much.
Thank you very much is there any
other members of the public who
wish to speak in support house
bill one of seven as amended
please raise your hand now.
Dale Pinkerton.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Dale G.
Kerr I represent the New Mexico
pharmacists Association we do
stand in support of this
important legislation I would
like to comment that years ago
well the legislature passed a
consolidated purchasing
requirement which
made all of the state plans
contract with one BBM so they're
all contracted with the same BBM
yet they have incredibly
different
costs.
And so I'd encourage this
committee to take a look at that
the millions of dollars that are
claimed that it would cost I
don't think are real I would
like to encourage some kind of a
valuation of that process
so would you stand in support of
this encourage you to support
pharmacies in New Mexico
thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you very much and with
that that completes public
comment at this time.
No we go to the committee
Senator Padilla.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative I am.
Really attempting to to get my
hands around this particular.
A piece of legislation
I have to say that there's
there's quite a bit of change
that will result our with this
this item here it did how much
should industry actually
participated in drafting this.
Mr chair and and gentleman at
this this has been a a work in
progress for years
we have we have worked with
several health insurance plans
through the years and and Mr
chair and I am a little upset
that someone told me that one of
that one of the people speaking
in opposition said that I do
have a choice of when using mail
order or not I do not I can read
are all plans are not the same
so please don't tell me what it
is that I can do but we have we
have worked we actually worked
with Presbyterian and gentleman
Mr Chairman I'm sorry to
interrupt you representative
you're speaking to one of the
the advocate or one of the folks
that spoke you're not directing
those to me no no no no.
And I'm a little panic because
I'm I'm trying to do this on my
phone and it just said it's
dying and is plugged in so if
you lose me I'll be right back
on my laptop but we did work
with Presbyterian and that was
the the amendment we were
unclear Mr chair and
representative Senator Padilla
that it would be the the same
right another person in in
public comment talked about it
will be a different rate with
copays it will be the same rate
so we did work with Presbyterian
they are not here in support but
they did they did say that are
amendments made it acceptable to
them.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative and I know we're
all reports is juggling the
stuff but it has really been
something as an did did you have
an opportunity or did you hear
from other mail order pharmacies
and what what what what was
there was their thoughts in
terms of how this might work
best for New Mexico.
Mr chair and Senator Padilla I
didn't hear specifically from
from them but what what I can't
understand is they they say over
and over that they they
negotiate for rock bottom prices
but they're worried about
another pharmacy if these prices
are indeed as rock bottom as
they can get the chances of a
local pharmacy being able to
meet them are minimal I would
guess I'm and so this this whole
it's going to cost seven million
at as as of the as my expert
witness that
There there will be savings
because of this because of
spoiled medications because of
medications that are stolen or
delivered to the wrong place and
we it in the in our legislature
have no way to look at those you
know we have one person who who
has to start over there have the
medications because that was not
delivered in time that's a whole
lot of money so I I I disagree
with the FIR but we do not have
a way to kind of see where we
are going to save money I mean
if someone doesn't get their
insulin and goes into diabetic
shock and ends up in the I see
you and you know maybe loses a
limb or something those costs
add up that we have no way of
measuring those.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative and and so a
question I have is it is the
local pharmacy and see the
national pharmacy in this
scenario or another organization
are they all going to be buying
from the same.
distributorship to deliver or
are they going personal local
pharmacy going to be.
It delivery things that are
already in their purview already
in their in their in their
buildings in just putting in the
mail locally I don't know how I
you know we're expected to know
is you know Representative
things about you know nine
hundred things at once so yeah
and and Mister chairman Senator
Padilla I will let my expert
answer but the local pharmacies
are not going to mail they I
mean they are going to be a
center I mean I guess they could
but the that the beauty of using
a local pharmacy is being able
to go in and have a conversation
with the pharmacist who can
review all of your medications
you may have known you for years
you may have grown up with them
so so I will let I will let Bree
answer the part about about your
your question thank you Mr
chair.
Thank you Mr chair Senator pedia
they can local pharmacies can
mail any state that bear
licensed and so for most of our
community pharmacies in New
Mexico we can only mail with a
New Mexico I don't think that's
what this bill is trying to do
is to try to get community
pharmacies to be able to mail
medication I think it's what it
both to be doing is giving the
patients the option do I have to
use the mail order pharmacy like
my insurance plans that or you
know can I go down to you know
still held and get my my
medication from that pharmacy
it's giving that the patients
the option of choosing which
pharmacy they want to receive
services from.
Thank you Mr chairman and you
may have and and that
Representative and and the
extremists that the the words
that I just really needed to
hear which was I was using the
word choice you're using the
word option
So the folks that you described
in terms of maybe the the home
of the homeless population or
other groups of that nature are
the where they getting their
medications today or how are
they getting their medications
to the on going somewhere
together or how is this working.
Three I will let you take that.
I thank you Mr chair Senator
Padilla for the question I'm.
There is not a one specific
answer to that so what what I
have seen in my personal
experience of the community
pharmacists is that a lot of
time the individual they're
coming to seek help from their
community pharmacy and so for
example I gave that when I spoke
earlier I said I've had patients
who ran out of minutes from
their cell phone I've had
patients who live in shelters
and don't have a permanent
address.
Their their insurance company
was actually trying to their
mail order pharmacies actually
trying to send the medication
and they couldn't make that
happen so we were having to use
our resources to help assist
them in getting their medication
so even though you know our
pharmacies weren't the ones that
are filling the medication for
them you know we were the ones
on the phone with the mail order
pharmacy trying to coordinate
some kind of delivery and
sometimes that means that we're
trying to get it delivered to a
clinic or maybe their doctor's
office for them but again that
usually something that they need
a lot of assistance with and
it's hard if they if they don't
have you know someone to help
them do that.
Mr Chairman chime in here a
little bit about the to answer
Senator fifty is question about
how individuals experience
homelessness might be able to
get that medication go ahead Mr
Senator today are you okay with
that.
I was gonna ask you Mr chairman
if it was all right of center
have a I do a lot of
I do some overnight work with
the homeless just because of a
particular group here in
Albuquerque to does wonderful
job in that area I've gone
multiple times with them and
it's always a question that I
have you know it's this these
folks needs met medicine as we
all do as I do is whoever how
does it work.
Sure so Mister chairman Senator
Padilla and this is speaking
from my work as the president of
the board of directors for the
missing Valley Community of Hope
in Los crucis and this is a
campus that has a food kitchen
soup kitchen a food pantry a
health clinic health and and
psychiatric clinic the Housing
Authority a day care for
individuals experiencing
homelessness and so what happens
that to answer a couple of your
questions and full transparency
I'm no longer the board
president I stepped down as I
became Senator but I have six
years under my belt with them
what happens is they are able to
use the Community of Hope
address as their mailing
address.
Secondly through the through the
clinic there might be an
arrangement there where their
medications can be delivered.
And I do know that more Keller
has already consulted with the
community of hope to start
addressing the instances of
individuals experiencing
homelessness and Albuquerque to
trying model that program so
there are those resources
available not necessarily
available also everywhere but
usually you'll find that the
shelters are serving as also a
mailing address for individuals
experiencing homelessness.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator thank you Representative
bye I thought that might be the
case of you know we do have the
health care for the homeless
actual physical structure in
Albuquerque building facilities
are but that's just in one
location I mean there it's you
know it's a it's becoming a big
city one of the economics here
Representative Mr Chairman
representative Representative
what what economics around this
what what is this change with
this change whether the
economics of what you anticipate
happening through this option
impressive part of the market
or.
Mr chair Senator Padilla just I
think it's difficult to
determine but I have a hard time
believing that if indeed that
health insurers are negotiating
rates that are so that are rock
bottom clearance price that a
local pharmacy who was selling
one one million of the number of
prescriptions as the mail order
could match it so it's it's
impossible it's what it you know
when we dynamic scoring and we
talk about dynamic scoring for
bills and there and with health
care there's just so much no I'm
you know it as I said if you
have a bad reaction or you don't
take your medications and you
end up in a worse place we have
no way of measuring how much
that is costing the taxpayers
and or the health insurance
plans so and I I this the I deal
with a lot of medical issues in
the legislature and that's
always been a difficulty you
know you think well if we do
this that it's going to cost
more but but.
We may save much more than that
on the other end but we really
have no way to capture that.
In the last in the doctor
eighties center Dr cakey drive
Senator Hickey has some
questions as well Mr chairman so
I'll just end with this one
he anything in your legislation
Representative call for
different quality standard
quality related to that standard
of any kind this delivery verses
and remember providing these are
providing pharmaceuticals this
way versus how we do it today is
there anything that you would
change with your legislation Mr
chair and Senator Padilla no it
basically this is about giving
patients an option that that's
all it is the standards will be
the same the prices will be the
same and the requirements will
be the same.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative and by the way
Representative when you have
both your cameras on I was in a
ritual for taxes on one screen
you're looking that way the
other screen you're looking at
us so just enough already with
the zooms thank you.
I thank senator Senator Hickey.
Thank you Mr chair and
representative Thompson having
lived in this world for a long
time let me see if I can find a
little bit of clarity and it it
really comes down to as out.
Sure hope we shown a moment
where is the focus is on the
patient or is it price
Right now in the old days ten
years ago
we is is health plans used to
contract with pharmacies
independently
for medications and so forth the
world of pharmacy benefit
management has become so big
express scripts Caremark
and Optum and so forth that
essentially what is most cost
effective for any health plan is
to contract with them.
At a and and these are getting
pretty sophisticated now it's
here price and it's kind of the
concept that I think people have
known in the state the more the
more folks you have in the
planned cheaper the cost is
going to be because I the
increases price so that health
plans are getting what a better
price
so to speak because they go
through the PBS the local
pharmacies actually are the that
the the cost of the drugs the
are in as they're delivered and
so forth are not that all that
different what is different is
what's called the fill the for
the pharmacist actually going to
medication
So if if that if the if the
health plans and the PBMs and
again this is something that
they can contract they they
could potentially contract you
have the phrase you have to you
just have to take the ninety day
of that we're going to give you
and these are to be clear for
chronic medications acute
medications are all as point of
service there's no there's no
change in that this is for
chronic medications insulin as a
representative brought out
and hypertension medicine and
and on and on and on so it is
definitely lowers the cost of
care
to some degree or the health
plans because they contract with
the pharmacy benefits management
company who are able to provide
incredible Bach and they also
have this whole machine
in the mail pharmacy process.
Ones that were pointed out here
tonight to me are the following
one this will this could
endanger local community farms
you know the town isn't large
enough to have an Albertsons are
US agency or what have you and
they've just got a local
pharmacy which a lot of towns in
New Mexico if you the survival
of the pharmacy is somewhat
dependent on
The
The ability to be there and and
with the fail rate and so forth
and that all gets blended into
the PBM price for the health
plans but if you have a lot of
local pharmacies there may be a
little higher rate but probably
not not a whole lot but that but
the issue here is that there are
a lot of people I did happen to
us
Someone came into our
neighborhood NMC every mailbox
and we were away on vacation and
if you're Mentzer and they're
they're gonna and you know then
you can call and then the hassle
the documentation depending upon
the.
You know some of them are very
nice and accommodating other
ones are like now this is a
point of service business to
that
you know it's going to take us a
week or so to get your your
medication back or for homeless
people while it could be sent to
a particular dress there may
they may or may not be able to
to get to that address so as I
as I look at this and thought
about it and and I'm not so sure
about the FY are saving that
those are kind of formulaic is
as Representative Thomson said
it's very unfortunate that that
we do not do that then that's
fine because we are shooting
ourselves in the foot multiple
times by not doing that you
invest today and you learn so
much more the more you save so
much more than a more and that's
the kind of story that needs to
be here so when you boil it all
down I I as a clinician okay I
mean and I've run in German
company and I are all the
pressures of running insurance
company whether it's a a Blue
Cross or or a coop me the
financial pressures of there
there's no question but at the
end of the day what we on this
business what.
L..
And to keep people healthy and
therefore I am going to vote for
this bill even though the
businessman side of me says yes
but you know it could be yeah
but at the end of the day it's
about the patient is about their
health about their wealth so I
hope this is a very complex
contracting process and I and
maybe of next you up a little
bit in your mind but at the end
of the day
keeping the options open.
Is going to be very important
for the people who need to have
have the options left open for
them and it may be a little more
expensive for the health plan is
not gonna be that much thank
you.
Thank you senator Senator
Griggs.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Representative Thomson what is
the the F. B. FIR it was
probably done before the
amendment is is that right and I
guess had they been able to look
at the amendment do you think
there are analysis would have
been different.
Mr chair and senator Griggs it
was done before the amendment I
don't as I stated before this is
it and Dr as Dr Hickey said I'm
sorry Senator Hickey I've known
him longer as Dr Hickey I'm as
you said the these are the kind
of bills that that we do not
have a way to capture
and capture what might be saved
what might be lost so I you know
I don't know whether the FIR
would change but it was done
before the amendment.
Okay thank you thank you Mr
chairman and and Representative
because it it sounds somewhat
like if the amendment came in
and basically said they they
have to match The Little the
price that it looks like there
shouldn't be a major change but
you know I I don't I don't know
that but that's what it would
look like in Alamogordo Carlsbad
just different and I don't know
that there's a pharmacy at all
and Cloudcroft but in Alamogordo
we don't have.
What seems to be what we're Mr
chairman and and Representative
if you're referring to as a a
local pharmacy
your definition is a
participating community pharmacy
I think the Walgreens this CBS
news they could fit that
definition I mean that's all we
have been Alamogordo.
Carlsbad I believe have some
actual independent local
pharmacies that are that are not
Walgreens around her gender or
anybody else so I I think
there's a distinction between
those that are.
It looks like an individual
would be able to continue to use
well.
Could use wall Granger's
actually they use you're not
trying to differentiate between
that wall Grange and another
local pharmacy.
show I just I don't know do you
do you know though
Representative is the.
is the the the mail order part
is that a the the insurance
companies call that a budget
what.
Or do you how does that work I
mean
Mr chair and senator Griggs I'm.
That's a good question about the
benefit but you are right I mean
I we use CVS so and it's it's
not so much about the ownership
or the company it's about the
face to face as opposed to
through the mail that's the
difference I you know I'm not
sure how how the different
insurance companies help us and
and mail order is perfect for
some people and I'm not we're
not trying to are trying to take
that away we're just trying to
get give another option which is
face to face with a real human
being.
Okay and and
Mr Chairman representative you
know we had or we used to
express scripts and one point
and I don't know that when we
use them it was a requirement or
it was in you know an option at
that time but
Down the road we you know we use
we use Walgreens issues handier
and easier for us and I'm not
I'm not sure that you know it
was better because of the fact
that we might a lost a
prescription or any of those
things I I would guess that
certainly possible age it's also
it's also possible to not run by
Walgreens when they call you and
tell you that it's there and
forget about it I mean so but
but I appreciate you bringing
the bill I I I understand I
think what you're what you're
trying to to get that are you
you know I certainly wish you
didn't have to be a law to do it
but
We'll we'll go ahead and
Virginie other question will
will listen and then
she what I what I do and I can't
say I'll do the same thing I
would give chair before show so
thank you thank you Mr thank you
Representative
thank you for Senator Tallman.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you.
Representative Thompson.
So why.
Who is.
I'm with Presbyterian demanding
or even suggesting that I use
mail order so who is
Presbyterian exception of who's.
With the must be a lot of the
people not using mail order of
the pharmacists are still in
business.
what I'm missing here it Mr
chair and senator Thomas.
It was as I said up until
January first of this year we
have used our local CVS we got a
letter from our my insurance
through my husband which it we
retired from General Electric so
it's Blue Cross blue shield of
Alabama
and so they sent us a letter
that said as of January first
you will no longer be able to
get your prescriptions through
your local pharmacy they must be
through this mail order company
so I'm it's not it's it's fairly
common practice and bring may
have an idea of the percentages
it's becoming more and more of a
mandatory thing and as I said
before all we're looking to do
Mr chair Senator Thomas is to
give the patient an option and
it has the as a side a side
effect of benefit as far as I'm
concerned try to give our local
pharmacies whether they be CBS
or or fills peels I'm
opportunity to at least play in
the game if they can beat the
price.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
I support your bill so can I be
but beginning a similar male
health center letter in the mail
Mr chair Senator Tallman I have
no idea you may take that up
with I wouldn't be surprised I
was surprised that because I
mean we've been with this
company for probably a decade it
just out of the clear blue we
got a letter so and it's kind of
the way of the future I'm but I
I can't say what companies are
going to do it or not thank you
Mr chairman thank you
thank you so I don't like the
wave of the future I totally
agree that the.
I totally agree with Dr Hickey
is.
It's all about the insurance
company and money as and that
the patient be damn all the time
I world we would have insurance
companies so just in our and
unnecessary middleman when they
get out of the picture the power
off everybody's going to be sold
at the transfer but it is
against this I'm for it thank
you.
Senator a Hickey second time
thank you maybe just a couple
other things to clarify here for
and
who knows what the future holds
but the price he's this the it
is it is cheaper for the
insurance company for the he P.
M. C. intermediary to go through
one motion instead of giving you
thirty pills once a month give
you ninety fells at one time and
they will also give you and
every time you get a script for
thirty days you have a copay and
that that copay is set by the
plan I mean when once you have
chosen that plan and you may be
able Representative Thomson may
be able to say well we got
chair who are are whatever
however you get it and maybe you
want something different like
get your health insurance
through your state employment
the representative Thompson the
budget that does not come to our
folks here but most of the state
legislators have that will go
into that
but the you can always go to a
different plan but yes I think
you will see more of this but
see what what Representative
Thomson is done to help the
individual is that they can go
to their local pharmacy and get
the same over the counter ninety
day built in only pay two copays
are one copay whatever it is and
the and and that is something
that the health plan sets up
with the farms in the yes so
again it's it's different for
different people but as I as you
said and but I'm not going to
them the insurance companies as
we got a deal with them for the
moment
the the the the the issue is
what is what is most convenient
what.
Is most helpful for the
individual and also you well
bills bills aren't in that many
towns keeping them going in
those towns gonna be very
important the other night we
heard about Valencia County and
no hospital we're gonna get a
twenty four hour emergency room
which is really good
but you know these bills bills
where they are they they perform
a great service and we want to
be able to.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
and representative.
Okay thank you
I don't see any hands up for the
past Mr chair W. two is Senator
Padilla most who just wanted to
know were built built is located
or built.
And in my office but this revert
me to write a script for you
it's going to cost a lot more
you're my neighbor on the floor
Senators.
Okay so we have a depressed
motion by Senator Hamblen and we
have a second by Senator
Padilla.
On sure yes.
Okay.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Griggs.
Yes.
Senator Hamblen yes.
Senator Hickey yes Senator how
to meal.
Yes.
Senator Kernan yes senator
Sanchez.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator Clemente.
Well yes.
Senator Wirth yes.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Padilla.
Yes and Senator Shendo yes.
Nine in the affirmative and to
excused.
You have in the past so
representative Thompson.
you Mr chairman members of the
committee members of the
committee we are going to end
here but before we go the last
three bills on the agenda one
seventy eight one twelve eighty
and one fifty five these are all
health bills I've talk with the
our ranking member Senator
Kernan and though we both agreed
that put those on the consent.
I will do pass on house bill one
seventy eight Representative
Johnson.
Are they have a common second
second any opposition to the
motion.
I see none with the pass on
house bill one seventy eight.
House bill one twelve.
Two passed house bill twelve one
twelve as amended.
Do have a second I'll second
that.
Addition to.
Any opposition to the motion.
See none house bill one fifty
five.
The movie do that for us the one
fifty five Representative
Sweetser and Dixon all of the
seconds we have a second any
opposition to the motion.
Senator can make role just on
one of them so I know who's
here.
Okay go ahead Senator Brandt
wasn't here for the last one
Senator Griggs.
Senator.
Okay.
One.
Here.
Senator Hickey.
Yes in here.
Senator how to meal.
Here.
Senator Kernan.
Yes here senator Sanchez.
Senator Tallman.
Yes.
Senator Wirth more Senator
Padilla and locate so we just
had to use the line it was the
same as when we did it before
thank you thank you all and we
will roll those are the ones
over to Thursday and so we.
Good to be on the floor here in
the two minutes thank you all
thank you staff okay thank you
many.
