Eleven so you're okay you have a
quorum so far.
Again we we we don't have
current or Brandt yet I know
Brandt said usually right we
don't have print we don't have
Griggs we don't we have center
this is the only Republican it's
here right now.
Is here okay thank you.
The.
just remember how did I was here
today to show up.
Okay may I know Kernan Kernan
has a bill in the house at nine
so that she does she she's doing
both and then Brandt said he'd
be running about five minutes
late so you.
So is it Pieratt.
What do we have any way of the
bills that we can just move to
table.
just trying to see if
Representative Chandler paying
attention.
Will graves built a couple of
Griggs.
I
mean from day one Senator
Griggs.
Dinesh Mr chairman we don't have
any bills today I'm noticing
this.
But not all not at all.
You know with that fake
background Senator Padilla urged
not always there read only part
yeah he he somewhere he's not
telling I guess that's it I came
to my office this morning Mr
chairman I hope you give me
enough time to drive to Santa Fe
yeah I know about the five
o'clock so so so here's your
here's the schedule we're gonna
do the tax bills.
Then
hopefully we get to those and
then of we're holding over a B.
twenty as amended till tomorrow.
And then we'll try and do.
Ahar stop about one one thirty
to see so that we folks can have
some time before we get back on
the floor at five.
So we'll we'll see how far do we
get it is schedule today.
Mr chair Senator Sanchez side my
cameras not working I'm not at
the house but I do have I can
hear you and I can you can hear
me I guess for good yeah I know
a Senator Woods yeah we we can
hear you.
And so Mister chairman I would
just gonna start at the top yes
we're gonna start with the the
two ninety one.
So if we have I know that the.
We we we've already started this
amendments to it.
So
I think we have to amendments Mr
chair men and I think Senator
work at these two amendments on
to ninety one
correct.
So soon as he the.
Gets on thank you Mr chairman
okay all right good so so we'll
go ahead and get started with
the house bill two ninety one.
Sure most discussion going to
help with over of because of the
amendments to we're going to be
prepared again for that so
Are you just turn it over to.
Of.
Senator Wirth I guess on the
amendment yep thank you Mr chair
so
I did
Presented a cut up on the bus
amendments
whatever was Thursday night
and after much thoughts in
actually getting some FY ours
on on the proposal that I was
attempting to amend into the
bill we've changed somewhat the
approach and I have to
amendments today so I'd like to
start with the first one which
is point to two oh seven two
nine point one percent good and
and I move that for discussion
okay thank you.
And so Mister chair this
ammendment is the one that deals
with the property tax issue in
the bill.
And it simply takes that
provision out of the bill it's a
standalone amendments
you know we had the there's a
good there's good policy
arguments for and against this
provision but I think the.
The sense is that this is
something that really should be
in its own standalone bill and
so on proposing to as I did
Thursday night take out but this
is a standalone amendment to do
that.
Okay in the.
Discussion on the amendment the
chairman Senator Padilla so
Mister chairman and and the Mr
leader this is this is the one
with the second and the third
and the seventh homes is that
what this is.
Mr chair that's correct it's
it's it's basically you know the
proposal from.
Representative McQueen and I I
really respect what he's trying
to fix here because it's a huge
problem basically would.
Take away the three percent cap
for non primary residences and
you know for a number of reasons
I just think that really needs
to be thought through one of
which is for housing I know it's
being argued this is a plus for
housing what for all those
residential apartments.
complexes that have been built
for a while this would mean a
pretty significant tax increase
property tax increase if that
increase gets passed along to
the tenants that were in effect
you know increasing rents for
those who are in the lower level
apartment
housing situation also it was
expressed by many members in our
caucus concern about.
Second family homes and ranches
throughout the state and that
this would put families in a
position of having to sell the
family home that they currently
don't live in a box
you know use for family reasons
or family ranch because it would
basically instead of the three
percent as I understand it be a
ten percent increase Intel about
the current and correct so that
that is the thinking behind this
amendment.
Okay thank you very today you
still have for I'm I do there I
don't know if there are others I
would need to pass on the
amendment I have Senator Griggs.
Thank you Mr chair and you know
I have a couple of things that I
want to talk to the Senator
Wirth about on on the amendment.
the the striking all the
language I think is I think you
appropriate as as a Senators
cash.
And I just want to.
To make a couple of
recommendations as they move
forward and consider what they
want to do because.
I don't I don't know that this
is a bad approach I just think
that the number.
That Representative Chandler and
Representative queen selected
the ten percent number is a
pretty substantial number four
for property taxes particularly
go up every every year until it
it hits the right place I would
I would suggest as they move
forward with Vash which I'm
gonna assume they will is it the
number needs to be last and may
be in the range of say five
percent it will it will get you
where you're going it just won't
get you there as quickly and
maybe will not you'll create the
the issues that Senator Wirth is
has brought up show I you know
as an overall tax strategy I
don't know that I she that is
been been problematic I just I
just see the number as being way
too large and so I hope that the
representatives will we'll take
that for what age what age were
Senate's W. O. R. T. H. and and
go from go from there so anyway
Mr chairman that's my comments
on that amendment.
Right thank you senator.
I don't see any other hands up
we have a due pass motion from
Senator Padilla Mister chair
Mister chair I'm sorry this is
every time I can do we get to
Yes.
Okay.
Thank you.
I appreciate
I I I think this is a big issue
that that needs to be tackled
and I appreciate that Senator
words
you know approach and and sort
of thinking here I just wanted
to clarify a quick points in
case it makes a difference in
your decision but my
understanding that the wait is
drafted it would mean a ten
percent increase it's up to ten
percent percent so it really
depends on your property right
if if you're talking about a
luxury home on canyon road you
know perhaps that house would be
hit with nine percent but if
you're talking about maybe
ancestral land up north that
your grandmother in here you and
it's there we can't and there's
not a lot of development
happening around anyway it's
highly unlikely that that
property would be would be hit
with a ten percent tax increase
you know from one year to the
next so I I think that the while
your comments or will take and I
just I think that there may be a
little bit misplaced with regard
to how this would impact and if
I could yield to my co sponsor
that would be fantastic Mr chair
thank you.
Go ahead thank you Mr chair
thank chairman Martinez you know
yeah I appreciate them Senator
Wirth comments I I appreciate
Senator Griggs COVID.
I I think you know senator Wirth
made a comment that we need to
think through this I didn't
think it through this for
several years now I do think
this is the best approach I
would happily entertained a
number lower than the ten
percent.
Because the ten percent as as
you might remember I mean that's
the soft landing that's to
gradually bring properties back
to current and correct over the
course of its anticipated about
seven years if it was a lower
number it was seven percent or
even five percent you know five
percent my guess is you're
probably looking about twenty
years but at least we'd be
headed in the right direction.
so you know I personally would
be happy to to keep the
structure and lower the
percentage.
It is lastly Mister chair and
members you know I I've heard a
lot from my own constituents in
in downtown Albuquerque I have a
lot of constituents who have
that ancestral land up you know
north or south or somewhere in
between and they are they are
concerned and and rightly so
because they are you know their
grandmother was a person that
this whole thing was trying to
protect you know okay so I I I
don't totally understand how
complex this is but but I I
would I would say and like I
told my constituents you know we
can either just keep kicking the
can down the road and not
address this where we can start
to take a stab at it and figure
out ways to to to provide a soft
landing for everyone
but to surely also insure that
people with that ancestral land
people who are not speculators
are not buying up property to
build their dream vacation home
and they're out of staters are
those folks are protected.
And and the other folks can pay
their fair share like everybody
else all the at that Mr chair
thanks for the opportunity to
respond great thank you we're
back on the the committee.
any further questions from other
members of the committee.
I do not see any hands up so we
have a a motion by Senator
Padilla.
I don't think there was a second
yet Mr chairman right with that
was that was a do pass motion
correct occur over the option.
Representative ordered option of
the I'm sorry
I'm sorry Mister chairman
Senator Brandt a second the
motion okay we have a second and
can you all please
They grow.
Senator Brandt.
Yes.
Senator Griggs.
Yes.
Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Hickey yes Senator how to meal
yes Senator Kernan immediate
senator Sanchez yes Senator
Tallman is here and yet.
Hey Senator Wirth yes Senator
Padilla yes and explain.
Senator Shendo yes Senator body
of are just just you know I know
we're all kind of turn this one
by one letter three Sanchez no
you have a Republican senator
Briggs is gonna be one sponsors
on that piece when you bring
that next time thank you.
Okay all right so that amendment
is adopted so this Senator Wirth
thank you thank you Mr chair so
the second amendment is point to
two oh six oh nine point three.
And.
After our.
Extremely good hearing.
On Thursday nights and the
public input Thursday night and.
The fiscal analysis on that
continues to to move on this.
Bill away I I don't think I've
ever seen different numbers
flowing around as much as they
have but it was clear to me that
the proposal that I could
forward Thursday night would
have had a major fiscal impact
in FY twenty two alone it would
have been over a hundred million
dollars and that's because we're
loading up the working families
tax credit
and also it's because the
proposed.
Change to gross receipts tax.
The fiscal cost of a one eight
went up substantially higher
than it had been when I first
proposed Senate bill two eleven
which is the corporate tax bill
in the fiscal impact of the
cigarette tax went down and so
it was clear that we were not I
was presenting something that
was not consistent with I think
what we've been trying to do
which is find something that
revenue neutral or raises some
revenue so what I have done in
this amendment is removed the
one eighth reduction in the
gross receipts tax for now.
I removed the cigarette.
The tax increase for adults
playing lamb saying for now.
Well the rate change is the same
that was in the proposal
presented
Thursday night the corporate
income tax.
Proposal is the same and the the
revenues raised from those to
allow us to go up to twenty five
percent on the working families
tax credit but in this proposal
I've delayed the increased to
twenty five percent by a year so
that we don't end up with such
an overloaded fiscal impact in
FY twenty two before the
revenues from the new increases
come in to pay for it.
So that's what the amendment
does I did hand out on the floor
a.
Analysis that showed.
That this would cost fifty one
million dollars in FY twenty two
and I will stay to the committee
that there is capacity in
the budget to cover that I will
say that later
In the evening last night we got
a an amended fiscal analysis
which increase that the sixty
one million in FY twenty two so
that's a little bit of a concern
but it did increase the FY
twenty through FY twenty three
revenues from a one point five
increase to a twenty million
dollar increase and then FY
twenty four states eighteen
million increase in FY twenty
five is a seventy six million
dollar increase.
So Mister chair I think this.
Amendments.
Accomplishes the goal of
increasing the working families
tax credit and built on the work
on the extraordinary work done
by the house tax committee by
chairman Martinez Representative
Chandler.
and so it also it maintains the
elector and it maintains the
capital gains deduction.
I will state that there are
continues to be an issue with
the capital gains deduction
language
and so we have some of the best
tax mines in our state including
on Kelly o'donnell Janet peacock
from our committees but also
outside tax members looking at
that specifically it's the
exemption for New Mexico
businesses the one that the
exemption exists to the forty
percent elimination and that's
something that's going to need
to be addressed by chairman
Martinez and Representative
Chandler as you move forward.
Up just one final thing
as I stated up front I said that
on the.
Reduction in the gross receipts
tax the one eight is out for now
the cigarette taxes out for now
what both of those issues are
still very much in the mix and
senator when you also the
chairman of finance on has
indicated that he is going to
look for a way to do the gross
receipts tax reduction and some
of that may be the cigarette tax
to pay for some portion of it so
I just want to make sure that
everyone understands that's
where where that is but that's
that's where we are today with
this ammendment not happy stand
for questions.
Do we do we move this for a
minute for discussion I don't
think we did all of them of okay
all right thank you so Senator
Griggs.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
you were.
Thank you senator Wirth and Mr
chair just before we go centered
rates we might want to go to the
Sanchez I just think I'd
September's gonna ask you all
right that that's fine.
Thank you thank you thank you.
Thank you again Center waste Mr
chairman I appreciated
you know I and I I apologize I
was in here on on Thursday I was
presenting drug resolution one
and Senate finance in the times
is in work out so I'm sorry if
I'm repeating things you already
heard you know I think that the
way the house structured house
bill two ninety one with regard
to the personal income tax rates
you know we felt that the way
that that was done really helped
capture those income levels that
quite frankly are probably not
really impacted by COVID these
are folks who get to Zoomer and
telecommute from home these are
folks who probably haven't seen
an interruption wages
you know it's it's not as it's
not as aggressive necessarily
but we felt that it did enough
to capture enough of that income
in order for us to be able to
increase elector into we to be
able to increase and expand
working families tax credit.
I do
I should say that this is the
first time I see the amendment I
haven't seen the FIR Sir any of
the scoring so I'm I'm just kind
of speaking from what you've
said but the the range look the
same as well what I discussed
with Mr o'donnell a few days ago
so and I have to say the range
even though they're a little bit
more aggressive in your proposal
Senator and and Mr chairman
they're not you know they're not
outrageous for us they're not
something that's completely out
of bounds I I think it's it's
very much will bowl we did not
contemplate corporate income tax
you know our bill and that's
just you know for a variety of
reasons we've not contemplated I
see that it's in here in in your
presentation.
With regard to a gross receipts
tax deduction which I know is no
longer part of this amendment
and so perhaps I don't really
have to say much about that I am
glad that it's not in here
anymore or
you know I I my my philosophy on
gross receipts tax adjustments
at this point in the game and
when I see the game I mean the
last thirty years of of the game
is that any reductions really
should be tied to restructuring
the gross receipts tax code
itself and I don't I'm not
really crazy about the idea of
reducing and paying for it with
some other unrelated revenue
source that just doesn't really
seem
right for me but obviously you
know as this bill moves forward
and as a committee process takes
shape you know the Senate
committees are you know what
we'll do the work that they need
to do so you know at this point
not really you know.
Having seen the the both of
these and and understanding the
FIR the fiscal impacts I'm gonna
say it's it's it's on friendly
but it's not it's not terribly
unfriendly improve that way it's
it's it's it's doable and and I
appreciate your work senator
Wirth and and missile in Dr
Donal and committee I mean this
is part of the legislative
process
you know we we we all we all
like to think that our ideas
best idea out there but there's
another a hundred eleven members
of this body that have really
good ideas so I'm I'm open to to
do whatever you all decide to do
and I appreciate the opportunity
to address this second proposed
amendment Mr chair and senator
Wirth.
Thank you.
So with that I have Senator
Griggs Senator Brandt and
Senator Padilla.
On the amendment.
Thank you Mr chairman on that
you're on the amendment act I
was not particularly excited
about the tax rates in the bill
so on I'm even less excited
about the tax rates are in the
amendment are the
The G. R. did not to the G. R.
T. come an outage I think your
representative Martinez if yours
truly right I mean the
discussion on G. R. T. ought to
be on G. R. T. and not in lieu
mechanism do this and do that
because as we talked about at
our last meeting the thousand
dollar expenditure and an eight
percent G. R. T. or an eighty
eight and and eight percent G.
R. T. to the difference was like
twelve dollars and fifty cents
for remember
reminded a dollar but I it which
is very insignificant in the
amount of money that someone
would have to pay for that.
You know it's a page about a
thousand dollars worth of.
G. R. T. subject to staff I'm.
But the the amendment is your
staff these rates are going to
get in the pocket of
New Mexicans who are are.
Working and our.
Working hard for you know to to
make a living in our state and
they're they're doing well I
mean there's no telling I mean
you know the the changes coming
rage between seventy five
thousand and a hundred thousand
so guys guys doing doing pretty
well but as we talked about
again
at our last meeting we raised
the tax on on folks and there's
less money in their pocket there
is less money to go to
charitable causes less money to
support little league baseball
and those sorts of things and
many of these people many of
these people that were fiction
increased taxes on our small
business owners there are she
court Boehner's to where the you
know their income comes through
the corporation flows right
through so this is a.
This is a direct hit on on a lot
of small businesses so I I can't
I can't support the the
amendment and I'm really not
gonna be able to support the
bill either but I'll have some
other comments on the bill and
but those are my comments on the
amendment so thank you Mr
chairman thank you senator Wirth
for bringing the amendment.
Thank you Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman senator
Wirth and we just lost our two
mile enrollment but that's okay
you know we we we tried we tried
but I do appreciate the changes
that you made to the amendment
I can't know for for the same
reasons that server Griggs
stated so much more eloquently
than I will
will build support the.
Your
personal income tax increase
The corporate income tax in.
We talked a little bit about
this are you an idea of offline
on the corporate income tax it I
can't remember but what is it
how much of our tax
does that affect in and who does
that mostly affect.
Also Mister chairman Senator
Brandt corporate tax applies to
C. corporations so right out of
the gate you eliminate all the
New Mexico pass through
businesses just four percent
LLC's so these are the big the
big boxes those that generally
have done pretty darn well
during the COVID not all sports
but mostly also though these are
the corporations that got a
forty percent tax cuts in twenty
seventeen so since we did our
minor adjustments in twenty
thirteen basically.
We had a forty percent tax cut
at the federal level this takes
it from the current rates which
are five point nine percent over
five hundred thousand dollars to
seven point six percent over
five hundred thousand dollars
which is less than a two percent
increase so forty percent
reduction at the federal level
less than a two percent increase
on over time and again one of
the fundamental.
Kind of purposes behind what the
house members have done in this
bill which I think we're taking
to step two is that we are using
this money to increase the
working families tax credit to
twenty five percent in FY twenty
three so we delay that for a
year
but so so again it's a policy
choice putting some more
progressivity back into the
personal income tax and the
corporate income tax to help
working families and that's what
this ammendment does but senator
rand I think that answers I hope
that answers your question it's
it's C. course the big more
generally multi state.
Thank you the that did answer
what I was trying to figure out
exactly who that touches on I I
don't know that we should use
COVID as the reason behind this
because it's not just a
temporary tax dealing with COVID
you know this is this is
changing it permanently
but and I'll thank you you were
I think you're saying that those
big box stores were really
affected by that
In that work I mean we we saw
the you know unfortunately a
couple years ago I looked at by
home depot stock unfortunately I
didn't because I would I would
have made some good money have I
done that because you know as
soon as COVID hit all of us
including myself what started
going to home depot and all the
other home improvement stores
and fixing up our homes our
property because we weren't
allowed to do anything else and
the.
So I really wish I'd bought that
stock but those those companies
work affected by the of the
pandemic but the pandemic
hopefully will be passed us very
spare so well so that we can
move on with our lives
but this is a permanent change.
I guess I don't have as big of
an issue with the corporate tax
increase
I also don't think you know just
because the federal level
reduced to that we should
increase that
should be looking at our taxes
as they apply to us
we own them you know you you and
me may have a little small
disagreement on what taxes are
for but I don't think it's
actually that wide and in
talking to you one one
so the.
I just I have so I guess my
biggest issue here is that the
individual personal income tax
increases
I'm fine with the work you know
the the low income tax credit
that we're giving people the
working families I will say that
just because you make over a
hundred thousand dollars a year
or I think yours is the of the
state the increase starts at
seventy five thousand a year
doesn't mean you're not working.
It's you know everyone is
working I thank you as an
attorney work
it's it's work it's maybe a
different kind of work then the
person
doing landscaping job it's more
mental although I will tell you
some of those guys doing those
landscaping jobs and what some
of those shows and I'm amazed at
some of the things that come up
with with your mind and then be
able to put it together so I
think we all work it's just a
matter of at what level of
income the do we want to help
people and whether or not we
should do that through our tax
system I don't know this one of
the things I struggle with but
the the appreciate some of the
changes you made in the
amendment I really appreciate
and and want to thank you
personally for pulling the other
one out separately so we can
support something on this bill
and that actually meant a lot to
do so thank you for that thank
you.
And Mr chair sounds like I might
get Senator Brandt vote on the
corporate tax of you better be
careful all pull that one out
so.
Okay Senator Padilla.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator Wirth I'm on the I just
a go back Mr chairman to the
sponsors of the bill what the is
it the entire amendment or is it
just portions of it that you
are.
does it was the turn that
gentleman Martinez somewhat
unfriendly it's a new tournament
Senator of our.
To use that one thank you very
much because I have to deal with
that quite frequently in my
chamber well Representative
Martinez or Chandler who
Representative Martinez Mr chair
I think I think senator Wirth
you know he's a.
He's a little older than me and
been around longer than me and
so the he's crafty he's got he's
got a good amendment it's not
the it's it's it's not but it's
you know on unfriendly on the
merits I think for me it's more
I haven't had the chance to be
through and really fully
understand it I love the what he
calls a fully loaded working
families tax credit thing that's
I think that's fantastic I think
it's great I think on the
corporate side it is A. as I
heard him explain and and and
you know.
Recall for all of us the fact
that you know corporations got a
huge tax cut at the federal
level not to mention the tax cut
we came here in thirteen
and.
Offsetting some of the cost of a
fully loaded working families
tax credit by having
corporations pay their fair
share that's that's a pretty
damn good deal in my opinion
but you know I I I don't you
know as as with my co sponsor as
the the two folks who are
leading this tax package on
behalf of an entire chamber I
don't think at this point I can
say with firm is that this is
friendly.
Or even unfriendly I I just
don't have enough information so
I'll just defer to the committee
and to your process and to for
you to do what you.
Wish to do and then we'll move
from there.
So Mister chairman and and that
and and representative of
generating no Representative
McQueen if you wanted to jump
in on the this page did did did
you see this or can we get this
to you and we're gonna be here I
think for five hours today
so Mister chair and senator I
did get this this fiscal impact
now on this for me just now as I
did the amendment as well okay
just wanted to make sure thank
you so so then Mr chairman and
leader Wirth so I just want to
make everyone aware that what
what what the leaders talking
about here on the corporate
component is is.
Is the.
The twenty four thousand plus
the increase over
I think it's five years just for
the income that's over five
hundred thousand.
My I'm reading that correctly Mr
chair you are reading that
correctly and what one thing
that's important is we used to
have a middle bracket and
actually
Senate bill two eleven that I
introduced left that middle
bracket in but it didn't it was
just confusing didn't raise much
revenue and so I've taken that
middle bracket out here so
basically this will still mean
that if you make less than five
hundred the corporation makes
less than five hundred thousand
dollars and do and we never
change that right it stays at
four point eight percent of
taxable income up to five
hundred thousand dollars it's
only when you go over five
hundred thousand dollars that
there's there's the less than
two percent phase and
that I explained earlier.
Mr Chairman leader in the next
five years later the gets you up
to the seven point six for the
income over five hundred
thousand what why the twenty
four thousand I don't have been
served we haven't.
We had tax bills that we dug so
deep into in the nine years I've
been on this committee why the
twenty four thousand so I think
Mr chair and someone can run
there and maybe die out doctor
doctor I think that's the that's
the four point eight percent up
to five hundred thousand dollars
so that's the base amount so if
you made five hundred thousand
dollars you pay four point eight
percent which is twenty four
thousand dollars so that's a
that's a really important point
Senator Padilla because that
means even for those who are
over the five hundred thousand
dollars they're only paying the
increased percentage on that
amount over the five hundred so
you could argue that this is
even a last you know again
increase than the two percent I
reference because I was using
that the the percentage increase
for those over five hundred
thousand dollars so I I really
this is a good question and I
appreciate you making those
distinctions.
Thank you Mr chairman and the.
Maybe Dr Donald can answer that
so so on the highway and once we
get down to twenty twenty six if
she's willing to answer this
what what percent of businesses
are are the over five hundred
thousand do we know.
Mr.
All.
The question but I can get that
number for you or
it act again in almost Mexico
small business are paying
through the personal income tax
anyway so we're talking about
relatively large businesses I
think that the the majority of
them are in that upper of the
larger businesses are in that
upper bracket but I will get you
the breakdown.
Thank you thank you doctor
Donald Mr chairman and and the
I'm gonna go back to the
sponsors of the original bill
actually what was your original
intent here
You had you develop this package
for us to to to consider here
was it wise thing that one of
the worst in your what was the
original intent and secondarily
with does this harm your
original intent or does it still
get you to those numbers that
you were looking at or of the
elector and for all the other
things that you've built into
your package yes so thank you
for the question Mr chairman and
senator by the the the original
intent of the bill really is to
continue the good work that this
legislature started in twenty
nineteen with the leadership of
our former chairman Jim Trujillo
to begin to undo the the two
thousand three tax cuts you know
when I presented this on the
floor I talk about.
Valentine's day two thousand
three we had a new governor and
there's a quote in the
Albuquerque journal where he
tells the people of New Mexico
that he was about to deliver for
them the biggest Valentine's day
gift ever.
and that's when the personal
income tax rates where slashed
in half to what we had proof
prior to twenty nineteen
nineteen which is essentially a
flat income tax
right more less.
wreak you'll recall that that
very same here the legislature
voted to tap the land grant
permanent fund to pay for quote
unquote educational reforms.
In retrospect.
But we really did is we pay for
huge tax cuts for the wealthy.
So in twenty nineteen chairman
to heal started the process of
of doing that obviously we
didn't get very far once we
crossed over to the Senate we
had a really good income tax
bracket similar to what you all
have in front of you in the
amendment.
But at the time the Senate which
as you'll recall look much
different than it does today
really got it the entire income
tax section and we ended up with
what we ended up which is
essentially two brackets now are
the four point nine and then the
I believe five point nine for
the for the uber uber wealthy.
House Bill to ninety one seeks
to continue that work of
bringing more progressivity into
the income tax brackets.
understanding that you know
we're in the middle of a
recession within the pandemic we
have to be surgical and tactical
in how we impose those new
brackets.
Aside from that the other intent
of this bill is to to put more
money back in the pockets of
working families and so by
increasing elector which has not
been increased and the over over
twenty twenty five years or so
Lichter the lowincome
comprehensive tax rebate which
literally puts money in the
pockets of working people he
puts money in the pockets of of
of seniors on fixed incomes you
know we've had a lot of
discussion about exempting also
secured benefits for income tax
you know sort of across the
board whether you earned you
know thirty two thousand dollars
in income tax but it in social
security benefits or whether
you're in sixty thousand dollars
this is a very tactical and
surgical approach to that
because those lower income
seniors in our community on a
fixed social security income
will get a rebate under the the
the the proposal in front of you
up along side of that is working
families tax credit which
originally was set at ten
percent in twenty nineteen
chairman to heal was successful
in increasing that to seventeen
percent in our bill we're
seeking an increase to twenty
percent and also an expansion of
the credit for workers who file
taxes without a social security
number these are these are
workers in our community schools
who you know are working and
paying their taxes they just
don't have a social security
number they don't qualify for
the credit currently under our
bill the would and then also
young workers without children
so we expand that each group so
that those those folks can can
can can benefit from the credit
as well that later at that
latter idea actually came from
the foster care community is as
foster children each out of the
system you know they're out
there working and they're unable
to claim the credit because the
way the federal credit is set up
they don't qualify for that in
our credit pay backs off of that
federal credit so that's the
real rich.
Only intent of the bill and
again you know listening to you
all debate the amendment you
know I don't think it deviates
too far from it
I think it raises a little bit
more money in order to pay for a
fully loaded working families
tax credit which is not a
terrible idea at all.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
that Mr Chairman and Mr leader
Mr Chairman Martinez you know
how to talk at my heart strings
I am I am the lobbyists for
every foster child here in New
Mexico on the legislature so I'm
glad you pointed that out
because that is super important
in all sorts of stuff in that
area
so so Mr chairman Dr Donald did
did and I don't expect you to
have this on the fly I was
looking at Texas and Arizona and
and the Colorado I think we're
right in line with Colorado I
think Texas is just.
One percent of as I understand
it is.
I don't think that we ever get
you know into that that lane and
necessarily with what's it how
many people we have here in our
ability to raise dollars to we
want to do
but it does a three tenths of a
percent increase over five years
every year for five years did we
do any analysis on on what sort
of impact that's going to have
on on business economic
development job creation for for
for for companies because the
corporate income taxes go up I
guess you go from.
What is the.
Yes.
And to the six point two to six
point six six eight three tenths
of a percent do we do any
analysis on what sort of impact
that's going to have to business
creation development start up
operations center.
Mr chairman center for media you
know the the question of whether
or our corporate income tax
rates and increases in corporate
income tax rates
A negative affect on the start
up of businesses the expansion
of business is it the retention
of businesses it's pretty much a
philosophical question quite
frankly the Economic Development
Department has weighed in on
this issue asserting that you
know increasing the top bracket
is going to.
Going to put New Mexico in an
unfavorable light relative to
other states and that might
affect retention and recruitment
however I mean I think we have
lived experience that reducing
these rates did not result in
the incentive or
didn't did not enhance.
New Mexico business measurably
so it's.
You know it it's one of those
things.
An analysis of the degree to
which this would impact
business is going to be
assumption driven ends fairly
subjective it you know corporate
income tax is one of those sort
of black boxes and Tax Policy
but but I do I do and it in all
fairness the economic
development department has
asserted quite firmly that they
believe that this will have a
chilling effect.
If I could up I agree with all
due respect to the Economic
Development Department that's
their job
I think when you when businesses
look at get issues and and
actually Senator Hickey and I
were talking about this when
they look at the list of issues
that actually affect in there
and and there.
Their decisions you know the tax
rates are pretty low down down
the list this is a tiny
fraction of an increase to it to
introduce that just caught forty
percent reduction at the federal
level and so I just think you
know I I I understand economic
development folks need to make
their pension continue to do
that but I think we are working
very hard this session to look
at other tax ways to assist you
know attracting businesses that
I do not think and you framed it
exactly right Senator Padilla
it's like out you know three
tests are for tents a year it's
it's a it's a rounding error for
these entities and so again I
get that there are arguments on
both sides but I I I really
think that this is one of those
places where you know it is a
Senator Brandt you know even
acknowledged you just we have
entities and and folks need to
pay their fair share to fairness
issue and so I I again that's
the policy choice that you know
Dr Donal is when both sides and
Now Senator better brand shaking
his head but you are little more
than the other things I've got
to keep your camera off their.
What I I.
I just I just think that what
we've done and I just want to
reiterate and and I do before we
vote on this I want to close
because there's one more
provision in here and I want to
give us senator Candelaria huge
shout out because really he
along with the folks in the
house has been our champion for
elector the working families tax
credit and there is and
gentleman Martinez there is a
provision on page five and
section six which I think you
will really like this is
something Senator Candelaria had
it's a requirement that there is
an annual statements of
withholding and information
regarding state assistance for
low income New Mexicans provided
to with holders so it's making
darn sure that those that can
qualify potentially get notified
they can qualify and so I think
that was a senator Candelaria
provisions I didn't want to miss
that because that is something
different from what you all did
and I don't mean to interrupt us
Senator Padilla because you've
got the floor but I did just
want to.
Kind of push back on the not not
on Dr Donal she said exactly
what the economic development
folks did but just just push
back a little bit on that
appreciated in minutes your
amendment Mr leaders I'm glad
you're doing what you're told us
everything that we need to hear
so I just you know just doing
some at some map here real quick
make sure look at this the right
way so what once were the seven
point six.
versus the four point eight for
the income over twenty four
thousand just over five hundred
thousand Dr Donald I hope I'm
I'm saying this the right way.
so it it's it's it's essentially
another what twenty eight
thousand at one at from a one
million dollar businesses that
is that what this this comes to
so Mister chair if you take a
five hundred thousand I'll get
my calculator out to.
I think I think it's fourteen
plus taxes thirty six thousand
on one million is that so thanks
so so if I'm so it's seven point
six percent on the for the extra
five hundred thousand so the
twenty four thousand five
hundred and the an additional
seven point six percent of five
hundred thousand dollars on that
second.
What it so it's a fourteen
thousand dollar exactly what I
came to you know what I just
want to make sure it was a forty
so the the the four point eight
on the five the first five
hundred is what it is today it's
four point eight on the second
five hundred today but if you if
you do if you do the increased
to seven point six five years
later I'm coming to twenty four
thousand I'm sorry fourteen
thousand as the actual increase
on what versus what would happen
to this business one million
dollar business today is that
correct actually let me back up
because actually today it's five
point nine percent on the second
five hundred that's the current
law so we use the four point
eight exactly five point nine
percent on the second five
hundred under your hypothetical
so it's not even fourteen
thousand and it's more like nine
thousand or something correct
that's exactly right it's even
it's even last so so and I don't
know like and play with that so
it's it's it's estimates and
that's over and let me just say
that's phased in over five years
that's a five year things drive
of Donald's will waving her Mr
chair give yield to her forehead
acted on.
Mr chair members of the
committee it I just I just got
an answer to Senator PDS
question with regard to who you
know basically the breakdown of
of businesses and tax liability
with regard to size and and what
what I got was that the top one
percent of corporate income tax
payers account for about ninety
percent of the liability so you
know it's very very very much
weighted towards the topic you
know why can't we can't talk
about now we're of taxpayers
necessarily because some of
these are very big and there
aren't that many of of what they
are paying ninety percent of the
liability.
Mr chair if I may I go ahead
Miss Iglesias thank you I was
looking through some at sit
documents that we got from the
tax department and it looks like
about six hundred and thirty
eight businesses have a set
taxable income liability of over
five hundred thousand and that's
about point eight percent of all
state taxpayers.
There you go I thought that's
what you were going to say Dr
Donald so Mister chairman so
I've been in did you do this
drive to this analysis that
broke all the different
proposals and.
That that's don's work Senator
Padilla I thought when we went
through this I mean that the
leader went over this with me on
the floor yesterday and are now
on you know we're in the middle
of this I'm looking at it in
much more detail as I scanned it
yesterday I thought it was going
to be a heck of a lot more than
it actually is you're talking
five years later this being
spread thirty million dollars
being spread across that that
that increase so.
I think I'm I think I'm good
lesson leader wants to say
anything else I think I'm done
with my questions well I think
it's all all to be determined
you know what actually comes in
again corporate taxes and tough
one to predict there's no
question about it but we'll see
again very good question Senator
Padilla thank you Mr chairman I
know the other southwest okay
Senator Tallman David Abbey
Senator Kernan.
Senator Tallman you mute right
takes me I five fingers not work
very fast.
Thank.
So
Yeah I proposed a up.
Then income tax I the draft
ahead of bills drafted we're.
Increase the income taxes and
raise about a hundred million
dollars.
However that was before a.
We.
Before they were.
The COVID relief bill was
enacted.
By the Congress and the.
So we're gonna receive over
three billion dollars one point
six.
Go directly to the state local
government I get point eight
billion and the schools about.
A billion dollars.
So this finance director of
finance chair.
Was quoted as saying if you're
looking for money call the
schools.
Is there again of.
A billion dollars that's a total
of about three point four three
point three billion dollars.
So as I said I after the bill I
had a bill drafted that was
gonna raise about a hundred
million.
dollars in income taxes not
because I'm a firm believer.
That that's the fares to most
equitable tax there is.
But since
Now that the we're learning that
we're going to get
Mr amount of money from the
federal government I was
wondering why.
We are.
Are so determined to increase
taxes are being cut would be in
favor of I.
Increasing the the working
families tax credit ally C. T.
R..
And
That and forget about increasing
taxes and for a year or two
because a raising such a small
amount the income tax on a race
forty million dollars that's
what one.
One third of one percent of four
seven point three billion dollar
budget argue against my good
friend
Your work with Senator Wirth.
And I just so wondering why.
We're so determined to raise the
taxes which I'm not against
raising taxes maybe at down the
road why we saw the term to
raise it in light of the fact
that there were so of.
Flush with the.
Money coming in this year so I'm
Sierra I think it's a it's a
perfectly legitimate question
I am having been here for
seventeen years R. I have seen
how challenging it is to address
revenue issues we have been
living on oil and gas roller
coaster and I know Senator
Kernan and I I'm I'm thankful
that we that we have that
there's no question but you know
and and senator current for for
many for the last couple years
has been sent finance committee
in you've been cautioning you
have been cautioning excel in
this session I think you started
with some real flashing yellow
lights and they backed away a
little bit because all of a
sudden you know things have been
looking better and now we have a
huge job one time non recurring
money it's a totally different
discussion senator Paul and then
the discussion about trying to
find and and put some
progressivity back into the tax
code and I recurring solutions
to our longer term problems I
mean I I think that the the
difficulty is that the time to
to have this discussion actually
is right now it is more
important than ever because it's
hard to predict exactly what's
gonna happen and that's what's
so tough about making changes
back in twenty seventeen thirty
four senators voted for a three
hundred and forty million dollar
tax increase on the Senate floor
and it was a whole variety of
things that was vetoed by the
governor at the time it's just
this is a hard thing to do no
matter when you do it I think
actually the fact that we have a
question is an important piece
to make sure that if we don't
get this right we're not in a
situation or cutting the schools
and that's what happens here if
you don't get it right and so
and if you'll notice this is
pretty close to a revenue
neutral proposal.
And I'm very proud of that our
presidents has led the recovery
package we can debate that for
the first time in a very long
time we are talking about
poverty we are talking about
helping those who need help the
most that's what this bill that
the house members brought over
is doing it's saying wait a
minute those that can most
afford it need to be paying
their fair share to help those
that need help it is a
philosophical discussion for
sure I think you know we call
that the fully loaded working
families tax credit I think all
we're doing here is taking a
phenomenal proposal and making
it even better I mean are you
kidding me less than one percent
of the top corporations having
to pay a tiny little rounding
here so that we can help those
who need the money the most
that's what this is about and I
do think that putting
progressivity you've been a
champion for that you know
you've been a what your bill
started increase your bill would
have increased rates over thirty
five thousand dollars this
session and that's where we kind
of started as one of the
frameworks so I think we've come
a way back from that to trying
to get into an area that's more
reasonable but I just I would
suggest that.
This is exactly the moment to do
it and yes we've got some one
time non recurring money but
don't get that don't lose the
discussion you know that just
say well just because that one
time recurring money let's not
do this now because it's a tough
tough vote I mean you you've
been hearing this bill each and
every year you've been here
because I think you truly
understand that putting
progressivity make sense so I'm
founded back a little bit
because because I think you're
raising an important issue and
I'm sure we're gonna get you
know more of that you know is
this bill moves forward and
that's the debate I'm sure they
had on the house floor.
Thank you Mr thank you as
senator for
doing a good job of explaining
your position thank you.
Okay we have a Senator Kernan
noted Senator Hickey.
Thank you Mr chairman I
apologize for for joining late I
had a had a bill in the house so
if if I could go back so we just
have the either John or
Just tell me again about the the
ninety I heard the word ninety
and so one percent of the the
corporate tax payers are paying
ninety percent of the bill on
this did I did I hear that
correctly.
Miss Iglesias so actually before
I ask Mr chair I could jump in
because actually but that
something is slid under my door
here at the capitol from T. R.
D. I think this is important
it's the number of.
Corporate filers that pain this
corporate tax so there are two
hundred and sixty one filers
between five hundred thousand in
a million.
There are only four hundred and
sixteen companies.
That have taxable corporations
secours we're taxable income
greater than a million dollars.
And and so that I think the
total when you add those
together it was eight tenths of
one percent.
But it gets even smaller when
you divide it up for those that
are.
We taxable income over a million
dollars.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
thank you for that and so it an
even smaller number of.
taxpayers are paying the.
The total amount it's going to
be our race to this increase is
that correct.
So Mr chair the the it's yes
it's a very small groups that
are impacted this because again
I think it's Senator Padilla
point out you might not of been
here and this is really
important for all the new all
the C. courts.
That pay less than five hundred
thousand dollars this does the
rate stays the same stays of
four point eight percent so it's
only increasing
the rate for those that are over
five hundred
thousand dollars and we took
there was a middle bracket that
originally was in our law not
taken that out because that just
gets more complicated.
Thank you and I'm you know again
as I as I have heard testimony
on this we're basically we're
we're not we're not raising
taxes we're shifting the burden
of tax payers so we're not
increasing revenue which is
shifting it to the corporate
then in in the large ones and
some that appear to be large but
when you look at some businesses
that might fall into that
bracket is that the five hundred
you know I think about it I'm a
business owner I certainly don't
rise to the level level of that
but you know when I have when I
have extra dollars at the end of
the year at I'm looking around
to see what how can I utilize
that to make my business better
and so when you own a business
and a corporation and and
somehow you've got that little
bit of extra money you can give
racist or you can improve your
your facility which often times
and needs to be done over time
you better have a pot of money
to do that so so even you know
regardless of of that level I
think sometimes the money that
that is available can be spent
and what I did enhances not only
the people that work for that
corporation but after the
facility itself to keep its
thank you just another thought
on on the fact that we're such a
volatile law state with regard
to read today and I think some
of that we can control as a
Legislature and certainly this
session we have done a number of
things through the passage of
legislation that will continue
to make the industry that that
does provide so much to the
state even more volatile so
that's a concern to me when we
talk about volatility certainly
the world market place role
and certainly
you know we're hearing now from
the federal government that's
going to have an impact on
southeastern Mexico because we
have so much federal land but
they're a lot of things that we
do as a legislature that.
That since the message that over
time and I will continue to say
in three to five years.
If things do not
if things are resolved we're
we're going to see even more
volatility in and senator Wirth
is absolutely right you always
raise taxes when you have a lot
of money so he can't you can't
raise taxes when you don't have
any money and I'm not for
raising taxes on I'm trying to
figure out how we can get more
companies to actually want to
come to New Mexico in until we
address our regulatory system
which we're not doing that you
know we're certainly addressing
it but not the way that I think
will attract companies to come
here there's just so many
factors involved in why a
company would want to move to
New Mexico and I'm I don't know
that we're gonna see a lot of
companies exit New Mexico but
when the economic development
department is concerned that
we're doing things that make
that job more difficult because
of what we're doing today I'm
concerned about that so.
Just.
As you can tell I'm probably not
real crazy about the bill I do
like parts of it and when I
voted for house bill six I knew
that I was helping working
families and I appreciated the
opportunity to do that and that
piece of that I think is is very
appropriate and I don't disagree
too much with that but I think
on the other hand
We have to begin to figure out
how we're going to be attractive
this is state in keeping
corporations here and
encouraging them to come it just
sounds like not much money that
that I'll tell you
I think that the it's just the
idea that we're asking very few
taxpayers to cover ninety
percent of the cost of this bill
not so with that out are we
intend listen to work back.
Thank you Senator Kernan of the
Senator Hickey.
Thank you Mr chairman and that
Majority Leader worth for
bringing this bill forward
I'm trying to be right there are
there are a number of points to
be brought out
I I have had in my career the
opportunity to run companies one
that maybe over a margin of over
a hundred million a year each
year
in New Mexico companies that
have made.
Millions when we look at love
lesson and
True health New Mexico and the
amount of corporate income tax
and I understand this is
primarily C. Corp so our state
it's it's minuscule
it is really minuscule it's it's
decimal dust
to the chief financial officers
when you're when you're dealing
with that
secondly I to desperately want
to bring
companies into the state and and
the C. courts but they're gonna
worry about that decimal dust
what they're going to worry
about is crime.
Education.
And and now health care and if
we do not generate income.
To for the state Revenue I
should say to address those
issues they are going to come.
And so we have to find ways to
fix our issues.
And yes the.
This I've I've dealt with CFO's
my whole life and they've been
frustrating and the innovation
is a dirty word to them
and because they like making
money that right thank you but
good corporations really listen
to the CFO but they also look at
the other factors.
Ways to work and
the good that can be done in
society and so I think there are
multiple factors to bring people
to New Mexico but we have to
have dollars to fix the issues
that really make New Mexico not
such a great place to locate a
company.
Finally I would point out and
the supplies probably the most
of us because we're invest I
think many of us that I see
right here here
we're we're in retirement we're
watching the market every day
you know the market center
record yesterday
with the.
With the
with with the new bill it's
going to go up even higher and
higher and I can tell you
insurance companies are the big
ones no they don't make their
money on the business of
insurance that's a one to two
percent margin businesses like
grocery stores they make their
money on is there massive size
and their massive earnings from
size and then the phenomenal
investments and returns they get
on those investments the only
have to have a small part of it
tied up in reserves so
I think eight eight eight tax on
the C. corporations and the the
P. I. T.
is absolutely warranted because
I want to see these other issues
fix that then drop as Mrs to New
Mexico so I definitely stand in
support of the majority leaders
amendments and thoughts on this
and I thank you all for
listening to my observations as
and the and doctor side remember
not only a doctor I have been a
businessman for most of my.
Thank you.
Thank you
I don't have any of the of hands
up with regards to the
amendment we are still on the
amendment.
So we do past Mr chair okay so
we have a new path motion by
Senator Padilla do we have a
second and.
Okay.
Okay.
Second by Senator Hickey.
The lady can you please take
role on the.
When the amendment.
Senator Brandt.
So.
Senator Griggs no Senator
Hamblen.
Just.
Did you say yes Sir pass yes
thank you.
Senator Hickey yes.
Senator how to meal.
Yes.
Senator Sanchez oops I felt your
okay no sect senator Sanchez
Senator Kernan no.
Senator Tallman.
Yes explain my vote.
Senator Wirth yes Senator
Padilla yes Senator Shendo yes.
Seven two four Senator seven
four and for us in opposition so
it's not a do pass Senator
Tallman.
Thank you Mr chair just why echo
what us Senator Hickey dis
stated when I was city manager
got involved land economic
development look at a lot of
surveys what the companies look
for when they they relocate.
And and taxes were never higher
than number five or six what's
what's ahead of that skilled
workforce infrastructure quality
of life good schools.
And
Actually the good government
they want the they were looking
for a government that it's the
provide such a high quality of
services and that's how they
attracting employees so thank
you thank you Mr chair.
Thank you us so the amendment
has been adopted and so we're
now back on the bill of Senate
Bill me a house bill two ninety
one.
Mr chairman I would move to pass
on.
House Bill to ninety one as
amended and Mr Spencer.
I'm sorry house taxation and
revenue committee substitute for
House Bill to ninety one as
amended.
Okay we have a second the
motion.
And then I we have a second by.
Senator Hickey.
Of.
Before we go to the vote there
is a discussion Mr chairman this
Griggs and Brent so Senator
Griggs.
Thank you Mr chairman I do
believe Senator Brandt was ahead
of me I almost hate to let it go
ahead of me but I'm.
Your age before getting.
thank you thank you Mr chair
there been lots of comments made
during the discussion of the
year you know of the amendment.
and I think one of the things we
ought to talk about a little bit
here we talk about these
corporations and you know
frankly most of those
corporations that are are Hey
and all of that money probably
here in the southeast we're oil
and gas is done done so well
sure they are you know they're
carrying water for those guys.
there's been discussion.
About people need to pay their
their fair share imagine engine
I mean it's a good point but the
discussion of what's fair and
what's not fair is a is very
very valid
you know we had a we have tax
rates that I guess we thought
were fair that we brought down
to where we think we're we're
fair up to think we need to go
back up and they'll be more
fair saliva it's it's an unique
discussion well talk about Sarah
then I think I think that all
that does is create potential
for disagreement when we bring
things like Sarah into the into
the discussion we talk about it
it's a tax break for the wealthy
here for that uber wealthy well
I don't believe New Mexico just
loaded up.
With wealthy and and uber
wealthy and we go back to the
discussion of
S. court and all those small
businesses that these increases
impact and I think you know
everybody and we talks
philosophy we want to and I
think that you know those are
valid valid discussion but we
also have to talk about and when
we look at that we have to look
at where we are what are the
state's roundish.
And what things did they offer
when we talk about the economic
development climate to bring in
business in bringing people in.
Are you know our big are big
bully to the strictures who has
no personal income tax they have
a high property tax we're all
aware of that and there's other
things in Texas but you know and
and Senator Tallman brings up
you know good points about
recruitment what people look for
one of the first things people
look for when you're come in and
they look at what is the income
tax rate.
They look at is our tax on
social security they look at
those things when they think
about coming to New Mexico Texas
Arizona Colorado you to all I
mean we're all in competition
for those folks in those
businesses so when we look at
doing this we're not in a vacuum
we we truly are not in a vacuum
and we need to
we need to be aware when we when
we discuss at.
I do want you know I do want to
agree with we're senator Wirth
about some things that he
indicated that you know now is
the time.
What a lot of ways now is the
time now is the time to consider
those things which are also
going to create issues for us in
the future.
And Senator Padilla and I've
talked about one in particular.
That one in particular tax is
the tax that we don't have on
food.
We also have a hold harmless
payment that we may from the
state every year every month to
municipality.
And that tax for that payment is
going down and what.
It is it goes down we're gonna
force the nationalities to
increase their tax rates to
cover the lack of the hold
harmless payment that we're
making so the discussion that we
need to be having as well and
we're having it right now we're
having a let's raise taxes on
this guy this guy this guy we
need to be have it or let's get
rid of that whole farmers let's
place a tax on food that is not
detrimental to the low income
people that we thought we were
trying to help who we helped
when we took away the tax on
food with me Senator Padilla
Senator Brandt Senator Shendo
Senator Kernan tion of almond
Senator Wirth Senator Hamblen
just look at all the options you
will.
And.
The poor people that were it
happened on the.
They have Snapple they were
impacted we're now in this bill
that we just now amended we're
increasing the working family
tax credit which will go a long
way toward absorbing any hurt
that somebody might be might
have if you put a taxes no more
than four percent on food and I
believe those are valid
discussion for us to have to
date have on the floor have
where we can shutter and ditch
Turman what is right for New
Mexico because we are and we
should hear and say what ever we
will.
But when we come down to when it
comes down to it and hold
harmless goes down each and
everyone of us need to
understand we're gonna call
municipalities and counties to
raise taxes to cover that and
that's exactly what will happen
and as a city manager Center
tall men will understand that as
well as as anybody.
I believe that is something and
I know I know for a fact that
I've got an FIR or the bill
which is Senate bill three sixty
eight.
That does that.
But for four percent tax on
food.
Limitation hold harmless it
allows for no personal income
tax social security and and
allows for no personal income
tax on military retirement and
it breaks even for the state
according to the FIR.
And I I think those are good tax
policies.
To deal with issues this is a
tax increase this isn't
necessarily a real tax policy
change engine we're gonna change
corporate income tax a little
we're going to change income tax
a little these other things are
policy issues that we're gonna
change how we do things in our
state and I think those are
important discussions to have
the money I gave you guys
yesterday.
On the floor I gave you an
opportunity to think about
detention.
A fifteen billion dollar
opportunity for our state and I
think that's something that is
very valid as well so
Mr read Mr chairman members of
the members of the committee I
think we got opportunities there
are things we can talk about
other things I want to talk to
Senator Wirth about as this bill
moves forward because I'm sure
they will.
but there are things that I I'd
love to be because I think there
are things we can do to take
care of issues that we're going
to have to address and Mr
chairman and members the
committee I thank you for your
your time I won't be supporting
the bill in its in its current
form but I look forward to the
opportunities to maybe make it
better so thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you just Senator Griggs
Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman and as I.
It's more time to look at the
bill would I just have a
question absolutely I need
clarified for me from the
sponsors of the bill on page
ten.
under the working families tax
credit not just increasing the
amount but we're increasing who
can get it and I'm mainly
looking at B. which starts on
line yes
in the explain to me the age
requirement in.
Line fourteen I'm just not sure
I know the taxes were probably
could've called my nephew and
gotten this information in
California but because he does
taxes he's kind of busy right
now so if you could help me with
that yes thank you Mr chairman
and senator rand the the bill
and exclusions for young workers
without children ages eighteen
to twenty four.
The way the credit a curly
operates as I'm as you have
children you have to be twenty
five years old receive the
credit and that's because it P.
backs off of that rule law what
we would be creating is
await for those young workers to
get into our credit even though
they don't qualify for the
federal.
So this would just be for for
young people eighteen to twenty
four.
that don't qualify for the the.
Was it the income tax credit
through the the earned income
tax credit the federal one
that's correct that we would
give them a twenty percent is it
a.
Your credit on our taxes.
Yeah let me let me bring in my
experts so she could take you
through the through the
different steps and that she's
on here amber Wallin with New
Mexico voices.
Mr chairman members of the
committee amber Wallin and the
deputy director New Mexico
voices happy to answer any
questions on the Senator Brandt
currently New Mexico's working
families tax credit is that the
gentleman Martinez about it D.
backs off the federal EITC and
the federally ITC has arranged
in in and originally when it was
passed in the seventies that was
thought that many young adults
those without children that
would be able to benefit
financially from their parents
and we know that's certainly not
the case and not always the case
in New Mexico and so this
expands the credit to workers
under the age of twenty five but
again these are workers who are
earning income paying income
they would just now be eligible
for the state working families
tax credit.
Okay thank you and so so I I
guess my question then is so The
New Mexico taxpayers.
Basically Hey because the
federal government doesn't.
Mr chairman members.
Mr chairman members the members
of the committee Senator Brandt
yes there's some different
exclusions that exists for
different types of workers and a
number of different states of
five states I believe have
expanded their state the ITC's
to younger workers so they ended
that federal exclusion of
workers under the age of twenty
five.
So this means that those workers
in New Mexico now in its
estimated between eighteen
thousand to thirty thousand
estimates vary between LFC and
here do but it's estimated that
those young workers would now be
eligible for the credit so right
now workers under twenty five
are only eligible if they have
children but workers without
children are currently
ineligible and so that would
just allow those young workers
in our state to be eligible to
claim the same credit is
everybody else that would still
be based on the amount of income
that they have it would just
bring them into eligibility
thank you very much for she
those just some that I was
reading through it I just didn't
understand it so thank you thank
you Mr.
Thank you of so I believe we
have for the a do pass motion by
Senator Padilla on the bill.
Was there a second.
Or or Senator Kearney have a
question just just one quick
clarification now that we have
to the corporate income tax
increase in there I just want to
maybe from Kelly so so it is
over five years and I recognize
that this corporate income tax
increase so what does that two
point eight percent each year
well it goes at two point eight
and four point eight up to seven
point six percent over five
years and so what would be the
total percent increase
you know I'm just thinking that
it's almost doubling what
they're paying currently so is
that close to want to fifty
eight percent increase over five
years.
If Kelly just answer that one
question that's all I'm here.
Sorry sorry Mister chairman
Senator Kernan so the question
is what is that what is the
percent increase from the
current rate up to this date
essentially almost eight percent
just about it's about sixty
percent off the top of my head.
That just want to make sure
everybody hears that so we are
taking a small segment at.
Intel income taxpayers and we
are increasing their taxes over
the next five years sixty
percent so keep that in mind if
you vote on this bill thank you.
Okay I don't see any.
And up now so Senator Padilla
you have the motion and that we
have a second I don't think we
have a second yet Mr Senator
Hickey seconded it.
Second by Senator Hickey lane
can you please take a roll
Senator Brandt no ma'am Senator
Griggs now Senator Hamblen yes.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Hotmail yes.
With that you Senator Hickey it
would have a meal correct thank
you Senator Kernan no senator
Sanchez.
No.
Senator Tallman.
Senator Wirth yes.
Senator Tallman.
Senator Padilla.
Yes Senator Shendo.
Yes I'm sorry AUMENT says yes
okay sorry Senator okay seven to
four so the.
Seven in the affirmative at four
in the negative.
Okay so the we have a due pass
motion on Senate bill.
The mid September house bill two
ninety one as amended twice
thank you Mr chairman and thank
you for all the discussion
committee I appreciate it thank
you.
Okay now we're moving on to the
house bill fifteen.
I know we've had the.
The discussion on this I'll turn
it back over to
Representative Ortez.
Of.
It Mr chair can I since since
we've already had discussion we
adopted the amendment I move a
do pass as amended okay all
right that that's fine so we
have a new path also under.
Second by Senator Padilla lately
please take role.
Missed Mr chair what what we on
I'm sorry go a little fast for
me House Bill fifteen which is
the sustainable building tax
credit that was supported by the
builders association.
Amended thank you.
So okay so we have a due pass
motion we have a second lane can
you please take grow Senator
Brandt no Senator Griggs.
Yes.
Senator Hamblen yes thank you
yes Senator how to meal yes
Senator Kernan yes senator
Sanchez.
About.
Senator Clemente yes Senator
Wirth.
Yes Senator Padilla yes Senator
Shendo yes.
Nine in the affirmative and two
in the negative.
Okay good so we have a depressed
motion of on house bill.
Ovens fifty eight Mr chairman
work as yes I'm sorry what.
Okay I just want to we're not
gonna do twenty right twenty no
we're not house bill twenty till
tomorrow okay thank you.
I'll see how.
CNN.
Okay so will now move on to
House Bill committee steps to
the hospital to seventy eight.
Representative Harper Martinez.
Morning chairman.
The morning.
All right do you want the the
two minute intro or the forty
five minutes background on gross
receipts tax.
I I think the latter I'm just
kidding.
For the hour and forty five
minutes.
Well I appreciate that senator
thank you.
The representative thank you so
I will keep this very brief.
I'm chairman committee members
What we see in front of you is
essentially kind of the two.
Options that we took off of the
menu of gross receipts tax
options that we had and and how
special attacks and Revenue
committee house bill two seventy
six had about eight or nine
different options and it.
that basically originated from
the big tax reform bill that we
worked on together about five
maybe six years ago.
In a bipartisan way is always to
the interim how Senate Democrats
Republicans.
And the bill meet really far in
the process but former chair of
finance warned me that doing it
all at one time.
Was gonna be a real challenge
and he turned out to be right
and so the last five years we've
actually passed many parts of
that bill
in smaller chunks actually
passed about two thirds of that
bill.
So what's what's left is really
addressing the most egregious
forms of the paramedic in our
tax code.
And and that was what this menu
consists of in house bill two
seventy six looking at tax
permitting the taxing of
Business inputs.
and and we all know that the two
biggest problems of their gross
receipts tax are are one of the
rate is too high.
And those are the discussion in
this committee about we would
have a lower at the second is
the professional services
business demands professional
services tax permitting.
And and and what this means is
that what we're really hurts the
small business is the most.
I'm because you're bigger
businesses your medium sized
businesses they can afford to
have one on staff H. R. person
H. on staff a payroll person on
staff taxed bookkeeper
they have their own accounting
department usually right but
your small business your your
mom and pop was two or three or
four employees they have to
contract out people have to
contract out accounting you have
to contract out legal services
right and so we called the G. R.
T. penalty on small business.
And so in the original seventy
six we had about I think it was
seven different professional
services that were identified by
our tax experts because the ones
that were New Mexico's really
stands out.
so working with the committee
west of the committee staff on
chairman Martinez
and what was the capacity that
we were given this year we
substitute that menu out with
what you see before you which
takes care of just two items
with these two items will make a
big difference in New Mexico.
The first.
Is it a deduction for from gross
receipts on manufacturing
equipment.
And we are one of only a few
states like what around five
states that still tax
manufacturing equipment.
and this again is really a small
business profits are big
business
you hire a lawyer to get an I.
R. B. and you don't pay tax on
manufacture equipment your small
businesses that pay.
And so
that would be a great help with
the permitting not taxed at that
instantly the second thing it
does is for a business to
business transaction for
bookkeeping or accounting
services that would no longer be
subject to gross receipts tax.
And and again just so folks
understand because I often get
the question why are you giving
lawyers a tax break recounts the
tax rate that that's not what's
going on here the the lawyers
and accountants to pass that on
to the small business small
business page so what this
effectively is it helps every
single small business in the
state that has to hire an
accountant or bookkeeper to help
them was there your account and
so so that really affects every
single small business every
every single nonprofit across
the state and and that
I think I'll pause there I'm
happy to answer lots of
questions but I have Mister
chair for my co sponsor store
online I'd love to get his
thoughts as well.
Representative Martinez used
online.
The page is missing as well.
I don't think he's on.
All right that Mr chair all all
center questions okay so before
we go to your question committee
we'll go to the public.
Seventy eight we do not have and
members of the public register
in advance to speak in
opposition if there are any
members of the public with us
here today who wish to speak in
opposition to house bill two
seventy eight please raise your
hands now.
And with that we will go to
those who registered to speak in
favor beginning with Carlos on
tech.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee on Kerr less on
tech president of the New Mexico
business coalition we strongly
support this bill and we really
appreciate the work that the
sponsor has done on the
legislation he's our then a
champion for fixing issues with
our tax system and I applaud him
for the efforts on this.
This issue that he is fixing has
been a really big problem for
the state it's a deterrent to
businesses operating here.
I think that this fix will go a
long way incorrect in our tax
system I urge you to support
this legislation thank you for
your time.
Thank you very much are there
any other members of the public
who wish to speak in support of
house bill two seventy eight
please raise your hand.
Maybe thanks.
Hello members of the committee
thank you for letting me speak
my name is Nate banks I'm
registered lobbyists for
Americans for prosperity I'm not
speaking necessarily on behalf
of the organization today but I
do
would like to score this this
legislation thank you so much
for you to provide me to speak.
Thank you.
Public comment.
Okay senator Senator Hamblen.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative for your
continued work
I hope you got to hear that I
think you did the discussion
just before it is I will just
tell you that we are very
excited on the Senate side to
have a a committee now
designated for tax and tax
policy and so we've been having
great discussions
and I think that's a really good
thing to have so couple things
one I want to disclose a right
up front as a lawyer who charges
gross receipts tax which is
passed along to the clients that
I representative as I understand
this bill if that gross receipts
tax is going away other clients
I represent will pay a little
bit last on their bill in my
correct in that understanding
so Mister chair and and are
poorly or worse thank you for
that
So in in the original bill your
correct lawyers
would no longer have to charge
gross receipts tax to their
clients but that original menu
the cost for all those items was
too big.
There was a it's about eighty
eight million all together and
so the two that we selected were
manufacturing equipment and
accounting and bookkeeping
services so I'm I'm hopeful that
as we continue to work through
and reforming our code that
those other
those other options that were
identified.
HR payroll legal services
engineering I. T. services and
financial services that those
eventually will also not be
socially G. R. T. but not at
this time chairman I appreciate
that clarification I thought I
had word you say I heard the
lawyers buyers work out but I
think that was obviously in the
original bill so I just wanted
to make that statement I do
think it's important to look at
the FY are on this bill and what
it's going to cost because again
I think it complies white into
the discussion we were just
having on the prior to the wall
so can you just go through
and if you don't have these
ladies running you the my guess
is very FY twenty two FY twenty
three FY twenty four kind of
cost of this yes yes I hear many
provision yeah chairman I'd be
happy to and and your your
mention of disclosure a jog jog
my memory I'll just take a
moment here as well I think
everyone has been on this road
with me over the years knows
that my dad's an account all
just disclose that as well that
is towards the end of his career
but my dad is an accountant
again it's not a tax break for
accounts they don't pay it's the
small businesses.
but to return to your your
question chairman and Mr leader
the bill the total cost of this
bill is fifteen million dollars.
but because we started January
because we started halfway
through the fiscal year the
first year we always yes seven
and a half.
The dollar impact and then when
it's fully implemented it's a
fifty two million dollars.
And so Mister chair I wanted to
point that out because looking
and it's.
The kind of side by side of the
FY are what we just passed.
Basically in FY twenty three
assuming
the prior bill as amended in
this committee passed it would
bring in twenty three million
dollars this anti permitting
provision would cost seventeen
million dollars so we have a do
you now for the five million
dollar net gain in FY twenty
four however when the for
calling the fully loaded working
families tax credit kicked in
the prior bill would only bring
in eight a half million and so
we would actually have a ten
million dollar loss in the prior
year and then it's it's it's
very hot faces in and things
start to kick in by FY twenty
five it's pretty much revenue
neutral and I and I just think
it's a little bit short one
point nine million dollars short
but those are kind of rounding
errors in the grand scheme of
things but I just I I just
wanted to get like that because
I'm gonna support this bill
again I think this is part of
our overall work but one of the
reasons I'm gonna support it is
because we are doing it in the
confines of the bigger
discussion so that we're not
continuing to cart away because
there is nothing worse than
carving away at at G. R. T.
because it's just the base gets
narrower the rates get higher
and I had to pull out
Representative for pre
appreciate this the just the
lower the G. R. T. by an eight.
Up the FY are on that was.
Was even higher than I had
anticipated said the seventy
million dollar range for an
eighth and is Senator Griggs
correctly pointed out it's there
and you don't even notice the
change for those and so trying
to deal with the big picture
it's going to take something.
Pretty historic in terms of the
revenue so that we don't end up
just taking a wearable Tax base
we become so over reliant so
that's all I have thank you Mr
chair thank you so thank you
senator Senator Hamblen thank
you Mr chairman thank you
Representative Harper this is my
first meeting with you and I'm
appreciative that it's on the G.
R. T. you may not know that I'm
I'm the CEO of the Las Cruces
green chamber of commerce and we
talk about the importance of
small business and just their
value an impact to the community
Senator Griggs is talked about
small businesses giving back to
local communities local
charities and so I really
appreciate you bringing this
bill forward and just for full
transparency I'm a sole
proprietor and provide
consulting and and I get charge
gross receipts tax and and and
one of my big pieces just the
inconsistency of the range
throughout the state and and
really look forward to
conversations with you more on
that because you obviously
really exported quite a bit my
question actually so mine is
more of just a committee of
being grateful for this and just
recognizing that and and I look
forward to supporting at and and
do appreciate is Majority Leader
Wirth and mention of looking at
the bigger picture of of what
we're doing and and and doing
our best to try and help support
our small businesses so thank
you Representative proper for
doing this thank you Mr chair.
Great to meet you Senator thank
you Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative Harper and it's
it's good to see even though
it's only on the screen.
Center.
You like my office so is open
this is a come on by the time I
do have you know we we.
These I was always surprised
when I came to the state that we
charge G. R. T. on services this
is kind of the weirdest thing so
anytime you bring anything get
rid of some more some more of
those I will support it but we
do need to have the you know the
big picture discussion on our
entire tax structure and I know
you've been a champion of doing
that really hopeful that we can
actually start working on it I
think we missed opportunity this
year.
Because of all the revenue that
we have you know we're we're
told in in lean times we can't
do it and then we get told in in
times were flush that we can't
do it so I I am starting to ask
the question okay so when can we
do.
I think you're with me on that.
I was surprised and how much we
charge taxes on people who sell
their homes in our state.
A lot of people think what we
don't charge tax when you sell
your home well yeah actually you
do.
because the commission that is
paid to the realtors and we have
to pay G. R. T. tax on and it's
ridiculous is a ridiculous
amount of money so every time
you buy or sell a home in the
state of New Mexico you're
getting taxed on that because
you're getting taxed on the
commission those commissions are
kind of big so that becomes
another big bill you know as
you're trying to get into a home
we're trying to sell a home.
And so I don't think this
dresses that doesn't.
Chairman no and and I wish I
could say you're the first one
to a brought that to my
attention what to know a lot of
our commission based businesses
they they pay gross receipts tax
on the commission and then of
course that commission is then
also subject to the income tax
so it sort of double tax.
And so what what we're what
we're trying to do as we look
holistically at our entire tax
code.
Is you know I'm I've been a
proponent of doing it revenue
neutral right what we're not
trying to decrease money to the
to the state or increase money
to the state I just what's
appreciate the tax code so that
it's more fair.
And and that's a great example
place where
we probably should watch.
At addressing that double
taxation.
and your holistically so that
you know what we we can address
other areas where perhaps there
should be taxes some of these
loopholes this water Swiss
cheese that describe and use
that to to make up for the loss
of tax.
We just got a need to make some
phone due out of our Tax Code
working in get rid of all the
all those holes
because it's it's just a mess
and I will tell you it's not the
realtor that pays the G. R. T..
It's passed on the closing to
the person selling the home and
to the you know whoever's paying
the the commission they're
paying the G. R. T. not the
realtor
and so it just gets passed right
back down to the end user just
like with everything else and
every time you use an account
gets passed down to the end user
every time you so any kind of
services it gets passed down to
the end user in the system the
system it's an issue with our
tax system that does make our
state less desirable for people
to come to or when they get here
they start realizing they start
wondering why did I come here
and they start looking at how do
I get out here so thank you I
appreciate it and that will I
will be support your bill.
Thank you chairman Senator
Senator Brandt this Senator
Tallman.
Thank you thank you Mr chair and
that this was applaud the
Representative for bringing
endorsed this bill
The tax permitting is one of the
top five complaints I receive
from my constituencies or at the
door.
Through email or phone calls so
Really at this in a support this
in the I think the.
Representative from Rio Rancho
for bringing this up bill for
thank you Mr chair thank you
senator appreciate it.
Thank you Senator Griggs.
Thank you Mr president president
Mr chair I yeah I mean I know
maybe you're gonna get their
center but.
And Representative good to see
you the.
The discussion really really
interesting and there's there's
a lot of lot of things that
there are to get at when you
talk about your meeting and you
know frankly when I was in
business I didn't pay much
attention to it.
Honestly
but first time I ever heard of
it was way back in the early
seventies when Ronald Reagan was
running for.
The actually one running at the
time he was gearing up to run
for something he actually came
through Roswell New Mexico and
he made the he made some
statements about tax permitting
such interesting to you know the
knowing she how long it takes to
make a real difference in some
stuff that I I do want to remind
Senator Brandt and and others
and and representative I think
you'd be good when we
you know when we get into these
discussions deeper you know
places who may not charge G. R.
T. Y. you know Texas that charge
G. R. T. on services is what are
they are charged for.
Read the state commission for
instance because here it's the
commission and then the the
commission of a tax on the
commission.
But just to be young be clear
gross receipts tax is charged to
the business you compassion all
but it is charged to the to the
business so that you know the
the realtors could suck it up
and pay it they don't they don't
want to do that but they they
could
have to go to go back to your
bills.
Just limit you made choices are
manufactured in the county.
I yes and and what was what was
your reason to pick those two
versus you know senator Wirth
lawyers which you know I I don't
know that I'd want to help
lawyers out anytime soon but but
maybe we could so full.
Please give me your your
thought.
Chairman and senator exact
that's a great question
and it also there there really
to kind of our founding
principles that term Martinez in
the staff and I work through in
making those two choices.
the first was what do we really
believe it's going to make the
biggest difference to the most
businesses the most employers in
the state.
And obviously every employer
especially the small ones has to
do bookkeeping and accounting.
I'm so this is gonna affect
everybody.
you know there was a you know a
legal service or engineering
service for I. T. service you
know you can make arguments one
or the other but.
I'll see every small business
every year has to contract out
for legal services.
I'm the second one was what can
we afford and so given the the
capacity limits we had some of
the bigger items on that menu
list were legal services I think
that one payment at close to
thirty million dollars by
itself.
and so what those are the really
the true constraints that we
since making a selection.
And and thank you Mr chairman
and representative for that
attack I remember there's a
fairly substantial amount of
gross receipts tax chargeable
for our I believe in books at
the your college when you when
you buy by those I don't I don't
know how much you owe that to
our but it was it was a pretty
big and I I think that that is
something you need to move
forward maybe before you think
about some of these other guys
think about that and some things
because you have been infection
ability of kids to pay for their
school.
A little bit anyway and we can
we can certainly send them the
Nitish
Press by saying you know we're
we're not gonna charge tax on
the books you buy to go to
college show show Mr Mr Chairman
representative thanks for
bringing the bill all our
support this bill and and
hopefully we you will will make
some headway as we go all so
thank you again Mr chair
representative.
Thank you chair thank you
center.
Any other questions from the
committee.
Thank you Senator Representative
Harper for for all the work that
you guys done over on the.
The house side I know it's been
a.
A huge a huge issue to tackle
and and by increments I think we
will get there so with that
what's the pleasure of the
committee what we do that's most
produce passed by Senator
Padilla.
Second second by Senator
Hamblen.
So lame please said to grow.
They.
Thank you went to lunch.
Recently.
Hello David the.
It.
Okay laying the good to grow.
Who is working on an amendment.
It must be a big everyone yes
okay they were a.
Thank you know on a house bill
two seventy eight to go ahead to
grow okay.
Senator Brandt yes.
Senator Griggs.
Yes Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Hickey yes Senator Hotmail yes
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Sweetser yes Senator Tallman yes
Senator Wirth yes Senator
Padilla yes Senator.
Yes Levinson nothing
Representative you have a do
pass the vote so Representative
thank you chairman and committee
members and I am very excited to
have a taxed sister Committee
and the Senate.
rex I work with all the thank
you.
Thank you.
Okay we will now.
Move on to the Senate bill
eighty three.
Thank you Mr chairman to be with
you this is Senator.
Nine one here online with you
hopefully my expert witness tie
Costello's also online.
Mr chairman and I would like to
I took to make a brief statement
Mr chairman of committee what I
bring before you today is a bill
we called the local choice
Energy act because for the first
time it would give local cities
counties and tribes the ability
to sure energy from whoever they
want rather than the one kind of
monopoly provider that we are
all only allowed required to
work with.
eight or nine other states have
local choice Energy or what's
known as a country wide is
community choice aggregation.
Where.
Consumers are given this choice
in where we allow the free
markets actually.
Enable competition what they
have found is they end up with
lower bills and greater energy
what's really exciting about
this bill however is that we
governments can actually create
public utilities to provide
energy and where they and and
according to the FIR this is
some pretty neat research public
utilities energy rates are at
times as much as twenty percent
less in here in New Mexico City
of Farmington has a public
utility which which they really
enjoy and
I'm sure like the ability to be
able to provide energy to
surrounding communities there
which this bill would allow the
would allow public utilities to
also expand their service
territory and work together with
other municipalities so it's a
really exciting bill Mr chair
and Committee it does I want to
be very clear if in order for a
so the way it works is a local
government.
City county or tribe would make
an affirmative vote as public
body to seek out and then choose
a different provider.
if they did that.
The current provider of that
energy would be four what's
known as an exit fee which would
cover their stranded assets if
you want to call it that for
their costs that they have sunk
into surveyed surveyed servicing
that customer base recognizing
that under the current model
their investments made
and they should be able to
recover those costs those costs
would be included in the bill to
to the customers.
Of that jurisdiction is nine
choosing a new provider.
I will say I think it's a very
good time to pass a bill like
this because of the fact that so
many assets around the state are
reaching the end of their life
whether it's called natural gas
whatever it is it's better to.
To shift now the generation of
that rather than have new assets
bills and that so the law Mr
chairman this bill would require
any local choice energy provider
to meet the targets of the
Energy transitioned Act at a
minimum to meet the renewable
portfolio standards of the state
has to be at least as green and
then I finally Mr I want to be
clear that this bill only
affects generation of of energy
it only affects.
The creation of the Energy it
does not touch the transmission
of the energy that the
transmission wires nor the
distribution of that within the
community and this bill says
that those rates are to remain
the same and that customers will
be
You know charge the same
arrangement for that and with
that Mr chairman I think that
kind of summarizes it I would
like to turn it over to tie
Castel who's an energy.
Ernie who works with some
programs in California I can
speak from first hand experience
of because California is one of
the states that allow us I'd
like to invite Mr tossed element
restatement issues online with
us.
Go ahead.
There is.
We can't hear you.
Can you hear me now yeah we can
it would sorry about that that
senators that thank you for your
time this morning my name is
tied to all school Energy
attorney based in the San Diego
area and I've been working with
community choice programs for.
Only ten years now
look at is that centers that
were mentioned earlier local
dress Energy authorizes cities
counties and tribes to buy and
generate power and sell to the
residents and businesses within
their jurisdictions the local
utility are cooperative
continues to provide
transmission and distribution
service transporting the prior
that's bought and sold by the
local choice energy provider for
feet
and the bill also requires that
local shows that energy
providers pay an exit fee to
utilities and cooperatives to
reimburse them for current
investment in generations
facilities are contracts for
power excuse me thank you for
your local trust now has been
authorized in eleven states
across the country
looking just as authorized in
California it's called community
choice there in two thousand ten
and now has over twenty
community choice programs
operating throughout the state
serving over ten million
customers well judges proven to
be an effective model it have
prepared to terminate generation
in California in some respects
including providing consumer
choice maintaining competitive
rates
the majority of the state
program rates are between two
and five percent lower than
utilities increasing the
renewable content of the power
supply and promoting local
investment and economic
development at the bill does not
tuning for New Mexico state
controlled energy supply and its
passage would be beneficial
particularly at this time as you
know the energy transition that
calls for utilities and Cooper
is a shift toward renewable
sources of power this will
require local choice energy
providers to do the same and
come now it would make for an
efficient and cost effective
transition process for
communities you decided to form
local choice programs with that
I'm I'm happy to take any
questions that that any of you
all have thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman we stand
for a questions okay thank you
Senator Steinborn of now before
we go to the committee for
questions we will go to the
public.
Read we will begin with the
register to speak in opposition
beginning with Patty Williams.
Good morning committee members
and chair I'm chatting Williams
I'm the registered lobbyists for
the Sapporo electric cooperative
we sent bullet points to all the
community committee members last
week in opposition yes Senate
bill eighty three four major
problems with Senate bill eighty
three as it relates to the
provision of energy to rural
areas of New Mexico that also
incorporate municipalities the
local choice energy providers
will effectively be unregulated
party outside PRC oversight
which regulates all other
electric providers current co op
customers have to opt out to
maintain the status quo which
deprives the coops instantly of
a large portion of their
customer base and taking the
concentrated meters out of the
cooperative customers as
burdensome to the most remote
and rural customers making more
cost of electricity higher and
most important this bill creates
thank you next up we have Vince
Martinez good morning Mr
chairman members of the
committee that's Martinez tri
state generation and
transmission association my
twenty twenty for over fifty
percent of the Energy tri state
leveraged its member owners will
be from renewable sources six
years earlier in the game
mandate on behalf of our eleven
New Mexico not for profit rural
electric cooperatives we stand
strong opposition to Senate bill
eighty thirty.
As a multi state provider of
electric generation transmission
you're not a like for profit
independent power producers and
energy brokers we.
The federal energy regulatory
commission tri state has the
where with all to serve New
Mexico customers and I'm like
energy brokers who merely
aggregate market we own
generation we operate
transmission and we manage
energy far members we know how
to serve our load with our
resources we are accountable to
our members and provide them
with the real fixed costs and
support of our rates Mr chairman
members of the committee if you
like to we all witnessed a few
weeks ago in Texas you're gonna
love thank you next up we have
JD Bullington.
Thank you Mr chairman members
the committee this is JD
Bullington speaking on behalf of
the greater Albuquerque chamber
of commerce which believes New
Mexico is now a leader in
sustainable energy development
and that progress should
continue uninterrupted Senate
bill eighty three going to allow
local governments to be involved
in the energy generation and
management business these
entities are not currently
structured for that important
task New Mexicans recently
passed a ballot initiative that
should bring more experience to
the state and many of those
voters know the history of.
Associated with having an
experienced people and too much
political involvement in utility
regulation this legislation
would help rural liberate
similar problems across the
state file and local governments
to plant oversight role in
electricity generation thank you
the time.
Thank you we have Rico Gonzalez.
The morning Mr chairman members
of the committee.
We stand opposed to this to this
bill for for a variety of
reasons almost every section of
it can can find you issues the
amendment the main issues for us
though that I'll go over is one
New Mexico's system our grid is
not ready for this kind of of
CCA or community choice
aggregation to in.
Inside the bill reliability for
the customers is almost not
mentioned at all.
and number three there's a
concept in regulatory law of
obligation to server this does
not allow the CCA's or have any
input on obligation of the CCA's
to Sir we thank you for that
debate and thank the senator for
for bringing thank you next up
we have Ashley Wagner.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I'm
Ashley Wagner director of public
policy for the New Mexico
chamber of commerce and we
oppose this bill because it adds
I'm here complication and cost
in a time that our local
businesses and communities
especially need energy
reliability and affordability
first of local choice programs
are under regulated meaning
communities that have no
transparent mechanism to keep
their energy bills it is an
affordable it also sightings
customers and depletes customer
base in business the more
customers you have the lower you
can price your.
Outline our communities will
have higher bills finally local
choice would give energy
oversight to local governments
and city officials I'm certain
that many smaller communities do
not have the in house expertise
to devote to the complexities of
energy management costly
mistakes will be made please
vote to oppose this bill to
ensure that are vulnerable
communities maintain their
access to reliable and
affordable power that expertly
managed thank you.
Thank you next we have Kevin
grumbled.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I'm getting role
steel of the Mexico Rolex for
Klopp's Association and we stand
opposition this bill this bill
would mandate
consumer participation unless
they actually took the decision
to opt out New Mexico costs we
serve over eighty percent the
land area New Mexico on only
twenty percent population.
If this were enacted local
communities and I'll give you
the exam.
Return
Paul Croft Sapporo Moriarty
pickles they could they could
take the heart out of our rural
areas and make it more
unfavorable to serve the rest
there is an interesting Wall
Street journal article on
Tuesday of this week that said
these local aggregators people
that chose to do that rate
nineteen point two billion
dollars more than the state of
their income utility thank you
next up we have with and I just.
Mr Currier.
Carlos you Madam.
Yes good morning chairman Shendo
members of the committee Carlos
to start with the Public Service
Company New Mexico we thank
Senator Steinborn for the
conversation regarding this
legislation in deregulated
states providing customers with
energy options was somewhat
successful New Mexico Paul the
same has several years ago
however the scare reality
California's rolling brown and
black out success thank yeah
deviation from New Mexico's
parallel path and what we also
saw Texas this past month some
of concerns and challenges with
this bill are control the local
energy choice.
Governments don't have the
expertise or experience managing
a local energy company maintain
energy supply reliability what
we've seen in other states
consequences of mismanagement
Committee too many challenges
social financial scenarios for
communities and all New Mexicans
this bill that are unnecessary
impotence stated devastating
risk for already struggling
cities and counties to undertake
PNM stand opposed to local and
we chose thank you.
Thank you next up we have
address mall.
Mr chairman I'd lose my would
Mexico will electric cooperative
association given role one was
already make comments and be
happy thank you.
Thank you next up we have
Matthew had a meal.
Thank you at this time we will
go to the general public if
there's anybody else would like
to speak in opposition to Senate
bill eighty three please raise
your hand Joseph Herrera.
Good morning Mr chairman.
Members of the committee just to
that general manager for support
electric cooperative.
We stand in opposition of SB
eighty three we serve seven
counties that have the highest
rates of.
Poverty
SB eighty three puts the added
burden on a under staffed and
under funded public Regulatory
Commission.
SB eighty three also would put
the responsibility for new
services.
Line extensions on local trails
providers who don't have the
experience and down with line
extensions it also would put our
staff
at safety risk because when
you're operating you just don't
cut out the system to be
operating on the same wires that
creates a safety issue the city
of Farmington has a well defined
service area and these local
choice providers primarily exist
in states that have higher than
average rates than the state of
New Mexico thank you next step
we have Robert Romero.
Yes Mr chairman members of the
committee this is Robert Romero
registered a lobbyist for Kit
Carson electric coop I'm
speaking on behalf of Mr Louise
radius
As many of you then okay Carson
will be using one hundred
percent solar daytime hours by
November of this year with that
question has over a hundred
million dollars in as all of our
contracts if this bill were to
pass our members with the rest
of the members would be
responsible for the millions of
dollars and stranded solar.
Storage assets
for those reasons and the reason
stated by the other call up some
we should we're where we are not
in favor of this bill thank you.
Thank you finally we have
Michael d'antonio.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee Mike d'antoni
with Xcel energy
of all the the legislature's
well intended by the Senator
Steinborn they're just too many
examples around the country
where this is up failed not only
do they do these programs are
not used to savings that the
accounts to produce there's also
catastrophic issues as was
experienced in in Texas from
this last cold snap.
In these community thirty.
hand and if you read the
literature sins of dollars
electric bills for a month of
usage because these just have to
procure energy off the open
market many times when prices
are high and when usage goes up
there's just it's just a huge
amount of risk for the general
purpose here so we are both the
and will be vote no for this
legislation thank you.
Thank you now we will go to
those who registered to speak in
favor beginning with that Mr
Romero you Carter.
Paul Gibson.
Julia gill.
Eleanor Bravo.
Thank you Mr chair and members
of the committee Eleanor Bravo I
am the chair of the board of
directors of new energy economy
local choice Energy provides a
structural change in political
and economic power it would
transform the control over
energy for monopoly utility with
out of state investors to a
local body local government
where residents have greater
access to more control will be
given new authority to respond
to local preferences to support
local economies to correct past
abuses to converting
transparently to invest surplus
funds back into their
communities to reflect our
values L. E. a and local energy
aggregation network is a
national organization that has
been standing by and present in
this committee as we have been
waiting for its hearing four
eighty three to come up however
they could not be here today but
L. E. A. and stands available to
assist municipalities to become
providers thank you.
Thank you.
We have.
You are.
Gail.
Karen any.
Gary A. and.
Good morning Mr chairman and
committee members my name is
Gary Payton representing the
coalition of sustainable
communities New Mexico a
coalition of the elected leaders
of the cities of Los crucis
Albuquerque Santa Fe and Santa
Fe County communities which
represent forty percent of the
state's population are members
strongly support local choice
Energy act because it increases
options for cleaner renewable
energy by opening markets to
competition.
Let's be clear this bill is
transferred.
It has the power to you the
legally protected status of
investor owned monopoly
utilities it creates
opportunities for cities
counties pueblos or tribes to
buy cheaper cleaner energy from
independent producers.
Our society elevates local
choice over centralized decision
making and competitive markets
to provide services at lowest
cost this bill has both values
at its heart we urge you to vote
yes on SB eighty three.
Thank you next up we will go to
the members of the public here
with us today so if you wish to
speak in favor of Senate bill
eighty three please raise your
hand now we will begin with Paul
Gibson.
Thank you Mr chair committee
members and bill sponsors for
introducing this important
legislation my name is Paul
Gibson co founder Rick Eckert
amok or see an all volunteer
organization with twenty five
hundred members statewide and we
strongly support **** three
public power utilities entities
of the kind that could be
created under SB eighty three
have more renewable energy on
their systems and at lower costs
this isn't just retake our
democracies opinion it's the
view of the US energy
information at thirty seconds
the official entity that
collects and analyzes
independent and impartial
information on all energy
providers the E. I. A. does this
analysis to promote sound policy
making public understanding I
encourage the committee to
follow their advice not the
utility industry who are giving
you misinformation about this
bill SB two eighty three
deserves to pass and we are
encouraging your support.
Thank you next up we have
Senator Johnson.
Good morning chairman members of
the committee my name is Senica
Johnson and I'm here as a
representative for yucca or use
United for climate crisis action
was in New Mexicans we dearly
love our state in our home we're
frankly frightened and
distressed by the addiction that
we witness to state revenue from
dirty energy.
refrain by the abusive
relationship that we witnessed
between our state and extracted
and predatory co corporate
utilities and industries are
communities want clean energy
and you opportunities for us to
local economic development that
doesn't trade long term health
and the ability of our planning
for short term and thank you
short sighted I knew that comes
to the.
Human life and stability of our
climate the local choice energy
will give our communities to
freedom to control their own
energy futures and surprised
when we'll be able to reinvest
those energy dollars back into
our communities as opposed to
out of state shareholders so we
ask that you lead with courage
and embrace that transition to
energy democracy at that so
desperately need yeah please go
in support of Senate bill eighty
thank you.
Thank you finally we have yet.
Thank you chairman members of
the committee my name is a I am
here as a spokesperson today
prepare to stand strong support
of just being we as the youth
and community development
organizing focus on social and
economic justice we believe that
municipal on tribal court.
Tribal control of energy
decisions energy supply with
energy levels would create
incredible opportunity for
community.
We have thousands of members and
supporters are organization all
members of our community
communities will be thousands of
dollars in which is the bills
every year if these dollars can
be used to invest locally our
second edgy we would be able to
move forward our communities and
big and big US renewable energy
in common goals we also would be
able to create jobs local jobs
and will be able to recycle
energy dollars backdrop of the
budget some of these are
communities like health clinics
parks youth family and senior
services in basic infrastructure
needs please vote on S. T. V.
thank you.
Thank you that completes public
comment at this time.
Okay Senator stumble for go to
of.
the committee for question I
think you requests to make a yes
there's no comment thank you Mr
chair thanks for this
opportunity and thank you
everybody for taking time to
give your comments today we also
share the absolute goal of
ensuring reliable safe energy
for New Mexicans
That's our number one priority
for all of us I'm this
legislation Mr chairman
committee I encourage you to
look on page six line six in
page seven line fourteen.
As there are multiple
requirements that the provider
demonstrate adequate resources
to meet the needs of the
customers.
And that they they have
documentation to show that.
Number two Mr chairman I would
point out that what happened in
Texas which was portable was
kind of uniquely Texas they are
not they are ironically not one
of the eleven states to do
community choice aggregation
they make certain management
decisions that resulted in that
and that's important for folks
to know in all the states have
community choice aggregation
you're not seeing those problems
Furthermore I would point out
that even with the public
utilities things happen that
weather happens and I know in
PNM service area they have had
blackouts just like el Paso
electric so this is not a
certainly reliability is
important and I think we're not
reinventing the wheel here on
that finally Mr chairman
committee I just want you to
know that the cities of Los
crucis Santa Fe Albuquerque and
the all pueblo council of
governors have passed.
The resolutions of support for
local choice Energy in are
asking us to do this with that
we stand for questions Mr.
Thank you no now we'll go to
the.
The committee.
We have Senator Kernan.
Okay thank you Mr chairman I'll
just stop we had started out and
so Mr chair and and senator can
your expert Mr Costello.
Respond to a question with
regard to perhaps businesses or
companies that would be able to
actually come into a
municipality and and set one of
these.
Programs that.
If you're expert could answer
that certainly at absolutely
Senator thank you for the
question
in California we have seen a
wide range of renewable energy
companies power services
companies just being supportive
and plan and contracting with
community choice local choice
programs and that the the
services run the gamut from
formation to actual actually
providing energy supply and we
have some of the you know top
names in the in the country
providing you know building
projects and provide energy
supply to the programs and G.
billing support and so there is
a very I think diverse rich
public private sector
industry right to support these
types of programs so thank you
Mr chair would they be willing
to to come into New Mexico what
and work with you municipality
to do this type of thing yes
absolutely thank you the the one
of the speakers mentioned
there's an organization that
helps just with facilitating set
up and establishment of these
programs and called the local
energy aggregation network and
there are other other
consultants and support services
that have been used by programs
California of course that would
be up to the city or the county
forming a program to make that
choice Senator thank you very
much and so I'm just want to
know if may be
If if Michael d'antonio still on
I need for him to tell me with
regard to Xcel energy what
percent of their portfolio is
now up in the renewable category
if it I don't know if you still
on yes Senator I'm on.
Chair would would he be able to
answer that one question very
quickly yes Senator I by the end
of this year with our new site
work when project to we
anticipate to be at almost fifty
percent renewables by end of
this year which is about nine
years ahead of schedule on the
TA okay thank you thank you very
much for that in the Mr chair I
just want to talk for a minute
about the cooperatives that we
heard from a number of those
today and I'd I'm in southeast
New Mexico where our Lee County
electric cooperative is is very
significant and extremely
important to the role of not
only to the rural community but
they also provide energy to the
city of Flemington and so when I
think about one of these
companies coming in from out of
state and establishing this type
of business within the city of
Lovington it really concerns me
because they were going to leave
many of the customers that are
that are outside of the city
left pretty much holding the bat
and this is the reason that I
can't support this bill we have
in place.
Co ops.
Covering eighty percent of the
state of New Mexico and about
twenty percent of the customers
and they are critical to
providing reliable energy to our
rural communities and so I I it
just really concerns me that
potentially that could be put in
harm's way within on regulates
system that could create real
problems down the road so Mr
chair with that I I have a real
difficult time doing anything to
damage our cooperatives they are
critical their member these are
not out of state organizations
these are owned by the people
who participate and frankly when
when there is excess.
Revenue that comes into the
cooperatives what they turn
around and do this they pay back
to those members that excess
money and I'm very proud of that
why did that work and I'm very
proud of the excel.
With regard to their renewable
portfolio and how they have
embraced that specifically in
southeast New Mexico I know
that's an expensive project but
they have invested because
that's what the state of New
Mexico asked them to do and
required them to do in their
head of schedule on the
renewables so I hope everyone's
listening to that we need to
make sure that everybody's
educated about what's going on
with regard to energy and with
that Mr chair R. if any other
questions.
Thank you Senator Kernan I have
a Senator had a meal and then
Senator Coleman thank you Mr
chairman and thank you senator I
have a few questions if you
don't mind
in this bill is there anyone put
it under it I don't remember
reading it if any reserves the
if there's any reserve supply
requirements.
You're on mute.
I do want to answer that yes
sure I Mr chairman Senator
there's not a specific reserve
requirements that the the bill
leaves that resource adequacy at
in the hands of the city or
counties that are forming these
programs but the bill does
require that they address that
need.
And there are through their
resource planning process and
procurement efforts.
Thank you for that now Mr
chairman I know the all pueblo
governors council has signed off
on this to pueblos in my
district now I'm wondering
How will these profits from
energy sales benefit
municipalities or pueblos.
As providers yes Mr a.
Mister chairman Senator I'm
really glad gas that by the way
if it's you might look at age
six line seven or pay six yes No
a six one six to look at the
adequacy issue you ask before
that is a really important
question to answer this question
Senator Mr Chairman about what
happens with the profits you
know the great opportunity with
this legislation Mister chairman
Senator is that local
governments can adopt to
completely completely different
model of energy procurement one
that puts citizens first one
that doesn't.
These profits first over
utilities servicing utility
billing by the ability to
actually create their own.
A public utilities and as the
FIR says what happens then is
rather than David Abbey
The profit built into your
utility bills you end up with
lower bills and so that's kind
of a different way to answer
your question but but really in
that sense the profits go back
to the people fundamentally
because you have lower cost
energy and and that's really the
call one of the coolest
opportunities aside from
competition that this bill
offers to all of us to citizens.
Thank you Mr chairman just a
couple more Mister chairman
Senator so I heard from people
opposing the bill about those in
rural New Mexico.
We'll be paying higher rates can
you talk about that is that
something that will happen or if
you can elaborate on that for me
Mr Chairman Senator you know
that's no there's no there's no
evidence to that effect this and
let's be real clear this bill
puts the local governments in
counties and tribes in the
driver's seat of deciding what
they want to do and deciding
you're choosing a different
route provides a better path for
its citizens and it also allows
jurisdictions to work together
counties tribes of any
combination of jurisdictions
work together so two things
number one I don't believe any
government would choose to do
something that would result in
higher rates for its citizens I
think it's the exact opposite
and and number two you know by
allowing them to work together
they can they can actually a
strategically our reserves.
Preserve a kind of similar
structures that they have now if
that's your choice number three
I should point out Mister
chairman Senator how to meal is
that existing utility providers.
Can also bid for this work
they're not automatically going
to be.
Shut out it's a level playing
field so so you may end up with
the exact same structure you
have today if there's no better
offer relief for local and rural
customers.
Thank you and one last question
Mister chairman Senator will
jobs be created locally in our
districts with if this bill were
to pass and we see this go
through Mister chairman Senator
yes I mean that's that's a great
another really good question and
a good you know a possibility
with this legislation that we're
excited about the opportunity to
create local jobs create local
companies providing this energy
and a generating it I should say
because that's all this is about
is the generation of energy not
the transmission or distribution
of it so it's completely
possible certainly that if you
I'll give you an example right
now the PNM service area even
under the Energy transitioned
Act even under their long term
resource management plan that
they are required to file with
the PRC they're generating a lot
of energy from nuclear power.
So that is bringing in power
from jobs that are coming out of
state from an energy source
frankly many New Mexicans are
given the choice I would rather
not probably purchased so if you
take state PNM service area and
suddenly that customer that
jurisdiction that local
government can say Hey well I
can produce and there's a local
cooperative a local entity or
local government that goes into
production you can generate most
of that power in New Mexico so
yes it would create more jobs
and create greater energy to at
a lower cost probably thank you
Mr chairman Senator thank you
for answering my questions I
have no other questions Mr
chairman.
Okay Senator Tolman.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
thank you senator for bringing
this bill forward so I'm a big
advocate for a.
World collapsing on that served.
Had not survived a roll call
after the.
I really admire them because
they provide a valuable service
in rural areas where the big
utilities won't go because they
can't make any any money in the
rural areas so.
So what's the difference between
the.
Community solar and in your
project.
The that you're thank you Mr
chairman senator Tom and so so
community solar is at the micro
level it's little projects
within communities serving
clusters of customers with this
is that is this is that a macro
level at a.
At a
Government level.
Thank and they really fit
together
through the legislation that you
have this this bill local choice
Energy it's local governments
purchasing for everyone in our
service area so having said that
they can just you can absolutely
plugin community choice
community choice opportunities
within that system you see so
what we're what this bill does
is really replace things at the
PNM level role pasal electric
level.
But the community choice
programs are a micro level below
that.
Within communities that plug
into that if that makes sense.
So if you carry this.
Thank you madam chair thank you
sense so if you carry this.
Conceptos.
Ultimate the degree we put that
PNM out of business.
Doubtful Mister chairman Senator
doubtful because I think the NM
is invested in and more than
just generation and are you know
they service a broad broad
service range it certainly there
are customers within the service
range to make it up to say Hey
we want to go with a different
company but it's possible they
would lose zero market share if
they could.
Compete with other good offers
out there they would just be put
in a position where now they
have to compete for those
customers.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for that the answer Senator.
So.
It's my understanding that these
types of proposals do not
generate any electricity they
purchase actress is that
correct.
Mr Chairman Senator no not
necessarily at all they are
generators they can certainly
purchase the energy that's one
opportunity but they can also
generated as well with that I
will definitely ask I answer
that consents good technical
question.
Mr chair Senator thank you for
the question now that that
community church a local judge
providers and under the bill are
authorized to both own
generation assets investment no
them and insurance contracts for
power and and that's the
experience that we have in
California where that providers
have done both of those things
they have they invested and and
own generation assets as well as
as by energy
subject to you know rules and
specifications that they have
designs and for example local
generation is one of the
specifications that some of the
programs have perceived for
their contracting of power.
Thank you thank you for that
answer thank you Mr chair so
California's got forty million
people we only have two million
people were not growing so this
actually people there's actually
a.
We contemplating actually of
having people.
Start up companies are nonprofit
so come on board and generate
electricity.
In order to carry out this
concept.
Mister chairman Senator it
definitely does create
entrepreneurial opportunities
for citizens in the state I
remember when I first introduced
the bill I had a local
entrepreneur based out of Santa
Fe came to my office incredibly
excited to have been involved in
traditional energy actually and
saying this is incredible that
they could then create these
renewable energy companies in
the state to be able to become
providers so definitely creates
an entrepreneurial opportunity
there but yes hi static print
thank creates a range of
scenarios that could happen.
Thank you for the Mr chairman
thank you for that answer so are
populations specially stagnant
he said this would create jobs.
Well how would I have helping
create jobs if it's if we're
only serving the same number of
people with the extricity.
Some people lose their jobs no
well Mr chairman.
So there's always going to have
more people producing the same
amount of electricity.
Mr Chairman as I said because we
get some electricity right now
like PNM is getting their
electricity from out of state
hello a nuclear plant.
I think that's a great example
well because the because if they
replace that energy with New
Mexico generated energy New
Mexico generated solar energy
for example then that would
produce local new jobs that are
otherwise in Arizona working at
a nuclear plant that's still
going to be in business those
jobs are going to be taken away
but will be will be using will
be creating that energy
domestically and that'll create
jobs.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you.
Senator what what's the problem
we're trying to solve here.
Mr Chairman the problem we're
trying to solve here is that we
have an antiquated model of
energy generation in the state
of New Mexico we have a monopoly
driven a profit driven I have no
problem with profit but we have
a very tightly controlled an
awfully driven situation out of
the PRC and I I will tell you
that having sat on the energy
committee for much of my time in
the legislature when I was in
the house New Mexico has fought
in these utilities have fought
every little optimization to
include two neighbors sharing
the solar panel we have a very
regressive model where utilities
get paid for building new power
plants we they do they do not
get paid for efficiencies in the
same way that public utilities
are incentivized to not build
new energy New Mexico is some
and so if we want to adopt a
model that it braces competition
innovation efficiency then we
need to kind of.
Break this current model that we
have in allow in these reforms
like eleven other states have
done that's the problem we're
trying to fix as we're trying to
accelerate the use of greater
energy trying to create models
that will allow for more cost
savings that's really what it's
all about Mr chairman is if we
do this we're going to create
the opportunity of lower costs
and greater energy for New
Mexico.
Thank you Mr thank you for that
just to so I have no problem
putting PNM out of business.
But.
What what insurance is can you
give us that you're not hurting
the rural cooperatives.
Well thank you Mr chairman thank
you senator for the question
it's because it's because of
this bill.
Doesn't replace the current
model of allowing local
governments that purchase energy
for rural cooperatives to still
be able to choose the roll coop
cooperatives I appreciate that
many of them to do a great job
and and I respect that I a
they are in a commanding
position because of the
demographics of New Mexico in
those markets to still retain
that market share and in for
communities to still aggregate
together in fact if anything I
think it allows them
opportunities like it does other
local governments to be able to
expand and even strengthen their
market share so it it just some.
But I understand the in security
that it may bring because of
competition but it doesn't
fundamentally put anyone out of
this it just create some
competition.
Okay.
Thank you for that to Senator
and this year thank you have
assurances can I give us that.
Situation the recently at the
current.
In Texas
well occur here thank you Mr
chairman also I would note the
exit fee that's also required if
if someone does get replaced and
they get financially made whole
for any stranded assets
but it's your question about
reliability get on page six line
seven.
The
local choice programs are
required to create
implementation programs that
demonstrate.
the demonstrate adequacy of
resources to meet the energy
needs of participating
customers.
And so it's just a fundamental.
Requirement of what they have to
do to even become a a.
A local energy choice provider.
And.
Mr chair I would say that like a
lot of public utilities or
otherwise is that
You know we talk about local
pride Senator was talking about
local pride it gets down to that
as well that communities doing a
good job of providing utility
service and that you know this
becomes a requirement that they
have to offer and you know
there's no guarantee there's no
guarantee with public utilities
that a they don't have blackouts
because they do but but this
legislation directly has
requirements that they have to
have adequacy they have to meet
adequacy needs of resources to
meet the customers that they're
seeking to me.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator Senator one last
question is there a up workforce
training component included.
Mister chairman Senator there is
a workforce he said this and hi
do you have that readily
available by any chance.
Yet I yes Mr chair Senator there
is a provision in the bill that
requires a program to include
workforce components in their
procurement plan planning and so
the the wall that specifics of
that plan is left up to the city
county or tribe that is
presenting this program or group
of them that is presenting this
program that is required
consideration of their
procurement activities
implementation activities.
H. nineteen.
H. nineteen Senator section
fourteen talks about their
procurement policy that the
policy has to define workforce
development.
And so it's okay thank thank you
senator for the answer thank
you.
Mr chair that's all I have.
Mr chair I'm going to move to
table.
Senator Kernan I have a question
will we'll keep that on the
table for now but I do have a
of.
Couple of questions for of the
sponsor.
Senator.
I know that the I introduced
this bill with you last year.
I know that there's been of
support from the all in the
public council of governors.
But I'm not sure how I mean I
know that with the cooperatives
and I know that ours is a famous
moment trick.
And you're talking about a
generation.
And he said this is a I think
one of the gentleman talked
about that this is all about
generation and not transmission.
I know that tribes particularly
in the rural areas like my
tribe.
We have long term right we
agreements with electric coops
to go to our lands.
And our payments a lot of times
of the right writer nineteen is
based on you know seventy
percent of the cost of those
right away payments to our tribe
will be from the whole base and
thirty percent from you know our
local our tribal communities.
Can you or your expert speak on
what impact that will have.
On those current right away
green equipment or pending right
away grievance.
Does that devalue those
agreements now because I just
don't know I know that the
tribes are supporting it at the
macro level but I don't know if
the folks individually at the
tribe of really understand how
this could or may or may not
affect them financially as they
look at these right away Griggs.
You Mr chairman for the question
and anti can you answer that
absolutely Mr chair Senator
thank you for the question
Mr chair I would expect no
impact on right of way Graham
it's for the following reason
that global chess Energy
providers only handle a
generation and procurement of
energy the transmission
distribution services left
completely in the hands of the
utility or the cooperative
is jurisdiction the the the the
lines at fall in as so in the
case of him is the.
Mr chair if it were were to
pursue one of these programs the
his nonselective cooperate would
continue to provide that
transmission and distribution
service and the right of way
agreement would continue to be
with the utility or the
cooperative as the case may be
so I would expect no impact on
on those types of agreements.
I don't know if the summer from
him is not let trick is I'd like
to hear from them as well
because they're the ones that
are negotiating his somebody on
there from the electric
cooperative that he is either if
not within the Lujan mess with
another co op that's dealing
with another tribe can can I
hear somebody from.
Yes this.
Kevin Greenwald would be able to
answer that Kevin Kevin are you
still on.
Yes Mr Chairman
I'm here but I don't know if you
heard my question.
could you repeat it please okay
up my question was and we're
talking about you know of local
choice energy and of.
At my question was a lot of
these.
Coops go through tribal lands.
And.
In.
Some indigo shade it right we
agreements no my tribe's right
now in a go she ation my
question was if.
If.
If folks are now generating
Energy and then pour it is from
my knowledge is that like for
the other the right writer
nineteen under the right away
payments to tribes seventy
percent of a lease I think
seventy percent of them.
Is for all the customers based
that pay for that right away and
and thirty percent goes no for
for that like say for example
he was Pueblo all over him is
probable tribal members.
We would pay thirty percent of
that you know for the right away
and it's distributed my question
was that this this the value
that right away for the tribes
or how would the co ops paid for
that.
It's now energy's been
Either generate locally or or
various places and less use of
transmission.
I don't know I answered and
asked the question right but I'm
just concerned about that.
Mr Mr chairman members of the
committee
first lady LA disclaimer Amos is
that part of my associations I
certainly can't speak on behalf
of them but he said that
the rates that are paid include
those rate riders.
And.
Yeah so.
The energy right that is rate
has a lot of fixed costs and it.
You know the actual energy
components priorities report
sent to that right the rest of
it is fixed costs so unless
those fixed costs are on
accounted for
In the next year another writer
yeah there's there's a chance
that
they can lose those they can
under collect a little
situations.
Mr Chairman I could add to that
a little bit.
Okay go ahead Senator thank you
Mr chairman you know it does not
it does not affect this bill
does not affect the transmission
or distribution of the energy so
those are costs are still paid
out by the customers separately
and as Kevin said you know the
bill also allows for an exit
fees so if there's some energy
loss that's being generated
sorry some and she's been
generated that's being sent
across those lines.
I.
By a provider of that energy
there legislative exit the so
that ultimately that is not.
Come out
Hey Mrs value it should not
anyway
but anyway hopefully that's
helpful.
Maybe helpful.
Already thank you
I don't believe we have in the
More questions from the
committee members we do have a
do not pass motion by Senator
Kernan that is non debatable so
I will go to the land can you
take growth please.
It.
It's a tangling motion the table
or table emotions are.
Senator Brandt.
Yes Senator great yes Senator.
No Senator Hickey yes Senator
how to meal
Senator Kernan yes senator
Sanchez.
Yes Senator Tallman.
Senator Clemente no.
Senator Wirth.
No.
Senator Padilla yes.
Senator Shendo.
But no.
I know those and.
Six yes.
So just be has been able.
Mr Mr chairman I know I meant to
tell you about the broadband in
this bill but it'll have to wait
till next year.
So little took for Senator to
get I thank you Mr chairman
thank you for the committee
discussion committee thank you
thank you thank you.
we will now.
Move to.
Senate bill one sixteen Senator
souls are you on.
Yes Sir I am.
You we were not the background.
It's appropriate for this
particular bill with dealing
with aviation you are you ready
for me yeah yes go ahead and
thank you and that Mr chair I do
have an expertise with me
Representative Lujan who is an
expert on general aviation on
small aircraft engines on
aviation fuel you know the
bronze for aviation and so
you'll be by my expert on this
and use that thank you to tell
you all you ever want to know
about engines and if you
question and doubt octane's and
out where it comes from and
small general aviation and how
it functions within the state of
the just the beginning of it
their point I used in the back
is my airplane the the nineteen
sixty seven you're playing what
that means it is more than
fifteen years old the internet
have a hundred horsepower engine
it was designed to run on eighty
octane fuel unaware that
Idiocracy you'll of board into
all the nineties so any octane
fuel was available it at
airports all across the country.
I went though it initiation
changed and instead of having
three your grade for grade four
piston engines the fuel industry
will two one your grade one
hundred leaded fuel and so what
about that we got read out of
the fuel industry of decades ago
except maybe Asian.
Where Levin fuel is still the
only fuel that is available at
airports in the state of New
Mexico and in many places across
the country.
What the airplane that I find
when I'm at home I carry you'll
that I get that one of the local
gas station which is unleaded
I'm alcohol you'll from the cold
recreation you'll I think it's
ninety two octane that I buy for
somewhere around two dollars and
eighty cents a gallon and
carried out the few what my
appointees
for my appointed Gen and it
doesn't have any lead in it but
I cannot find that you'll
anywhere in New Mexico so when I
fly other places I have to put
hundred octane leaded fuel in my
airplane that is the work but
dangerous because it causes
following of the plugs if I'm
not very careful with how I the
fuel mixture liar playing it
would let into our atmosphere
and
costs on the order of about five
dollars a gallon when I fly
other places.
As a result that hinders
economic growth and development
small recreational pilot flight
the general aviation usually
have lots of disposable income
they do look for places where
they can fulfill their played
without would be leaded fuel
with about seventy five percent
of the general aviation we
general aviation in the non
commercial wires why on ninety
two octane unleaded fuel but
it's not available at the
airport and the part of the
reason is unavailable is because
the fuel manufacturers have an
exclusive right to sell fuel at
some of the fixed based
operations and as a result do
not allow those of small New
Mexico companies that are
running the eviction services
that are small airports from
someone unleaded fuel they've
got an exclusive and so what
this does and this is probably
the shortest bill you see in any
of the with this year is yeah
preventive company from
that preempt somebody from
selling unleaded fuel if you
look at a map of fuel around the
country there is a very nice
little square where New Mexico
is where you cannot buy unleaded
fuel for aviation at the airport
that are recreation pilots from
coming into New Mexico or just
doing vacations we are trying to
build our general aviation here
in New Mexico and this is one of
the hindrances of this bill with
bird by a lawsuit that was filed
in California it works similar
type situation where a large
fuel company had a prohibition
from the local at the the fixed
base operator from selling
unleaded fuel and the industry
lost meaning that it was allowed
in California we don't want that
to occur here and so that's kind
of the basics up but if I could
I would like to introduce
Representative.
On and again it needs an expert
on aviation on the general
aviation on airplanes engine
efficient fuel octane can
probably answer any question
that you want in in that and so
read if you'd like to kind of
give a little overview of the
that I might have that.
Sure thank you so much for
hearing of about this dilemma
that we have here one of the
things that we want to keep in
mind is that there are over six
hundred thousand pilots flying
license they're flying here in
the United States.
At about two hundred channels
and general aviation aircraft so
when I say general aviation
aircraft think about
people who are flying around
using their airplanes for
transportation in across country
mode just like you would drive
your car to another city or take
a vacation in another state or
in our B. up people are
traveling in their airplanes
people are visiting we had some
wonderful people from Colorado
who came down the Los crucis I
just a couple of days a retired
couple who flew their airplane
down here Los crucis just to
visit and of course our seven to
look poster.
And all the CO right off the
bat.
So what we are dealing with here
is a very expensive of fuel
prices for aviation fuels.
That are primarily unnecessary
and loaded up with unleaded.
She's made with lad which is
been a prohibited by the EPA six
nineteen ninety six
it's kind of a sad situation
that we're still having to deal
with this but of.
The DFA has of federal related
regulations in place that allow.
Regular unleaded fuel the same
field that you bite your gas
stations and put in your car's
or legal and safe to be used in
of about seventy plus percent of
the general aviation aircraft
that fly throughout the United
States unleaded fuel is used all
through Europe it's used in
Australia of South Korea all all
across the world because they've
gotten rid of the the lead to
toxic lead that in it ends up
settling in embedding in the
soil of of our forms and or
For a community areas of most
airports or around the community
so this can really this really
does affect of the the purity of
our soils.
The thing that is really
important to understand is that
this is been legal sense.
The mid eighties and many other
states have airports which
actually sell a what we call
mobile apps which is regular
unleaded fuel of bill talked
about going to a map aviation
People pilots you're very spry
sensitive to fuel costs.
And they're always looking for
the best deal just like a of the
driver of a or B. motor home and
are always looking for the best
deal so there's many apps that
show us where we can get the
best prices on these fuels when
they pull up these apps New
Mexico doesn't even come up on
the apps of date by pass us and
go to Texas state go to Colorado
they go to Missouri out to
California the Pacific Northwest
and all through the Midwest and
Florida they can get low cost
clean unleaded fuel for their
planes so with that in mind they
tend to plan their trips around
that I would love for more.
Families to bring their of their
kids and their grandkids to New
Mexico I think it's a wonderful
state to fly into I think from a
tourism point of view it's
absolutely the weather's great
there's so many things to see
and do and why.
Put up a barrier.
That causes people to go to
other places because it's a
lower cost vacation as an
example.
Thank you.
Okay I think kind of the bottom
line is all this does is the no
one can prevent someone from
selling unleaded
of the recreational fuel at an
airport if it's not happening in
an airport this doesn't require
anybody to sell that you'll you
just can't have a prohibition
against it and that's what this
does.
Okay thank you of before we go
to the committee for questions
a.
I'll go to a public comment.
Press one sixteen we will begin
by going with those who
registered in advance to speak
in opposition first off we have
Jessica wrote.
The.
Jonathan Fritz.
Really cold.
Afternoon Mister chair.
I want.
And I'm here today to oppose
Senate bill one sixteen the
first reason we believe this
creates potential cross
contamination of fuel basically
putting the wrong fuel and
aircraft we also believe there's
not really a commercial
application for selling unleaded
fuel FBOs and so why sell it at
the there's not a market for the
airports it real estate that you
strongly limited so most
airports will not allow or have
the room for additional tanky
and and lastly there has not
been any coordination or
communication with F. B.
operators in the second.
Regarding Senate bill one
sixteen.
Basically we are baffled why
this bill is being presented
thank you again for allowing us
to post Senate bill one sixty.
Thank you now we will go to
those who are here with us in
the public if you wish to speak
in opposition to Senate bill one
sixteen please raise your hand.
Now we will go directly to the
public for those who wish to
speak in favour to Senate bill
one sixteen if you wish to speak
in favor please raise your hands
now.
Thank you very much that
complete the Cup of public
comment at this time.
Great I will now go to the
committee secretary breaks in
the Senator Hamblen.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
thank you senator I think I
think we heard one the comments
from from mission Gould about
you know discussion this you
know maybe in the in the rules
but I guess you my first thought
when I saw this was well okay
why is that a wise and a
challenge by the the F. B. O. in
Alamogordo should not in not in
favor of it
so I I don't think I can
supported right now but I I
still don't know why there
couldn't be you know
opportunities but I think maybe
that's what needs to occur.
in the interim general shells is
with us.
you know with everybody.
On the you know and and economic
development committee or
whichever one we we I deem
appropriate to just to just talk
about it and she all right if
there's going to be that may be
it has to be at a certain place
on the tarmac where there
couldn't be confusion at all
between between it I I don't
know what really all the
concerns are but there is
concern and when you come to
come to fly and you know you
can't make too many mistakes up
there
and that's that creature you
know as an issue of safety so
while while I understand that
you know that you yourself are
going to be very safe I mean it
means somebody could make a make
a mistake in really really have
dire consequences so I would I
would think that maybe we could
come to a solution but I don't I
don't at me doesn't sound like
right now the way that this is.
The way to do it and
I just yeah I appreciate you
bringing the bill I appreciate
you start discussion because it
sounds like it it needs to be
have so thank you Mr Mr chairman
and and thank you senator.
I have Senator Hamblen Kernan
incentives.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator souls I know how much
you love flying and have yet to
be able to be up in your plane
is part of me that is a little
nervous but I know other folks
who have enjoyed finding you're
playing just a couple of
questions how common is it for
planes of your size to be able
to use unleaded fuel.
Okay Mr chair that is the only
thing that's available to my
flight out the only way I can
not use
this to use leaded fuel of I
know what it was what this was
designed as eighty octane
unleaded fuel it is not
available to me anywhere in New
Mexico at that airport I must
carry it out there with me in
five gallon containers that
answers your question I'm not
sure if I legislative answered
it reversed at.
Centers all Mr chair it's like
how how frequent is your plane
unique and if so is it that you
modified the engine or what did
you do.
No and and if I could let me
refer to the the Mr economy you
can tell you know what's the
what's about how many airplanes
and another one Miner point is
that No Way unique okay.
Thank you for that and that's a
very good question.
The thing to keep in mind is
that about eighty percent of the
airplanes out there were
originally certificated by the
FAA and the engine manifest
first to run on low octane fuel
eighty to eighty seven octane so
think about that as the regular
unleaded fuel that you put in
your car today.
When aviation contracted in the
eighties the fuel supplier said
you guys need to come up with a
one size fits all solution we're
not going to make super on let
it mid grade and a low octane
we're just gonna do one thing
and so the fuel suppliers
refiners got together and said
we're gonna are supplied just
one grade of fuel it's going to
be one hundred octane and it's
going to have let in it they
made that choice for us and even
though that seventy to eighty
percent of the airplanes do not
require the high octane fuel we
are all forced across the
country to use it.
And it would be a can to let's
say that you have a Toyota Camry
that runs fine and Toyota says
please use regular unleaded fuel
and you drive up your gas
station in your gas station
owner says you can only use.
The super on let it that the
portions of the Lamborghini
issues that's all that's
available to you Hey the five
Bucks and move on.
You don't have a choice and we
don't have a choice here.
Thank you Mr Han and Mr chair
Center souls with this you know
obviously I don't want lead
going into our atmosphere I
don't want to go into our
groundwater as well the the way
it is said it is that airports
can either say yes or no to
doing this am I correct on that.
This does not require it for
instance the
The big based operator who
talked about it was concerned
that it would be forced to do
this doesn't require anyone to
it just means you can't stop
them from doing so I'll be do
have some FBOs americorps
managers are the state they
contacted me after this bill
came down and said this would be
wonderful for us we would love
to be able to put in a self
serve so it but highly on the
pilot as far as putting the fuel
in a self serve unleaded gaff
the ninety two octane but you
can buy there's one or two
places in Las Cruces that sell
it so if that were available to
us and all it does is it doesn't
allow anyone to prevent that.
Okay thank you Mr chair thank
you senator souls that I think
that was my my main concern just
because of the practicality of
of well whether or not an
airport has the resources to do
that has the capital to install
a big huge tank that would have
this gas and if they have the
option to say no then that is
their right if they choose to do
that then there is an investment
and that that that
infrastructure to provide that
and then work that so it's not
for saying that on any of the
FBOs but it said that that's the
correct summary my correctness
Center souls.
Okay Mister chairman Senator yes
this is simply doesn't allow
somebody who is already there
from preempting somebody else
because they got an exclusive or
because they're being told by
the manufacturer that you can't
sell anything except our hundred
level that are you know that is
eighty eight your all it does is
it doesn't allow anyone to say
no you can't do it.
Okay thank you Mr Mr chair
Senator sold one last question
what is the the environmental
impact of this the the fuel that
you have to use now and the
opportunity to use the unleaded
fuel.
Thank you that's a great I have.
Great question of which Mister
Han can tell you lots of detail
about the studies have been done
around airports due to the lack.
Yes thank you for that question
up as if you're not aware in the
early nineteen seventies of the
environmental protection agency
identified the of level of
toxicity associated with lead in
the soil and what the sources of
those eight of that lead was led
once simply used as an octane
booster.
To enhance the octane of of
gasolines at the time of there
are some of us probably hear
that remember the apple.
Letting you would always get
Bethel fuel you know that was
the high octane of fuel for your
cattle Act for your Lincoln I
remember my grandfather buying
the ethyl fuel for his higher
performance car of by the.
Late nineteen seventies it had
been banned and by nineteen
ninety six there was no unleaded
fuel for on road vehicles that
were allowed in the United
States the the the reason for
this was that they had found in
sampling soils in the
communities where the cars in
the airplanes are they found
high levels concentrations of
lad and it's been demonstrated
over over multiple studies about
of the toxic issues associated
with the lad once it gets into
your blood stream and the amount
of time that it resides in your
bloodstream this is especially
in the issue with people who are
advocate outdoor hikers bicycle
riders and and kids who were
playing of football and soccer
and and playing in the school
yards you know they are there go
ahead right if you could talk
about some of the studies that
have found higher levels of
right around the airport yeah I
think that's what
carry your hand went I was.
Sure so the the the lawsuit that
Senator souls referenced of from
two thousand eleven one is a
environmental issue associated
with of aggravated of levels of
soils in communities around
airports in California that was
what started the lawsuit of the
aviation manufacturers said well
so sorry that's all we have
available and then after several
years of litigation they settled
out of court and they started
remediation projects and one of
the things that they agreed to
do was to not prohibit the sale
of unleaded fuels at the
airports and.
Prior to that the of the F. B.
so FBOs the fixed base operator
but I want you to think of it as
a as a truckstop for airplanes a
gas station for airplanes that's
an MPO and so the FBO of their
all franchise things like
chevron Phillips sixty six they
were or were contracts Lee
prohibited from selling anything
except their own brand their own
product and that's and that's
what the California suit settled
is that the the refiners
couldn't to prohibit.
The FBOs in California from
selling and unleaded fuel and I
wanted to to show you something
just to give you an example of
of where unleaded fuel is sold
this is a map and I'm gonna hold
it up here and you can see that
there are I guess it's backwards
but you can see here we are in
New Mexico and you can see as
you work your way towards the
east the this is a field map
that shows all the different
airports all the way down into
Florida up into Maine over in
California that cell on leaded
fuels so this is this is not new
this is not
you know we're not forcing
anybody to stop selling unleaded
fuel all we're asking is that.
Aviators that come to New Mexico
and fly in New Mexico have the
opportunity to buy the same.
clean fuel that you can put in
your car today in Los crucis in
around New Mexico that's it
thank you Mr on thank you Mr
chair Senator sold that's all
for my questions.
Okay we'll go now Senator
Kernan.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
cells and I've had a
conversation about about this
issue and and the reason that
that came to my attention was
at.
I received an email and also a
phone call from.
Mr prime Jonathan fry think he
may have signed yet not you
didn't get on to to speak.
And.
Anyway he's vice president of
the national air transportation
association and he he raises
several issues of concern with
regard to this and I think
probably the number one concern
that I have is.
If this is available at an
airport and you have two
different kinds of fuel
available and by some chance are
the wrong fuel gets into the
airplane in other words there
are many many airplanes I'm sure
that fly into to the different
airports in the in there that
they're fueled by FBOs and
everything's just fine but if
there should be a situation
where an airplane that is not
retrofitted are is not bills are
is not certified for the
unleaded fuel.
He indicates that it could be
the pretty catastrophic so to me
it's almost like putting diesel
fuel in a in a regular car we
know what that we need to the
engine so I thought well you
know I I believe that accept I'm
gonna follow up with that my
good friend Representative years
Scott who also has built is only
applying he has several
airplanes in is a long time I
let.
So I asked him for his opinion
on this and and he confirmed he
said yes there are places where
you can buy at the end leaded
fuel but he did indicate he said
yes it most certainly could do
some pretty significant damage
to an airplane that.
That was not certified to take
that come to you all in in some
of the fuel is not certified.
I believe it's not a certified
aviation fuel so so the fact
that that also has to take his
own deal with them I hate that
for him because I know he does
love to fly and I know that at
he's very careful said pilot so
my concern is what we do at the
airports and so they decide that
they're going to sell this fuel.
And.
By chance if if you have an
apartment that may not be as
experience to Senator cells or
potentially you have the
refueler someone there on the
ground that.
Might not be paying attention
not be communicating with
private I just worry at I don't
think it's like you're in a in a
car and you have car trouble New
Mexico over the south
Representative if you put the
wrong fuel into an airplane that
is not.
Bills to receive this type of
fuel
what could happen Senator sells.
Potentially thank you thank you
and yeah what I'm we can tell
you way more than you want to
know about how walking to work
and everything else I just want
to know what could happen to the
point.
Yes Representative out there are
two main types of fuel that are
current the soul that airport
one jet fuel and what is the
hundred octane leaded fuel the
piston engine we runs on the
hundred octane leaded fuel of
the engines run on the jet fuel.
The biggest concern is if you
put jet fuel into a turban bird
into a piston powered airplanes
that causes catastrophic
problems of six or seven years
ago in Los crucis one of the the
F. B. the big based operator the
white men went out with the
wrong here with the airplane and
the pilot did not check the
recent it did not check the fuel
when he went back out as pilots
we are taught to every time I go
out to my are played I drain
fuel out of each wing tank I'm
looking for three different
things when I do that what I'm
looking for a little bubble of
water at the bottom that shows
that there may be some water
into the tank that I want to be
careful there's not water the
second one is I'm looking at the
color of the fuel that I drain
out.
You'll have a different color to
them the pilots are hot this as
part of their training and the
other is I smell it.
Jet fuel in New York.
Credibly difference of like
actually once the like heresy
and those are very different
characteristics and so I'm
hopeful putting the fuel in my
fire and as all pilots are
taught himself.
The third is putting the jet
fuel into a their plate and we
have that problem right now
that's what because that
catastrophic accident in Los
crucis this doesn't change a bit
of any of that using the ninety
two octane recreation fuel that
I carry out to my my if that
gets mixed with the hundred
octane that is sold at the
airport with wet in it
absolutely nothing is different
they don't cross contaminate
each other there is no problem
at all
if in a high compression piston
airplane and you put the ninety
two octane.
recreational fuel that I carry
out there.
Nothing is going to happen there
is no cross contamination in the
highest performance one you
might get a little bit of what
might be called knocking if you
are flying down at sea level.
At the elevations in New Mexico
it doesn't happen and I would
differ because most of this I
learned from Mr Han if I got it
right if you've got other things
you want to add to it but
we don't want to go into too
much detail so you so you're
not just the the jet fuel and
the actually getting those two
mixed that you're going to the
chapel eight.
Thank you Mr chair in in we
don't need to go into too much
more detail so I think what I
hear you say if you mix the
recreational fuel with the
what's currently sold.
I believe it's the one hundred
low that at if you mix it
there's no problem what if you
just totally that's all you put
in not not a mixture but just
totally the recreational at at
I'm feeling with that again just
make the engine knock a little
bit it would impact the ability
for that engine to make it
wouldn't give enough kid to to
do what it needs with the
additional Oct yes.
In in in that's really all I
have regarded that chair and
senator and let me defer to
Mister Han because it really is
getting into what does octane
Nina far help functions and then
in New Mexico Mr chair I don't
want to I don't want to take a
beating more time on this I just
think if this bill passes we
really need to have something in
the bill maybe on the floor to
to make sure that these FBOs at
do whatever is necessary I don't
know if they're requirements in
other states to to identify very
very clearly to I don't know
what you can do to because even
if it doesn't cost a
catastrophic situation it could
damage the engine somewhat so
that in the well I don't know I
I I guess I'm just kind of
reading from from this so anyway
that's really all I have to just
make sure that there's no
opportunity for anything to
happen that would be a dangerous
for for pilots thank you that's
all I.
Thank you Senator Kernan thank
you all will go to Senator
correct now.
Right.
Thank you Mr chair do I have my
that my hand up.
Your hand was up in the
panelists I also have you don't
have a question no I do not I'll
I'll be sure to take it down.
Thank you all go to Senator
thank you now.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator souls will bring this
bowl so I'm you talk about sixty
one F. B. O. The New Mexico.
And none of them sell it right
now.
Mr chair and and senator I don't
believe that we do but that Mr
Han it keeps up with those
things on a daily basis.
yes thanks for the question
that's correct yeah there's no
FBOs to my knowledge no no
refueling operations in the
state of New Mexico that sale
the FAA approved unleaded fuel.
Thank you Mr chair of.
Senator sold and what would the
cost be to implement putting in
a tank and all the stuff to
maintain selling this different
guests that these all these
airports that sell fuel now for
airplanes.
Mr chair and senator I don't
know what the cost is in this
bill doesn't require anyone to
put that in and so it would be
entirely if somebody were to
choose to do that because they
felt like it would be a benefit
to the airport or their
operations they would certainly
be allowed to but this bill
doesn't require them to do so
when I don't know what the cost
the.
Thank you Mr chair Senator souls
in an earlier I was trying to
listen to get smaller substance
so any one of the FBOs are in
New Mexico now can opt out and
not sell it if they want you and
your bill or they would have to
sell it.
Mr chair and and senator they
can opt out they are not
required to do there all this
bill does is there cannot be a
prevention of somebody I'm
selling it either from the
manufacturer or preventing
somebody else from from selling
that if they choose to.
So Mr chair Senator that be like
a third party and not actually
the F. B. selling it.
So would you go to Mr chair
Senator that when you go to the
F. B. O. U. land there I would
say and you put fuel you're
buying the fuel from the
airport.
Correct.
No you're not buying it from the
airport you're buying it from
the the company or whoever is
there
who is been contracted to do so
there are some of the FBOs that
we choose to put in the unleaded
fuel because they cater to
smaller planes like money rather
than to large corporate
airplanes that are more likely
to the need and run better on
the hundred octane what if they
choose to put that in what this
would do is it would not allow
for instance for what sixty six
from say yeah we've got an
exclusive you cannot put that in
because we have an exclusive.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator the response that's all
my questions now Mr chair
Senator.
Thank you senator Sanchez thank
you senator dole I don't have
any other I don't see any other
hands right are there any other
questions for members of the
committee or what is the
pleasure of the committee
chairman I have the just one one
more question.
Representative thank you Mr
chairman verses I just put my
hand up so that's probably why
you didn't see it
Sir souls.
I guess I'm a little bit
confused is there anything in
the law now that makes it
illegal for airports to sell
this you'll.
Mr chair and and senator there's
nothing that makes it illegal
there have been instances in
other states and other places
where the
the the corporation that
provides the fuel it said you
can sell our aviation you know
what I dollars a gallon
exclusively you are not as the
W. O. awhile before the NFL Sir
all that serves recreational
your that is occurred other
places this is trying to prevent
that.
Chairman Senator is is that
occurring in New Mexico.
Currently.
Mr chairman I would defer to
Representative Lujan who has
more information on these kinds
of things.
Yes thank you for that question.
So just just to reiterate the
the FBOs are the fuel providers
at the airport there are they
are
Corporations LLC's they're
typically not owned or operated
by the airport think of them as
a franchise vendor that is
authorized to do business on the
airport and the.
For instance like think of them
as like a McDonald's or a Burger
King and so as a result of that
they can only sell what their
corporate of product line is.
So in the state of California
they found out that that was not
legal in in the way that they
wanted to be able to sell
unleaded fuel in the FBOs said
our our company won't let us
sell the unleaded fuel and that
lawsuit was settled in favor of
being able to sell the unleaded
fuel and that the companies
could not prohibit the selling
of the unleaded fuel they
couldn't
Keep the keep that a lot of fuel
from being made available to the
community.
So Mr Chairman
Senator Wirth you're basically
putting a law to try to force.
The fuel companies to.
To do so this you know.
No no Senator no we it does not
require anyone to sell the
future they just cannot be
prohibited from selling the fuel
which is where my concern has
confused as to who's prohibiting
it.
The the the supplier.
Correct.
The chairman and senator yes it
would be the supplier sometimes
will give have the FPO provide
an exclusivity type of a
contract that you can only sell
our hundred octane leaded fuel
and your FPL you are not allowed
to sell any other fuel to
airplanes at the airport.
Okay so it's it's like
To go back to your McDonald's
analogy it's like McDonald's
saying
the that some of them can't sell
the you know the Mick
Representative sandwich does
your I guess that's the only
thing I can.
Related to.
Well they basically at all the
moment and and it I have read
please make sure you always
start with Mr chairman so that
we're going through the chair on
the so so yes Mr Han if you
would Mister chair Mister on.
The the FAA.
Is the federal regulating agency
for fuels and operations at
public airports like
Albuquerque Santa Theresa Santa
Fe Santa Fe Los crucis airports
they are the authority having
jurisdiction over the operations
and regulating what happens at
all of our public airports the
FAA has certified.
Unleaded.
The fuel.
And has made and has made it of.
Made it legal to use for
aircraft owners since nineteen
eighty four so it's federally
legal to use in all fifty
states.
The.
You'll suppliers.
Have prohibited.
The distributors.
From selling anything except the
one hundred low lad.
You'll.
I think understand that also
it's it's like of the you know
the the pet enters into an
agreement to only sell Pepsi
they are forbidden by Pepsi to
sell anything but that.
And you want to make sure that
they can sell coke and Pepsi.
They have the option they have
the option of being able to sell
to the king and so we're gonna
state law that the district
reader can't.
Not allow them to sell Pepsi.
Okay.
Direction.
Senator that means you contract.
Mr chair Senator that's probably
the a good analogy for how it
would work and and again because
of the concern we have led in
the environment of.
The high cost and things of that
sort so I I think that's a
reasonable analogy for the
exclusivity that the
distributors Mr chair Senator
the reason it doesn't hurt
you're playing this because when
your airplane engine was built
all that was available was
leaded gasoline all right so
just like my dad had an old
truck that we had to switch over
eventually but that was all it
was available.
Mr chair Senator actually it was
the opposite at airports my
airplane was designed to run on
eighty octane with no leading.
Your aviation started having
unleaded fuel first report was
required in the in automobiles
and they took that away where
now I have to but let that fuel
with it is I don't
counterintuitive instance
backward because that is.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Sir.
Thank you Senator Brandt thank
you Senator sold are there any
other questions for members of
the committee.
Hearing none are there is a
budget.
I would like to go through the
past Mr chair.
Okay we have a motion by Senator
when we have a second Homan's
comments seconds.
Second by Senator Tallman.
Representative wrote you would
think the the role played.
Yes Brent.
No chair Senator great.
No.
Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Hickey just.
Senator how to meal.
Yes.
Senator Kernan.
No Senator Tallman.
Yes.
Senator Wirth yes.
Senator Padilla.
Yes.
Is Senator Shendo there yes okay
thank you and back to us
Senator Hickey yes thank you
for in the know what category
and seven in yes voting yes okay
all you have a your path at all
and that that back over to us.
Your.
Thank you and I hope I hope you
learned some interesting things
about aviation and aviation fuel
today and I will you got to get
the lead out thank you.
Thank you all right thank you
vice chair for.
Taking over a little bit now
will move on to the Senate bill
three ninety seven of.
Senator McKenna are you on.
Good afternoon chairman and
committee members thank you very
much a good afternoon and today
I present as being three not.
Three ninety seven to you it's
tribal land gross receipts this
bill is meant to address a
significant problem for Indian
tribes in New Mexico our
chairman and committee members I
do have a subject matter expert
with me ms and Berkeley Rogers
and I believe governor Bello of
the public back in those with us
as well.
Chairman we do have three
proposed amendments to the bill
would you like for me to find
the overview of the bill and
explain the amendments later.
No would we have those I believe
this amendments late we're the
amendment right.
You have a yes if you if we
could I'll go ahead move those
moments for for discussion
purposes and then you could
explain them and then we'll go
to the committee for questions
on those amendments.
Or.
Okay go ahead or yeah we haven't
heard this bill before so maybe
you can explain the bill.
And then explain the amendments.
Chairman I heard this in Indian
Affairs I'm familiar with the
issue so but the rest the
committee of maybe with the
exception of of Griggs in the
heart of meal.
I'm.
So our chairman and members
tribal governments have had a
good working relationship with
the New Mexico taxation and
revenue department generally the
NM TRD has a joint powers
agreement with many tribes
concerning the collection of and
reporting.
Of gross receipts.
it's an example of a green meant
that can benefit both the Indian
tribes and our state.
There is a problem however with
the law governing these
agreements and this bill is
intended to correct the problem.
Under these agreements the
tribal tax that taxed revenue
may collect on behalf of a tribe
is capped by the tax rate of the
county or municipality within
the tribe's boundaries so for
example the pueblo back on what
is in Cibola county.
Where the tax rate is six point
eight one two five.
The neighboring local government
of requests has a slightly
higher rate.
Eight point one two five.
So under the joint powers
agreement The New Mexico tax
taxation and revenue department
can only collect the some of the
Cibola County right for Aqaba.
Even though the problems rate is
closer to that of requests at
eight percent.
So the cap on the tribal tax the
state will collect on behalf of
the Indian tribe is based on the
definition of a qualifying Tax
in the law.
And that's why we cannot handle
this administratively we have
to.
I handle it through statute.
So if enacted chairman and
members SP three ninety seven
would amend the definition of a
qualifying tax for the purposes
of the joint powers agreements
when collecting gross tax
receipts.
So this would allow the state to
collect tribal tax at the same
or greater range the tax as the
tax rate.
Of the county or municipality
within the tribe's boundaries.
So again using alcohol as an
example well after my kids could
not tax less than Cibola County
it could tax the same at the
higher rate and still have the
tax collected pursuant to the
joint powers agreement I'm is is
that
Is that satisfying to the
chairman and the.
The members for the overview.
You want your expert to the
maybe also explaining you know
oh sure I'm yes thank you very
much chairman yes miss Berkeley
Rogers could you offer an
opening statement to the
chairman and the members thank
you.
Mr chairman and committee
members.
As many of you know New Mexico
is a national leader.
In resolving tax issues among
the state and the tribes located
within the state's boundaries.
And one of the in one of the
ways this is been done is
through the joint powers
agreement on gross receipts tax.
However as as Senator McKenna
has explained it actually
creates a limit on the extent of
the tribe will tax the state
will collect.
And this is really important
because in New Mexico we can
either have these agreements
where the state is really is
taking the lead in collecting
the tax.
And we have been wanting to do
doing that instead of having
twenty three different little
tax offices doing that and so it
it is actually a benefit to
everyone.
Up.
But when it creates this limit.
It really impinges on the
tribe's ability to react to
financial situations.
And so this bill as we said
would allow it would revise the
existing law to allow the TRD to
collected tribal tax that is
equal to or greater than the
state gross receipts tax and
local option tax imposed by the
political subdivisions located
within the exterior boundary of
a tribe's lands that are held in
trust by the United States.
Now I understand the first six
this right created a double
taxation issue that is incorrect
there is no double taxation
issue no one is taxed at both
the right of the state and the
tribe combine.
What this does is that certain
transactions that take place on
Indian land.
Are taxed at one rate and that
is the right we would like that
to be the right of the tribe.
And then.
Once it is collected.
For.
Place those kinds of
transactions where the state tax
is preempted by federal law one
hundred percent
the revenue goes to the try.
In other situations and they're
referred to as class two
receipts.
Twenty five percent of what is
collected goes to the state and
seventy five percent of what is
collected is going to be try.
So there is no double taxation
issue is also potentially
beneficial to the state and to
the tribe's.
Because with that increased our
tax rate by the tried first the
state collects an increased
amount and three percent in the
three percent administrative fee
which applies to both
both classes of transactions and
additionally while this is a
credit mechanism any monies that
are greater than the credit
mechanism that is collected by
the state and is given to the
tribe ultimately ends up in the
in the general fund pursuant to
the wording of the statute.
Now why this becomes a major a
major issue for the tribe's is
that during this past year
tribes that had little to every
possible source of revenue.
I'm like states.
We cannot collect property tax
so we are limited in the kinds
of tax we can collect.
You can talk about an income tax
into a very recently you had
such high levels of poverty on
Indian reservations that that
was not really a feasible means
of taxation.
Are the majority in the past
year the majority tribal revenue
generators and normally tribal
businesses.
Have been closed you have
tourism facilities hospitality
talent he facilities in gaming
casinos they have all been
closed in fact Actimize is still
close to the state.
At the same time tribes as
employers
Had you eight make the hard
choice of whether to keep
trained employees employed.
or.
Act.
Cognizant of the fact that it
was one of the largest employers
in all of Cibola county New
Mexico kept its employees on the
payroll through October when he
could no longer afford to.
And that of course helped the
local economy.
They are that's fine for now if
there's any specific questions
we get to the bill will come
back to to to you act.
All right.
So.
Senator McKenna.
Yes chairman okay so
we did with the.
So yeah we make the motion for
discussion purposes only so are
the any questions on the
amendments from a committee
members.
Chairman a move adoption of the
amendment okay so from a motion
to adopt the amendment by
Senator Padilla.
Mr chair I second this is
Senator Hamblen Senator Hamblen
second of a lane can you place a
to grow.
Senator Brandt.
Yes yes Senator Griggs yes.
Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Hickey.
Yes Senator had a meal yes
Senator Kernan yes
Representative yes Senator
Tallman.
Yes.
Senator Wirth.
Senator Wirth Senator Padilla
yes Senator Shendo yes.
Ten then one excused okay so the
amendment has been adopt this
you have an amended bill and
since you already talked about
the the.
Explain the bill will go to the
public right now.
Three ninety seven we will go
directly to the public was with
us here today to hear from those
who oppose the bill and to
oppose the bill and wish to
speak please raise your hands
now.
With that we will go to those
who registered in advance to
speak in support of the bill
beginning with Robert Apodaca.
Dennis Wanyama.
Hello can you hear me yes.
Yes good afternoon Mister
chairman and members of the
committee my name is Dennis one
you have I am currently that tax
and revenue director for the
bubble Act money and I'm also
representing I just chair person
of the Pueblo tax administrators
coalition which represents
nineteen the the nineteen
pueblos in in the state of New
Mexico I fully support SP three
ninety seven don't really have
much to say as Senator McKenna
and and Rogers explained it very
well I just like to add that we
just to pueblo we like to
continue the need to generate
revenues especially through the
G. R. T. I again when we look to
we're looking to raised is to be
able to disable or to the public
right at eight percent the state
will be benefiting from that as
well as benefiting from the
increased and many the
administrative fee as it
increased tax thank you very
much.
Thank you next up we have
governor Brian fellow.
Good afternoon chairman Shendo
and members of the committee I'm
governor Brian bio the public
outcome and I am sure to voice
the bubbles strong support of
Senate bill three ninety seven.
The present joint powers
agreement concerning the
collection and reporting of
gross receipts as an example of
an agreement the committee can
benefit both Indian tribes in
the state however there is a
problem with the the law
governing these agreements and
those bills intended to correct
that problem under outcome was
tax agreement for gross receipts
sales and similar taxes
qualified trouble taxes that
taxation and revenue may collect
on behalf of the tribe are
capped by the tax rate of the
county or municipality within
the tribe's boundaries for
outcome of that is Cibola County
where the tax rate is six point
eight one two five percent
however act was gross receipts
tax rate is eight percent the
neighboring city of requests has
a slightly higher rate of eight
point one two five percent the
cap on the tribal tax the state
will collect on behalf of an
Indian tribe is based on the
definition of a qualifying Tax
in the wall it is not something
that can be addressed
administratively if not this
Senate bill three ninety seven
with the man the decision the
definition of a qualifying jobs
for the purposes of the joint
powers agreements when
collecting leader.
This would allow for the state
to collect the tribal tax at the
same or greater right just a tax
rate of the county or
municipality within the tribe's
boundaries.
All I come up could not tax less
than Cibola County it could
taxed at higher rate and still
have the tax collected pursuant
to the joint powers agreement.
During this pandemic apple has
not been able to take full
advantage of the tools available
to support tribal programs and
services okay see no remains
closed and it just.
Only one of our tribal
businesses that is not
generating revenue as such it is
essential that the state collect
and we recover our full gross
receipts tax.
This amendment increases the
revenue that accuracy was
pursuant to the joint powers
agreement and we ask for your
support Senate bill three ninety
seven thank you very much.
Thank you governor and thank you
for joining us this morning or
F. yeah afternoon now.
Thank you.
Okay.
We have any other members of the
public with us who wish to voice
their support for Senate bill
three ninety seven this is your
last opportunity please raise
your hand.
Thank you very much that
concludes public comment at this
time.
Okay thank you so now we'll go
to the.
The committee any questions from
the committee.
Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman and and so
I'm just this is completely new
to me I didn't even though we
did this
and so help me to understand.
So the.
I didn't realize that the state
had to give authority to the
tribes to charge tax
Mr Chairman I I'm I guess I'm
just not understanding exactly
what we're doing in the bill I
don't believe it's in four G.
but it's.
All have and robbers address
that.
And US senator you're absolutely
correct the state can not.
Limit the amount of a tax that
are tried.
Has the sovereign authority to
set it next.
Pursuant to these joint powers
agreement.
Cremins which are otherwise very
beneficial for both the state
and the tried.
This law that we're seeking to
change right now limits what our
tribe can have the state collect
okay.
That's what we're getting at.
I think I get it now thank you
Mr chairman I appreciate it so
it's really about the mechanism.
The right now all the tribes of
entered into an agreement with
the state to act as the look
just for lack of a better term
the tax collector.
To bring that money in and then
giving it out as it's supposed
to be under the laws that that I
can get that right.
Yes okay good right that that
that makes a lot more sense to
me I was to move trying to
figure it out read through the
analysis and just sometimes we
just have to put as clear as we
can for right so and then
there's I I I guess the state
then keeps a portion of that for
for doing that for the tribes is
that the twenty five percent.
Chairman.
Percent is as an administrative
to be now there is to cover the
cost of the state collecting.
The staff out of transactions
where it is unclear who may or
may not have the taxing
authority.
and instead of litigating those
issues over and over and over
again as some states do and
costing the state and the tribes
kind of money the state of New
Mexico and the tribes have
entered into the joint powers
agreements which provide for
those class the transactions
seventy five percent of the tax
will go to the tribe twenty five
percent will go to the state and
that the state uses that to
credit it to the state gross
receipts tax and local option
tax for that locality with in
the tribal boundaries so that
the state takes it now takes
some to see bullet county and
some to the state and then there
may be some leftover.
Under this bill it reverts to
the general fund.
The provision it's not always
easy to see.
But it states that and section
eight withstanding any other
provision of law to the contrary
the amount of credit taken laut
shall be applied proportionately
against the amount of gross
receipts tax and local option
gross receipts taxes and they
get the amount of the
distribution of those taxes
pursuant to section seven dash
one dash six we won NMSA
nineteen seventy eight and if
you go to section seven dash one
dash six point one it provides
whatever you make the
distribution whatever's left
goes into the general fund.
Okay thank you very much I
appreciate that it just helps
helps me understand the issue if
it comes up again and as I wrote
on this bill thank you thank you
Mr chairman.
Thank you all.
I don't see any other.
Hands up so what is the pleasure
of the committee Mr chair.
Last DELLOSO Senators Sanches so
the motion for do pass and
seconded by Senator Padilla.
Lane can you please call Rowe.
Senator Brandt yes.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen.
Yes.
Yes Senator hada meel yes
Senator Kernan yes Senator said
just yes Senator Tallman.
Madam.
Yes.
Senator Wirth.
He's not here Senator Tallman
back to you.
Yes Senator Padilla.
Senator Shendo yes ten to one
one half lengths used thank you
senator McCain I do have a due
pass it back to you Senator
McKenna.
Thank you very much and members
I really appreciate your time
and deliberation and I also want
to thank our subject matter
expert missed and Rogers and the
governor for joining us today.
Thank you.
All right we're now move on to
the Senate bill four thirteen I
know you know this is not here
we did have this discussion but
I believe a Senator Kernan is
going to go but this bill.
Well thank you Mr chairman I'm
going to introduce the bill and
then hopefully Adrian with the
LFC is my expert witness and I
see John guest bridge are on
there John this is Adrian
available to help with this.
Yes I am here Senator okay well
I Mr chair I could I'll just
turn it over to to Adrian to
explain bill thank you okay go
ahead I would much Mr chair
Senators this bill more than
anything is supplement is what.
You are you know.
And can others mute your mikes.
Thank you Adrian go head start
again of course so this bill is
meant to supplement the
broadband initiatives that are
being championed by Senator
Padilla and by Senator
representatives in the house and
it's meant to solve that last
critical piece so we can
actually reach that last mile
and strengthen our middle mile
network so what it does this
bill allows our communities to
build.
And leverage all of the existing
infrastructure so any
infrastructure owned by the
cities and infrastructure on by
the counties and infrastructure
owned by the state anymore
streamlined fashion so that way
we can lease it out and
companies can then build out
from there to actually make it
financially viable to reach a
provide internet service to our
most rural communities and also
to increase our capacity to make
our internet quality better
which will at the end benefit
pretty much everyone around
the committee substitute you
have before you has a few
changes from when we talked last
we included.
Hi definition of uncertain
underserved that aligns with the
baseline standards promoted by
the FCC making it clear that
this tool is meant to be used to
reach those people it's not
meant to compete with industry
it's not meant to over bills
it's meant to facilitate and
reduce the overall cost of being
able to build out broadband for
the whole state it also makes
sure and cleans up the provision
the anti corruption prevention
so that weight in the event that
a franchise gets developed
between counties and cities and
municipalities and the state no
one who's serving on that board
ends up you know being I and you
know and up into doing things
that go against the interests of
the state and the public's
interest and trust that we have
in them so we've strengthen that
provision in here as well in
regards to the other part the
bonding that is meant as a last
resort pool for funding because
the reality is the state right
now has money we're putting in a
hundred thirty three million
into broadband we're trying to
leverage well above a billion
from federal funds but based on
do it's report they estimate it
could take up to five billion to
complete everything and that's a
high limit.
This provides a tool where we're
able to use revenue bonds and
only revenue from leasing out
the state's infrastructure
leasing it out the counties
infrastructure our
municipalities infrastructure to
private companies use that to
pay back bonds so we can keep
expanding the state's
infrastructure or even just
operating and maintaining.
So that we we can provide that
service to to our people on this
call under zoom as well we do
have mark Edwards who is the
drafters who can give you the
context of where he got the bond
language what we're borrowing it
has existed in statute since two
thousand two and has been used
successfully there is statutory
support for it and then on top
of that we also have Clinton who
are you all requested his
opinion in regards to the funds
you can also speak to that so I
would like to differ right now
to Mr Edwards Mister chair if
that's okay with you.
That's fine good job.
Mr chair members the committee
my name is mark Edwards I'm a
staff for the Legislative
Council Service I'm here purely
for cancer technical questions
and if I happen to.
I give a personal opinion that's
my opinion and not that of the
council service.
I stand ready for questions
Hi
language from the language used
in statute for teachers need.
Hi if you're familiar with the.
Their number of and my teacher
housing units outside of Gallup
better way out from any sort of
major infrastructure that were
built through a our.
The bond process or a or a
program very similar to the one.
Design here for the transient.
And that's where it came from
that's where the language can.
Thank you mark.
And then at Clinton if you'd
like to chime in if that's okay
Mister chair.
Go ahead.
Mr chair in senators just has Mr
Edwards said I I work for the
Legislative Council Service I'm
not here in support of the bill
or in opposition to the bill
just if you have any or if you
any of the senators of this
committee have any questions
that I can do my best to answer
there's a few I think in the
initial committee and if those
are still outstanding but and if
I can do anything answer those
I'll do my best right now all
right thank you.
Okay with that of Senator Kernan
will go to we have a substitute
bill so that yes I was just
gonna ask about that if we need
to do not pass it on that.
Is that we did do not pass some
for for thirteen a day pass on
committee substitute for Senate
bill four thirteen for
discussion.
Great.
All right.
So with that we will go to the
public.
Percent and for thirteen we did
not have any members of the
public register in advance to
speak in opposition if there are
any members of the public who
wish to speak in opposition
how's your time please raise
your hand.
And with that we'll go to the
members of the public who wish
to speak in favor beginning with
Scott Scanlon.
The good afternoon Mister
chairman members of the
committee Scott Scanlon
registered lobbyists for the
southwest cable association and
we appreciate very much the
opportunity to work with the
senator on on the substitute the
changes that were made we
believe really strengthen the
bill we believe the bills.
Builds on the work that Senator
Padilla and others I have been
doing on broadband and we stand
and very very strong support of
the bill thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you next up we have
Catherine Nicolau.
Missy Currier.
There and members of the public
who wish to speak in support of
Senate bill forty thirteen
please raise your hand we will
begin with Catherine crocea.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is captain Kirk Shada and I'm a
registered lobbyist for eighteen
AT&T would like to first thank
senator Munoz for bringing for
thirteen forward we believe this
bill provides more opportunities
to provide better service to
customers throughout New Mexico
specifically and the high cost
and difficult to reach
underserved areas of our state
Senate bill four thirteen will
help in solving middle mile
connectivity barriers by
providing more backhaul for
networks we urge your support.
Thank you very much.
Thank you very much that
concludes public comment at this
time.
Okay great so now we're a.
On the bill with the questions
from committee members.
Senator Brandt.
Mr Chairman
Senator I I guess I.
Trying to catch up a little bit
here what is the changes that
were making on the committee
some of due to the original bill
and let me just address my main
concern.
On this bill is the eminent
domain issue so if you could
address that specifically our.
Mr chair Senator eminent domain
has been a hundred percent cut
next eliminated from the bill
it's not existed.
So we're no longer giving
private companies the right to
take people's property for the
purpose of putting a broadband
well that and and and and the
provision of regionally was for
getting the state or public
entities from taking private
companies
property or anyone else property
but we decided let's eliminate
all that and just leave it with
the regular admin domain however
that process works because it
there's case law and we want to
touch it I appreciate that thank
you that was one that was my
biggest concern on this and
trying to figure this out you
know the city of Rio Rancho has
come to me many many times
asking me to support changing
the eminent domain laws because
of our antiquated planning and I
have an every the minute willing
to support that so definitely
not gonna support for the so I'm
glad that that part of the bills
been taken out thank you.
So there's no other questions I
would make the to pass.
Thank you.
Mr chair thank you made it I'm
sorry yes of course thank you.
Okay we have a due process
motion by Senator Kernan and
then the second by Griggs so
late can you please to grow.
Senator Brandt yes Senator
Griggs yes Senator Hamblen just.
Senator Hickey yes.
You pass yes yes please.
Senator had a meal yes Senator
Kernan yes senator Sanchez.
Yes Senator Tallman
Senator Wirth.
No.
Senator Hickey.
no.
Senator Padilla.
No Senator Shendo.
yes.
Seven in the affirmative for in
the negative so it got to do.
Thank you so Mister thank you
and then the.
We are not doing in
Well what a we'll do that
tomorrow of I believe senator
Munoz has another.
Forty four thirty eight.
The current.
Thank you again Mr chair.
That with me today I have John
Gaspard to this the expert this
who will just turn it over to
him to.
So Mr Chairman.
And I think we have a
background noise.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Some of you may know of for
number of years in house bill
two
The legislature has employed
what's been referred to as not
withstanding language which
basically allows.
The state to ignore existing
law.
And as you may also know Senator
Yost very dim view of this
practice and we basically set
out to eliminate all the not
withstanding language in house
bill two.
The bill before you today
addresses one of those instances
are one when we looked at this
particular.
standing language we found that
it was to enable the finance
authority to New Mexico finance
authority New Mexico
transportation department to our
finance and facilitate of
bonding of highway projects.
The end consultation with the
finance authority we we
determined that the easiest way
to eliminate the need for the
not withstanding language was to
eliminate at a statute that is
had fallen into obsolescence
and had and have been used in a
number of years and so what this
what this bill does is very
short bill the additional images
section of law that is no longer
in use and with that Mr chairman
I'd be happy to respond to any
questions.
Okay thank you with that will go
to the public.
Senate bill four thirty eight
will go directly to the public
first off if you wish to speak
in opposition to Senate bill
four thirty eight please raise
your hand.
If you wish to speak in support
of Senate bill four thirty eight
please raise your hand.
Thank you that concludes public
comment.
Okay thank you know we'll go to
the committee any questions from
committee.
I do not see in the hands of the
committee so what is the
pleasure of the committee I'm
just looking for the past
present second.
That Senator Padilla Senator
Padilla a second.
Okay thanks coro.
Senator Brandt.
Yes.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen.
Yes Senator Hickey yes Senator
Hotmail yes Senator Kernan yes
the census yes Senator Tallman
yes Senator Wirth yes Senator
Padilla.
Yes Senator Shendo yes eleven in
the affirmative Senator.
Great well we're gonna have
Senator Kernan care my bills as
well you better have a good
expert that's all I'm saying.
Thank you so
Just for the folks
Will will go to the next one
we'll try to maybe do a hard
stop at two o'clock.
So that we folks can have a
little bit time before you get
onto the floor session so with
that we'll go to HB twenty one
we have a.
Representative Garrett yes I'm
here.
Witnesses Brian conduct.
And is she here.
The.
Is Brian Condit on.
Okay.
Okay let me start house bill
twenty one is the public works
project contributions it cleans
up technical language in the
public works apprenticeship
training act popularly known as
P. what and it requires
contractors in construction
category eight to either make
contributions to a company's
apprentice and training program
of their own or if they do not
affiliate or have their own
opinion ship programs they make
donations to the public works
apprentice and training fund for
all for all only to public works
construction projects.
What we are striving to expand
job opportunities across the
state in all industries
workforce categories and we
never shortages of many of the
skilled labor positions of this
bill promotes the expansion of
apprenticeship programs in the
state and it encourages
industries to either join start
or support existing
apprenticeship programs and I I
want to point out we already
have forty one registered with
the department of workforce
solutions they include program
sponsored by private industry
and companies I mean this
apologies there's of four
trades and farming can of their
registered apprenticeships and
by labor organizations we have
over eighteen hundred registered
apprentices in these programs so
the player can make
contributions to its own
registered and approved
apprentice program which should
it when it's in part to
participate in a public works
program or they can contribute
to the P. what program if you
don't have your own program you
only is Jerry then you pay sixty
cents per man hour for every
construction employee when
you're doing a public works
project and let's just want to
add a couple more things under
the current law which has been
in place for almost five decades
of the public works minimum wage
act there's four types of
construction eight B. C. and H.
B. as general building C. as
residential and ages heavy
engineering they all
participate in the Pequot
program or the partnership
program so this law would
require type eighty contractors
which includes street highway
utility and light engineering
construction to participate in
their con.
Should be oceans on either to a
registered apprenticeship
program yet or he what
contribution and including I
just want to say I really
believe this is a win win but
most of all for young New
Mexicans as they seek to
identify and go up the career
ladder or change careers it's a
powerful commitment on our part
to the training of the use I've
been impressed the associated
general contractors of New
Mexico not only participate in
the program but they actually
ten years ago open the doors to
the ace leadership high school
which many of you have heard of
it's an authorized state public
charter school that specializes
in preparing students for
careers in architecture
construction and engineering and
it's an example of how you can
prepare pre apprenticeship
programs and and really work to
develop our future work fat
workforce I would like to ask my
expert witness to make a few
comments before we open for
questions so it it Brian Condit
could say a few words.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Ryan
conduct our.
I'm still muted note no no
you're fine of go ahead.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee Brian conduct
executive director of the New
Mexico building trades council
all we have we have long long
supported a partnership in New
Mexico it's it's a wonderful
career path an opportunity
in types B. C. N. H. this
mechanism is help support of the
private contributions into
apprenticeship and allowed us to
expand them all broadly across
the construction industry and I
think after fifty years of
Taipei construction are being
polluted in the public works a
partnership and writing Act
thank you.
And Mr chairman with that we
turn it over to the committee
for questions okay before the
committee I like to go to
public.
Our house bill twenty one we
will begin with those who
register to speak in opposition
beginning with general Garcia.
Jane turned again.
Morning Mr chair members of the
committee chairman again with
New Mexico utility contractors
association and we do support
apprenticeship programs however
many public works contractors in
Taipei do not have access to or
have a partnership programs in
place and therefore would be
forced to pay into a fund that
they could not receive a benefit
from our industry and crafts
that do not have approved
apprenticeship programs are
still highly trained and are
held to the same second.
All public works contractors
including state and federal
safety standards this will raise
the cost of projects and lessen
the value of the taxpayer dollar
I have a couple of examples of
contractors number one is two
hundred eighty five thousand man
hours last year on public works
projects they spent a hundred
and twenty thousand dollars a
year on their own training this
would mean an extra hundred and
seventy one thousand dollars.
Thank you next up we have
Richard mon toria.
All right now we will go to the
public for
we will continue with those who
are here but did not register if
you do wish to speak in
opposition house bill twenty one
please raise your hand make
banks.
So.
Mr chairman and honorable
members of the committee thank
you for letting me speak my name
is Nate banks I am a registered
lobbyist for Americans for
prosperity New Mexico we oppose
this bill this is an improper
use of government to force
taxpayers to fund training New
Mexico should focus on licensing
reform and other employment
barriers rather than intervening
in this way thank you so much
and hope you have a wonderful
day.
Thank you now we will go to
those who wish to speak in favor
of the bill beginning with peak
Trujillo.
Adam Valdez.
Rhonda Gilliland Lopez.
And now if you wish to speak in
support of the bill please raise
your hand beginning with John
representative.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee John Lipschutz
with The New Mexico federation
of labor AFL-CIO.
We stand in strong support of
this measure we have actually
for the last few years and thank
the sponsor for once again
bringing this up this really is
a measure about fairness and
about training our future
workforce and both things as
well should be a priority for
our legislature we hope that we
can count on your support and
thank you very much.
Thank you very much.
Two individuals who are unable
to raise their hands in those
individuals where Jim Garcia
followed by Daniel so.
Jim Garcia.
Yes thank you chairman members
of the committee my name is Jim
Garcia I am the executive
director of the associated
contractors of New Mexico the
heavy highway Division we
represent over five thousand
employees the bill New Mexico
highways we are strongly opposed
to this bill for number of
reasons first of all a CNN has a
number of specific training
programs.
To access and and also to TTC
rate TTC P. that are
strategically designed just to
to train employees that work in
the second.
So we are we are in opposition
to this for a number of reasons
the heavy highway is the exact
since the mid ninety since it
began because of our specific
specified training with that
thank you for your time.
Thank you and finally we have
Daniel Silva.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee members appreciate the
service he performed for our
state I'm not opposed to house
bill twenty one because that the
private sector the contractors
and the department of
transportation DOT already
performing their training and
certification requirements that
required by the Federal Highway
Administration and we have a
very good program that has been
an aspect for many years
supported by previous.
Legislators and and poses the
this is a our legislation
requires one department to pay
for training to be done by
another department workforce
solution so we're already are
paying for that but every I did
this legislation requires one
department to pay another
department for something that's
already been done satisfactory
thank you Mr chairman committee
members appreciate you giving me
this.
Thank you very much that
concludes public comment.
Okay thank you will now go to
the committee for questions.
Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative good to see you
help me out with the bill so
we're going to have anyone who
doesn't have their own.
Of.
Internship program.
pay into so have a the tax of I
believe about sixty cents an
hour.
To
Be paid to the state that then
goes where.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator for that next slide
question the P. White funds go
to they're spread out among the
registered.
Membership programs.
Percent of goes to the
department of workforce
solutions and that rest which
was I want to say a million four
hundred thousand last year is
distributed to the registered
apprenticeship programs but I
want to re emphasize that come
but when you have your own
apprenticeship program you don't
rate if you want money.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Representative I I.
Think I actually reiterated that
myself.
But some that's sorry.
We need so.
Is the Representative the
companies that have their own
apprenticeship program is
approved who approved that.
Mr chairman and senator it goes
through the department of
workforce solutions X..
Hi process it's very actually
easy to do.
They have to be getting some
kind of certificate through that
Mr Chairman representative of
through the approved
apprenticeship program or is it
just.
Approved program.
Mr chairman and senator I think
Mike's expert witness can do
more details but there's basic
outlines Mr Condit can you
comment on that.
Yes Mr chairman members of the
committee R. Senator Brandt up
pretty ship programs in New
Mexico and United States have
two levels of certifications
state apprenticeship council
certification all and the your
project training US department
of labor training so all up
programs in New Mexico are
required to have both.
Thank you I'm sorry I had to get
up but the the office next to me
was being very loud I need to
shut my door so good likely my
answer.
so I I appreciate that
The money so so what approved
apprenticeship programs exist in
the state that this money would
actually goes to.
Mr chairman and senator there's
forty one approved programs and
again as I said in my opening
remarks they include municipal
apprenticeship such as the one
in Farmington private companies
and industries that have their
programs and labor organizations
that have programs.
Mr Chairman representative of
with do they get.
Just a cut of that or is it
based on how many apprentice.
How many people they have in the
program how is that the rate
out.
Mr chairman and and senator
Brett you know the answer to
that Mr Condit.
Yes ma'am they take the they
take a resources of that are
sent into the public works
appreciate assistance act fund
and divided amongst all of the
act of a pretty sure programs
and based the remittance on
contact hours per apprenticed so
it varies from the larger
partnership programs
yelp maybe fifty or sixty
thousand dollars a year to some
of the smaller programs that get
us substantially less and I
think the con tact our
contribution was eighty cents if
I'm not mistaken this this last
year two thousand and twenty.
Okay thank you I appreciate that
so them to and allows them to
defer the cost of instructors
training caustics federal the
budgets for apprenticeship
programs in the larger ones are
significantly higher than that
and that is contributed by all
by.
By private contributions from
private employers for instance
the national laboratories they
subscribe to our contractors and
and our trading systems and
contribute hundreds of thousands
of dollars annually into
supporting apprenticeship up
that are used intern to give
opportunities statewide two of
fifteen different construction
cross across the state.
Thank you I appreciate the the
answer I I just don't know that
that I think it's.
That we want to add this
additional cost to our
construction projects in the
state.
And and force companies that
don't provide their own
apprenticeship program although
you know I think it's wise for
companies are large enough to do
that to do that
but I just not sure want to pass
it on just so we can raise more
money so that can be sent to
these programs are made the
properties being better with
funding these programs if that's
become the the issue is the
funding mechanism
I am not sure this is something
that I can support of think it's
going to raise the cost on
everything that we do when it
comes to construction services
within every budget and every
county every city in the state
and so that's that's where I
would have yes Representative
some difficulty with the thank
you very much.
Thank you Sir read Senator
Hamblen.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative care for bringing
this forward you know I'm a big
fan of apprenticeships and I
feel it's important to cultivate
new professionals in fields in
the work force where there is a
need and demand and and my
apologies if you've already
covered this but how does this
affect local businesses who
don't have apprenticeships and
that are required to pay into a
fund that doesn't directly
benefit the.
Mr chairman and and Senator
Hamblen this only applies to
public works projects that are
over sixty thousand dollars it
doesn't apply just to your local
you know little companies.
Mr Khan did you want to add
anything to that.
Be glad to Representative
Representative Garrett exactly
right up under the public works
minimum wage act of the covers
type A. B. C. and H. for
construction projects in New
Mexico over of value of sixty
thousand dollars
it gets incorporated into the
value of the project I I would
say that if you do the
calculations it is probably less
than one half of one percent on
the total value of of of a
construction budget or
Appropration coming from the
legislature and.
Okay thank you thank you Mr
chair thank you Representative
get that's all I have any
questions.
Okay thank you of the Senator
Sanchez.
Thank you Mr chair
Representative thanks for
bringing this bill so there's
not many projects that are under
sixty thousand right so the
small construction companies
that do bills on these public
works jobs which are most all of
over sixty thousand and if they
have let's say ten or fifteen
employees.
They will be paying that our the
range.
To something that will benefit
them.
Mr chairman and senator thank
you for your question.
Remember that it's not a
difficult thing to start an
apprenticeship program the kind
of training programs that one of
the commentators said are
exactly what finishes use when
you have an apprentice they
receive I think they're starting
wages half of what a jury then
receives so your costs when you
have apprentices actually do not
go up I'm Mr Condit would you
like to add something.
Yes thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee
so project over sixty thousand
dollars are covered under the
state's public works minimum
wage act which we require that
payment of wages and fringe
benefits including the P. what
training contribution for type
B. C. NH so as we said earlier
that's been an act for over
fifty years and we have a real
track record on the resources
that come from the budget of a
publicly funded construction
projects have paid off
drastically and providing
training opportunities up for
for young people choosing to up
start a career as a construction
proper question.
Mr chair of Representative
thanks thank you for your
response but there is a lot more
smaller construction companies
that do get these public works
jobs there sixty thousand and
over that that this won't they
don't get the like us Senator
Hamblen was saying it's it's
it's it would affect them.
Because they're not able to get
that benefit of it the company
that only has two hundred
fifteen employees it's not that
easy for them to start
apprenticeship.
And there's a lot more smaller
companies here in New Mexico.
That have that many employees
between ten and fifteen under
twenty there you know the like
of Senator Brandt said the
bigger companies test to see if
we're gonna start a partnership
with these companies that have
smaller.
With this bill that you bring
they will be paying into
something and.
You know
Up to twenty five hundred
dollars to three thousand
dollars a month on a fifteen
employee company.
At the end of the year times
twelve that's a lot of money for
them to give away where they can
employ another person.
Mr chairman and and senator
water remind you that you can
affiliate with existing
apprenticeship programs are you
don't have to start your own
program and already type B. C.
and H. R. companies are follow
this process only type a does
not follow this process.
Mr do you want to add anything
to that
thank thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee exactly
exactly correct
I I would say that not getting
the benefit out of something
that the owner in this case the
state is building into the cost
of their project isn't
necessarily a cost to the
employer all when they do at a
at a construction estimate and
engineers estimate on the value
of our project let's say for
instance an intersection or
bridge or overpass the the
engineers will take into of
account of the cost of materials
the cost of steel of dell take
in of the cost of labor they
will take in the cost of
training in this case and they
will build that into the total
value of the project so whether
you're a large employer or a
small lawyer whether you choose
to participate in apprenticeship
program or what the you don't
everybody is on an equal
footing.
Mr chair representative and
Thank you for that I appreciate
your.
Answer.
K.
I don't see any questions from
the members of the committee was
a pleasure could you pass Mr
chairman also for the past
senator Padilla
had a meal with the second the
second by Senator oatmeal.
So late please to grow.
Senator Brandt no ma'am.
Senator Griggs.
Senator Hamblen yes.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Hickey.
Senator how to meal yes.
Senator Kernan.
Senator Sanchez.
Out Senator Tomlinson yes.
Senator Wirth yes.
Senator Hickey yes.
Senator Padilla.
Yes Senator should.
yes it's seven in the
affirmative for the negative
Senator.
Okay good Representative have
you ever to pass Representative
Bogart.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee.
Thank you.
One two.
HB sure yes they said you're
going to.
it's one forty seven now and I
have a few bills on consent I'm
just wondering if we want to get
started on another bill.
There may be questions on that
what were you wanting to do sure
This is the Representative the.
Reem on.
Not then the.
Yep to Senate bill three oh six
and then the next series of
bills starting from two forty on
down are all of consent those
last five.
So
Senator Campos are you on.
If not we'll move on to of the
eight speed to forty those of
bills H. P. two forty ninety
ninety eight sixty six and two
seventy one of I visited with
the our ranking member and those
are of our own consent so of we
can just move those so one by
one so option of that Senate
bill I move for you pass for
Senate bill three oh six I'm
sorry house bill two forty as
amended Mr.
Second by Senator Kernan.
Any opposition to the motion.
See none.
Bill passes.
House bill ninety.
As amended.
do pass on house money isn't.
Second.
Second by current.
Any opposition to the motion.
See non revenue pass.
Senate bill ninety eight as
amended.
Mr Chairman I have a question on
that with us bill I'm sorry
house bill ninety eight as
amended.
Mr I did have a question on okay
go ahead I just if anyone who is
advocating for this one I don't
know that is different from what
we just did this morning into
ninety one inside your I see the
word omnibus so to make sure
that what we're doing there is.
Is.
Yes but this is Representative
Harper if you want to answer
that are you on okay good I am
so also chairman all right and
in Serbia I've gotten so many
questions about that title I
think that title is very
misleading the house bill ninety
eight and ninety are the tax
departments to administrative
cleanup bills that we worked on
together as far the tax policy
committee that the governor
organized the this is tax
cleanup.
I appreciate that Mr chairman
and and Representative when I
can't pass a bill after two
years in the third year I
changed the name of the bill
complete.
All right I appreciate that I'll
move you press a committee
substitute for house bill ninety
eight as amended.
All second second element.
Any opposition to the motion.
I see none.
Revenue passed house bill sixty
six K. as amended.
We do that we passed by Senator
Brandt.
By Senator Kernan and opposition
to the motion.
See none will do pasal sixty six
eight one as amended house bill
two seventy one.
Also moved.
All
comments second by the
opposition to the motion.
The line we have a two budget on
house bill two seventy one.
Thank you the members of the
committee you have a.
But one to three hours of
relaxation so go take a walk
walk the dog Representative a
good of.
Pre dinner and I will see you at
five o'clock on the floor Mr
Chairman wants to go to
everyone's going to Judiciary
with me I would love to have all
of your views and I think it's a
different club there we go.
Thank you thank you for your
afternoon and we'll see you here
in a bit thank you thank you
thank you letter.
