Two forty nine establishes the
same law passed in Colorado and
other states that requires
motorists to yield to public
transit buses only if they
display a lighted is your high
yield sign and are in the
process of merging back into
traffic from a bus stop this
bill was brought forward by the
New Mexico translation
transistors Yushin which is a
coalition of municipalities and
counties that provide public
transit services by passing this
bill will help decrease
accidents and make merging into
traffic the state for action for
motorists and the drivers of
those public buses and also save
about ten seconds find stop your
mouth person you can kind of do
the ads that adding that up
which will significantly help us
is.
Stay on schedule what the
supplies to our buses that carry
fourteen more people and will
also be applicable if a bus is
displaying a sign that the owner
of the transit bus voluntarily
chooses to install with existing
resources and my experts here
today's JD Bullington is a
lobbyist for the New Mexico
transit Association and so at
this point and open it up for
discussion Mr chair.
that's super sweet simple and
sweet that will go out there
audience's leaders.
Here.
The.
Here so we're talking about two
lines of track the.
Direction the best ones it back
in I'm not quite sure part of
that folder just pick up one in
so that whatever is brought in
and the need to stop.
And let it pass.
Madam chair committee I'll go
ahead and that I appreciated
listening to them Mister
chairman Senator Kernan that's
correct this only applies to
buses that pull over and and
they're at that a bus stop.
And then if state if that
transit Department that boss
decides to install a lighted
sign they display the sign and
it works just like any other
yield sign motorists are
supposed to yield to let the bus
back into traffic and I do want
to add that this is one hundred
percent a voluntary program
because there are there
obviously said he's with more
population where this is
becoming more of an issue
Albuquerque Los crucis sometimes
answer Rios in Santa Fe.
If this is not an issue at all
and Alamogordo or the lan or
most luminous or in Carlsbad you
don't have to do it and it's
basically the program there's no
there's no you'll deal to bus
program in these communities
because there's not a problem
there's no need to put the signs
up.
Was that the borough head shake
like a whistle.
Also
of the
rules and they were appointed.
At.
The the the chief so.
okay.
Or thank you Mr chair the
question about the definition of
half of the million.
The four four.
Thirteen people maximum.
I.
The
the.
Heather the dust is that do we.
it has.
What what impact that the
installer is.
I did try to make sure I
understand what we're what we're
exactly here how that works Mr
chairman senator Wirth we're
we're exempting from the shuttle
vans for senior citizens point
is you know teams like that this
is really this is written to
only apply to transit buses and
also it's one hundred percent
voluntary.
Fairways practice providers of
your.
This.
Yeah the question it is a
passenger and
I.
Right all that on there because
even if they do the exam passes
a better definition of.
I.
The level of thousands or
millions that.
That money qualify.
Mister chairman Senator where
there is a definition of transit
bus on page eight line fifteen.
That.
Okay so what about the.
The operator of math the
operator of the law enforcement
officers.
The Mr chairman senator Wirth I
guess it might you know I have
to think about that more it
might but again it is completely
voluntary.
Okay I'm just standing there I
think a public maximize operator
Sierra finalize plans online in
the they may want to have some
staff that often are the way
that passenger there is.
I.
The whole one thousand of a
qualified.
And I think that's okay online
okay I just want to make sure it
is we have a limitation what is
your next question wiring passes
that why not have them on that
mission that we are one of them
this is what you Mr chairman
senator Wirth it's strictly
because the bill was written for
for transit buses and we didn't
want to create the impression
that there be some kind of new
onerous burden on every single
little passenger van that
carries less than fourteen
people even though it's still
voluntary.
Representative Harper Bernays
that same model is a state
programs.
I mean if you got move off of
our system.
Those are those are full.
Current qualified for this yes
that will well I yeah I plan on.
Things is I see what I do.
What we are offering you're
fully up to the.
If I may I Mr chairman senator
Wirth once again I think I think
this would only be implemented
in the cities that have some
rush hour traffic problems it's
you know it's kind of stressful
being a bus driver and you know
when you're trying to maintain a
schedule in your lives in ten
seconds to stop it adds up and
every everyone gets angry thank
you.
What else.
Is the.
But we tend to think.
It will motion for the passenger
Department.
For the second.
Mmhm so Senator called for
second okay any of opposition to
the the past move.
None do have a due pass.
Thank you to.
Eight zero eight two zero right.
Thank you.
All righty
I'm gonna go ahead.
Do.
The two.
The
fourth.
Two four two percent okay.
All right we have a Senator
Shendo so just let you know we
are rolling Senate bill seventy
six and Senate bill three oh
three the sponsors of asked us
to roll those.
So now we are on Senate bill
four seventy four and to keep
Senator Shendo up there we will
also hear Senate bill three
ninety six right afterwards.
So this is Senate bill for
seventy four school district in
the tax payments.
It's all your etcetera etcetera.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee Senate
bill four seventy four school
district in lieu of tax payments
What Senate bill four seventy
four addresses is an inequity
created by us back in the two
thousand twenty one.
The legislature a chain total
Lewin tax payments were
distributed to schools by
counties or municipalities that
issue industrial revenue bonds
for renewable energy projects.
just going to give you a little
background prior to to two
twenty one the law required the
bill payments to be distributed
hundred percent of the school
district which the project was
Joe Rafferty located the two
twenty one the twenty twenty one
law of required the the bill
payments to be divided between
all districts located in the
county or mentality that issue
the R. B. for a renewable
projects.
The one size fits all approach
of two thousand twenty one law
did not create an equitable
solution for splitting the loot
of the bill payments.
The Senate bill four seventy
four amends industrial revenue
bond act and and a county
additional revenue bond act
change health require in the
pavement tax payments is
distributed among the school
districts in the in the counties
or municipalities the changes in
Senate bill four seventy four
will not affect any of the
issues prior to the twenty to
twenty twenty three those
payments will continue to be
distributed as they are
currently being distributed.
So we did a created calculation
in here but we probably like the
discussed a little further as
well but with me here is Gianna
of Gruner she does the most Mr
most Carroll of school district
of and I'm gonna have a roll of
of the bill about what her and
her of her issue there thank you
thank you and Madam chairman
members of the board or the
committee I just a want to
express that one of the as this
came to our understanding when
we began discussing our bees and
Harding County
my experience my background was
the nature that that to.
The industrial revenue bonds
would be a huge asset to our
school district specifically
miss Carol has a very small
population we have the ability
to generate a very very small
capital outlay through bonding
and and so this was something
that was going to help us
maintain an update upkeep in our
school districts and so then I
figured out that in twenty
twenty one the law was changed
and that actually split the
distribution equally among all
the school districts in the
county Harding County happens to
be in a scenario where we have
three school districts that have
property within the boundaries
of the county the current
scenario the way the law reads
as president would require that
thirty three percent of the tax
revenue generated and Harding
County be sent to a school
district that is actually
located in quite County so
specifically this created a
concern for me were Harding
County is probably the it is the
least populated and one of the
most rural counties in the
nation that we would actually be
taking a rare opportunity to
generate tax revenue within our
county and sending it to a
neighboring county just because
they have a school district with
a very very small foot print
within the county so that school
district makes up in this
scenario about four percent of
the county
so the fact that they are
receiving thirty three percent
it significantly affects what
that that allocation would be to
Harding County otherwise if the
law were left intact the way it
was prior to twenty twenty or
considers how we have
come up with a solution to to
move forward in order to keep
fire bees
favorable and renewable energy
projects moving forward.
So that's the consideration.
There are other counties as well
I think in taking a look at the
at the numbers Sandoval County
we have we have payments valley
school district which in your
it in the in the fiscal impact
report actually
Shows it to be hema springs but
it is actually him as valley
school district that I recently
had a and I are be passed in
their district that
was under the twenty twenty one
long and consequently had to be
split five ways between all the
school districts that are within
or at least have a bit of a
footprint within Sandoval County
that includes
Albuquerque public school
district Rio Rancho public
school district so and even
proportion of that money is
spent to those much larger
school districts where the
majority of their not
particularly in APS is outside
of the county boundary so it
created creates an inequity for
school district rural school
dress district when our asset
that we would have to be able to
generate additional tax revenues
based on on at warm Tax etcetera
is basically taken away from us
and distributed to other school
districts who have other tax
base opportunities online some
of us in the more rural areas.
Thank you.
okay so at this point we're
going to go ahead and open it up
into the audience is there
anybody here in the audience
that is in support of this
legislation just by show of
hands.
Okay we have quite a few I do
want to be just cognizant of
time so I'm gonna go ahead and
take to from this type side into
from the site if you want to go
ahead and.
Get up and let's keep your
comments to a minute if you
would like to if you don't want
to actually you know what
etcetera etcetera how many are
in opposition of this bill.
All right let's note that how
many online anybody online.
Okay
you want to have full access to
fiery yeah I like to hear okay
so let's go head to the side and
two from the study.
We are trying to get things done
in a timely manner so if you
will please come on up.
Did you need to come up in
senators so that we can hear you
on the microphone.
Madam chair members of the
committee I am Kodi Sumpter from
the point school district time
the superintendent and we stand
in favor of this bill we have a
very similar scenario in our
district as was described in Mr
when him as valley.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Jill
Culbertson from the heavily
populated county part.
Population six hundred and ten.
And
Cattle population of thirty five
thousand.
But anyway you can see how small
we are and how much we need this
and there's a project that's
coming.
Too hard for the promoted that
come to a Harding County for
solar.
panels field and it's going to
be in the most Carroll school
district we feel like that was
care all about to get eight
fifty percent.
Of that and then the rest of be
divided among all three school
districts that have a footprint
in the county thank you very
much thank you.
I'm Amanda Culbertson I'm a vice
president of miscarriage school
board and I'm supported this
build not only for our small
school but for other small
schools in the state.
Right the last one.
Hi Kathy Trujillo Wiseman
heinous valley school board
secretary and we are in support
of this bill rural schools it's
always difficult so
we are very much in favor for
this as we are very small.
Representative I guess I saw
that you raise your hand you
want to go ahead make a comment.
Madam chair all stand is school
board member for unicycles it's
different in the rural schools
it's harder for us to be able to
get funding hear from other
sources so us tennis poor I'm
still a little bit worried I was
trying to explain superintendent
we had an I. R. B. with your
Ranko USA I don't know how that
will structure but I like the
idea of this bill thank you
Senator.
Right now we go to the committee
any questions from the
committee.
Besides that.
Sure thing Senator Kernan.
Thank you and I remember at the
R. the that was done in Lee
County right by clicking as
schools they receive the funding
as well as a junior college
because that serves a whole area
as well as a hospital that
Unisys school districts that
benefit it just a show of and I
think you know I remember this
bill a couple years ago and it
was a hard pill for them to give
it up and make concessions in
order to get some support for
that bill and I think it
probably was in the state and
I've.
The idea that we're that project
is cited for the most part with
when when you know when I say go
across wider areas that you want
them that's a more concise area
that in in maybe that's the
reason for sharing that for the
most part that the districts
that
this is side of most of that
should go I think fifty percent
is very fair and then distribute
the rest seven in some
particular way that
you know these are reported to
schools and that we need to make
sure there's some fairness there
so I certainly support the
having listened more comments
thank you senator Senator Lopez.
Thank you madam chair is there.
Excuse me I personally wanted
to.
This is limited to just a
smaller.
Or in other words for rural
communities or is this going to
be something that affects you
know Albuquerque Los crucis
Santa Fe in other locations.
Madam chair in the Senate
Senator Lopez I believe it it
affects on we're a joke
practically the project is
located
in for instance if the worst
located somewhere in near
Albuquerque an Albuquerque
school district is.
In that then they would probably
benefit if no other schools are
around there so the PS will
prevent that hundred percent of
things but in rural areas we
have large geographic areas of
multiple schools districts
within federal graphic area in
that county then that student
when the the split happens.
And I appreciate because just in
case somebody's watching out
there early Saturday morning to
see but just just for some
clarification.
And I persisted here and is
going on here in the back were
and L. E. S. C. did propose a
bill is working its way through
session as it does mention.
That
Capital financing the public's
going our way act and I get it.
for summer school districts as
to how you manage your money for
capital for capital projects
building a new facility of
school just so.
The kind of help you know that
they do this we also offers
other opportunities in this
state thank you.
Victor Lopez senator Wirth.
thank you madam chair and I
appreciated the of the thank you
Hey.
Solar project in Santa Fe
County.
it is
happily the school district is.
Holy of.
Portion of Santa Fe County and
I'm looking on page three
hundred F. I. R. I just want
everyone in the same.
My
whole family your family was
there I would just note that
under the current distribution
where we get an equally Amos
brings would get seven thousand
under this hypothetical of a
hundred thousand.
A man.
Davis right we get seventy one
hundred eighty four dollars
under the bill we have twenty
four thousand dollars.
So actually the all the other
districts so that because I
think that's where the projects
I that it would be located and
so I just.
Yeah I want to make sure that
this is this is gonna be.
Change in the.
The mixture here getting water
out of this for the status quo
there's gonna be people impacted
districts impacted they
currently are getting the
benefit is that they will not
want to go houses and there's
also it's all use of formulas
difference of one like that and
I do remember that we are taught
this is this is a I can't make
sense of it all of the offices
will live better this bill on
time to vet
So anyway I just want to find
out because I think it's our The
LFC did on this really I get a
phone waiver the house of water
so obviously the rural and
urban.
One last question this goes back
to the radio this is the line of
retro actively.
Das we are.
No no I I believe the.
I think in my statement I said
if any of those projects that
were already happened prior will
stay the same but anything going
forward from twenty three on
what.
Comply with this if it passes.
I think that's important yeah I
think are lost or we have to be
respected on behalf of the
change in the rules of the game.
Bob it is that we have that.
Thanks that worked Senator
Brandt on your next.
Thank you madam chair Senator.
It is bill.
The workforce.
The representative for the.
So I was one of the positions
side.
It is S. R..
So.
So much older so it's always a.
Thank you during this like this
really will do.
For that reason.
Law if you wanna make that bee a
friendly amendment.
Try this in the.
Of the district of the project
is and distribution of your.
the selection of the others for
for four.
Having a.
Cost the.
This is.
So that's really what it is
which is where it wasn't long
before we change that and
school.
Billings but your reviews and
like to change the rules for the
string the.
I.
Senator Representative Sierra.
The.
Scare of muscari.
Mescalero that's affirmative
south that some of these this is
northeast.
No Sir it's a Harding County if
you look at the excuse me madam
chair members of the committee
if you if you look at the last
page of the FIR you'll actually
see
a description
That is actually the second to
the last page I apologize where
there are some additional charts
with examples
Harding County is
twelve well highlighted there we
have miss Carol Logan and
rolling it shows exactly what
the split would be what had it
been do you need a copy of it
Sir I have an extra copy of.
This
is the.
Thank you.
This.
What what anybody else like a
copy that shows the term.
All of that.
So.
The.
We have
as opposed to when the law was
changed in twenty twenty one we
have reached out to a number of
school districts and due
diligence to try to have a
discussion with them some of
those specifically that I
visited with weren't even aware
that they were receiving a
portion of a poll that's how big
is there budget is that this had
essentially no impact on them
that it was even noticeable for
is to us rural districts believe
me we scrap and scrape for every
five or seven or ten or twenty
thousand dollars that we can get
and so
The general sentiment was that
they did not see any reason to
stand in opposition of this and
they were made well aware of of
that this was moving forward.
That is all I have all right
thank you any other questions
from the committee.
What is the will of the
committee.
Senator Kernan with the past two
and a second.
Second by Senator Lopez when we
take all.
Senator Wirth does that Senator
Griggs.
Senator.
Yes Senator okay yes.
It is that.
On that.
Senator Corman yes.
Senator Wirth yes.
Senator Hamblen yes in addition
of yes Senator right yeah.
Senators.
Nine one.
All right nine in favor you have
any pets thank you.
I'm here next bill.
Okay Senator Gonzales we're
gonna move to you after that I'm
sorry Center Gaydos will move to
you after that.
We do need to have a hard stop
we are set to be on the floor at
eleven thirty.
And so.
Hopefully we will get to four
thirty three.
But before we have to wrap it up
today.
Right at the center center three
ninety six the reason why our
for pairing Senator Shendo just
because you have to go present
another committee so we're
trying to get him out of here as
quickly as possible etcetera
etcetera it's all yours thank
you madam chair members of the
committee Senate bill will
basically what it does is will
increase a motorcycle
registration fee from what we
have currently a fifteen dollars
per year to twenty dollars per
year five dollar increase and
increase the amount of funding
distributed to the motorcycle
registration fee to the of that
fee within the of go to the
motor cycle training fund from a
two dollars to seven dollars per
motorcycle registration fee this
collector right now.
Senator.
And I have of Franklin here from
DOT has any specific questions.
You want to make a statement
good morning madam chair members
of Canadian Franklin Garcia with
the duty mobile division our
office has oversight of the
motorcycle training program
we have seen some increased
costs over the past couple years
and we are currently running in
the red so we have to supplement
some of those costs with our
different road funds are
different traffic safety of
funds that are are needed one of
the main issues that came up we
have some motorcycle stolen on
several occasions we had to
replace of motorcycles we also
had a of fund some of security
for certain areas and so we've
had we've seen of of a big need
for an increase in our our user
fees.
Right so going to the audiences
or anybody in the audience in
support of this bill show of
hands K. to you want to go ahead
and come on up.
Friday.
If you will keep your comments
about a minute if that's
possible.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is the energy and the motorcycle
safety foundation state
coordinator here in the state of
New Mexico the motorcycle safety
foundation MSF is a national not
for profit organization
sponsored by BMW B. R. P. Harley
Davidson Honda Indian motorcycle
Kawasaki KTM Suzuki triumph and
Yamaha since nineteen seventy
three the M. SFA said
internationally recognized
standards that promote the
safety motorcyclists with writer
Education courses operator
licensing tests and public
information programs MSF
curricula are utilized in forty
six states and by the US
military and federal government.
We collaborated cross the
federal government state
agencies Montoya and others to
offer training and support for
all skill levels so riders can
enjoy a lifetime of safe
responsible motorcycling and SS
wrongly supports comprehensive
state motorcycle rider education
and training programs such as
the New Mexico motorcycle safety
program and urges SB three
ninety six be passed to ensure
sufficient funding for the and
that and S. P..
State administered motorcycle
safety programs have enabled
more than eight million
motorcyclists to complete writer
education courses the D. O. T.
has seen more than forty eight
hundred motorcycle riders
receive training over the past
five years with the NMAA P.
reporting more than sixteen
hundred riders trained in two
thousand twenty two alone.
The national highway trade
traffic safety administration
recommends stated minister
training as an essential
component of effective state
motorcycle safety program.
Just be not three ninety six
will allow DOT to provide
additional training upgrade
training equipment improve
existing motorcycle training
ranges and increased public
awareness education for riders
and drivers.
Can I get one more statistic
request for that the number
motorcyclist in New Mexico has
more than doubled in the past
fifteen years going from fifty
thousand four hundred and two
thousand and six to one hundred
twenty thousand nine hundred and
thirteen and two thousand twenty
two therefore it's more
important than ever to ensure
that motorcycle training in New
Mexico is sufficiently funded I
appreciate your time thank you
thank.
Thank you morning madam chairman
members of the committee my name
is Annette torrez and I am the
secretary for the motorcycle
Advisory Council and the state
Representative the motorcycle
riders are all foundation in two
thousand twenty one it was
reported to DOT nine hundred and
thirty six crashes reported
forty six of those crashes were
caused by motorcycle rider
behavior only.
Indicating the need for this
program to educate inform and
teach you an existing riders the
skills to avoid a crash thank
you.
Thank you we don't have anybody
in support or opposition online
is there anybody in the audience
that's in opposition of this
bill.
I see none and I was to the
committee.
Senator X. I'm sorry Senator
Brandt and then Senator.
Movers or all right hello you
all headed up if thank you madam
chair and thank you center is or
any other pot of money that the
department had that they could
they could utilize for this
training instead of increasing
the fee.
Madam chair representative there
was a committee and Senator
Griggs we do receive a small
percentage of small amount of of
federal funds about forty six
thousand dollars in federal
funds that we get from our
national highway traffic safety
administration one thing I want
to we do we also utilize some
road fund as I mentioned we had
a supplement with some road fund
to to deal with security issues
and then taken away from some of
our other traffic safety
programs but one thing I think
you've heard the it's a user fee
in a sense and the right the
writers themselves are actually
in fact in support of the
funding that is increased as
long to goes back to the
motorcycle training program so
it's it's a user fee and it's
going back specifically for that
motorcycle program.
And madam chair Senators experts
thanks thanks for that
I appreciate that so that's a
good way to pay for stuff is
through user facial there we go
thank you ma'am thank you
senator X. center right thank
you
I appreciate the.
Bill
Two thousand rides motorcycles.
Very often for the class.
They are far less.
That.
Representative.
madam chair members committee in
center Brandt there is no
mandate that you have to take
the class
there's no mandate you have to
take a class or pass the course
the budget one of taking the
class itself is you actually
will be able to get your your
and do do you right in road yes
waived by completing that course
so there's an incentive to have
it done if you do need to want
to get your motorcycle
endorsement you would have to
pass the the writing test at N.
B. D. in order to get that but
the the incentive for this
training and we do have a a
basic rider course and we have
an experienced right of course
we have individuals that have
been on a motorcycle while they
can come back on and take that
on so there is Terry basis in
the sense but there's some
incentive to take the course to
get that of class and and
endorsement.
there are actions that the.
Right.
Agencies was the life of your.
One thing that I remember the
most is that all of our friends
to the.
Four dollars and a.
Expected to do that all the time
what's wrong so it's it's
actually maybe about six rubber
on the the other queue that the
of the writer.
So your insurance on we have
that is responsible we have.
Yeah.
So this is this is funded
I go into that class.
Sure where we're.
Senator Brandt Sierra.
So I.
madam chair members of committee
and and settlement one of the
best things about this course is
actually it's it's hands on we
have motorcycles and we have a
close range so so you're asking
hands on is not just a computer
online class that you're taking
session hands on and so you have
you have the interaction the new
ring of to arrange in
temperature range setting so so
that that hands on component
definitely the benefit.
the.
To see
Regarding.
Madam chairman of the committee
I'm not sure the the roof the
required test that M. B. D. is
similar to a road test you would
get your driver's license so and
he does have individuals that
well would
Find that motorcycle yes skill
test in order to get that
endorsement so there's two
things there's the NMED yes and
then there's this basic rider
training course and as I
mentioned if you complete the
basic rider course that waives
the requirement I and B. D..
Related to the.
I.
Right.
Menu is.
Thank you Sierra senator Wirth
you're just need our analysis.
Both Mr The New York for all
of your active date life for.
What we're doing this bill one
of the four.
The.
No it's.
The manager I don't want to we
should we have a lot of
liability using the lower the
cost of in ninety days.
Be able to offer that good
morning we get a reminder.
For a few minutes after.
you know I've.
Representative the brass on vote
by taking with respect the real
problem with the use of the line
eight.
Today but it is K. I certainly
noted that our local schools
themselves coming forward this
is the all market for three
years of of our support this
particular.
But I again I guess I need to
explain everybody.
All right.
So
the do it why this.
A lot of it doesn't make sense
yeah just one final question of
regular the as of the date
costly got motorcycles stolen
the money to pay one whose
orders like solar and wind.
So
Madam chair members committee
center worth we have on our
sites we have our storage
containers those large metal
containers and we are having
individuals actually you know
breaking into those breaking the
locks actually welding out
things and actually stealing the
motorcycle that are used for the
course so
so.
Individuals don't have to be
there motorcycle to the course
they could use one of the the
the course motorcycles but yeah
it was it was of chronic issue
for a while.
Well I just suggest chair of our
assuming their insurer yeah what
we got the insurance pay for
stolen motorcycle and not.
All the funds that are generated
by all the riders to training so
that Senator grants them that
right within the.
Good that is good thank you good
thing because it says the same
street.
So again I just want to make
that point I appreciate you were
in the bill.
But look at that and then we
will thank you madam chair thank
you Senator Lopez if we could
just be aware of time.
Thank you very much here.
Talk about four cycles I
appreciate for the measure but
as we all drive out there and we
see what cities and drivers are
doing an inmate at the older
ones
in order to have your this is
what I call light weight I like
going eighty miles thirty miles
an hour you know this using you
know and they the problem really
severe driving down.
I will feel and just the back
wheel thank you madam mortal.
That would be go through this
training.
I know it's not going to happen
madam chair of it would be nice
if there could be here every
trading seventy first.
This is just is is detrimental
not just for them but for those
of us retired master drive very
carefully Committee.
Related.
I think there was anybody else
before I go to the will of the
committee.
Well K. Sierra the past I've
second second center friends.
Really hello world.
Senator Graham yes.
Right.
Your.
Yes Representative yes the
problem yes Senator Wirth yeah.
Yes.
The yes.
Right.
Nine one excuse me have the past
thank you right next to Senator
Gallegos
Mr chair do you have a hard stop
time that you would like us to
shoot for.
For.
Of the or those who seek.
I'm gonna take action.
Definitely
Hear them so.
We have a good day goes.
Forty three director as well
yeah forty three and then of oil
for forty seven.
There were thirty three not that
this job of the three four four
zero which is the tax rate and
or or or.
All operate on a reduced rate
also it is a fact that expansion
of the tax credit.
Senator guy so what do the
eagles Griggs and the forties if
you know.
Right.
There's just.
Madam chair Senators thank you
for hearing me today I've got.
Sen bill two seven seven four
units of special needs adopted
tax credit
it does just a few things it
increases tax credit from
one thousand dollars to fifteen
hundred it also updates language
from husband wife to married
individuals.
And it makes qualifying
taxpayers required to report the
amount of tax taken to the tax
revenue department and then
also.
tax revenue department is
required to issue an annual
report with aggregate data
concerning the the credit and Mr
chairman madam chair and shares
of this not has not been
adjusted since two thousand
seven and in reality it option
is a an act of love but when you
drive a special needs child that
option has a lot of high cost to
it and what that'll stand for
questions.
Already so
Go to the audience anybody here
in support of Senate bill two
seventy seven.
What if you can come up and.
Introduce yourself.
She might work as my expert
witness K. Y. T. center again is
working together.
Mr chair members of the
committee good morning my name
is Emily Martin I'm the director
of protective services at CYFD
we are in favor in support of
this bill it around at thirty
eight hundred children at any
given time have been adopted and
are receiving receiving US of a
maintenance pay a subsidy
payment for for about adoption
eighty seven percent of those
children are special needs and
so this this tax credit again as
the senator said has not been
updated since two thousand seven
and very much will support those
children in those families that
make the commitment to to adopt
children how from the foster
care system thank you.
What else.
We will.
Anybody in opposition.
Senator two so seven.
In order to committee for.
It is.
This is also used to call on the
Senator corolla times employees
are thank you Mr chairman thank
you senator bring this had a
conversation with Representative
Hernandez in the house about
something I think I don't know
if this is the same delivered to
someone thank
about the roof reducing the the
financial stress that would be
on on people who adopt children
with different abilities and
different needs I'm wondering
and I my apologies for not going
to this morning has been very
much of a frenetic pace doesn't
include children who experienced
severe trauma.
Mr chair madam chair if we have
our expert witness come I did
not anticipate her here today
but I'm grateful she's lucky for
you to look through that.
Good morning again Mr chair
Senator yes every child that
enters the foster care system
has experience at some level
trauma of whether that's trauma
from the abuse or neglect that
they faced or the trauma from
being in in the child welfare
system so yes and that that
trauma is on many different
skills of many of the children
not receive a special needs
certificate have experienced
emotional trauma physical limits
are disabilities from that okay
so they they would be included
in on the.
Mr chair Senator yes the right
thank you that's all I have
Mister chair.
Hang
in
there till one.
senator.
The work is here is.
In order to
create one of those.
One.
Mr chair Senator I love
amendment to that point I was
trying to be fiscally sound and
look at it small increments it
has been since two thousand
seven and I've seen a lot of
bills that have doubled if you
want to make an amendment to
that point I would.
Considerate friendly.
The.
All of the issues.
That.
The.
Is.
The reserve
That was.
Amendment.
The.
Mr chair will consider that a
very friendly.
Oil House five hundred.
We're asking for.
The.
Fifteen hundred dollar credit.
Currently.
In this bill is is so we'd have
to look Mr chair the nation or
the on the amendment is.
Two thousand dollars.
Mr thousand five hundred about
would be two thousand and Mr
that be on page two line four
strike the one thousand right
beginning teacher to.
So the low.
From the moment this the
members of the committee any
opposition to that amendment.
The amended bill.
Mr connect correct my on the
line for I had one thousand five
hundred dollars so we would have
to strike the five hundred also.
One of the okay.
Thank you Sir.
Back in the bill.
The questions of the members of.
Not provided the committee I
think this will go to the state
sorry I will this one but I'm
sorry I just.
All right well thank you we have
amended bill.
Hold on to the capacity is on
the tax if you look at all that
with thank you I thank you
Senator
Thanks committee.
Senate bill four forty three.
The federal air passenger
capacity reduce which one four
thirty three four forty three
and then four forty three are we
going to four forty three and
forty.
The same time.
One of them to tax credit one of
them increases the size of the
airplane from thirty passions
reddit a student credit for
forty three that
have got with me this morning
Matt Thompson from S. three
sixty we can act my expert
witness Mister chair and and for
your efforts for access.
Thank you very much ways I'm
sure he will be my expert
witness today show are for sure
members of the committee this
house or the Senate bill four
forty three it's a tax credit
for small operators to help them
come into compliance with
methane rules and regulations
what we believe this bill will
do is allow them to to come into
that compliance can continue to
produce for years and years to
come and those will Brady B. A.
net gain to the state both
environmentally and financially
show with that I'll I'll ask
Mandy Moore say a few things
about that sure
thank you Mr good morning Mr
chairman to morning members
members my name's Matt Thompson
was strategies three sixty
Senator Griggs came up with an
idea to try to bring a more
stripper wells that already
exist in the state of New Mexico
into compliance with the new
ozone waste and methane rules
that have been promulgated the
last two years by OCD the IP and
in that environment department
so
these wells that we're talking
about here average three and a
half barrels a day they've been
in existence for twenty thirty
forty years they do per produce
a very steady small which of the
production the state of New
Mexico however they have they
have older metal in state and
they sometimes are emitter so
this bill would help offset some
of those costs to bring those
wells in the compliance it's
really the low hanging fruit for
for emissions bring those into
compliance with the three point
seven five tax exemption until
the project is paid off for
fourteen years because some of
them that some of the projects
will be so expensive in the
wells are so low in production
that they will never pay off but
this would prevent the wells
from being plugged for a band so
it will actually reduce the
number of abandoned wells that
the state.
Has to take care of by keeping
them operating in keeping money
coming into state coffers.
The at the bill will cost about
four point three million dollars
a year the budget the the
benefit to the state off of that
is three hundred and eighty five
million dollars a year so it's a
it's a small tax exemption for a
really large pay out on a
Mr chair we're ready to go for
questions.
Of anybody here in support of of
Senate bill four forty three.
Four forty three four forty
with.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee for those of you
who don't know me my name is Jim
Winchester I am executive
director of the independent
petroleum association of New
Mexico we have about three
hundred and fifty members and
most of them are smaller
producers who do live in operate
here in New Mexico and they
would be the recipients of this
exemption this bill does not
apply to the large multinational
oil and gas operators
essentially this bill does
provide a lifeline to small
independent producers and keeps
those low producing wells
running here in New Mexico up in
the tax exemption the bill
covers the cost of frankly the
Quitman upgrades but it is only
pay back to the operator after
he or she makes the investment
in that upgrade and then is paid
back on future production of
that well in other words it's
really the operator that's
taking all the risk here.
Overall it's a win win win
situation and what I mean by
that is that the state wins by
collecting revenues on the
extended life the well bringing
the state revenues that
otherwise would have been cut
off by the mature shut ins small
operators win by staying in
business through stretching the
life of these wells which really
protection entire submarket of
marginal stripper well
production he and as a bonus it
adds a new market for newly
captured emissions to be sold up
but finally and equally as
important the environment winds.
Refurbished low producing well
is in compliance with the new
ozone precursor rule so with
that I PNM urges you.
You anybody no opposition.
This bill.
But.
Thank you members of the
committee that Mr chairman
members of the committee Charles
good marker speaking for natural
resources defense council in we
don't think this bill is when
when when in fact we think it
smells worse than a methane
plume.
Since the bill suggests
taxpayers should pay the cost of
compliance with new
environmental regulations let's
take a minute and think about
what by those regulations exist.
They exist because
Without reducing venting and
flaring there's health harms in
other costs that the state picks
up and the people nearby pick up
that are not paid for by the
producers the venting and
flaring causes things like some
suffering of asthma among
children who live nearby there's
lots of reasons for why does
exist and
And essentially so when
The for with this bill taxpayers
would be subsidizing the cost
that was maybe direct a direct
point by the advocates but why
should we be paying the cost of.
But when there are other costs
that have been shifted to
taxpayers a return from the
health costs the environmental
cleanup costs and so on
it's it's just not fair thank
you.
Good morning Mr chair and
members of the committee.
My name is Camilla I am and I'm
the director of the Rio Grande
chapter of the Sierra Club and
we stand in strong opposition
and respectful opposition to
this bill the majority of oil
and gas in New Mexico is
extracted off public lands for
private profit because methane
gas up and tell the issuance of
the NMED smog rules and the
EMNRD methane rules many New
Mexico extractors either
accidentally leaked or
purposefully vented and flared
this public resource at no cost.
They're already exceptions made
for small oil and gas operators
in the NMED leak detection and
repair rules.
I'd also like to add that as of
March twenty first over fifty
percent of New Mexicos wells
were stripper wells and they're
owned by large oil and gas
companies mostly based out of
state we're talking about close
to thirty thousand stripper
wells representing fifty two
percent of all active wells.
Close to six thousand of those
wells are owned by Vigil court
which is the nation's largest
emitter of methane despite being
a relatively small producer this
bill is an unnecessary handout
to industry whose profits are
higher than any other point in
history we ask for your
opposition thank you.
Nobody on.
All right we'll go to committee
questions Senator thank you very
much and I really appreciate
that that you brought this bill
and just want to make a comment
or two in nineteen eighty six
when my father passed away the
only to deal I stripper wells at
that time if you think about
well I guess industry in
nineteen eighty six that was a
really difficult time for that
for us and so many passed away
I can the owner operator of
stripper wells so I do have a
pretty good idea of how those
work in and they don't make very
much they make maybe three
parents that day those wells
make more gas and I made oil and
it was very difficult to
maintain that and and keep those
wells going
during that time so the reason
we need to stripper wells and I
don't believe it's fifty percent
am I correct on that maybe Jim
could have.
I thought it was more like
twenty percent is that medicine
and running Mr chairman pastor
current the the number of wells
is there's about twenty seven
thousand stripper wells across
the state of New Mexico so it is
a large percentage I think it's
a little over half however it's
only about six percent of total
production that so it's a huge
number of wells and that'll in a
small amount of production we
further reduce that number by
limiting who can participate in
this tax exemption a producer
had cannot produce more than one
thousand barrels a day in pick
and partake in this so that's
not that narrows it down to a
three hundred and eighty four
operators across the state so
the court didn't count none of
those large producers can't did
this is these are like that the
doctor current ends of the world
to have a handful of stripper
wells that will that will be
allowed to bring those into
compliance instead of shutting
them in or banning them we lose
that forever would also like to
add that as technology evolves
in the nineteen eighty six
actually in nineteen ninety six
the Permian basin was a database
lot of but wells that were they
were all all marginally
producing.
Technology has evolved and now
those wells can be used to
sequester CO two so if we can
keep that well open long enough
it will have other usages so
this we we think that that that
that the state usage of three
point seven five percent for the
tiniest producers on the tiniest
of wells is money well spent to
reduce emissions recognition
chair those petitions have
choice with the new rules and
regulations which we know are
important yes and certainly
people trying to comply with
this kind of assistance in this
kind of tax credit they can
climb in continue with generates
Income for the state of New
Mexico Fund not only are schools
that we all know what that.
It's really important to keep
those those going if possible
that I have a choice of when it
becomes a.
We can't make any money.
Yes ma'am I think this should be
considered I I appreciate yeah
we're going to build and it's
going to help the industry
take you to provide to the
revenue that comes stated Mexico
and for the small producers.
Not only there are important
people in our community as well
these are not the.
These are the people that live
in Houston.
Process these are people that
live in my community for many
years and work hard to be part
of the community I revenue
status.
So I think it should be
considered it I know we will
take that certainly appreciate
yeah.
I think it's really important to
you revenue coming in Mexico be
able to lay out the.
Thank you Senator Kernan a
center called.
Thank you.
The.
The world.
Your kids are we're Senator
said.
Services of the bill stripper
wells both ever pay off for them
right.
Mr chair Senator.
District wells of been you know
more likely saying that our
they're paid off long time ago
but the the extra cost to bring
them up into the compliance that
we have today these guys are
faced with thanks for two things
right now they can either try to
do that or more likely they can
plug or they can walk away from
the walk away from that leaves a
liability sitting on the state
to go plug if they plug them
we've lost the production we've
lost the opportunity for
production for years and years I
mean the these wells or what's
what's happened one of things
usually right today with that
being well the big our our
well they drill and they come in
large numbers but there decline
curve is fairly state these
wells are no different from the
fact that they were grow
vertically.
They made Oil car barrels or
whatever they made today but
that's that's not gettable now
but the oil inflation some
mentions is still as much as
eighty percent in that in that
formation for their pull it out
did a little bit at a time.
And show this allows them to to
come into compliance.
It continue to produce that
amount of of oil which provides
revenue to the state of New
Mexico one of the things we
didn't talk about there's Matt
mentioned there's three hundred
and some odd companies each of
those companies employee
somewhere between ten twenty
people.
So as these things go away show
to the jobs for those people
they leave New Mexico and and go
away so
we're trying to preserve those
we're trying to protect the
environment we're per trying to
continue to provide revenue to
the state.
Okay and if if Matt could add
just a little too to.
Yeah.
So to.
Senator several of the
corporations a.
Visit our services.
Mr Chairman Madam it's both
their twenty seven thousand
stripper wells across the state
I about sixty percent of those
are owned by large producers
we're talking about the smaller
forty percent that are owned by
producers that produce less than
a thousand barrels a day.
Only the smaller producers yes
Sir
All it is it's reported to I'm
sorry Mr chairman Mr Senator
Tallman it is reported OCD on a
monthly basis and we can see on
the barrel of oil equivalent per
day and and the the producer
will apply to TRD in OCD and
will be determined determination
will be made for that they
qualify or not.
Thank you for that.
One of
is a life.
Providing incentives for this
are you here for thanks for.
The state prosecutor.
Thanks again for a.
Required radiation as a.
Mr chairman and senator I think
we do that and in.
Other instances well but what we
do is what what's best interest
in New Mexico.
In the best interest to to let
him walk to madam you know let
him continue to produce our let
him try to do that and if they
do this they have a chance to
continue to make money for New
Mexico.
H. prove it we know what these
Welch did we know what they're
going to continue to do so it's
not it's not like it's a risk
issues here we go we're going to
spend the money we're going to
continue to produce as well for
the attention to twenty or
thirty years.
Jobs are those that serve on the
longest.
Thank you the.
These.
That that
share thank you.
What else.
So
The survey questions a.
We're not gonna vote on this
single at the to the interest of
time we want to get there is
bill four floor simply so thank
the senator for rural the
school.
This is.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
committee your number.
All right now we have a Senate
bill for seventy five.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino at leave
a.
Lawyers usually here okay excuse
me.
And that.
Read of.
For.
What food to.
Yeah.
Trying to get in okay thank you
Senator of.
You know
The central for seventy five
thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee this is
a bill that was brought to you
and I by Daniel Montoya of.
For heating I need some insurers
are.
Montoya I was brought to us by
somebody and and.
She is of the this is a bill
that I think has great relevance
because one of the things we're
finding is that it's very hard.
For the behavioral health
workforce to be expanded if it's
almost impossible for private
practitioners to operate on a
basis that sustainable and one
of the big barriers to private
practitioners trying to set up a
practices in any community in
the state is that the gross
receipts taxes an inhibitor no
we we in the past we.
We ended the gross receipts tax
for managed care.
But that doesn't seem to have
that affected the individual
practitioners they're still
having to pay so that the
company the the the blue cross
through the.
Western skies are the
Presbyterian doesn't have to pay
gross receipts tax the state
pays that is part of managed
care but then when they contract
with the provider who's actually
doing the counseling they're
still charge to gross receipts
tax on that so we may have
thought we accomplish something
but all we did was PED's the the
profit margins they're they're
all nonprofits all we did is we
had the the the.
All earnings over over expenses
the budget.
Sheet for a you know piano sheet
for for the for the big
companies that then pay these
guys who then pay the gross
receipts tax so this is an
attempt at a trying to reduce
the the the inequity that exists
with that but secondly trying to
preserve and expand what we what
we have come to rely on as our
primary behavioral workforce
state the literally thousands of
licensed LPC sees marriage and
family counselors and and so on
that work around the state and
with that a let my expert
witness G. Montoya hit who
brought this to our attention
and I think she is she has she
indicates incidently that
there's dozens that are trying
to get on the soon that may not
be able to sing.
Yeah.
Part of me that.
Thank you chairman and members
of the committee we appreciate
your time and I try to be quick
we also have a Mr chair Senator
CA courting count sink New
Mexico counseling therapy in
practice board
chair
funds are trying to get online
so if I need to access her she's
part of the expert witnesses as
well
and then we have about twenty
that are trying to get in and
should also have thirty letters
of support for flea in your
packet.
So hello everyone my name is
Jeannie Montoya I'm an LPC see
licensed professional clinical
mental health counselor
practicing in the state of New
Mexico for the past thirteen
years I was born and raised in
New Mexico proud to attended New
Mexico public schools and earned
a master's degree from New
Mexico highlands university.
I chose this bill because I
wanted to help and make a
difference in my community and
rural areas I'm also the
government liaison for the New
Mexico counting Association and
here to bring attention to
public policy issues that affect
New Mexico therapists and the
residents of the state.
The harsh reality is this
there's not enough of us cancers
here in the New Mexico and yet
there are many barriers to
sustaining the ones we have.
Would you believe me if I told
you that on average across the
entire state.
There's about one therapist per
one thousand residents.
According to New Mexico health
care workforce committee report
that's right at the data
currently we have about five
thousand therapists therapists
and TRD data data show about one
thousand four hundred forty
returns filed quarterly by
licensed therapist for
population over two million.
Yeah that's crazy we need
additional help other therapists
in the fields in the field we
have lost after the pandemic
many have burned down had a
closer practices went into early
retirement or have left to other
states and that do not impose G.
R. tease on their providers.
According to presentation report
on gross receipts taxation and
health care presentation to
revenue stabilization and tax
policy committee that was
presented on October seventh of
twenty twenty two by tax and
Representative New Mexico is one
of the very few states that
impose gross receipts tax on all
health care services.
It is my strong belief that this
bill and will incentivize
therapist to stand practice
serving New Mexico and offer
opportunities to increase number
of therapists I pulling to
therapist.
pissed in other states to assist
us in the on going behavioral
health crisis.
On the surface it may seem that
this bill maybe costly to the
state's budget.
There's no cost on mental health
that should come first.
Retaining existing therapists
are providing much needed relief
for finance financial relief to
the practices will ensure that
they can continue to provide
mental health services needed
and will bring more therapists
to the state the more patients
seen by therapists translate to
higher earnings for them which
then directly increases
contribution to the state tax
revenue stream through the self
employment taxes and support
thriving.
Of the overall economy of the
state this is not just a plea
for from behavioral health
therapists but also from
behavioral health patients
children youth adolescents.
Adults elderly many of whom wait
months on wait lists to gain
access to quality hearing care
in New Mexico.
I strongly urge the committee to
consider and pass Senate bill
for seventy five and I thank you
for your time and your service
I'm happy to take any questions
and I also have Rikki Palmer
with me she's part of this with
the
nica acceptance counting on for
for profit a license supervisor
and see provider and my role
models.
Thank you the we'll do is so go
to the audience or Senator no
that's fine if.
Okay so anybody here support for
seventy five.
K. state to a few comments.
Thank you everyone.
what we want to get to this bill
before it adjourned at twelve
so.
The money.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee Julie on a coup by
Representative The New Mexico
behavioral health providers
association we really love this
bill for the reasons that the
senator said this actually gets
dollars and income into the
direct pockets of providers
thank you so much you.
Thank you.
Hi my name is siris Laramide L.
P. C. C. and Taos and in doing
this twenty years and.
Almost went under I mean I am I
make for overall for fed tax
reporting sixty five thousand
six thousand goes to Chris
receipts.
My income level is under thirty
thousand because of what right
cost.
I had to bail out on body
Gonzales who's my landlord
during comment because they
could not afford it.
I complained to him about this
many times.
Nothing is being done I'm ready
to quit I have twenty clients
per week.
They're all under the age of
ten.
All from all parties CYFD.
I can't sustain my business.
I thank you I thank you to pass
is there something that has to
be done I have calls I have a
thirty five kids on my waitlist
any time I have a cancellations
parents drive across town to try
to get their kids and and when
they don't show up I don't get
paid.
So we had snow storm last I know
clients but I still have to be
gross receipts tax and the only
company that ever indicated what
my groups receipts tackles
western's guy and it's being
paid a five percent rate my
gross receipts tax and houses
nine so it cost me five dollars
each time I see a kid.
That's crazy.
Please pass this.
So I want you to imagine I feel
the emotion that just came from
one of our therapists here in
New Mexico I trained therapists
at reasonable rates I often lose
money when I do a training for
therapists because they believe
they need to be trained.
I have therapists that work for
me that before they worked for
me couldn't get adequate
training because they couldn't
put money to see continuing
education credits they couldn't
get trained in suicide they
couldn't get trained in
behavioral health issues they
had to just to survive we do
this because we care we're not
here trying to make a million
dollars and be happy and retire
we are trying to save our
communities.
When I get twenty one calls a
day for people needing mental
health care and I have to turn
them away because I cannot hire
enough therapists they're not
coming out of grad school and
being happy in starting
practices they're going to
agencies that pay them twenty
dollars an hour because it's
safe then when we get fed up at
being paid twenty dollars an
hour we started private practice
and we hit the ground running
and we're proud we started a
private practice and then with
each issue it's well now you
have to pay this now you have to
pay this now you have to pay
more.
I have Mondays where I don't
even know if I'm going to make
pay roll because I have to pay
gross receipts tax bill.
This Monday I will have forty
five dollars in my business
account after making payroll
it's not because of a bad
accountant it's because my
therapist need to I will wage.
They need to thrive in this
profession they need to not burn
out.
When we don't have enough money
we heard inside.
We had issues with money.
And so what I intend to do is to
create a world where therapist
get paid a right right wage
everyone gets paid a white cat
right wage it's hard to say.
But also when you need something
when you have a child or a
partner or a loved one who needs
mental health care the you can
call up somebody and they're
ready to see you.
Two month waiting lists are not
okay.
We need the gross receipts tax
to to lift the burden off of New
Mexico therapists thank you
thanks for your time thank you.
One more and I think we have
somebody on them as well.
hello terror members of the
committee my name is Arianna try
it I was born here and raised in
New Mexico all my life in my PhD
in counselor education a
licensed mental health counselor
and I worked in substance abuse
prevention for over fifteen
years and my various roles of
the console and educator and
prevention nest and behavioral
health counselors I can tell you
the academic epidemics related
to substance use and mental
health in our state resulting in
tragic and untimely loss of life
although it may seem like Senate
bill for seventy five is another
risk to state revenue I can tell
you that allowing behavioral
health professionals to
employed.
Financial burden like you've
heard here today burn out
increase their commitment to New
Mexico in providing services to
our residents will help expand
services across the state.
By supporting this bill you are
making a commitment to
behavioral health professionals
and ultimately allowing the
revenue to go directly to the
two top causes of death in New
Mexico which are higher than the
US average rate which is suicide
and unintentional injury thank
you.
But will resume I believe that
is Mr.
Okay all right that that's one
of the yeah absolutely want to
go to speak or move but.
One minute so we can all play.
Hi my name's Kathleen Charest
and I'm the executive director
for the New Mexico counselling
Association and we are here in
support of this bill I've worked
with the Mexico counseling cigna
so ciation for over ten years
and in private practice as well
as creating practice myself I
can tell you on a personal level
that I have not been able to
hire and retain health due to
the fact that I have to make my
gross sales receipts tax it's
very important I came to the
business very early on and I
work for an organization that
served five hundred people in
the middle of the international
district which we know is a huge
district in Albuquerque that was
shut down because they couldn't
pay those taxes we want to make
sure that future cancers don't
have that we feel like we are in
active early taxed and we
appreciate your support for this
bill and we welcome any
questions thank you.
So.
That the we'll go ahead and the
go to the committee for your
question.
Members.
The question.
You mentioned one inseego that
does cover some of the tax
that is that western scholars
will well as that's curious
because she had a
The.
A document that you showed me
and it showed that at one point
they baited with their after
they did so I'm not sure what
and we can't really.
Because it says tax the interest
taxless interest so I don't know
what at early really revealed it
didn't I I do remember though
when we passed the bill.
I was under the impression I
think a lot of us were.
That ending the the the gross
receipts tax for managed care
would would filter down nobody
would have to pay the gross
receipts tax on that because the
state included set in their
contract when they when they
when they contract with
Medicaid.
That is covered so they're not
paying it I don't believe
they're paying gross receipts
tax.
The but the service that they
hired actually do the work
certainly our.
Chair and in in this is been a
problem with all of them yes.
The only state I think if we are
G. R. T. on medical and I know
those houses state.
Maybe that's why we don't have
the provides you know.
Just going back and thinking
when my husband was a practices
and separating out what you
could charge TRD off what we
could that's a nightmare in
itself right there because your
private insurance you Hey but
you can charge the budget but if
it's an NCO and it you know it's
supposed to be covered but then
those contracts that you have to
sign with the MCO it include
that may not I'll just tell you
it doesn't so you know I don't
know this is we keep talking and
talking and talking about it and
Dr Hickey Senator Hickey point
of bills that behavioral health
is treated like all other
medical and yet you know here we
are with another situation where
G. R. T. is an issue that I
think that it's just that go
ahead and and not able to figure
out how to pay for it and hope
it's included in the discussion
you know we're not going to vote
on it but that we've got to do
something with this thank you.
Senator Lopez thank you Mr
chairman I know when we passed
the bill I assume incorrectly
apparently that
that covers services have to
that is that was what was
prepared for us so I'm like oh
my gosh Mr chair also here this
past interim committee hearing
many of our providers
Concerns about.
Testing with nexus for
our communities specially on on
the other.
Yes so
I just I just we're working.
Sorry.
Our.
Okay anybody else.
The the the order of this we
information folks are in here
all bills that have that have
either tax exemptions to yours
but it's we just hold on and
then we're working on this tax
package in the cities of the
committees are is.
With that thank you Mr chairman
I would just echo Senator Kernan
scum it is the simplest cleanest
thing would be to eliminate the
gross receipts tax on local
medical services and then if we
have a loss of revenue maybe in
chip the income tax because once
they pay the rent and they pay
the repair if they're making
enough to pay any income tax we
can get on that.
All right thank you as a
patient.
Thank you for your time and your
service will be related to the
thank you thank you all for
being here so we'll go to us.
Senator Griggs.
One more.
Illegal here thank you for
thirty three or thirty three
education heard this this bill
Mr chairman committee before
it's a it's a rural air service
subsidy it started out with nine
passenger aircraft Division
amended last year to thirty
we're taking it to a hundred
which fits those regional jets
once you go past a hundred you
want if with additional
requirements when it comes to to
the airports and the airplane
itself they have to have a new
an additional
Steward in order to to provide
for the customers but this
givers this gives places like
Alamogordo Los crucis as well
sure Hamlin where they can fly
those jets to Phoenix and we're
currently are there's no subsidy
to help out with that so that's
what this does you state it's a
competitive grant award through
the through the division there's
no guarantee there's the money
there to do it it's just a it
just gives us all an opportunity
to apply and see if the she did
what she did you know it should
the cops Carlsbad all of them
should be able to do that as
well show Mr chairman and
members all our stand for
questions with that.
K. so we'll go to the committee
and the and many are aware of
supporters of the four thirty
three.
Yes.
The ability of them anybody
opposition.
No okay we'll go to committee.
Senator Tallman.
So the reason.
Whether.
If the Mr chair Senator.
Aircraft will have to be less
than a hundred seats to be to be
considered.
Less than a hundred change.
Right now
all the right now the sure sure
right now it's less than
thirty sheet.
Sure we get show Mr chair yet
she gets turbo prop she get the
maybe some small need at that
doubtful we share most of the
the regional jets with which
people would like to be able to
fly on.
Don't qualify for the program.
Yes the Senator Hamblen thank
you senator extra bring this
because as you alluded to the
New Mexico in Los crucis we have
a new transport system from our
air airport that we have the
small planes that would benefit
a great deal from this and so
I'm I'm happy about that.
The thing about.
The other questions.
I.
The.
Federal.
I'm sorry for sure generation
here you.
Because of this.
Because we're we're just we're
just.
That is.
Mr chair Senator that that's all
it is is just it's allowing a
different classes pointing to be
able to be utilized or be able
to be
available for their potential
grant not that for sure deal.
Those.
Discuss that the federal read
more.
Mr president in the in center
size of what's of federal
requirements.
Right we take action.
Services.
Share and and senator it's a
state grant availability yes I
mean it's it's too and to a
quarter million dollars
available to the community to
help them.
Match what they may have to pay
to the airline in order to get
the airline to come with us.
Users of the.
You're welcome the the Q. of the
senator successful cases when we
did the bill we increases
thirty.
Yes.
So this or.
More or less.
Yes the fiscal impact so.
The tax would be passed by
Senator Kernan second by Senator
census.
Any opposition to the new
password should.
Do not forget the past.
Thank you Richard committee six
two zero.
Have a question already we are
it's earned can't edit I have a
