Trying to do.
And I want to thank the
committee members for showing up
on the Saturday morning. Uh, we
appreciate it. There is
breakfast.
And the breakfast is from Sierra
Sierra Club.
So thank you very much, Sierra
Club for our breakfast burritos
this morning. So Senator Pope,
it's yours.
Thank you and a three piece suit
today. OK.
Yeah, we're gonna present today
Senate Bill 178.
And really there are two parts
to this bill. The first part
involves the imposition of a fee
of 5 cents per barrel of
produced water on owners of oil
and gas wells in New Mexico.
The fee imposed is referred to
as the produced water ee.
reduced water fee will be
collected and administered by
the Taxation and Revenue
Department and then sent to the
Energy, Minerals and Natural
Resources Department for
plugging and remediating
abandoned wells.
The Environment Department
estimates that this fee will
amount to $68 million per year.
And the FIR estimates around 80.
To $95 million.
In 2021, the state land Office
projected an $8.1 billion dollar
gap between bonds and actual
remediation costs, a number that
continues to increase as
financial assurances do not meet
the actual costs of plugging and
remediation.
There are more than 2,391
abandoned wells on state or
private land, but there are
thousands more wells that are
known as orphans and waiting.
Enert estimates that the average
cost of plug and remediate a
single well is $300,000 but some
cost $1 million.
The risks of unplugging wells
are enormous. The environmental
and health issues are mainly the
release of large amounts of
methane, a potent greenhouse gas
and groundwater contamination,
which can introduce carcinogenic
chemicals in the drinking water.
