Properties.
You said right here.
Yeah so at this time.
We'll go ahead and the the the.
Senator.
I think the.
That is.
Mr.
Here.
There.
Thank you also to the here and
the will this turn this on for
those that are watching on
webcast or or zoom in want to
thank all of you for being here
this is our first a committee
meeting our last one was more of
the organizational so today will
start hearing bills we
I will go ahead and before we
get started just for the folks
in the audience and those are
watching I can start from a far
right and have food you
introduce yourselves and.
For the public thank you
senator.
One of.
Thank you Mr chair I'm senator
Daschle Sanchez I represent
Cibola McKinley Sapporo in
Valencia County.
And it's an honor to be on this
committee these are great people
to work with them I have a bunch
of fun like we did last year
good to see all these people
that I've never this is my first
experience of seeing this many
of the problems we've had COVID
so always always a TV for the
last two years so thank you all
for being here today.
Thank you through if we got to
of that you have all freshmen.
Commission chair and and folks
Station Ron Griggs on from
Alamogordo I represent the
southern part Otero County Board
of of any economic I'm looking
forward to seeing some really
interesting things issue.
Thank you Mr chairman in the
state Kernan I represent Senate
district forty two which is late
getting Chavis and.
Thank you.
I think that Leo yes until about
Representative will follow.
But that is that okay.
Hi everyone hear words twenty
five percent.
Vice chair of senator Kerry
Hamblen from district thirty
eight and beautiful southern New
Mexico which is much warmer than
it is here today.
Thank you all of state senator
Benny Shendo chair this
committee representing Senate
district twenty two from Amos
Pueblo Representative portions
of Bernalillo Sandoval McKinley
Rio Arriba and San Juan County.
Of lane just stepped out of my
committee secretary Rebecca her
brothers not doing very well so
she turned up to Denver to be
with her.
And the lady my secretary from
the last couple years or.
Stepped in so good to have her
here the set this thing off.
I know freshman freshman C. this
pressure is always up to some.
So with that will go ahead and
get started Senator Tolman as a
little emergency so yes me to
skip over this bill so Senate
bill twenty six Senator
Gonzales.
Just as a reminder of for folks
that have tax bills that either
are asking for exemptions or you
know of credits and all that
stuff we're going to hear those
bills but we're going to take
action you know it is a lot
happening in terms of the tax
package and so forth so we'll
hold all those bills here we
will hear them but we're not
going to take an action to.
And on the road so with that the
Senator Gonzales go ahead and
present your bill Senate bill
twenty six thank you Mr chairman
and the members of the committee
good afternoon and also with the
US my expert witness us we'll
have him up to some part a
little further on his is my as
potus from Alice C..
And members so.
Senate bill twenty six is an
excess oil and gas fund to the
severance tax permanent fund.
Oil and gas revenues for six
million in FY sixteen they were
one point five billion in FY
twenty one and there are
expected to be at four point six
four billion in FY twenty four.
Oil and gas production is
expected to peak in ten years or
less.
Even though our current revenues
are high our state economic
predicts that revenues will
start declining in the next
eight to twelve years we can
stop the decline in revenues if
we begin to prepare now.
Senate bill twenty six.
This is a this bill involves two
problems without affecting the
transfer to the early childhood
Trust Fund or impacting the
budget processes first it makes
the budget less reliant on oil
and gas revenues and seconded
prepares the state for
eventually decline of oil and
gas.
The general fund is currently
receiving a wind of windfall oil
and gas revenues starting in FY
twenty five this bill would
capture only new windfalls and
invest them in severance tax
permanent fund.
This would grow the general fund
with interest earning in more
stable sustainable manner and we
know this because supplement
fund are the most stable source
of the general fund revenue.
Mr chairman and members of.
Before I go to all.
My expert witness
Hello this morning in the news
so and this was reported in one
of our local channels and this
is from the economists from you
and and research saying exactly
the same thing as I just
mentioned here of you know for
the state's production to be the
other one is there's been other
hello source of news indicating
the same you know with oil and
gas but with the I will leave to
my expert witness Mr Ismael told
us with the LFC staff and then
we'll be open for questions.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee.
This bill was not considered for
LFC sponsorship so I I'm.
Required to tell you that I'm
not here in favor or against
this bill but instead instead
here to speak on the mechanics
and the impacts of of what this
bill would do so as Senator
Gonzales mentioned this bill
does not affect distributions to
any other funds that's worth
noting off the bat but it does
setting new threshold at which
oil and gas revenues cannot
exceed in the general fund and
it sends any windfalls above
that threshold to the severance
tax permanent fund.
This bill is the result of
interim committees held over the
last year the LFC NSIC staff
requested by both the revenue
stabilization Tax Policy
Committee and the legislative
finance committee who requested
that we analyze the issues over
the last year produce
recommendations to solve both
the volatility in the general
fund and also to address the
outlook that Senator Gonzales
mentioned about declining oil
and gas related revenues and
this bill as a result of that
study and this concept was
presented to both LFC and rest
at in June and October and
attempts to solve both of those
issues.
As we've presented in in some of
these last revenue estimates if
you all have heard them the
latest oil boom is overwhelming
the five year average is that
you all put in place on the a
few years ago and as those
averages fail to protect the
general fund from volatility the
legislative intent of those
mechanisms to stabilize the
budget and limit the the
reliance on that industry is
starting to fade as well so
ultimately this bill would get
New Mexico off the roller
coaster of oil and gas related
revenues and this is the only
bill that we seen at the LFC
that would not only mitigate the
general fund increasing reliance
on oil and gas but actually
decreased the reliance over time
I think within the next two
years we estimate that it would
reduce the general fund reliance
by almost twelve percent.
So according to to the analysis
we've done with S. icy through
twenty forty five this bill
would completely offset declines
in oil and gas revenues that are
currently expected in the long
term and addressing those
concerns that were originally
raised by LFC and and rest at
and of course the the latest
study that was just published
yesterday Senator Gonzales
mentioned.
It's important to note that this
bill would not interfere with
the budget process and can be
done with in in in concert with
both the LFC or executive budget
and a recurring tax package so
it would reduce the amount of
new money in FY twenty five by
less than four percent leaving
recurring budget growth in that
year likely well into the double
digits in FY twenty five on top
of the FY twenty four plans.
And with that Mr chair thanks
for reading all Mr chairman
members of just one one more
part before we go into our
questions is
I think it's very and it's our
responsibility to to just be
very careful with what's
happening and what we're doing
with the budget that are just to
give the members of.
you know the solid information
up between twenty nineteen to
where we are today and this is
does not include twenty twenty
three.
We have a added.
The mill between thirty to
thirty three percent additional
recurring to the budget which is
one point four we have to the
okay but it is so there is a
high full of approximately you
know within the range of fall
one point four billion added to
the budget to where we were in
twenty nineteen now that is so.
You know it is really nice to
recognize all of our work I have
a budget today but also keep in
mind you know what we're adding
to the recurring part and this
just give so the Avenue awful
just being very of.
For state you know good planning
and another good way to work
with the the surplus that we
have with that Mr Chairman we'll
take some questions area thank
you as well as to for the
Questions.
That.
Thirty.
This live audience.
On.
We will go over the are not.
This bill will start here.
This is so and.
In opposition.
Or
or the right hand side.
There in the audience here.
Those are favored.
Right.
And.
The computer
or anything I want.
The.
Of.
Yes.
If they are.
Okay
Mr chair members of the
committee I'm cert cert senior
vice president of the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
we stand in support of this
legislation over the last six or
seven years the state wisely
chose to capture excess oil and
gas revenues for a few important
purposes to create a true rainy
day fund to better insulate the
state against future crashes and
energy revenues and to support
the ongoing expansion of early
childhood programs stand will
and responsibility keeping this
excess revenue out of the
general fund has also help to
keep our fiscal dependence on
oil and gas and checked with the
massive new surplus for
experiencing we need to do more
in this regard and we agree that
should include capturing and
sending still more oil and gas
revenue to the sat severance tax
permanent.
This is a smart approach
investing these excess dollars
to date will generate a healthy
and more sustainable revenue
stream in the future and we can
make this change without
affecting the structure and
intended either the tax
stabilization reserve for the
early childhood fund which is
important we urge you to support
this bill thank you.
Thank you.
Okay.
Is that the committee okay all
right thank you and so with
that.
More Mr I would choose a member
of the state investment council
that.
There there been times of we
really have grown the final
slide increased contributions in
the years this time we have
grown at a any of the funds that
we can put in there
strictly come back in the
revenues from them come back to
benefit all the people in New
Mexico you know a lot of people
don't realize we will be in
dollars in the forms here and so
if if you know if we can put
that money and get it investment
going home we have real.
Real slides in income it would
be very helpful I think for the
long run for the stability of
our state now this is my
personal comments they're not by
the server on the state
investment council would for at
the request of the center for
your with your approval.
We are.
Thank you thank you with that we
will go to the members of the
committee.
I thank you very thank you Mr
chairman and I want to thank you
for bringing the bill
so Mister tors can you explain
we were talking about earlier
about we all know that the only
gas is very volatile source of
revenue for the state that
particularly now my concern is
what's actually happening
happening in the oil field with
regard to where the production
is coming from and how that's
different from previous years
when we had production can you
kind of bring us up to date on
where we are with regard to the
sources of that production and
why this is a little bit
different time.
Mr chairman Senator Kernan
and sure none of this is news to
you but as we know the print
most production most oil well
produces is it within the first
three months of its life and
from there it takes a really
steep dive in terms of how much
oil it produces per day and so
what that means for the state of
New Mexico is a constant need to
continue to put new wells online
in order to continue growing
your production oil and
I'd say maybe in the last five
years we have built up sort of
an inventory of wells ready to
to begin production called
drilled but uncompleted wells
those of bills up until about
the pandemic and since then most
of the companies in New Mexico
have begun relying on the
inventory of drilled but
uncompleted wells to to power
our production forward and we're
seeing that inventory declined
quite quickly so unless we see
our our drilling pick up it it
becomes increasingly difficult
for the state to continue
growing in its production thank
you Mr chair and I think that's
my point that many of the the
wells that are being produced
now are wells that were drilled
many years ago never appears to
go and they've just been sitting
there and with the high prices
of low right now they're going
and completing the wells that we
worry about two thousand plus of
the the ducks the and completed
after the dental plated in those
are rapidly decreasing and so
when that it gets down to a
really low number I think we're
we've got about half of the
money may be wrong on that but
close either
companies need to come in and
invest capital which they're not
doing at the same level they
were before for and and the
other issues leases just start
selling we're not really sales
so I think that's a huge risk
that I'm not sure we're when we
talk five years out I don't
think that will and so I really
think it is critical that we do
things like this because we are
spending a lot of money.
And I just don't think it's just
so this is a real good start and
I hope everybody's paying
attention to what we may have to
come back and do it five years
we'll see thank you.
Thank you senator Senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr chair just a couple
questions and here's why the LFC
the LESC consider this bill from
our first why state not one on
the.
Mr chair at least in part of the
bill had been right in time for
consideration at that point.
Okay I appreciate that Mr chair
because I think this is.
Recommendation they're talking
about movie billion dollars a
nonrecurring money into this
fund so obviously this is a and
we did here is in the tax
committee
concept so.
I just want to make sure that
that I understand.
I'm looking at the.
Fifteen FIR shark this year so
basically this wouldn't start
additional distribution Martinez
right until twenty twenty seven
Representative say twenty twenty
five is.
Mr chair Senator worth twenty
twenty five FY twenty five so
again why then under the far
right hand column of the show.
View this.
We set.
That Mr Chairman center with
that question is because of the
five year average that the
severance tax permanent fund
distributes off of so it takes a
little bit of time for those
fusions to make an impact so
this is additional in addition
to the current baseline so
that's that's sort of why it
takes a little time to roll.
Over.
Okay that makes sense and figure
that out.
Jenny said I I.
So you're spending all of these.
We also know the money's going
back into.
Capital outlay projects what
what is percent do we determine
the percentage of the severance
tax explain to me again how that
works Mr chair and senator Wirth
it is in statute and I believe
before nineteen ninety nine it
was fifty fifty so fifty could
be used for capital and fifty
could be or would be sent to the
severance tax permanent fund and
that climb to believe to around
ninety six ninety seven percent
there maybe around twenty
fifteen and then since it's gone
stepping down and it's currently
stuck at eighty six percent and
hasn't been revisited since and
and to be clear that's sort of
the revenues into the bonding
fund and then they're allowed to
be distributed from there but it
gets a little hazy with the
ability to do Sanchez bonding
because I can capture a lot of
the cash and prevent any of it
from reaching the permanent fund
is Senators and extension there
are a lot of my first focus on
the Senate floor four thousand
attendees brought bonds and you
know it's interesting with both
the W. the end of the list and
so there was a.
Leadership I think
Representative one at all I know
is when I voted no a bunch of
Republicans impassively also did
not when I got huge trouble.
For more because of that that's
been the focus of the funds
bonds get super tricky
Good how I appreciate this and
then again I think this is a.
This makes sense and it's
something that.
Send over to finance and let
them middle round with this but
again it's a.
Policy choice would for one
final thing with so this year
we're not using we're doing all
of the capitol
general fund.
So much check out another
example of all these things I
think we're gonna see the
severance tax fund really starts
at the top of the the
representative from in from oil
gas the pharmacy distributions
or not using the father health
some this is something that
really gives up again long term
health.
Thank you thank you senator
Senator Brandt moved to pass.
On the.
No no I think the I was looking
at the same charter thank you
senator and so for the know that
the we did have that a
presentation on the revenue
stabilization Committee December
and you know I I think the the
Representative Harper you don't
try to do this those few years
back and it was really that at
some point back in time there
was really no money going into
the phone at all and so forth so
I think one year was like thirty
dollars at the I believe you
have so
Anyway so with that we do have a
motion on the.
For for a a do pass Senator
brand we have a second.
Second by our Senator hard meal.
Of the state grow Senator Brandt
yes.
Senator Griggs yes Senator had a
meal yes Senator Kernan yes.
Senator Sanchez yes.
Senator work yes.
Senator Shendo yes.
Senator Gonzales chairman
members thank you thank you
thank you for bringing this up
for those of you that are here
for Senate bill twenty two
Senator Tolman has an emergency
so he's asked to roll this to a
Thursday so those of you that
are are here for Senate bill
twenty two will that'll to
Thursday.
Senate bill twenty eight Senator
Brandt.
I think all these folks are here
for me okay.
Your bill's or orders for
I want to pursue all of them for
being here for me.
Is the right one to do it.
I go it's under Mr chairman this
bill is is actually long overdue
we're one of only two states I
don't remember what the other
state is that doesn't actually
give of a tax deduction for
teachers who use their personal
money to buy classroom supplies
so this bill very simply allows
that to be a tax deduction the
first year would be five hundred
dollars the second year of
thousand dollars in the state of
thousand dollars we can always
revisit that if it's a it's too
low in the future but we need to
make sure this is put in place
you know it's it's it's bad
enough that our teachers and of
having to use their own personal
income to buy classroom supplies
but it's it's it's pretty bad
when the state then turns around
and says now give us tax dollars
on top of that this doesn't cost
the state very much money and it
really tells our teachers how
much we appreciate them.
The.
All right of that if that's the
case so we'll go to the audience
who will start of those if that
are opposed to this bill will
start over here hands up.
I see none will tomorrow right.
Those in favor of the bill.
Good marker.
I
like to first models who the
half of the New Mexico forces
action for New Mexico
residential.
The Sanchez Bill.
By Senator
and
you know this problem has been
Twenty years.
That the lack of the state
direction that has been from the
teachers purchased prospect.
What is.
Okay all right thank you this
time we'll go to committee
senator formula.
Thank you Mr chairman minor
comments I was a school teacher
in two thousand and left the
news over the classroom and was
making twenty three thousand
dollars a year and so any
additional money that I had I
spent on ensuring a five extra
note pads for the students of
the land I happen to teach.
Senator Sanchez's cousin while I
was in the land of the number of
students and communities rural
communities that don't have a
lot of supplies that they need
and so I used excess money but I
have to ensure they have with
the needed to be successful in
the classroom and I want to
thank the senator for bringing
the school board and that's what
I I supported because I know how
much money you put into sure
that we're successful in the
classroom thank you Mr chairman
these are.
To Senator Kernan.
Thank you Mr chairman thanks for
the bill hi
just you know wonder a little
bit about how many teachers
would be able to actually take
advantage of it because we we
all have a I mean there is a
deduction that's taken by
everybody you have would you
have to itemize to be able to
claim this I believe Mr chairman
center I believe you would I'm
not sure if there's a way to do
it where you wouldn't
but I I believe you would have
to which.
May make it not had a lot of
teachers because of that
standard deduction I think
that's what you're talking about
yes and so Mister chairman but I
think it's a good message to
send not only to our teachers
that we do care about and
recognize how much money they're
spending but also maybe to our
school districts and they have a
lot of money right now many of
them have a lot of cash balances
I know when I taught school many
years ago I would go down to the
supply closet and everything I
really needed was there but I
spend a lot of money on my
classroom just to kind of
enhance what I was doing it
wasn't so much you had to have
it because they have rate
pencils in the but but it really
made the experience better for
the kids because teachers did
bring that special Dutch in each
classroom
I wonder too if if parents I
mean it parents spend a lot of
it that supply list you go down
for many of our kiddos and I
think that's what we do the
staff of us and those kinds of
things because school supplies
for for people that are low
income have a really difficult
time providing all that for
their children so this is really
good bill for people to hear
out school districts are
listening and provide those
teachers with the basic things
that we really really need so
they don't have to spend their
own money that would be thank
you.
Thank you Mr chairman Sir we
could make a tax credit and
then.
But I'm not sure center works
with.
Pro struggle with them.
Anybody else in the committee.
Mr chair just quickly Policy
Center currents question I want
to make with the definition on
page two of school supplies I
mean I.
Whether I was years I mean is
that is it to provide for oddly
enough to all those issues I
mean teachers.
Purchased all kinds of things
for their classroom.
That that this is the that and
again I appreciate your friend
got this is this is super
targeted but I just listening to
what Senator Kernan Sierra or
expanding experience of what
teachers do in those kids the
full experience I just don't
think a lot of things are
covered.
Mr chair I can respond to that
because in in the for instance
in first grade we do many
activities that involve center
activities which require a lot
of different things every single
week you change that out of the
still something not at prepped
me that that took a lot of time
in a lot of things that you're
not gonna find and Sanchez so as
a teacher of the Walmart of
wherever and and yeah this these
are important things that need
because most of those things
probably are covered with the
district that a lot of the other
things to do so Madam classroom
probably not the in so you can
say it's turned into your
account and find out that.
Coming up and take advantage of
it but again it's a message bill
that tells our teachers how much
we appreciate that and I think
it's more than a hundred
hundreds of dollars I think it's
more the thousands I think a lot
of teacher.
Well over a thousand dollars a
year appropriations.
Prevention thank you.
Mr chairman Sir as I think the
things that were not allowing or
things that really should be
covered by the district on their
you know that's.
Computers cell phones and things
like that really are things that
the teachers they're not really
supplies that the students are
using really want this to be
focused on elect Sir our meal
was saying you know you got some
low income students in your
classroom
The.
Sometimes the teachers are going
on final supplies because
there's nowhere else to go for
as an example I used with the
media in this actually did
happen when my kids were younger
we bought the wrong scissors the
ones with the pointed ends
instead of the rounded ends and
so you know that happens and so
the teachers then go out and buy
the right ones and so it's the
simple things like that that the
teachers are having to buy for
the classroom these other things
are things that really should be
provided for by the districts
and and honestly if the money we
send to the districts was given
to the classroom none of this
would have to be provided for by
the teachers but we've allowed
the administration of our
districts become very over
bloated and we need to make sure
we focus on that this kind of
stopgap measure as we try to
look and deal with more that
administrative costs that we're
seeing in the districts and Mr
chair with scissors qualified
school supplies definition I
think so.
Part lies maybe the.
I mean I guess that's the point
I mean if we wanted to I mean
I'd be open to any kind of
amendment opens up the top I
think we need to leave the but
not including part so we could.
If you input at the next at a or
you could take out the
descriptive language on the top
into state school supplies or
use the classroom and Mister
chair I don't want to get out
over my skis and we can send it
back to education and let the
educators this this we could
deal that I.
Well I don't think it's going to
finance yet of but I think I
think this is the this is the
kind of thing that that we
certainly can put into the.
This bill that we're talking
about and and so but I just want
to make sure we get it right to
self so I just think you know if
I don't know if you're here
Center Branham in the chairs
gonna hold these these different
bills were not run about one by
one so we're gonna have a little
time to potentially tweak some
of this language because I do
want to make sure that.
You know what Senator Kernan
brought up which I think is.
Really relevant to the breadth
of things that teachers are out
of pocket for which certainly
these are some and I and I and I
why did not.
It's not not withstanding we
don't need you know like that's
a bad word but not including
is important but I just again
I'm kind of pondering.
The definitions there thank you
Mr chair seat center currently
Miller.
I think educational purposes
really covers a big part of that
that would cover anything
science projects that maybe you
need to go out and purchase
something for that.
Our projects I think it's forty
four hundred and
I keep looking at it think about
it
I do like to thank you cannot
spend down because this is a
simple fix on that and we could
bring it back if we're not gonna
send it forward
but a simple fix on that would
be including including but not
limited to notebooks paper.
Yeah I actually missed I don't
think you need to do that with
let's talk the council because I
think this case law directly on
point but they don't like not
including and maybe we maybe
okay that we've got attracted to
let's look at the ones that did
suggest drafting it this way yes
I and I think it made to them so
strapped to this this way I
think for reason.
Parexel with the LFC look at
that.
Any other questions.
On the definition on page two
line nine were public school
teacher.
Of.
So is that in in this public
school charter schools or
because I know that the state
will also have teachers that
teach in Catholic schools so
they will be ineligible yeah and
and we be a bureau schools with
will be ineligible is that Mr
Chairman we did discuss that
some in our office actually the
answers and I had a discussion
around that and just for
simplicity purposes we do want
to keep public schools again I'm
more than willing to open up to
all teachers but then you have
to figure out how do you define
so by having to be licensed and
public school would include all
of our charter schools all of
our charter schools are public
schools under the definition of
public schools so it would
include the eighty nine
districts all schools in them
and all the separate charter
schools makes a little over a
hundred.
but yeah I.
Probably wouldn't for the I. A.
schools but we could at the
same.
Well it will take a look at that
and.
Yeah I mean that we want to make
this is inclusive of as many
teachers as possible my wife
teaches one day a week at a co
op for private school students
because she.
We we took some time off so we
could travel in the COVID has
she has a sex is going to go
back in the order classroom or
not so but which she then count
as a teacher fees license in the
state of New Mexico she's not a
public school so she wouldn't
know me and and we were we're
looking at this as a income tax
deduction correct so limited to
just public schools and not.
Committee but we could always
change it to a credit this
festive Star Wars this
understand because I know of no
my mom was a retired Catholic
school teacher of thirty plus
years and and and of course
those guys have no money so it
was always probably half of her
paycheck probably went to buy
supplies for for her classroom
and so forth and so of lower at
education as one of knowledge to
a long time friend it's a has
students here for the Santa Fe
Indian school of mark Ericsson's
a science teacher he's been
there for thirty seven years and
committed to the kids so I just
want to recognize more thank you
for reading students here.
The school students can you
please maybe get it we're waiver
so so that our committee and
folks can see we are stand up
please don't be shy.
Thank you thank you so but no I
I think this is a good bill and
I think you of good support I
think this Senator Kernan
mention I think it sends a
message and you know we sort of
believe in our teachers and all
the things that we're trying to
do for them as well so
as I mentioned before you
stepped in and that all the you
know and the tax bills that
either require exemptions
credits there was this whole
those and take no action until
we see you know what the
capacity and on all this stuff
is coming forward so.
With that well we're not gonna
take action if any more comments
Senator otherwise we'll move on
to the next thank you Mr
chairman and I I now know what
it feels like to be on the other
side of holding the builder.
Thank you of Senator souls are
you familiar of the Senate bill
thirty.
You ready Mr chair go ahead
Senator when you're ready thank
you and first thank you for
giving me a call make sure that
I was here on time to present
would you like to deal with an
amendment the short amendment to
the bill first off or would you
like it later on in the in the
bill as we talk about what the
bill is of want to talk about
the bill and the impact of this
bill is a rework of one that I
think was in this committee two
years ago that would require the
transportation services division
to purchase electric vehicles in
the state of New Mexico and
requiring that by twenty thirty
at least seventy five percent of
those state vehicles are
electric the there are
definitions that indicate
exactly what that would mean how
we get capacity of batteries as
we all watch the ads and I'm
sure the Superbowl ads you're
going to be filled with
commercials for electric
vehicles I've heard some of them
now have ranges up to four
hundred miles which is amazing
what a few years ago you
couldn't get one that we go two
hundred miles they are
developing rapidly and just
about every major manufacturer
now has some sort of electric
vehicles the idea is for the
state to be the leaders to
purchase electric vehicles in
their large eight but that also
drives putting electric
recharging around the state is
part of the point behind doing
this the electric vehicles cost
less to operate by significant
amounts and so that is more than
compensated for by the what is
currently a higher sticker price
on the front end over the life
of the vehicle when the motor
pools trying to to manage those
they have significantly lower
operating costs and maintenance
costs that more than covers the
overall cost of those vehicles
you can read through the various
pieces that puts on here has to
do with the definitions of those
particular vehicles the.
Proposed amendment just puts in
a higher up if you notice on
page two.
Starting about one ninety where
it talks about the weight of the
vehicles the the General
Services Department felt that
that had should be reinforced
further up
that is they are talking about
late duty vehicles not ones that
are over the eight thousand plus
pounds which are heavier duty
ones of which there are not
currently a lot of that heavy
duty vehicles available on the
market the reason for the
seventy five percent is there
are some situations where
electric vehicles may not be
appropriate for by the deadline
of twenty thirty we may still
have the internal combustion
engine vehicles that have not
completed their useful life and
are still on the books at that
time some of the situations
where an electric vehicle may
not be appropriate might be the
department of game and fish
where they've got officers that
are going a hundred fifty miles
out into the wilderness
somewhere doing management or
hundred checks and things of
that sort where it would be
getting pretty close to the
range of the vehicle to be able
to get back safely and for those
each would be allowed a total of
two you know there be twenty
five percent of the total
vehicles would not fall under
this so it's not a total you
have to replace all of them and
with that I'd stand for
questions or propose the
amendment I think you have a
copy of that amendment in your
your packet so they are
available to be handed out.
You should book a Senators the.
We have got of the go ahead and
of.
Representative I'm not a member
of the committee so I can't move
the amendment but the amendment
on page one line fourteen after
also part of the title within
certain light duty so it's not
heavy duty construction vehicles
or dump trucks or things of that
nature.
And then on page two line eight
after all at the end of that
sentence would again put in
light duty vehicles that are
rated less than eight thousand
five hundred pounds.
Unloaded base weight and are
classified as.
Share our within the okay we
have a motion
I move the amendment we have a
second Senator Lopez thank you
Mr okay thank you of.
The opposition to the amendment
see none of them of the bill.
Thank you.
I'm open for questions okay if
you for we go to the committee
will go to the audience.
Over to my left those are in
opposition to this bill.
So fans the work right.
None those are are you in favor
of this bill.
Done a lot of press recently and
a lot of people and the probably
hundreds on zoom waiting to
testify after I'm sure yeah so
one of we have anybody on favor
go ahead of federal here.
Okay.
Introduce yourself for the
record.
Mr chairman of the committee
this gonna with the circle of
here and the chapter
Representative thirty five
thousand members and supporters
of the recently passed state
clean cars rules.
to our state there's a huge
opportunity to pay for state
charging stations the purchase
of a lot.
for St Louis which reduces our
impact on climate change and
improves air quality toward
residents this bill should
clarify that the vehicles with
her of normal replacement
schedule and that this was not
present a sudden replacement of
vehicles of course the state
budget fully funds this
replacement as well so we just
we stand in support of this bill
you will yes thank you.
If.
Chairman members of the
committee Charles Walker
speaking on behalf of natural
resources defense council in
full support is still very
important measures special ed
safe residents of Santa Fe were
so much so much the state three
is driving around including area
so as to full support for.
Meeting my name is Sankalp the
committee to advocate with
conservation voters Mexico and
we are also looking for other as
comission us and is to achieve
the Jackson Act will transition
away from oil and gas
this that missions from
transportation makes up fourteen
percent of total emissions in
New Mexico years of.
Way to address that and for that
reason I have also mentioned
that.
What is thank you.
Mr Chairman John Garcia
secretary general services
department I want to thank
senator bill appreciate your
efforts and putting this forward
we're not in favor the bill or
against the bill at this point
we're doing our own analysis
there's some concerns that we
all have about charging stations
availability issues of cars
themselves you know can we
actually purchased some of these
vehicles
battery capacity and then
maintenance build out are are
just a few other issues so we
expect to buy these parts as we
can and and when they're
available but at this point
don't have an opinion on the
bill and so I think again
Senator FOR putting forward.
Be available for questions I can
answer any my last day is Friday
so we should.
Anybody else.
Is the rule of go to the zoom.
Have you have on line next
opponent from the.
League of women voters of New
Mexico has a position that we
voted on it which states as
follows that we support policies
and incentives that reduce
greenhouse gas emissions by
promoting greater energy
efficiency developing clean
renewable energy sources and
encourage encouraging further
research on alternatives to the
combustion of fossil fuels for
energy.
We strongly support this bill
because we believe as the state
becomes part of the market for
electric vehicles when they are
appropriate what this will do is
to strengthen the overall market
and reduce the cost because
we're increasing demand and
therefore supply will follow
therefore we are strongly in
favor thank you.
Thank you.
That okay all right that's it
for public comment will now go
to committee Representative a
Senator of meal thank you Mr
chairman thank you senator so
just a question Rio Arriba
County we have practically no
charging stations what we that
work with finances on the line
item I wasn't sure if that there
was funding from the state for
instance.
Mr chair and senator charging
stations tend to follow demand
for charging stations that's
part of the purpose of this bill
is when there are more electric
vehicles the commercial charging
stations are very likely to
follow along to provide for the
charging of those vehicles we've
seen that across the country
other places that have larger
numbers of electric vehicles
charging stations start showing
up
certainly and as we all know
Tesla has been one of the the
main ones that it started the
the whole market towards
electric vehicles and they put
out exactly where charging
stations are but we're starting
to see a bigger problem
information of those along the
main interstates within New
Mexico so that there is charging
available but as they become
state wide you're going to start
seeing municipalities and others
putting in charging stations so
that they're able to continue to
take part of the economics that
come from being able to move
people.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
so.
Senator Griggs.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator guest.
One of the things that I'm I
wonder about are supposed is
affected your targeted targets
twenty thirty.
you've got a an administration
in office until twenty twenty
seven that you know certainly
are addition porch and
production.
And just and and wonder do you
believe really it's necessary
given the situation we have
today to to do a bill that
requires this instead of
Mr chair Senator what I imagine
this administration will work
for ET al.
Mr chair and senator some of the
estimates for electric vehicles
is there going to be by twenty
thirty are likely to be making
up eighty to ninety percent of
all new vehicles light duty
vehicles in the country as it is
this bill may not be necessary
the point of this is to ensure
the General Services Department
has a plan for how we're going
to get there so that we are not
when and as was very ably
pointed out provided they are
available that we are moving in
that direction there are no
penalties if we don't get there
this is aspirational this is
mostly us that there is a plan
in to purchase those as they're
available and meet the needs
with the goal of having seventy
five percent by twenty thirty
there's no penalty if we don't
do that I didn't want to put
that into it.
It's aspirational so that it
helps move the market in New
Mexico in particularly for the
infrastructure and charging
stations and others.
Care center I guess I can see it
a little more so if the
administration was a whole.
To the action pro for the
legislature should not hash it
has to be but I you've got a
ministration actually supports
it may go you know if you're
talking eighty percent so maybe
that.
By the end of the trial
I don't know and I I don't know
that I I also believe that she
was sharply and struck the
General Services Department to
give get online get ready to
session I guess the concern is
the the law all probably isn't
needed with the administration
we have today
And so I don't I don't General
Motors really help initial not I
mean you're sending the signal
that you want certain things
done but I I believe certain
things were probably headed that
way regardless Mr chair Dr
that's that's like insurer fall
something that looks like we're
headed that way whatever we do
so thank you.
Thank you Senator Kernan.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you senator of quick question is
it does it appears that
departments or agencies such as
the department of public safety
and transportation that this
would not would that not be
included in the the percentages
with those be left outside of
what your request is.
Mr chairman and senator I'm not
sure I understand which ones or
where is that department public
safety these are law enforcement
that are out on the roads they
don't have time to stop and
recharge in department
transportation out in in the
field all the time it seems like
this is more of an urban rural
issue in rural New Mexico
really difficult to to be able
to figure out how you can
utilize of an easy out when
you're out in the country all
the time whether you're in the
oil filter apple culture
whatever and you've got an
exemption for DPS in the LCS
thing in this bill are they
included in your percentage
that's required.
I think I understand Mr chair
and senator I think I understand
now some of the reason that they
were not included in this is for
the very reasons that you put is
they may not be able to make
that and so up as I read and
understand what my intention is
is of the ones that would be
included that they would not be
the twenty five percent that are
included however if you've ever
driven one of the Tesla's for
instance they'll be to just
about any of the police cars
we've currently got on the road
I watched very interesting a
video of Tesla verses in
Lamborghini something or other
it was they're amazing electric
vehicles are very very fast if
they need to be and so I could
certainly see our police cars
switching over to that and
provided that there is charging
available the police often have
to stop for lunch and with rapid
charging if there's the charging
build out also they have
opportunities to do that but
there are exceptions because of
some situations where charging
may not be available because of
distance and other types of I've
been incredibly impressed in
just the two years when I first
introduced this at how much the
range of electric vehicles has
expanded.
Thank you Mr chair and and I'm
not concerned about the state
for public law enforcement it's
more about the distance and you
know they're on the road all the
time and and maybe they can stop
for lunch to recharge if they
stop close to a place where he
can just charge so I think
there's some concerns there but
I also think Mr chair that there
other departments that need more
reliability and more distance
and more time on the road
it makes me a little bit nervous
to think about people that are
working out in in the oil field
being required to to check on
oil and gas production things
like that and the staff out
there because we're talking
about an hour and a half to get
out to a place in in an hour and
a half to get back those are my
concerns have another question
with regard to the replacement I
so as you speak being replaced
are we replacing that vehicle
are are we replace batteries
into the vehicle.
The Mister chairman Senator
typically they do not replace
the batteries in the vehicle the
batteries when and I remember
when they first came out they
were concerned about the length
in the life of them and every
single one has lasted longer
than what they initially
expected them to last and so
those that isn't from my
understanding has not been a
problem with electric vehicles
and the newer models have longer
lasting and greater ranging
capability up I don't think that
that's a problem at all the data
that is come out on the total
cost of ownership and
maintenance of for the life of
the vehicle electric vehicles
have a lower total cost overall
than an internal combustion
engines to electric vehicles you
don't have change oil you done
the they usually use
regenerative braking so the
brakes last longer there's all
and quite a number of
maintenance things that they
don't have which lowers the
total cost from purchase to end
of life dennoch internal
combustion engine.
Thank you Mr chair and so what
would be the cost to replace the
battery and electric vehicle Mr
chair Senator I do not know.
Not need fund that so
question I have Mister chair
it seems like in the fiscal
implications in the F. I. R.
that it would.
Across the state of New Mexico
close to thirty one million
dollars to replace the remaining
state owned vehicles with the
fees at twenty thirty incentive
procreation associated with this
bill.
Mr chair and and Senator Kernan
there is not as I look through
the F. I. R. this was be the
straight up cost to replace all
of those vehicles not the
incremental cost of the
additional initial cost to
replace them over the others and
therefore we already are putting
this money into replacement
costs on a regular basis the
initial cost currently of
electric vehicles is more than
an internal combustion engine
but again we get a savings on
the backside in the maintenance
the FIR makes it look like we
have to just buy all the
straight up new and aren't
retiring ones ever that this is
an additional total overall cost
and that would be inaccurate.
Mr chair one last question state
employees today often times are
they allowed to take their state
owned vehicles home are do they
have to leave those basically
parked somewhere at the
department for that for.
Mr chair and and senator I
suspect there may be some of
them that are able to take their
vehicles home most of them
probably stay at the office and
they bring their other vehicle
Ian I know up in here in Santa
Fe many of the state.
Buildings have electric charging
in order to manage those the
state fleet that is there.
But I don't know what percentage
take their cars home I know many
of our police officers and such
they do take their vehicles home
as as a result of their position
But I don't know what percentage
or how many of them do so.
Mr chair trying to figure out if
if the vehicles are parked at
the department where they work
and they have multiple vehicles
and I assume that would be
charging overnight.
At various.
Plug in stations or if they take
them home they would do that at
their home and so I don't who
would pay that cost I know there
is a bit of a cost associated
with doing that providing the
charging stations within your
home and then the cost of the
electricity then there's
Casamento where you do it so
just curious that that that's
all I have just been served that
those.
Responding to the.
Just deal with many of the
people would take their vehicles
they may have been part at the
state agency during the day and
the plugging and then instead of
at night
Certainly that would be on an
individual basis but the I could
envision that in some instances
that they might get a stipend
for the extra cost of
electricity if they're charging
at home for the state use of a
vehicle but I think that would
be worked out by individual
agencies I would think similar
to what they might you know have
a state credit card to pay for
gas costs when they're off on
business someplace.
Thank you Senator.
What else the committee.
Questions.
Of.
Senator Tallman that is.
Five years.
And
back to this.
As the new ones ago for five
hundred miles so so
But that's not a problem.
overall it's that they're going
to stop making gas powered cars
by twenty twenty twenty twenty
five General Motors the staff
and affection gasoline engine
cars powered cars in two
thousand thirty.
And the.
The the batteries just don't
wear our read recently that.
This.
Note that the cars are driven
more than million miles and that
still was working fine but they
don't know how long it's going
to.
Because nobody's driven one long
enough to where that.
So it's a.
I wholeheartedly support this
bill this is where the future
and that thank you for bringing
this bill.
Thank you senator.
Already so thank you.
Okay well motion on the path
okay well motion for the past.
Then a second.
The opposition to the motion.
We have okay so we have to.
Propose so we're just going to
roll call we will.
Senator Hotmail.
Senator Kernan no Senator Lopez
yes senator Sanchez is not here
Senator Tallman yes Senator
Wirth yes Senator Griggs sorry
I'm late.
Hello.
and Senator Hamblen no.
Senator Shendo a yes.
I for and two against with the.
Thank goodness we will thank you
Mr chair I hope the governor's
listen and because I'm gonna be
complementary to the I believe
that this is something that the
administration can address
because they can they can see
and feel that different for the
artificial deadline may or may
not not be needed and one other
thing that we did mention is
either Hyundai or kia.
Has brought in the California a
hydrogen powered car that the
marketing and for.
unique areas in California so it
could be Senator as you move
forward with bill you look at
the clear that it would be
electric for.
One of those other technologies
that may come in before we may
just jump right electors.
Thank you thank you Mr Senator
thank you thank you so of course
of five to to to to pass.
Thank you.
So.
This Senator Ortiz Y. Pino is
here.
Okay.
All righty
Okay all right.
are you this expert witness
thank okay R. I will there is
okay great okay.
The committee for fun.
I.
All right just right.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Welcome thank you Mr chairman
thank you members of the
committee.
I'm here today on behalf of the
home health care agencies in the
state.
And with me is my expert witness
Meggin Lorino the director of
the president president
Executive Director executive
director of the.
Of the home health care agencies
of New Mexico the their
association and what happened
the reason we bring this bill
before you is what happened is
during the COVID epidemic during
the pandemic.
There were federal programs made
available to help agencies that
have been seriously damaged
financially by the by the
pandemic.
And
Among those where the home
health agencies they were unable
to to to to do their work in the
same to the same extent they've
been able to do it before and so
financially they were all
teetering on the brink of
elimination so the federal
government made a
under the art the maybe maybe
payments to those agencies and
to those agencies were shocked
to find that when the payments
arrived the state of New Mexico
had
Tax those with the gross
receipts tax and so they'll lost
about eight percent of what they
needed to survive
there maybe a second or even
third tranche of those payments
in the next couple of years but
not the on that we're just
talking about something that.
Would happen over the next
couple of years and this bill
seeks to make sure that we
include them along with the
other agencies that we did this
for.
When the state in the you know
pass the cares Act funding and
exempted those those payments
from gross receipts tax so we're
just seeking to add this group
and the art of payments to what
was already given to other
agencies under the cares Act and
with that I'll turn it over to
mislead you know so she could
explain exactly what what we're
after.
But thank you senator Mr chair
members of the committee so as
it Senator Ortiz Y. Pino said.
In.
June of twenty twenty at and
yells for special session at the
legislature and the governor
signed house bill two and and
with that you exempted cares Act
funding to non hospital health
care providers and twenty twenty
one the US Congress passed a at
American recovery plan act which
and it had earmarked some
dollars for home and community
based providers those so and
that is basically bringing down
to New Mexico a ten percentage
point increase to R. F. map for
certain Medicaid expenditures
for home and community based
services.
Senate bill thirty six it's
simply expands the exemption of
gross receipts tax for non
hospital health care providers
to include our providers so that
our providers can ensure that
they're using those dollars to
care for the patients that are
in their care to make sure that
they are using those dollars for
its intended purposes which were
explicitly to recruit and retain
caregivers which as you probably
know is having the same type of
employee shortage and crisis to
care for our most vulnerable New
Mexicans so
as senator Pete there to the
Pino said year one has already
been distributed to our
providers to our home and
community based providers
through personal care service
program we understand that
because of the state
constitution that we're not
gonna be able to get those
dollars back but our year two
and year three dollars have not
yet been provided to our
providers and we really want to
make sure that moving forward as
much of as much of those dollars
stay with them so that they can
get it out to their workers is
that they can get it out to get
PPE invest in infrastructure and
all the stated purposes of that
bill which did not state that it
they wanted it to go to the
state of New Mexico one other
thing is I do understand that
you all are in general not
passing out and tax bills today
but this does you probably have
noted has has an emergency
clause and that is because those
are your two and year three
people this year two dollars
could basically be going now at
any moment so then our providers
would be liable and again for
our constitution not be able to
get those dollars this is not a
long term and funding mechanism
it is just for three years so we
really every dollar we can save
as a dollar that will go to
benefit a pretty vulnerable
industries.
And then with that Mr Chairman
will stand for questions.
Okay thank you did you just say
seven Jason there you all should
have a substitute bill that was
delivered yesterday
I.
And and happy to have a place
for me.
It will.
We.
We have to have.
In order to put that on the
table thank share the other one
of the do not pass on Senate
bill thirty six seventeen of the
substitute for proper
discussion.
The motions of the head in the.
So all the yeah Mr Espinoza the
explain he's the executive
director of the association this
is our lobbyist.
I like these give us all the
time yes chairman members of the
committee the substitute bill
that you have before you when we
drafted the legislation HSD did
reach out to us originally the
bill because the cares Act
dollars didn't come directly
from the federal government
directly to the providers under
the are for payments it's
actually going to HSD and then
HSD is making the payments so we
just per agencies request fix
the language that says payments
from HSD to these types
providers yeah and I believe to
it just the and here here here
and that they helped us draft
the substituted if you like them
to have answered questions or
make comments and so forth.
That.
Okay so of.
We have a substitute
on the on the floor.
If the discussion so any further
anybody maintenance do want to
comment.
Anybody from HSD.
A good morning Mr chairman and
committee members are always
welcome within CFO and deputy
director at Medicaid and we
don't we don't stand in support
or against the bill
but what this bill does is
exempt the pay of payments are
payments the gross receipts tax
and pretty standard it'll create
a little bit of administrative
burden on us but we can deal
with that so and to point out
that our payments are temporary
payments thank you they're not
and they only last well the fund
has funding so basically it
offsets the general fund costs
with federal funds.
Thank you appreciate that thank
you.
So at this time will of go out
there Jerry anymore the state
tax is tax there's so many of
them TRD okay have a
good afternoon for rate in tax
policy director of taxation
department
of course the tax rate is almost
all all right we have the
largest school provision in
department still which is the
Senate on forty seven the
committee hearing down rose so
we honestly do support that.
Renewable and we did a system
taxes viruses item around the
fact that there's an
intermediary which is a huge
issue.
Systems thank you.
That's it Mr chairman okay so no
of go to the audience so we'll
start over here those are
opposition to this bill.
Anybody.
Over to my right.
I see none of those are in favor
of the Senate bill Skadi of
Bill.
Okay so those in favor will
start over here.
Anybody.
Back there.
Representative.
The heart of us here and we have
a twenty one this is not just
for the Mexico health care
association Canada Mexico versus
the let me we sent four SB
thirty cents we appreciate all
the assistance we are dollars an
issue where that the cost of
nursing care is present we want
to make sure that every dollar
to the same way as the cares Act
money in this will ensure that
dollars go to health care
delivery and not.
Thank you.
What else would anybody assume
we do have
to
point go ahead.
I am.
Right.
On the staff and and.
If they are.
Having it happen on users out.
There are no.
Good.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
and members of the committee on
Meghan McAllen the executive
director of the New Mexico
behavior health providers
association and we stand in full
support of Senate bill thirty
six and home kids mom help
health care providers
the funds received from the app
for payments went to provide
necessary services but the
obligation of the gross receipts
tax on those funds so we can be
the infrastructure support for
that care including behavioral
health care very much appreciate
your ongoing support of behavior
health care and health care and
again urged full support of this
bill thank you very much.
You.
Have a comment.
Go ahead and.
Chair members of the committee
on one second if your record of
the association of developmental
disabilities community provided
here to support Senate bill
thirty six as amended we thank
the senator for bringing this
bill forward thanks for your
consideration.
That we have there.
Hi my name is Karen was Mr
chairman and members of the
committee thank you for allowing
me to speak I'm here on behalf
of the American physical therapy
association New Mexico chapter
and we are in full support of
this bill and depended on
physical.
Important part of health care
and we fully support in in the
in in the costs related to
providing health care thank you.
Right now there are.
Thank you we'll go to.
As of the committee.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
chairman can you and maybe we've
got
TRD here there's a.
The difference in the FY are.
The T. R. D. F. I. R. is a lot
lower than the LFC FIR which in
FY twenty for the LFC estimate
is one point three to five
million dollar general fund
nonrecurring and TRD is one
point three million to for the
nine hundred thousand to the.
Local governments that local
government piece is up to two
million on the LFC I'm just
curious if there's a different.
Analysis or what what that is so
I'm not sure market you can help
with that are
Mr Chairman work I can Mr part
is always the still echo there
is good is ma'am I believe that
we may percent receive different
information on phones so be paid
out of there are and so.
Or your dad so.
And Mr tors comment on that
twenty minutes yep Mr chair and
senator with a flight Mr Chaykin
mention and looks like we're
using different methodologies so
we'll have to put our heads
together trying.
Posted on the okay Mister is
anyone here from the the cash
for the.
Disability.
I bring this up because I think
this is one of the things we're
gonna have a discussion about
peer omitting and lots of these
G. R. T. everyone needs to
understand this hits all the
local governments to and so I
just want to make sure that you
know if they're listening and
that there they understand here
that if if we do this which
again I think policy wise like I
get the arguments but I just
it's not just us at the state
it's the local governments as is
shown on the FIR so yes yes
ma'am committee members of at
the LFC is aware of the of the
funding and so they'd probably
included the impact of the are
signing into your the probably
not that's probably I assume
that's a difference of the bill
confirm but
that maybe.
Okay well I do I do think again
I'm sure someone's listening
that will.
You know let those in the yeah
let them know that the local
governments no but that's
something the flag and then I
just want to you know the issue
of the emergency clause.
Is a good one to it typically
you know and again I think we're
holding these bills until we
figure out exactly what all the
numbers look like but there may
be well maybe maybe we should
put this into the omnibus bill
and then my friends over there
on the other side of the aisle
will have to help us get the
emergency clause get across.
But it's a significant that
that's an important issue that
we need to be aware of because
again as we put together this
bill which I think is what we're
doing with all the tax bill
synergies Pino I just before you
came the chair and that's we're
gonna kind of hold them and see
exactly what the capacity is and
this is not occurring so that's
an important distinction to that
but this may be one that at the
same time we sent to the house
because of the emergency clause
you know if if if the and if
there's a willingness to do what
I think you should take it might
go out as a separate bill to
make sure we don't if it's in
the of this bill and.
We don't have the same kind of
love for the tax bill we had
last session you know that then
you would lose the emergency
clause of quite frankly that the
big numbers FY twenty for myself
okay that's all I have is just
taxes videos from committee.
Thank you senator Wirth on your
comments because I was thinking
about you know and respect to
the emergency clause that
perhaps you know since it's
temporary money it's not
recurring yeah that that we may
have to look at that little
differently so what will visit
that you know as we would put
the package together to see this
my goal as a standalone as close
to the on this package so for so
thank you we appreciate that
okay with that all right so with
that was going to hold this will
take no action appreciate the
presentation and what we'll get
back to you okay thank you thank
you yes.
Senate bill thirty seven Senator
meal.
Regional transit G. R. T.
distributions.
Yeah.
Yes
or die.
We can just.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee thanks for having us
today use this bill last year
for last session and a thirty
day session and since we ran out
of time it didn't make it on to
the finance committee's agenda
and so we're revisiting the bill
again today and so I'm gonna
just remind you what's the but
the Senate bill will do and so
apparently there's for rtds in
the state of New Mexico and only
two of them Rio metro and the
north central R. T. D. have
voter approved regional transit
gross receipts tax at this time
now Senate bill thirty seven is
simply changes how the regional
transit gross receipts tax is
distributed to the regional
transit district once the voters
have approved the tax now
currently the taxes omitted from
the tax and revenue to the
county and that it collected in
and the county remits it to the
respective R. T. D. now this
bill will remove the county from
the intimate intimate Terry
process so that the taxes
remitted directly to our to do
another process was fine when we
were and New agency but now that
we have eighteen years under our
belt we believe that the R. T.
D. can take over at generating
is getting that are gross
receipts tax on their own that
would give you three major
points of this bill before I
send it over to my expert
witness Peter Dreier the the
tribbles having having a county
of re shuffling the distribution
of tax to in RTP recipient the
legislation makes it a direct
distribution from tax and
revenue to the R. TT and so no
different than what happens with
this apologies in counties to
the county would no longer need
to account for these funds as
part of their budget process in
order for a county to account
for these funds which did not
belong to them they must inflate
their annual budget to show the
receipt of this income and debt
at the expense going out.
It paints an accurate picture of
the budget to the public and
three it removes the need for
multiple tax sept agreements
between each county in our TD
taxed revenue and the R. T. D.
and New Mexico finance authority
when our to do is undertaking
bond financing and to my right
of me is that Peter SCHWEYER
who's going to service my expert
witness that I'm gonna turn it
over to him if he has any
comments.
A good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee my name
is Peter SCHWEYER and general
counsel to the N. C. R. T.
that's north central regional
transit district you're probably
more familiar with us if you're
familiar with us at all as the
blue bus and we find Trancers
over ten thousand square miles
of rural northern New Mexico
we've been we were the first
transit district in the state
there are four total districts
but the two that have imposed
this tax increment are Rio metro
in Santa Valencia and and
Bernalillo county stand in C. R.
T. which we are and really about
PTA's Los Alamos and Santa Fe
counties
really this is just sort of from
our perspective look keeping
thing because it just means the
tax that we impose our it tax
increment which is one eight to
one percent gross receipts tax
comes directly to us instead of
going through our county members
we feel that we are now mature
organization we've grown to be
nearly a hundred people and that
we're now capable of.
standing on our own to exit this
kind of legislation and would be
a good indication that the state
agrees as well that we're
prepared to move forward as it
it we're we're we're local
governments were basically
subdivisions of the state of New
Mexico and small local
governments so I don't think of
anything that X. the thing I did
want to mention is that from our
perspective we're talking about
twelve checks a year from each
county so it's not a whole lot
of
Should it seems to me like it
should be a whole lot of work to
just re direct twelve checks
here from you to the member
counties that's only seven
counties so I we think it's
fairly simple legislation but it
would be a good indication that
we are now organization prepared
to deal with our own finances
thank you.
Thank you Mr chair.
Okay so thank thank you a
senator bill will go out to the
audience those that are in
opposition of Senate bill thirty
seven.
Start over here anybody here.
Xenon.
Those that are in favor of
Senate bill thirty seven.
Scott Scanlon registered
lobbyists for the blue bus folks
and and senator Hermio in the
expert explained the problem
this bill has been in front of
this committee for last couple
of years the first time this
committee amended bill made a
stronger bill and last year we
ran out of time so we just think
this is a simple matter it's a
shame it has to get fixed
legislatively but we urge your
support thank you Mr chairman
thank you.
Nobody else in the audience.
Nobody knows them.
Okay so we'll go to members of
the committee.
I think they like the bill Mr
chairman.
I move closer for the best.
Second by Senator Sanchez
anybody in opposition to the
motion.
See none of the best.
Mr Chairman thank you thank you.
Given so
Senator Munoz I know they were
finishing up can you so many
lateral.
There were four is built.
North as we want to know I mean.
Seven days on a with that with
that one because.
This reminder we have this huge.
Both LFC.
We were state Santa Fe in.
Thank you the floor over here
so.
One.
US senator Munoz.
We came in just a little short
of finishing up so.
Senate finance.
I can see
I am sure that.
Question is on the weekends.
For.
Thank you Mr chairman Senate
bill one oh two just requires a
semis to stay in the right hand
lane same as the last three
years but with an additional
penalty of two hundred fifty for
not doing that just some
background information you'll
see it in your FIR right in just
McKinley County alone right.
In just that eighty mile stretch
in McKinley county from there's
online there's been forty five
fatal crashes and one to four
fifteen regular crashes in the
in.
I believe we have the mantis
mapping your FIR and maybe get
that T..
This is the same thing but I
just got more dangerous and more
dangers as we travel I. forty.
And it's hard for person from
grants Gallup wherever to go
down that road and I think
everybody traveled out to Gallup
sometime during the interim
committee experienced I. forty
if it's best issues getting.
There's too many wrecks too many
people are dying it's costing
way too many lives and now with
this bill we're just adding
additional penalty
in New Mexico I think there was
I'm looking for that I our
section and may not be in yours
three hundred eighty four fatal
accidents in New Mexico I forty.
So.
That will stand for questions.
Will.
To the.
The.
One of the.
Right I will support cares five
forty needs another land all the
way.
It's it's crazy and there are so
many people that need for
letter safer for us right to my
home we love it is the drives
going on for four.
That.
Just say no.
It.
All.
thank you
thank you for reading.
This will be the.
What was the reason.
Pocket veto.
So.
This is the what's.
What what is safer for the so I.
Stages from there he could use
that one sentence please.
About the millimeter.
The intent of the donor do
Sierra in one sentence it's very
dangerous if they're not on the
right hand lane.
Three four times a year.
We call this.
The two dangerous maybe because.
Hi Carl is so fast that.
I would just tell you maybe or
the charging station.
For a chance to get.
Did.
Senator Sanchez over there he
travels I forty with this
trucks.
and what he experiences.
Try to business.
I've been getting paid all of
our business but is competing
Regis just a death rate in just
what happens on I. forty with
driver and semi distractions
right have you talked to any
attorney that suing over any
fatal accidents and ideal the
drivers are not from here and
the minute accident happens they
leave the country and they're
gone but there's been people
killed in Gallup sitting at an
accident flood and a semi comes
in a rare and some right.
Was slowing down or semis it
moving into the left hand lane I
think there's like one hundred
eighty two crashes that affected
that none totaled not fatal but
the fatal numbers a pilot lower
I have that somewhere I don't
know why they stick in my file
but if it's just a it's
dangerous you get on I. forty in
here are going along at seventy
five miles an hour and a semi
pulls out at sixty five and
tries to pass the other semi at
sixty seven and and traffic
backs up for ten miles and
frustration levels with people
are getting ridiculous and and
even in accidents that I've seen
is you'll see truck drivers now
carry scooters so they can get a
little scooter and go up the
road into a vaccine and how long
they're going to be in income
that.
Okay well.
Thanks for the explanation of
the.
Have just basically.
Yeah I.
The justice school brought up
children.
And is making sure the state
police are near.
I want to be a witness to that.
Thank you for your.
Thank you so often anybody else
on the committee.
And over this bill for senator
Wirth do that so motion for you
pass we have a second Senator
Kernan.
Anybody in opposition to this
motion.
I see none yeah would you pass
on Senate bill one oh two.
In my in my bill sponsor or help
help rural remain there we can
pass this one just quick.
If there is any of that in this
of all for this bill for those
that are listening eight zero.
Okay all right thank you SB one
of four thank you Mr chairman
and members of the committee sub
of a committee set.
Have.
I don't think that's what it was
but now if the committee no
our.
This was a because of the change
in our secretary we're not drop
so it's not the fault of them
it's ours so we're gonna go
ahead and the gate of listening
about it coming in time three
but we were able to.
Getting out is Mr chairman I
you're looking over the sub we
miss we miss community and with
an airport now Stallis and so
that's what the sub does.
You also see that this changes
the data of appropriated funds
twenty three state twenty four.
Yes and I have that one of
the past
on the Senator one point because
for thank thank you for.
All right so you have a
substitute thank you Mr.
Thank you chairman Senate bill
one of four price critical
funding for construction
rehabilitation and improvement
projects across the state
airports are critical services
in New Mexico to long by law
enforcement firefighting medical
services tourism and economic
development.
Over half a billion in unfunded
projects of Santa D. O. T. and
adequately funded with federal
funds or remains thank you
because lack of state funds and
have they've grown substantially
this doesn't bill there's about
three hundred fourteen million
dollars to the Department of DOT
for the aviation division and
includes projects around the
state for a central New Mexico
north eastern New Mexico western
New Mexico every corner of the
state and twenty one million for
tribal airports
You know for sure is that the
money is spent in timely matter
and then I will do some
background
you may or may not know that I
have a pilot's license in FY
appointment I've landed in
Deming talx Gallup Santa Fe
pretty much every western
community Farmington Aztec
goal kind of go over the state
and you see the needs and I can
tell you in that mean when I
landed on that runway I thought
I might have been a dirt runway
because it cracks with that why
in your dashboard kind of
vibrating and moving across and
then there tax away was just as
bad Santa Fe is is in pretty
good shape they need some
runaway worker tax we work and
you feel that in your plane and
feel that but I will tell you
let and a sauce which is a
weather information system and
you guys may watch morning news
and wonder why Gallup and have
their little temperature up on
the morning news for like ninety
days they wash which gives a
reading across the state of
winds temperature right density
altitude and informs pilots
what's happening in the area
when they're gonna land.
One that a wash when out and
almost for ninety days and I
don't know what to DOT aviation
department so long to get that
pushed through is we have
medical flights because of
snowstorm tried that could leave
and so they had to go to window
rock and transport them there
and get the a wash out of there
because if anything were to
happen on that flight and you
have a loss information right
then F. A. A. for the medical we
came back and said he is fluent
danger and you kill that deal
because you know that the icing
situation in McKinley county and
Gallup at the airport was not
read on the reader and you you
put people at risk and and
that's our here for has been for
I I know commercial flights
canceled a gal because that and
it happened because of weather
and predicting the weather
there's been a lot of medical
flights but when things happen
in airports and their
instrumental to to communities
the number one rule about
airports is you can always tell
how much money is in town if you
look at the airport we look at
Santa Fe the automatic jets that
are out there in the run waste
certain days or maybe ten or
fifteen private jets we have
commercial services if anything
would happen to that A. Woss in
Santa Fe you would be diverted
to Albuquerque and I think that
happened a couple weeks ago but
not because they have lost and
so you would not have that
system in place but we all
neglect what we don't use it and
and reflective that money but if
we're gonna add tourism economic
development jobs to New Mexico
airports are critical for that
what's happening in Roswell Los
crucis is about to get a new
flight from Albuquerque that Los
crucis art already exists and
they're looking at a Santa
Theresa for a commercial cargo
flights in the center so
airports are very critical what
this does is help us catch up
maintain.
Yes I know Senator Sanchez's
also pilot.
And and by his own plane and so
with that I think will stand for
questions unless I missed
anything.
Mr chairman members the
committee thank you I'm Allison
Nichols at the municipal league
thank you so much the Sanchez
well I think you did a great job
explaining the needs that are
are point face we have over half
a billion dollars unfunded
funded project needs and that
was done that state was that in
twenty fifteen so those need to
provide the ground game time
funding has really stayed
stagnant over the last two
decades at the federal level so
has not been able to to fund
those growing project backlogs
and just a couple notes on the
bill it builds in fiscal
accountability by requiring
reversion of the money after
four years in FY twenty seven so
no re authorization and that's
to encourage timely spending of
the money on the money's also
appropriated to our aviation
experts at D. O. T. so they can
find vetting an oversight of of
projects spending.
and then finally it fully funds
projects so we hope that will
avoid sort of the piecemeal
funding approach and and allow
these projects to get started
and completed in a timely manner
before FY twenty seven and then
we think this bill is really
important because it's not only
a an investment local
communities so in our job
creation economic development
health and safety.
But it's also an investment our
state's infrastructure as a
sponsor mentioned airports to
provide a lot of statewide
support for firefighting law
enforcement medical capabilities
expanding business travel and
tourism and also the
construction projects would
generate G. R. T. revenue for
local governments and for the
state we think is a really
important investment and and
this is the time to make this
investment in New Mexico's
aviation infrastructure so thank
you so much for your support I
just want to add one comment one
time I was in San Diego on the
beach and if they're playing
goes by and says house forty
nine Bucks right and I'm like
how do you get from setting of
the towers for forty nine Bucks
right so you look it up right
now flight lose every Thursday
out of tech house to go to San
Diego and goes to Dallas and so
I mean it was amazing to me it's
easier to go to for me to go to
Towson gets up flight then is to
go to Albuquerque in and catch
it catch a flight so.
For forty nine dollars.
Percent.
Mr Chairman okay at this time of
we'll go to the committee will
go out to the audience those
that are in opposition to Senate
bill one four.
Nobody.
I see none.
Those that are in support of
Senate bill one of four.
Thank you for bringing this bill
forward Senator us my name is
Albert Thomas I am a senior vice
president gore and Houston also
the
past president and state board
director for the American
council of engineering companies
New Mexico we supporting
legislation that brings forward
funding for infrastructure to
our state and this one specific
airports which is here is
important to economic
development for communities it's
also important for safety in
terms of firefighting and
emergency so again thank you
senator Munoz and we strongly
support this bill thank you back
there for them chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Michael Garcia Office both
arms off of those ABC hearing
from we just take care of a a
lot of experience the state of
Mexico from all four border
farms in play number down of
awful and over to order and the
our our friends here a more from
all of those on.
this is a really important
committees understand these
communities in between services
rendered handle those are the
communities that need help that
they cannot fund all the
projects in and out of the woods
hangar projects that a lot of
that so this bill really will
help these communities but
they're tourism related.
Fe that Representative thank you
for that.
Really wild for savings
understand a not fully support
all these are for for this bill.
Thank you.
Mr chairman and committee years
and with the city of Los crucis
we really appreciated timing is
built Los crucis our top
priority this year and also last
is no objection where forces.
We can utilize it for economic
development to the industrial
parks wrote four thousand acres
of city owned by cost free way
from the airport and also we
just started err service
utilizing the rule has been from
the legislature passed and so
forth we're selfish perspective
diesel truck right and diesel
Pueblo for all of the council
reiterated to the Los crucis I'm
hoping to have utilize your
service this can be a lot
cheaper for me to get down there
the lockers and I'm like I spend
a lot more to all of your.
The the limitations with the
project we appreciate Sanchez
bring it for one and one full
support this legislation thank
you thank you overall this of
course.
But.
Thank you Mr chair
representative so if for some of
the executive director of the
New Mexico municipal league expo
so.
In the sponsor for their work on
this occasion for our executive
committee back in November and
this bill affects approximately
forty seven not only beautiful
but also regional airports and
this is really critical to the
development as the mentioned
before and we stand in full
support of this sorry again not
out free to.
Mr chairman and committee thank
you my name is veterans in the
director of mediation division
for a.
This is the version.
of the proposed act I didn't see
their workstation Division on
their budget passes I would
appreciate the page eighty issue
division to be there right next
to the victim Department of
transportation so we have a we
will be able we can help
administrative funds thank you
appreciate it thank you.
Got there and senator for that
telehealth the more of us here
with me this is are we standing
a strong supporter of the bill
we would say that this is a good
investment what I would call
durable the infrastructure and
that means it has a long term
impact of a statewide in rural
communities and a big piece of
some of the project that we're
looking at is that for would be
pieces of the airport the second
service for forty years no
longer so we see a lot of impact
that taxpayer dollars for this
thanks to Senator for
sponsoring.
Your.
Mr chairman members of the
committee I think Bob Brooks
president of the association
Mexico excuse me I appreciate
the the work center.
Senate because.
Along with I also like to save
the state and the federal
government do a pretty good job
maintaining our critical assets
the report but the rest of the
airport really really bad and
the work that we can never get
to given the runways and
taxiways opened a high priority
in the state as a very.
Taking care of that for for for
the rest of us the internal
structures are deteriorating
rapidly and this bill will go a
long ways to bring our airports
have to what what they need to
be at.
Thank you.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Chelsea
Canada and I'm here on behalf of
the New Mexico chamber of
commerce we support Senate bill
one oh four in the investments
that includes reporter the
gateways to local.
Torrez New Mexicans and goes to
destinations across the state
this is especially important for
our state being the fifth
largest state I land mass to
connect all of us as for
economic development
opportunities we think the
sponsor for bringing this
forward thank you thank you.
Hi Mr chairman.
Thank you very much for this.
Back in the City of Santa Fe
first happened support.
Legislation.
Growing.
We're doing a twenty two million
dollars.
And this will help and more we
need more to get this
Thank you very.
For the rest of this position.
And gas that is stored in.
Galvan airport is the best
constructed over forty years
ago.
He did.
To the Department center yes it
is great job explaining.
Out there as well these money
for this this is great in the
facilities up to speed.
Here.
The.
Right feeding the dress
rehearsals Agency.
Yeah one of these endeavors into
established a more integrated
down beneficial to both the city
of Gallup and.
Thank you Mr Gramm for that.
You've reached of what we hear
and we'll finish up with just a
very good gentleman give me
thank you.
Chairman committee members I'm
Mike Morris more Clovis and I
want to thank bill sponsor for
this our regional airport in
Clovis is it represents a
tremendous amount of opportunity
for economic development as also
providing critical services to
the region including the person
contractors can airforce base
which do a lot of travel in and
out of the area and our little
airport is struggling to keep up
and we need to make improvements
and invest their at this this
bill is music to our ears we
have the essential air service.
Airline providing daily flights
to Denver or Denver
international as well as Dallas
fort worth right out of Clovis
and we have nearly thirteen
thousand four passengers in
twenty twenty two our airports
growing this would help us keep
up thank you I think there's
more.
Chairman and the committee
members namely Crawford there
was also no echo everything.
Everyone's been saying we we
have just started and hopefully
will complete master plan for
our airport because of the
situations that are there right
now this but whether hospitals
we average about twenty earlier
this month for more local
communities so it's it's an
integral part of our safety the
last two fires that we just
received from the right far more
support if we maintain their the
airport all of these things
would help go a lot further to
make this more compatible for
the needs that we have in the
future is to tourism it is the
front door our community for so
many people with the race track
and everything that we have seen
this so Senator been great this
season so all those things we
have a burgeoning local.
Rupe of people that are actively
the one to build hangars on
their own so we have a lot of
driving fines and things are
geared for tourism and so we
have actually made this
proponent of our new marketing
program so we appreciate this we
think Senator programs for thank
you.
Committee chairman members of
the committee.
Import tax committee in the
Senate
Little different world as.
And as a matter on what I can
only tell your orders fifty five
hundred acres insiders it was
just second largest sack race in
the United States will.
Given to us in nineteen sixty
five to nineteen sixty five
incentives given to us and then
the government okay then they
walked off and left town with
sixty thousand people the thirty
thousand people we provide
housing anywhere just by picking
up the payments they didn't make
any difference and when you look
at what we were left and settle
with that we have probably one
of the largest the.
Problems because our bases so
large and the the problems that
you have all just trying to
find a security measures to
control movie get access to the
inside the fence is extremely
expensive
because of the all those they're
all controlled by the TSA and
their their
You know every access point to a
growing let alone one car and if
you if someone else starts to is
it's a huge risk
and provision for those we have
you had decided for quite from
thousand days to five from CD
today right now they're they're
down because of the shortage of
of pilots they had resolved
COVID F. a lot of the times we
retired so they take up all of
regional jet
pilots and Services you shortage
there
I can tell you the cost of doing
things we have the probably
largest base facilities for
firefighting jets we can right
now we so one
the C. ten at the time we are
should be scheduled Bill B. C.
tens of the time to do to do
that as quickly we need a tax
way it is six hundred feet long.
And the problem is that graduate
has to be about four feet taken
concrete through forty second
concrete after you build a base
under a to support the weight of
that chat and therefore DC tends
we had three of them were also
at one time and and for
fighting.
the northern New Mexico this
summer
we have our own station it's
better to be honest trying to
get money six million from the
federal government to fix that
for it is very difficult I'm not
sure that even this is even.
The code just what we have so
many needs in our air base there
there anybody knows any might
know this or not if you have any
golfers are
go for thank you choose to any
kind of contact with less than
mention of order whether it
stable but if you have work on
the what we can't do that that's
important because they're six
million dollars on this and this
for runway for taxiway lights
there are costs because of the
first.
And you know there's people I
want to save everything after
that you can't afford to have
those lights go out when
somebody's coming in and you
look at the national the there
is we have a and trying to
maintain those bases that were
built in nineteen forty and
nineteen sixty five the hairs
and even down I just.
And it's it's really is beyond
the capacity of our
of our community to to really
keep that the space up and fifty
that
fifty five hundred acres and
they're wanting us my partner
over here for the national it
doesn't like us very much
because of the damages done to
airplanes and I hail and we've
had lately overall goals been
for automatic staff and these
are Asian sure stomach good job
that
we have a lot of issues with all
these issues are on the same
are for all the come off of the
do aviation critical needs less
and so what we're gonna do with
all this is try to knock out
this much that means many other
the problems as they can.
in our community we have a huge
problem in our terminal because
they sent they have to projects
of the with the same time and we
have an update space for about
seventy five people that are
waiting so it's it's a real
problem and to get involved to
pull together then asked her to
scheduling because where we are
with regional jets into the
wrong a lot of time and they
serve all our projects we have
an awful lot of people from
Carlsbad Artesia read also
and Hobbs's early jet to goes to
Houston so we don't get many
from there our whole region has
been serviced by those results
Jackson it's been very it's been
a very good thanks for all of us
getting people in to visit and
to go into our
the needs are astronomical and I
know Ronald we're stated get
probably more money than anyone
else I'm gonna tell you the
facilities that we have in our
town to thirty thousand people
we could not maintain the stuff
at the new requirements for
security you'll.
can set you back a lot of money
because they all want to have
video cameras on every entrance
into that facility.
And when they're fifteen you're
covered fifty five hundred acres
you know that's a long way
apart.
This you have to to run the
table to have a dependable why
are wifi system that will work
to go that far away but in any
event you have to have
electricity all those facilities
to make a more and so it's
really tough but these are
projects in the are needed by
every airport in our community
and so in our all state so I
would ask you to please.
from the bank it's it'll be good
I was a pilot I actually figured
out that you can use the you
don't get copies and Dr Sanford
question is going to the airport
again and applying and drive the
Santa Fe then have to wait for a
taxi to get there so anyway
there's just a lot of things you
just have to be careful not to
cough.
All right all right thank you Mr
mayor.
Okay all right with that we'll
go to the members of the
committee senator thank you Mr
chair so first question is do we
need an amendment based on the
testimony about putting
division.
I've seen some shaking hands no
but again the gentleman
indicated department
transportation you could add the
words aviation division if you
need that I don't know the staff
Mr chair Senator words we we did
speak with Council Service about
that and they advised us that we
didn't need to fund we do have
language in the bill that
references not withstanding
language in the state aviation
funds the City of Asian fund is
reverting and we wanted to start
this issue what is non reverting
and this this money is intended
to be reverting so working with
council service we believe we've
addresses issues but of course
happy to discuss more twenty do
we replace in on in a non
returning fund which we don't
want to do because of the money
is not spent in in the four year
period a lot of money there are
some Mister chair I believe it's
your committee that has an issue
with not withstanding language
so I think we need to talk about
that yes I mean this is this is
a huge problem is we're
basically we pass laws and then
we say well we're not standing
out more we're gonna do
something else I mean is there
another way so the cell I just
think as you move forward as a
drafting issue you may want to
figure out if there's a way to
have a separate I mean just to
tell you you're going to again
especially with the chair Senate
finance bringing in not
withstanding bill I think that's
going to get into something just
for the Senate so I just flies
that because again it is a an
issue and then I guess Mr
chairman my real question is
how.
How do we come up with these the
allocation in this bill.
I think they're surveyed in the
in the DOT's needs for their
aviation Division right
you know we look at it.
If the average if we look at
Adams can use Gallup right
galloping this pull right
they've done some of this work
that in new tax way this year
but they still need to ramp and
eighty at terminal for more
services and so they came out
they called Gallup and and they
said what your aviation this
needs or they're off the
relation state aviation require
I guess I'm just laid out here
Mister chair I mean again I see
you know you heard testimony
city Santa Fe it's got twenty
two million dollar.
Project and yet there's twenty
other cities here that have I
just summon curious how we who
made the determination about who
gets what here which always with
any of these bills that's an
issue so I'd just like to get an
answer.
Good gentleman.
Chairman.
By Daniel and with that in these
probation vision these projects
are the these monies were
developed from the capital
replacement by.
For that's what that's how we.
So Mr chairman again I think so
that's basically.
The capital work so again I
think what we mates there may be
some tweaks here to this again I
I bring that up because I know
for example in Santa Fe they've
been selective in what they're
asked there may there
prioritizing what they're coming
they're not putting they're not
putting every single amount of
dollars they're looking for on
the C. by.
They're basically saying well
again we did it we did we got
some more for money so now we're
not going to put all their for
money on the list and or maybe
it's on the list I see we got
airport directors making yield
to him Mr chair if that's okay
sure.
Members of the plan James Harris
on the new airport manager.
Or
as previously the airport
manager close.
What phone
To the airport was used.
We live
four million dollars in touch
with the action that the report
but we are in support of the
because even.
We have.
Funds come from Medicaid for
various of the what we got
compliance issues if you've been
at the airport recently
installed construction going on
we're finding.
slaughter with as we begin to.
Four million dollars over budget
right now so we're so we're
forced.
Every little bit helps
I understand that prior to me it
really was put in much on the
side of the I have.
On the.
I.
There's exhibit right.
Then again it may be re hiring.
But we are happy to have a.
Airport
I mean as we talk about this I
think we you know again I think
there needs to be.
It's just it's just it's
interesting that the IC IP list
is what's being used in and
again we just taking I was there
do we just take whatever one
submitted on the IC IP list and
that's what's in the in the
bill.
If you if you actually be is for
with the state this is our point
only yeah but noted there were
some things that were taken off
of it they were staging or
something that wasn't wasn't
ready in the next couple years
but that was ridiculous.
The.
The point of this short to see
why the Senator Wirth raises
that issue because.
Every city every major city
except Santa Fe is receiving ten
million dollars or more Clovis
Farmington Alamogordo last as
last crucis so.
Look at this staff they kind of
stands out.
So Mr again I just think and I
don't want to I want to make
this just about Santa Fe I just
want to make sure I understand
where it's coming from and I
think that the import this is so
important and and I really
appreciate we actually a number
of years ago
we were able to get some money
for airports in our state as
part but you know again we have
no where near the resources we
have to I mean I fully
supportive of doing this I just
again I want to make sure the
ICAP process if that's the only
thing that's being used here it
just it's it depends folks asked
I mean again I'm looking at the
the city of Tatum twenty two
thousand dollars is not going to
do a whole bunch of airport
repairs in Tatum New Mexico and
maybe Tatum needs more that some
of maybe didn't realize that.
You know they don't put on that
specific list they're not gonna
get it self I just I certainly
gonna vote for the bill move
forward but again and as it goes
into.
Finance you know we can talk
about.
No I think you need to be
tweaked a little bit because you
never know what agency needs
right as a C. I. P. less that
they send to D. O. T. and so if
they don't put on their less
than nobody knows about it right
but also in their money and then
Santa Fe once forty eight
million and and instead of four
right and so I think that as we
move forward and aft we get a
little bit make sure everybody
can get in there and get what
their needs are met maybe not
fully elected their needs but
try to get at least a ballots to
treat everybody equally and just
Mr chair was there it was our
understanding for by all the
cities that this was that this
kind of I've never seen a bill
like this with all the airports
and me was our understanding
that this was something that
might be coming.
I'm seeing a suicide note so I
mean this is a new thing and
it's a and it's great I mean I'm
not in any way criticizing it
but I just think there's got to
be a set of rules everyone's
plan under and it feels to me
like it is kind of a.
You know.
Sounds like Clovis.
It was done one way Clovis and
and done a different way in
other cities I just I just flag
that because their May again and
I appreciate you know you'll
you'll look at.
Thank you I know that the.
Gentleman here and we'll go to
the.
first unit on and up versus the.
We were just kind of for fun
Planning processing rentals
depended from the IC IP which
contends the a little bit of a
wishlist we prepare our capital
improvement plan for the airport
thank you consultation with FAA
representatives in each state
the initiation we have a
consultant as well on there and
it's a lengthy process that
results in our capital plan we
do that and what we it's a five
year outlook.
That's helpful I appreciate that
and it's good to know but I was
going to say the exact same
thing is the I. P. is a planning
document the use for their work
projects and things like that so
it's no it's not DOT's fall that
your point for putting this
stuff on there is here for small
Univision recognized what the
airport is going to be the next
five years so the CBC's as
planned up for that and then
money is allocated for not
allocated based on the
priorities.
And Mr chair that that's a super
helpful because the problem is
we were used to the IC IP list
is a capital wish list Liz and
this sounds like it's a very
different this is good
clarification is a different
process and obviously you know
there's an issue and you you fly
Act itself this is helpful thank
you should thank you we go to
Senator Kernan thank you Mr
chair is there any participation
by the local communities whether
to city or county I know they
get federal dollars I'm sure
that help move this forward I
would assume that
Bills the communities
participate.
Mister chairman Senator going
to.
Senator John right now we're
standing in the percent state
funded projects.
For this particular.
This funding but the other
programs.
State much as percent.
Thank you.
Nineteen in New Mexico okay so
we're gonna go to Senator are
you Senator okay Senator Sanchez
and Senator X. thank you Mr
chair thank you senator for
bringing this bill
just a quick comment one I'd
like to introduce a constituent
here in my airport manager from
bland John Thompson it's amazing
that we're not gonna let him go
anywhere.
And Senate thanks for bringing
the bill and as senator Munoz
said yes.
All this is great and you know
flying around here and in New
Mexico online at these different
airports a lot of work is needed
whether you're in a small plane
big planes to bring in
infrastructure bring in jobs
bring this is long overdue and I
believe they're poor managers
the mayor's city managers are
here we heard Mister Jennings
speak for a while there about
how long overdue it's been so
fully support of this anything
we can help you.
Senator Griggs.
Thank you Mr chairman you guys
the the actually I. P. when they
talk about that the ICAP is is a
planning document but it's not
all cities all counties do it
the same way as the as we look
at their at their particular
issues that airports if I
remember you guys it's been a
while the airports were funded
in large part ninety five five
five.
Page ninety five percent federal
five percent state five percent
local on the development of a of
a lot of stuff show.
Communities are looking at their
investments in order for each
maybe look at eight.
One community may look at a
little bit differently because
they see the the greater
opportunity federal dollars
today and the other one may not
see that
so I I don't know when I I would
I would appreciate it Senator
issue as you move forward is it
you know you you check or have
somebody check with the the
individual places again to see
if.
See what they see as far as
their as their planning
documents are if that's what you
reliance.
Because if you're relying solely
on that that I she I do it one
community may be looking at a
little bit different than the
other and you've got a great
opportunity today.
Today to fund some of the motion
or if you need to do that but
Mr chair and an incentive
expense all I do is I know that
Alamogordo.
Alamogordo just got some stuff
awhile back from the from the
Feds to do some work on airport
show fifteen million days may be
perfectly adequate for all of
their their upcoming meet but I
can't.
I can't say that for sure but I
can't say that Santa Fe has a
whole bunch in the just they
didn't show up at least in in
the early part of their I. XII
rate because as we talk about is
five year planning document well
maybe in year seven Santa Fe is
looking at a major airport
expansion I.
Well but that that serve the
only thing that I'm the issues
this issue for because all of
these places maybe and whether
H. withers and for the board to
much or whatever might be it
probably never enough show thank
you Mr chair and thank Shannon
thank you.
Okay I don't have the also the
question I think Google my
questions were answered so what
what is it is it is this in the
LFC wrapped.
Mister chairman Senator no.
Okay it was a discussion LFC
about
no not in this context.
Okay.
So what is pleasure the
committee.
To pass we have a motion for to
pass and to work with the second
Senator census.
Any opposition to the the past
motion.
I see none it's a new path.
eight two zero and just before
we of adjourn of the guess folks
are listening the press they
want me to restate the last vote
on Senate bill one oh two it was
nine two zero.
Yeah so with that will adjourn
thank you all.
