I think.
Senator home and are you with
us.
Okay it appears senator Tom is
in the room.
And Senator Brandt is not here
and Senator Griggs is on his
way.
Senator Michael Padilla is here
I didn't hear you call my name.
Okay thank you.
So.
Senator Shendo.
All right.
Thank you.
Okay
Okay yeah I know we we have a
quorum.
So this Mr chair existed they're
not letting them in I think
checked to make sure that they
are leading in the room.
Ron Griggs says he's not being
where.
Representative said there's
nobody in the waiting room of
the icy bricks.
Okay there's a legitimate reason
why he's not be let in.
Okay great grant to be a few
minutes so he's not there yet
thank you okay thank you Senator
Kernan and before we get started
I know we got the one hand up
but of those of you that are on
the call that are not committee
members and are not on the bill
I would appreciate if you could
turn off your cameras so that I
have an easier chance of
Making sure that my committee
members are and so forth I
appreciate that and so once
you're on your bill you can
either turn on your cameras.
So before we get started I
believe there is a Senator
Hickey.
You have your hand up he yes Mr
chairman thank you
again I'm not quite sure how to
go about this if I get to ask
for a point of order or whatever
but
If I I'd like to as we go into
the agenda today which is.
Pretty packed I'm wondering if
and and I know we're behind in I
know I've got a bill that's and
behind but
I have literally spent about the
last hour and a half returning
and talking to people pro and
con and the community solar bill
and it's my sense that this is
probably gonna take up once we
get to a gate pass the rid of
the bills that we've already
rolled over it's gonna take up
most of the time and on some of
the people who have
In talking to more wondering if
maybe they have a chance to work
with the.
Both pro and and con work on the
bill a little bit the
potentially might be able to
move a little smoother when it
just hurts on I'm wondering if I
make a motion or just a
suggestion to roll Senate bill
eighty four over to our next
meeting and and start fresh with
that and and then take the time
we need with that I believe that
would be Thursday afternoon.
Of the Senator of Majority
Leader word.
Yeah Mister chair I I certainly
appreciate the suggestion and
and it's here and do what you
would like for Senator Hickey.
This bill was a sec there was an
internal process there was a
whole group that met for six
months on this and I just me
again and realize that they're
still not completely agreements
what you know we're trying to
get to that point where I don't
know the two days is going to
make any difference on this but
I I certainly respect you know
the the desire that you have to
try and hear from everyone but I
just I did want to point out
that this this bill is been
around for a couple years and
went through a whole stakeholder
process during the inner and and
obviously as you can see there
was not an agreement that was
read Ezzell you know me I'm
always trying to find a way to
get to agreement but I just I
didn't want to kind of lay out
that districts.
Yeah.
Thank you.
May I speak again Mr chair yes
the Senator Hickey go ahead.
So I I understand that and
and we've been Senate bill
seventy one which is not around
forever but it feels like it's
been around for ever but you
know we are actually I mean
that.
Points of standoff actually
people have come back together
and you know that's that's
that's kind of what I hope to do
that with some other bills to
and I'm just wondering both
really in consideration of our
agenda and getting through a
number of bills
that the you know hopefully a
couple of days or it might take
a few more days but I just I
think things would run smoother
if we were to put that off I I
don't know if anyone else would
like to comment on that and
again I recognize that it is
it's probably not a motion it's
it's at your discretion Mr
chair.
Okay I do have a Senator hard
meal had his hands up and then I
have Griggs and Kernan.
Thank you Mr chairman now I've
had the same calls coming in
wanting to know if there could
be more time for discussion on
the bill and so that was and so
I'm echoing what Senator Hickey
also said and to see if there's
any way but I'm hearing both
with the what leader worth just
that and what Senator Hickey
just said and I'm just wanting
to know if there could be more
time for discussion.
With this bill with those who
oppose and those who support
thank you.
Okay thank you I
Senator Kernan Griggs.
The.
Let's see Mr chair Senator
Griggs was ahead of me okay a
yes Representative.
Mr chair Senator and it really
had matter I think that you know
the this particular agenda is
full of bills that are liable to
take a long time I agree so I
don't I don't know that would
benefit anybody anyway bye bye
trying to.
role any particular bill
override I expected more likely
good chance we don't even get to
eighty four.
I mean there's there's a lot on
this agenda right now that are
not not just simple easy issues
I'm the I'm looking at my screen
and and center Lopez age is
right there and I know her
bill's not going to be just a
walk in the park so what it's
just it's gonna be it's gonna be
a long afternoon I think so that
that's my comments.
Mr chair.
Okay thank you and Senator
Kernan.
Thank you Mr chairman I think
two things here I think we ought
to consider of knowing up front
kind of what our stop time is
and then at that point as we get
closer to that bill if we think
we don't have enough time to get
that that you know the the
conversations that it needs at
that point I would certainly
want to make sure that we don't
run up against a particular
stopped on with thirty minutes
left for that bill so my
suggestion if you could give us
some idea of when you think we
might yeah I know many
committees are doing a hard stop
at a particular time.
I don't want to go too far into
the night and I think that let's
come to determine up front we're
we're gonna stop in if we get
too close to that bill we don't
think there's enough time to do
it justice then maybe at that
point we can make that decision.
Already Senator Padilla I thank
you Mr chairman and I I think
what I was going to say it's
pretty much been said but what I
I would just add a compromise
here and at least a if we do
feel like we have the time to
get to eighty four which I am.
My voice mailbox my email box my
text my I mean I can't turn
around without getting some
information on this particular
bill I think it's come to a head
I think we're gonna need to make
a decision that you know with
this is been over a couple years
now but I want to respect
everybody involved in the
process but if we get to the
point where we have enough time
I love Senator Kernan suggestion
by the way that way we can give
guidance to folks that we don't
want people waiting around
forever like this I think that's
very unfair to them
but if we get to the point where
we do speak again to hear this
bill maybe what we agree to
ahead of time is that we hear
the presentation and the pros
and the cons and and and to
something tells me that this
bill is going to take a little
more effort and work so maybe
that the sponsor takes what she
learns or what they learned
today and able to use that is
the work on to build maybe at
some point for a little further
for future in a presentation
where we actually make a
decision I just maybe that's a
happy meeting right there in the
middle Mr chairman.
Okay thank you all of committee
members thought for your
suggestion of.
I know that
I know people have expressed
concern even committee members
and so forth and appreciate
Senator Hickey and so rather
than trying to decide whether
we're gonna have enough time I I
think what I like to do I know
Senator Hickey has made a motion
to roll this over if we get a
second and then if there's no
opposition I would like to do
that that we have these people
know they don't have to wait
around and figure out whether
we're going to get to are not.
Our German and be glad the
second that there is a a second
on to Senator Hickey is motion
and is there any opposition to
that.
Mr Chairman.
This is Senator Lopez and one of
the co sponsors on the bill for
community solar.
And I you know I've also asked
to see if the link could be
given to Senator Stefanics who
is also a co sponsor I would
certainly appreciate if I may
add a piece and I understand
it's still the will of the
committee but if we could just
stay and go with the agenda if
you don't get to it today then
of course we do time then it'll
be on for Thursday but I would
certainly appreciate that we can
still stay on the agenda as you
have prepared just my my at.
What twenty five cents worth
dollars worth of us information
so thank you Mr chair thank you
a they can go to a of.
Senator Wirth look like you were
a.
Moving to get into your camera
yeah I know I just you you asked
me based on Senator Lopez is
requests
I'm gonna object to the to the
motion and I again I
realistically I don't think
we're getting there anyway it's
we're going to be in the Senator
Kernan situation.
And I don't want to in fairness
I I do think you know towards
the end of the agenda I don't
want to start you know what
twenty minutes last because then
we really should roll it to the
next okay all right so so much
that's the case of a thank you
all for your suggestions so we
will go down well as I have it
and then see where we're at but
the time we get to eighty four
and if we feel that it's time to
time then the if we if there's
enough time for maybe just a
presentation and then roll over
of to the next committee for any
action than
so so that might be the route to
take a doctor doctor Hickey
Senator Hickey.
Thank you Mr chair appreciate
all the comments and and I think
there's nine ways to skin this
cat one where the other the last
observation I would make though
is that there are tons of people
on this waiting for this bill
and for them to sit on the edge
of their seats while we're going
through as was said doesn't just
even the first bill may take a
lot of time and rather than
knowing with certainty that we
get to it first thing on
Thursday and that's the other
observation I'd like to make an
I also just wondering given that
that I and again I'm learning
procedure here so bear with me
if if I had a motion that was
seconded if there's an objection
does that then because it to
have a no vote or again this is
really just in your hand your
decision making and whatever you
decide Mr chair on.
No no you know I I know we're
we're a committee and and I
think process why you did make a
motion of there was a second and
though it's my call I think you
know I would like to come back
and it wasn't objection to that
motion and then maybe we'll do a
roll call and if
if folks vote in favor of a move
this over I know it's it's at
the end of this my call but I
will be much more comfortable
if you know if there's people
are are not.
Are are are are willing to just
roll this over and be certain
about nuclear and next time as
opposed to whether we're gonna
get there are not many we're
asking a lot of people to wait
around of for a long time and if
they know for sure that it's not
going to happen today then they
can be ready and and and for
Thursday so all.
With that what I'm gonna do is
If the.
The court if you can call the
roll and the motion is is to
roll this over till Thursday so
with that of a comedic role
please.
Senator Kernan.
Who's gonna take the roll
Senator so the secretary.
I'm
I'm I'm the secretary
I thought I was.
They're not sitting next to me
anymore so I know it was we made
too much noise.
Okay all righty.
Senator Representative yes.
Senator Griggs.
Yes.
Senator Hamblen.
I'm sorry I didn't hear you.
It was a no no okay thank you
Senator Hickey yes.
Senator how to meal yes.
Senator Kernan yes.
Thank you.
Yes.
Senator Tallman.
Yes.
Senator Wirth no Senator Padilla
yes.
Senator Shendo.
No.
Three knows.
Eight yeses will roll over to
Thursday so
Thank you committee members so
we'll move on to
we'll let the will notify the
Sanchez well.
So we'll move on to Senate bill
one ninety seven.
Senator Lopez.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
members of the committee I sit
in front of you is Senate bill
one nine seven and what Senate
bill one ninety seven is it is
increasing the excise tax rate
for cigarettes tobacco products
and E. liquids as well as close
System cartridges for electronic
cigarettes.
Mr chairman what the bill is
also doing as it changes the
distribution from the cigarette
tax.
From to the comprehensive cancer
center at the what UNM health
sciences center and the New
Mexico finance authority of
which of course Mr chairman if
we look I have and I know you
have this of course on your FY
our roots on behalf of and for
the benefit of UNM health
sciences center department of
health facilities the credit
enhancement account and rural
county cancer funds.
Mr chairman members of the
committee what part of the bill
is also with the bill is
attempting to do is increases
the excise taxes for cigarettes
sold given or consumed in the
state.
You twenty cents in the bill
also decreases the tax stamps
sold at face value.
And Mr chair and I do have some
expert witnesses who would like
to say a few words.
I do believe that they are on
with us.
First with you to start with
Linda Siegel.
Thank you.
We are Mr chair members of the
committee Linda Siegel
representing the American cancer
society and I this is a very
detailed billing for I just
wanted to hit all the high
points of the changes for you
Senator Lopez says this raises
the pack tax rate the pack of
cigarette tax rate by two
dollars and does that in the
language prying increasing the
tax on each cigarette by ten
cent so now the tax on each
cigarette would be twenty cents
and this will make the total tax
on a pack of cigarettes four
dollars we raised the tax in two
thousand and ten by a dollar
sixty six and again a very
modest increase in two thousand
and nineteen by thirty four
cents.
And the public health the the
public health people ABCS the
heart association along we are
interested in driving good
public health policy by
increasing these taxes.
This we have increases in other
tobacco products now to macro
produce the tobacco products and
liquid the cigarettes in the
state and the clothes cultures
systems they are taxed based on
a percentage of the price and
twenty other states tax those
different tobacco products based
on a percentage of the price so
we're proposing raising the
other tobacco products which
would include things like
chewing tobacco from twenty five
cents twenty five percent I'm
sorry to eighty three percent.
Raise the that the very low tax
on E. cigarettes which is now at
twelve point five percent to
eighty three percent and the
closed system cartridge increase
that by the same amount cigars
stay the same.
And little cigars are taxed in
the same way as cigarettes at
that ten cents a little cigars
may be paying twenty cents now
that sounds like a big increase
for these other tobacco products
E. cigarettes the reality is
that if you increase the price
of cigarettes and you don't
increase the price of these
other tobacco products by
A similar amount you will drive
people to those cheaper products
and of course as public health
people we want to see people
stop smoking people start vaping
people stop touring for their
health so this makes all the
other tobacco products except
cigars comparable to the price
of the package of cigarettes.
The next section that we look at
Is the
the area where we reduced those
percentages and I know that some
of the Lee entities that get
money that are are part of that
year mark there is concern that
the percentages went down but
that's just because when you
raise the price you want to keep
them where they are you want to
keep them at the current dollar
amount so the percentages have
to go down.
The tribal issue we do not touch
the tribal language at all in
two thousand and ten an
agreement was made and tribes do
not pay any tax on our other
tobacco products and the
agreement with the US the
tribe's
For one time able to
race there are tobacco tax raise
their their tax a little bit and
they would still be less than
Cigarettes and store that's not
on tribal lands and so the
tribes don't have any obligation
to raise your price to anything
they can do whatever they want
although we have seen with
increases that that tribes also
increases a little bit but still
maintaining the low.
The price of tax stamps that is
also a formulaic adjustment
where since we're raising the
prices to keep the price of the
tax stamps the same we lower
those percentages.
The
The FIR indicates that this will
raise about twenty million for
the general fund.
And what's important to remember
that when have the.
And St Onge.
Very and in our own state when
ever we have raised the tobacco
tax.
We have maintained or slightly
increased revenue so we have a
decrease in consumption which is
of course what we would like but
we maintain and increase the
revenue to the state so we would
not expect any reduction in how
much the state is getting that
would go to the general fund.
So that concludes my case.
Thank you Mr chair still have at
least two others who would like
to say a few words if I may
thank you again go ahead Senator
Lopez thank you I'm my second
expert is my Haitian Sitta whose
government relations director
with the American heart
association Mr Sita.
Thank thank you Senator Lopez.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee.
Thank thank you for the
opportunity I I just wanted to
stress on couple of points.
You know we re distributed
package.
The packet for you and if you
look at the top fifteen states
with the highest tobacco taxes
have one of the lowest smoking
rates among both adults and you
they with an exceptional one
state no New Mexico's ranked
third highest in terms of high
school students using E.
cigarettes out of forty four
states only behind West Virginia
and North Carolina.
And you know we we charge twelve
point five percent which is one
of the lowest.
If not the lowest in the country
and and you see the highest you
know rates and usage so that
this is not a coincidence you
know and cheaper tobacco prices
are driving are you you know to
these dangerous and highly
addictive drugs and for example
in New Mexico.
As of twenty nineteen there
there are thirty seven thousand
six hundred high school kids are
waiting.
And there are eleven thousand
one hundred middle school kids
are.
So I mean that we you can see
the correlation between cheaper
you separate prizes and tobacco
prices and high usage one you an
adults and then I also want to
stress on you know a couple of a
lot of misinformation and
falsehoods you know being being
spread by by the tobacco
industry you know that there's
so you know what I were you know
that their claim is whenever we
increase our taxes like you know
those cross border purchasing by
legal bills and you know people
go to the tribal shops you know
that that could be there could
be some of that but researchers
shown most tobacco users by
their products from stores
within five mile radius of where
they let and the majority of the
smokers do not have the means to
purchase cigarettes and all and
for example in New Mexico forty
seven percent of adult smokers
in New Mexico are on Medicaid.
Eight hundred and thirty two
thousand dollars in New Mexico
small are on Medicaid and
there's also this false claim
about smuggling and illegal
market will affect you know tax
collection you know the tobacco
companies and their allies you
know continue to make these you
know false arguments about
tobacco tech and tax increases
you know will not generate new
revenue and lead to new senator
and cigarette smuggling black
market in smoke or tax evasion
but we we provided the.
A chart to you that shows every
single state has increased its
address fax or tobacco taxes
have received more revenue than
what it would have collected
absent a tax increase and for
example in New Mexico when we
raised our taxes by seventy five
cents in twenty ten you know
the.
The smoking rates declined by
eight percent but the revenue
increased by sixty eight percent
no raising thirty seven point
five million dollars and you
know the another claim by our
friends on the side like you
know this is gonna shut down mom
and pop stores and convenience
stores.
I mean that that this is
absolutely false you know they
do not lead to drop in number of
convenience stores are retail
stores nope and you know
university of Illinois in
Chicago they did a study.
No they look from twenty that
two thousand to two thousand
nine they looked at the
correlation between raising
cigarette taxes and the impact
on convenience stores no on the
contrary they saw you know an
increasing number of convenience
stores because people are when
they're not smoking you know
they're spending that money on
other you know items so I mean
and also you know the another
claim is like in Tax with
wrestling Act low income
citizens I mean that that this
is very ironic coming from them
when they the tobacco industry
has aggressively targeted you
know low income communities
minority communities blacks
black Americans Hispanics and
LBGTQ so you know who one of the
good things we have in New
Mexico is you know Human
Services department has
implemented in twenty nineteen a
comprehensive no tobacco
cessation programs for Medicaid
you know what recipients so you
know we we have that.
Services so these Medicaid poor
people want to quit you know
most smokers want to quit and
given the opportunity they will
and so we have a good program
that that will help them.
And finally in old Leake New
Mexico is not the only state you
know trying to raise taxes you
know Maryland just passed a tax
increase of dollars seventy five
color Colorado just past their.
You know.
Through a ballot measures they
increase by dollar ten Texas is
considering you know increasing
their tobacco tax.
By a dollar fifty you know
Kansas by dollar fifty Georgia
Indiana and New York so the this
is this is a public health issue
and raising tobacco taxes has
proven to decrease you know
usage level both among adults
and you and and the cost savings
to the healthcare cost is is is
is is tremendous so.
Thank you senator for the
opportunity and Mr chairman and
members the committee.
Thank you
Mr chairman my last expert is Dr
page hello she's a general
pediatrician in Farmington New
Mexico she serves as the
American academy of pediatrics
chairperson chairperson of three
youth Easter eggs of prevention
and cessation here in New Mexico
Dr place.
Hi good afternoon Mister
chairman and members of the
committee as senator Linda Lopez
mentioned I'm part of a greater
national push to really
highlight this is an epidemic
this you the cigarette use our
so thank you for this
opportunity to speak again this
afternoon and thank you doctor
Senator Lopez for supporting
Senate bill one ninety seven so
first I just like to briefly
share this story with you to
underscore some of the health
consequences that we're
highlighting prior to me
speaking today so thank you I
was recently caring for
seventeen year old male who
presented to my clinic after an
emergency room visit when you
hit an elevated blood pressure
reading of one fifty over.
Reference normal pressure
reading should be less than one
twenty over eighty during a
follow up visit with me I was
gathering some more information
to figure out why these lectures
were so high and after asking a
couple screening questions of
which included tobacco E.
cigarettes screening questions
submitted to the building
multiple times a day over the
last couple months to cope with
the loss of his grandmother and
exporters understanding of the
needs of the building and over
the course of a few follow ups
actually decided to stop making
out together and at our next
follow up a few weeks later as
measures and actually normalized
he was feeling better so this
story is just one of many that
highlights the devastating
consequences of tobacco use
among youth which can include
one pressure elevations as I
mentioned chronic cough
shortness of breath soldiering
senior graduate and even
addiction eighteen and other
tracks as Mr see to highlighted
New Mexico is not and you said
this epidemic in terms of E.
cigarette use and faxes we have
no and in twenty nineteen The
New Mexico youth president
resiliency survey actually show
that one in the New Mexico high
school students use E.
cigarettes and in some counties
it's actually as high as fifty
percent the Surgeon General
Surgeon General in twenty
sixteen reported that you
cigarette use among news is
quote I'm safe including E.
cigarettes and how it
additionally I wanted to
highlight that you cigarettes
are actually not FDA approved
smoking cessation that.
the major cigarettes contain
nicotine which is highly
addictive and harmful to the
developing adolescent brain
which we know continues to grow
until age twenty.
For example one jewel line
continues the cinematic eighteen
as a pack of twenty traditional
cigarettes we know that nicotine
increases the rest for future
drug addiction so be on a team
Senator aerosoles actually
contain harmful substances just
percentages will turn my
articles heavy metals and
flavoring elements there's
growing evidence that these
substances can damage lungs in
light of the ongoing COVID
nineteen pandemic I would like
to highlight a recent study by
the journal of adolescent health
in August of twenty twenty that
cited teens and young adults who
use these requests for actually
five to seven times more likely
to be infected with sars to
reach you in those who do not
use E. cigarettes so how can
raising tobacco taxes actually
changed behaviors among people
twenty fourteen report minister
General cited that raising
cigarette taxes but one of the
most effective tobacco control
interventions because we know
the increasing price has proven
to reduce smoking especially
among kids and young people for
example a ten percent increase
in cigarette prices estimated to
result in a seven percent
reduction in overall cigarette
consumption among teens who
proven to be more responsive to
price point than adults New
Mexico is currently ranked
eighteenth in the last with our
two dollar per pack tax rate if
we doubled New Mexico's tax
tobacco tax that would actually
make a state in the country and
a leader in the southwest on
tobacco prevention and moreover
increasing tobacco taxes as been
highlighted previously country
significant revenue I'm
sometimes asked estimated
upwards of twenty nine million
dollars for our state and other
programs that are families and
community schools so the other
piece is reducing smoking rates
tobacco tax increases actually
reduced secondhand smoke
exposure to are more vulnerable
populations including children
and pregnant women and women's
oftentimes harmful impacts
secondhand smoke on whether
including health problems
ranging from this respiratory
infections asthma attacks
developmental delays in most
devastatingly seven conducts and
drum.
Is an applicant's for children
and teens we owe it to this
generation to put an end to this
using our academic institute
provided for tax not only this
generation to help with the
health of the tree Mexicans for
years to come recent product
taxes in New Mexico is the first
step to ensuring this next
generation of New Mexicans is
negatively impacted by the
harmful effects of tobacco or
nicotine thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee for the
opportunity to speak you have to
answer any questions you may
have regarding harm harmful
effects of tobacco use in
children.
Thank you very much and Mr
chairman we will stand for
questions.
Thank you Senator Lopez we will
go to the public at this point
and if there are any public
comments please
give your remarks of to the I
think we got quite a few so.
The.
Actor to one minute please and
so forth so with that we'll
start with the opposition.
All right opposition today first
up we have Ruben Baca.
Yes go ahead.
Thank you Mr chairman members
the committee for the
opportunity to testify.
I'm gonna stand in opposition to
this bill because it's.
Increase is.
One of the highest the most
highest of ever seen.
I would like to remind the
committee that even Bernalillo
county we're book and that both
sides but native American smoke
shops.
What you're not really gonna
what you gonna do you gonna
drive point of sales the point
of sales back on to the
reservation.
I would like to say that it's.
We we don't sell cigarettes to
kids.
We have
Several safety spot safety
things in in place we do the we
card system we do the scanning
system our cash register.
Is it is an age restricted
product only for you to oppose
the legislation thank you.
Thank you.
We had through Senator.
Through center.
Okay.
John.
J..
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee chair this are on
behalf of Swisher international
and also blue sky distributors
I'd like to just focus on the
numbers
our current tax system mention
is two dollars per pack this
bill would double it that would
make us fifth highest in the
nation significantly higher than
our surrounding states to put it
in perspective Colorado's
current taxes eighty four cents
per pack Arizona's current taxes
two dollars per pack in Texas is
a dollar forty one per pack to
put that in perspective would be
roughly five times higher than
Colorado two times higher than
Arizona and three times higher
than Texas we believe this would
just simply drive consumers to
other states are businesses and
also create a black market for
second respectfully oppose this
bill.
Thank you.
Next up we have Daniel Moore.
Daniel Moore.
Okay now we have crystals on on.
Mr chairman members of this
committee Chris balls on on the
register lobbyist for always is
vaping CBD.
Mr chair members of this
committee I'll gonna just as
well just focus on the numbers
because that's your restriction
of this coming at this moment
with this piece of legislation
in twenty twenty the legislative
session the we had the tobacco
products act was passed and
included a tax on the products
that no the exist prior to that
year right we all agree just
stakeholders to get with the
legislature in addition Mr
chairman on this twenty twenty
one the state legislature right
now we know that we are
considering a bill to legalize
recreational cannabis what tax
kind of this by twenty percent
that's one for for the right off
the proposed a tax Mr chairman.
Think about this for a moment
flavor vape is one of in not the
leading category cannabis market
place but it is legal so that is
all obviously there is a
disparity happening right there.
Thank you very much.
What can land.
Hi there thank you Mr chairman
Scott Scanlon registered
lobbyist for Altria I just want
to up the the the the industry
worked what the legislature
actually work with Senator Lopez
over the last two years to
proactively agree to increase
our taxes up to two dollars and
then last year we agreed and
work with the senator to raise
the age to purchase to twenty
one years old so we feel like
this incredible tax increases
basically unfair we work with
the legislature over the last
few years and and before that we
worked in with discussions with
the tax writers and and the and
the leadership so we feel that
this is unfair tax increase and
the numbers on the other tax.
Other tobacco products right now
we're at ninety six cents in New
Mexico this would increase it to
three dollars and nineteen cents
Arizona it is twenty six cents
call.
Thank you very much John
Thompson.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee my name
is John Thompson I represent a
local nonprofit trade
association of independent store
fronts and I want to piggy back
on something that was said
earlier this bill will tax
tobacco based products that
eighty three percent so the ten
dollar purchase you would have
eight dollars and thirty cents
of tax for eighteen dollars and
thirty cents sale Mr chairman
there is legislation in this
body again as was mentioned it's
going to tax cannabis based bait
products to the twenty percent
so Canada state that fifteen to
twenty tobacco right eighty
three Mr chairman that's a
disparity that's worthy of note
especially when you consider
that you have to be twenty one
to buy both of those products Mr
chairman we would ask that you
consider those disparities as
forty seven through the process
thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee.
Thank you.
Are there any other members of
the public who would like to
speak against this bill.
Miss Vigil Kington.
The.
Chairman and members of the
committee on story of my name is
misty Pilkington I am a small
business owner in the state of
New Mexico I am.
I'm sorry.
Okay and I'm also president New
Mexico Alliance.
A couple of things that have
been said previously.
The idea that that you all I
mean you will not end up getting
all this revenue for the state
if shops are shut down vape
shops cannot afford that eighty
three percent tax on their
liquids they can't afford it the
public's not gonna pay it
contrary to what people don't
believe that there is there any
kind of a black market trust me
the.
Hello with that all the time
constantly people are getting
they're getting their products
on Snapchat and Instagram that's
the biggest place Snapchat and
Instagram is that registers that
shop no not the state of New
Mexico it's not so I mean that's
where your kids are getting from
the kid the doctor promo
mentioned I would guarantee that
you had a disposal thank you
very much Patrick block.
This page with.
A good afternoon Mister chair
and committee members Pat block
registered lobbyist for the New
Mexico retail association I
believe many of the previous
speakers have had the points I
wanted to emphasize so I would
just say that we feel like
the increases are too large and
too soon after the last one and
we oppose the bill thank you
very much.
Thank you.
And we had hands.
Can.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee my name
is economic waste and I'm here
on behalf we state and city
which is a small business in the
state of New Mexico I urge the
committee to oppose SB one
ninety seven and eighty three
percent taxation on vape liquid
which is only manufactured by
small businesses in the state of
Mexico will only benefit big
tobacco companies temple a lot
of small mom and pop businesses
out of business additionally the
tax bill that recently passed
almost two years ago what was
and continues to be very
confusing to small business
owners many of them have been
through audits and troublesome
situations in the confusing way
what is and what isn't covered
under the tax bill.
These this bill aims to increase
small business tax from twelve
diploma have percent eighty
three percent which is an
effective increase of six
hundred and forty percent the
care current rate in comparison
with only proposing twenty
percent tax on cannabis products
I hope that you will oppose this
bill.
This is in New Mexico.
One.
Yeah I just I've been listening
to it and I've been I just I.
Hello.
Or mute okay and we have one
more.
member of the public it looks
like.
With your hand up.
Yes New Mexico Terrel.
You have one minute.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee
I'd like to begin by saying.
You know I've been.
Lobbying on tobacco for
Representative of we have to
rentals tobacco for sixteen
years and yes you have raised
the taxes and yes adult usage
has gone down but it has leveled
off to about sixteen to eighteen
percent.
Okay so that's that hasn't
changed every time you raised
the.
What Mr speaker built through to
tell you is that in two years of
those two thousand nineteen data
but he doesn't want to use the
two thousand twenty on under age
usage that is gone down
tremendously and it'll continue
to go down
thank and I know all my times
are you know he says that Texas
and Kansas are considering no
they're not those legislatures
are not going to so thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you very much.
What.
Yes we will now go to members of
the public who signed up to
speak in favor of this bill
first with Bill Jordan.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee of Bill Jordan
with the Mexico voices for
children
this issue is personal for me as
my father passed away from at
the same after many years of
being a heavy smoker tobacco use
and vaping or serious problem
for young people and their for
New Mexico if we're learning
anything in these last eleven
months it's the importance of
good health habits and good
public health policy this is
good public health policy.
We know the big tobacco will
fight to get their products into
the lungs of as many New
Mexicans as they can their
deception a big tobacco has
played out in courtrooms across
the country for decades the
think they still to see they
still target people of color and
they still target young people
with creative flavors and
packaging we hope this year will
be different and we urge your
support thank you.
Thank you very much next step we
have Laura Ryedale.
My name is Laura radio and I am
with we take our democracy good
afternoon Mister chairman and
members of the committee retake
strongly supports this bill in
order to improve our public
health thank you.
Thank you very much next up we
have Shelly Man Lev.
Thank you so much Mr chair and
members of the committee my name
is Shelly Man Lev I'm at the New
Mexico Public Health Association
I've been a tobacco control
advocates for twenty years New
Mexico working with the Santa Fe
public schools and thousands of
you you start smoking before the
age of eighteen it is rare for
someone to begin smoking after
that and it is our youth that
are most impacted and sensitive
to price this is eight research
based strategy that will save
lives save medical expenses for
the lifetime of the issue and of
course also raise revenues for
state so on behalf of public
health and health equity and
particularly for those most
vulnerable you will end up being
addicted to a deadly drugs we
strongly support the H. S. B.
one ninety seven thank you.
Thank you very much next up we
have ten Davis.
Thank you Mr chairman instant
Davis some of the New Mexico
Center on Law and Poverty we
need stable sources of revenue
to generate funds need for vital
services such as health
education public safety and
public infrastructure and
tobacco taxes are effective
tools to reduce consumption
especially among youth leading
to improved public health
outcomes and health care budget
savings so we do our to the
committee to pass this bill
thank you.
Thank you very much next.
We have Dominic Silva.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee Dominic
still with the American heart
association it's been said that
the cigarette tax would be too
high of a disparity between our
native American Community
business in fact if we simply
look at the state gas tax of
seventeen cents which are data
Merican don't pay.
In fact.
They don't sell it a seventeen
cent disparity it's usually
within a five to six cent
disparity there for using that
difference for their
infrastructure on their own
communities that'll be the same
difference with the tobacco tax
will be able to utilize these
monies to help their health and
wellness within their own
communities I support this bill
thank you.
Thank you.
Next up we have good more.
Mr chair members of the
committee thank you very much
for the opportunity to speak and
senator Sanchez thank you so
much for presenting this bill
it's so important
what I ask you to imagine for a
minute instead of deciding now
what level of taxation is
appropriate for tobacco products
that are already sold imagine
something completely new and
different is brought to you in
your you're asked to decide
whether or not to allow.
Scientific studies resent the
science nobody argues with the
evidence shows the product will
kill no more New Mexicans every
year they will die directly from
our precious alcohol eight
illegal drugs murders and
suicides combined.
Forty six hundred two thousand
six and New Mexicans are every
year.
Eight hundred forty four million
dollars will be spent out of
taxpayer money every year to
address the health impact direct
health impact of this product
would you legalize this probably
not so we're we're talking about
here is helping to address this
on thank you very much next up
we have Donna a person.
Donna option.
All right moving on we have a
Torah.
I'm torn yeah this is Patricia
toward and
and I am spear is a mom speaking
to you as a mom and is imminent
I'm speaking for my art ten
years ago in twenty ten eleven
years ago my son was smoking
almost three packs of cigarettes
a day and because of that tax
increase in twenty ten he
actually was motivated to stop
smoking and he is smoke free to
this day when he stopped begin
to stop smoking his guy his read
pressure was hugely high and it
was on blood pressure medication
he today is still very healthy
and his blood pressure a few
days ago was a hundred and five
over sixty and he's no longer on
blood pressure medication my
niece died a very early death
from smoking and so I encourage
you Mr chair and members of this
committee will.
Next.
We have Joanna Strother.
Good afternoon chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Joanna Strother and I'm a
senior director of advocacy for
the American lung association
significant tobacco tax
increases always produce
substantial net new revenues in
every single instance our state
has passed a significant
cigarette tax the state has
enjoyed a substantial increase
to its state cigarette tax
revenues I just want to make
clear that Colorado passed the
tobacco tax via their November
ballot is now at a dollar ninety
four and will continue to
increase over the next seven
years we did codify the age to
twenty one as the federal law
passed in December two thousand
nineteen I want to make clear
that this is eighty three
percent of wholesale price when
we're talking about other
tobacco products the national
youth Survey data did show that
there is a decrease in you use
however in New Mexico we
actually increased from thirty
percent to to thirty seven point
five percent of kids using
tobacco products so we have a
public health problem and we
ask.
Thank you very much next up we
have Richard Mason.
Yes Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Dick basin
I'm sure the action maybe the
league of women voters of New
Mexico leave about is usually
opposes regressive taxes once it
hit lower income people the most
but we have the exception for
taxes that have a socially
desirable goal in this clearly
needs at that
that that up to object objective
so we stand in strong support of
H. S. B. one ninety seven
hundred to two passed thank you.
Thank you next up we have Carlo
crew Hawker.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Carla
creating how for and on behalf
of the center for civic policy
we support as the one ninety
seven the tobacco industry
increases serious impact in New
Mexico's public health
particularly impacting
communities of color a young
people with ten percent of high
schoolers using tobacco products
increasing a tax on tobacco will
curb use among young people as
well as help mitigate some of
the a hundred and forty four
million dollars that tobacco
related health care expenditures
because the state we urge it has
bill with a do pass thank you so
much.
Thank you and finally we have
Lauren McCloskey.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee my name is Laura
McCloskey and executive director
of the chronic disease
prevention council and we
support this bill as it affects
health equity the major tobacco
users are either uninsured or
covered by Medicaid and smokers
supper at higher rates for
chronic conditions but health
insurance is unattainable for
many smokers below a certain
income level with an increase in
tax they're less smokers less
chronic diseases and those are
available to utilize free quick
resources we support this bill
thank you.
Thank you very much are there
any other members of the public
who wish to speak in favor of
Senate bill one ninety seven at
this time.
If so please raise your hand
using the reactions but and.
All right that concludes public
comment at this time thank you.
Thank you for a before we go to
the committee for questions I
just want to let the committee
know that we will not be taking
action on this bill we are going
to hold that just before we go
with other tax bill so with that
do we have any questions from
the members of the committee for
the sponsor.
Mr Senator Brandt.
Sorry gentleman was looking up
something real quick the.
General is no one else other
hand up so let me just just a
couple of questions
Mister chairman Senator Lopez
what is our normal G. R. T.
right for the state you know.
I'm Mr chairman Linda would you
be available to answer.
Chairman representative.
Please that means Mr chairman
members the committee Senator
Brandt.
There is no G. R. T. tax
attached to to cigarettes it's
just this cigarette tax that
goes to the state.
Thank you Mr chairman and and I
understand that actually I.
Was gonna ask that but I think
our normal tax rate is five
something this I can't remember
honestly I don't know if anyone
knows it's the state side and I
guess five percent or something
like that
and yet.
We're taxing these that knows
what would the tax at four
dollars a pack.
the if it was G. R. T. I mean.
That would be a.
Basically twenty cents the way I
just asked that but the
percentage would be through the
roof
So.
Mister chairman Senator Lopez
what do you
What do we see if we raise this
high.
what do you think is going to be
the effect on the black market
for cigarettes there been any
the anything looked at as far as
that goes.
Mr Chairman.
As is I think we know when you
do raise prices higher in
different areas of this liquor
whichever there's always the
assumption that you're going to
have a larger black market for
any of the products that are
being sold or tax.
the intent of course here to Mr
chairman members of the
committee is to make sure that
we do Turner as much as possible
with a higher increase of the
tax due to younger people from
starting to smoke and I know
that in the tap back oversight
you know for the settlement
Michael settlements oversight
committee we've had many
testimony Mr chairman members of
the committee over the years as
to how higher taxes do teacher
of the beginning the usage of
tobacco products so we're
talking about black market I
know that it exists in almost
everything and even with the
other issue that was raised
about cannabis there's always
that potential of the black
market doing what they do
but for us Mr chairman members
of the committee our hope that
this bill does of course pass it
is implemented that we again
continuously stall stop those
younger persons from starting to
smoke and of course Mr chairman
members the committee we know
revenue is going to be true
decreased over the years but for
us that's the right thing to do.
Thank you Mr chairman etcetera I
appreciate that and I I I
totally get the attention of the
bill
the the concern is that we are
very close to the border
our state is a border state
wouldn't it be really easy that
I can see the the new black
market the you know the new
crossing the border things not
going to be marijuana it's going
to be more Los or.
Some other kind of cigarette has
there been any anyone look at
that and what the the effects of
that might be.
Mr chairman if I could Mr sida.
Are you available.
Madam chair of the resort Mr
Chairman Senator Brandt I think
the research so far has shown
there is no correlation between
raising taxes and and and the
black market I think up you know
that there's a lot of this
information of their Senator
Brandt I think you know is in
some cases you know there's the
cigarettes smuggled from low tax
you know jurisdiction are sold
directly to the customers you
know I mean maybe maybe through
black market but these black
market sales are quite small you
know compared to the sales
through otherwise legal
retailers so and and you know
the reserves and and the numbers
produced by other states I think
we produce we we provided that
list you I mean up every state
that has raised taxes you know
them seeing their revenues go up
substantially so that there is
you know.
Well that creates a black market
you know I'm sure it will but
it's not.
You know impact the revenues to
the state and and even the black
marketers who will be selling
their products directly to
customers you know through
whatever means.
You know those those.
The cost or not you know
substantially low.
Okay thank you appreciate that
So Mr Chairman.
Senator you said that by raising
the taxes it will lower people's
use of tobacco products
HASERT okay one of we seen the
last time we raced Services been
a couple years if we see a
decrease or increase in the use
of tobacco products.
Mr chairman Mr Sita.
Mr chairman members of the
committee Senator Brandt thank
as my colleague from the lung
association just pointed out
nationally you know the U. rate
has gone down but in New Mexico
it hasn't since we raise the
you know two thirty four cents
in twenty nineteen.
You know we we were at thirty
four or twenty four percent and
twenty seventeen think of the
current numbers are like thirty
seven point five percent.
This is the you the you know you
cigarette use.
Mr Chairman Mister sea that
appreciate your the problem is
we're conflating a bunch of
different issues so you're E.
cigarettes on one side you get
regular cigarettes on the other
side and so
what about the actual just.
Let's let's just a cigarette use
in New Mexico when we raised it
from right to the heart of a
dollar sixty six per pack to two
dollars a pack did we see the
usage of cigarettes go up or
down in New Mexico.
I think up but.
Mr Chairman Senator Brandt I
think that that number is about
sixteen point nine percent has
stayed constant.
And the Utah right smoking right
is is that eight point nine
percent so that has also been
like constant.
So when we raced to from I
believe it was thirty four cents
a pack to two dollars a pack it
had no effect in New Mexico
that's what you just so.
Mr chairman Senator Brandt I
think the reason we want to
raise substantially because.
You know in twenty nineteen we
we wanted to raise as as a
coalition at least a dollar but
you know the industry economic
and you know that there was a
agreement you know to raise it
by thirty four cents and we were
opposed to that right because we
knew thirty four cents will not
make a difference in in the
usage rates among adults and you
because thirty four cents you
know the the tobacco industry's
pretty creative with their
marketing so thirty four cents
they will discounted out so that
that as a result you can see you
know even though we raised by
thirty four cents you we did not
see any reduction in smoking
rates or tobacco use rates both
one you and adults so that's the
reason we're recommending higher
rate that will you know kids and
adults are price sensitive you
know so when you raise it
substantially you know the
behavior will change but thirty
four cents and thirty in all
anything less than a dollar or
you know will not have any
impact because the tobacco
industry will discount those out
so the the the user will not see
a big price difference.
Thank you I
I thought you said just the
opposite a little while ago so
I'm just trying to follow and
and track
do we raise taxes two years ago
but we did not see a change and
you're saying it's because we
did raise them enough even
though we raised
about twenty percent.
Mr chairman and senator Brandt
you know that that's exactly the
point you know thirty four cents
will not make a difference and
and people's you know changing
their behaviors because the
tobacco companies they discount
L. and and the end user will not
see a big difference so that's
so.
That's a reason like you know
you can see any big difference
and and our smoking rates among
youth and adults you know drop.
And and I don't really Mr
chairman I don't really follow
cigarette prices because I
haven't smoked in thirty one
years so it's not something that
I really keep up with the case
only when I'm at the gas station
I see Mr on the.
The sign above the home and I
look at that so there's no way
I'd ever start smoking again.
and so maybe improving your
point for you
but as we increase so what
you're saying is that when you
increase taxes.
It curves someone's behavior
changes their behavior.
This is that right Mrs Sita.
Mr Chairman Senator Brandt
that's exactly right and and
research has shown that.
And if if you look at the the
the top fifteen states I think
we provided that she with the
exception of one state you you
see their smoking rates are a
lot lower than New Mexico and
other states.
Mr Chairman Senator Lopez why do
you think that in New Mexico it
didn't decrease when we raised
it we certainly see a big change
The New Mexico actually went up
why do you why do you think that
is.
Mr chairman Mr Seto would you
please yup.
Mister chairman Senator Brandt I
I think up up I'll try to
explain it again I think in
twenty nineteen we are cigarette
tax was dollars sixty six and
then we raised it by thirty four
cents as I mentioned you know
thirty four cents is not enough
to change somebody's behavior
because the tobacco industry and
the cigarette industry they
disco those prices so the
customer is they don't feel you
know any difference in the price
so it's it's a very nominal
increase for that and unless you
raise a by a dollar more than
you know we we want the any
taxes to be raised should should
be directly you know you know
the.
Transmitted to the customer so
the customer will feel like you
know this is expensive and that
will change the behavior and
research has shown that time and
time again and so do like you
know you know fifteen states I
keep mentioning is what what the
highest you know tobacco taxes
cigarette taxes one of the
lowest you know usage rates.
So Mister chairman Senator I
guess the goal is so no one will
use cigarettes right isn't that
the ultimate goal.
And Mister chairman Senator yes
right it's all if we would be
smoking anymore is the health
it's the health costs that will
have to pay for many different
ways.
So Mister chairman Senator why
don't we just make it illegal.
I'm Mr Chairman you know we
raised the age and you as well
as I know to for passed if we
had a prohibition on liquor back
in the day of course that
totally changed everything back
in in from with regards to that.
Yeah we're trying to change
human behavior as best as
possible and this is you know
cigarettes are not something
that you need this is an in my
estimation Mister chairman
Senator of your cigarettes are
not necessarily something that
we have to have in order to
survive the luxury.
and if we do costed out with
regards to the taxes early those
who can't afford it but for
those that maybe on the margin
because if we raise the taxes
higher than me cease to smoking
provide of course another way of
which they can
maybe a.
It utilize some other venue I
guess that maybe for their their
own usage for whatever
determination maybe but the
costs to us Mister chairman
Senator are so expensive as we
grow older as with COVID at this
point in time Mr chairman
senators you know if you have a
long disease if you are smoker
it does you know COVID has it
much much harder since the
disease of course centers and
and the funds so this is you
know as as we talked about for
young people Mister chairman
Senator yeah the cost if you do
in fact we even have this debate
Mister chairman Senator when we
were I'm debating on raising the
age up to twenty one and would
it deter of the you know as well
as I do Mr chairman there still
adults to purchase for younger
people to so that's also a
concern but you can't constantly
figure just to wear except at
the point of sale who's selling
to who but versus buying given
for that so it it it it's up the
full contextual conversation
Mister chairman Senator but our
intent would be wonderful if we
could have no more smoking our
tax that we do pay to help cover
for the care costs of health
care would be greatly greatly
reduced.
Mister chairman Senator
what age bracket or people on
the age bracket what the
economic record people normally
and who smoke.
For the most part do we know.
And Mr chairman Mr speaker do
you have that in.
The.
Mr Chairman Senator Brandt the
majority of the people who smoke
are or low income.
Communities people of color.
I think up in in New Mexico
forty seven percent of adult
smokers or on Medicaid.
The majority of the smokers are
are on Medicaid or uninsured and
low income communities.
So what what the what what with
their income level B. Mr
chairman Mr seated doing now is
that is that poverty is that to
our percent of poverty do we do
have any idea.
Representative Mister chairman
Senator Brandt I think you know
the in order to qualify for four
Medicaid I think you you have to
meet certain federal poverty
levels and I am I don't know
what that level is but it's it's
it's pretty low.
So Mr chairman Mr cedar are
cigarettes addictive.
Mr Chairman Senator Brandt as a
former smoker I can say there
are highly addictive it took me
more than seventy years to quit.
and I started smoking when I was
fourteen years old.
so they are highly addictive and
there's a lot of research that
shows their highly addictive.
and you can ask any smoke or you
know it takes several attempts
to quit.
As I mentioned Mr Chairman
Senator Brandt you know you know
what what one of the questions
we get asked all the times like
what what are you doing you know
to those poor people like if
they want to quit we we we we
have a good smoking cessation
program that's being offered to
the Medicaid.
recipients it's it's very
comprehensive it's it's
nationally recognized.
You know we want to thank you
Secretary Scrase for
implementing that it's got group
counseling individual counseling
you get chapter six you get the
you know
nicotine gum so Las injures you
there are no limits and how many
times you can attempt so you
know we're also providing making
sure you know these folks who
want to quit you know they have
the resources through the state
through the Medicaid program.
To to do that.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Mr see the what about the if
we're raising it so much I know
usually a smoker smokes two
three packs today we're not
talking about just one pack a
day
so you're you're raising at
least two dollars
and then if the industry raises
a sum of of that
Are any concern if these folks
are already struggling the that
it might cut into whether or not
they have food.
There's a lot of we're gonna can
continue to smoke coming we've
seen a reduction when we race
the right but that doesn't go
away even if you could raise it
to ten dollars a pack and there
are still people that will small
because it is that addictive to
some people I was fortunate I
threw away and never smoked
never create a.
and so I was I was very
fortunate in that respect most
people don't have that
Experience so is there any
concern because it's mostly in
low income and even poverty
level people that they won't be
able to feed their family
because we're increasing so much
that they're gonna spend their
their grocery money on
cigarettes.
Mister chairman Senator
I think what we also have to
having a conversation is not
just bringing up the low income
communities
you know I've lowincome
communities are targeted for
many different reasons and I
know that you're committee also
has had discussions with regards
to a title loans and other
areas
we drive around my community you
can kind of spot where all the
smoke shops and all the others
are located.
I know where the targeting is
that we all do Mister chairman
Senator as to where and how
Some of these products are sold.
In the I I think that what we're
looking for here Mister chairman
Senator is as the bottom line is
for public health and whether
person is on Medicaid or has of
your health insurance through
their company it's still a cost
to society we all still pay it
in the rising cost of healthcare
you know persons whether I
Medicaid or you can you have it
and this insurance through the
business that you work with we
still all rate the bottom line
cost with regards to lung
disease cancer and all the other
atrocities that come as a result
of smoking COPD and things as we
grow older so for me Mr chairman
you know just to single out a
particular
Your level of income for
communities to me it is a full
context as we look so we're not
just targeting Mister chairman
Senator looking at those who
have a lower level of income but
it's across the sectors to make
sure that we can discourages
best as possible and Mister
chairman Senator of course for
our younger people
you know there's there's they
don't have as much income
available either at their behest
but we're hoping to discourage
again because once you do start
and again Mister chairman
Senator this committee we had
some discussions we were doing
that up to twenty one if you
don't start smoking by the age
of seventeen by that point you
have a much better health L.
come with that as you grow older
so Mr Chairman etcetera I would
just hope that we wouldn't just
concentrate specifically to look
at the lower income because
again we're looking at the full
context as to how we can improve
health outcomes for our state
thank you thank you Mr chairman
and senator I appreciate that
and I'm not the one that brought
up the low income that was in
your testimony here witnesses
testimony
yes we know that forty seven
percent I think was the number
that he is of people the smoker
in that income level so I think
we do have to address you know
at least you know that small in
the room that it does exist and
there is a concern there I
again.
I hope people quit smoking I
did.
In the I have a really good
friend who smoked all of his
life is about the same ages may
impact on the group out six
months apart and he just quit
the last year and the I'm really
proud of him for going to he's
my best friend and and I'll be
honest with you it's a lot nicer
to hang out with them
now that he's not smoking and I
bet you the next time we take a
cruise together it's gonna be a
lot more enjoyable to me having
to go sit on the smoke back with
someone smokes and so I'm really
glad he quit smoking and I hope
everyone does I appreciate
The that you would admit that
raising the tax rate changes
people's behavior I think we
know it does
I think we need to tie that into
some of the other tax bills that
we have coming Mr Chairman as we
start looking at our tax bills
understanding that raising taxes
does change people's behavior I
will look at that when it comes
to raising our personal income
tax and the change of behavior
we're gonna see in our state
when we do that and that is a
lot of people are just goalie so
I think we have to understand
that changing tax rates does
change human behavior and I
don't think that should ever be
the purpose that we use our tax
code for I don't believe that
our tax code should be used to
change our to curb social
behavior to something that we
either like or dislike you know
the other thing I think was a
very good point actually hadn't
thought about it was the fact
that you know we're getting
ready to vote on a bill.
Probably I think we're gonna
vote on the bill this year to
legalize cannabis.
Smoking.
Cannabis.
Your tax rates going to be
around twenty percent or less so
I think there's you know there's
some issues in that arena
but that apparently.
That is a behavior that we
walked and so we're not in taxes
because we want that behavior
this is a behavior we don't want
so we're going to increase the
taxes on it.
To really high level I never
believed in sin taxes I don't
think that they're helpful
overall to a community overall
to the state but I do think we
need to do everything we can to
help people quit smoking and
Senator if you'll remember back
I did support your bill to raise
the minimum wage to twenty one
couple years ago and in fact.
We should be raising the minimum
wage on every thing to twenty
five because that's when the
brain is fully developed and you
are I believe it's ninety
percent less likely to become
addicted to something if you
don't started until your age
twenty five if you remember on
the cannabis bills in the past I
always supported at the age of
twenty five and so thank you for
that thank you Mr chairman and I
see that the the doctor is
waiting to get on and I can't
wait to hear what the doctor has
to say.
The doctors taking notes a
doctor Hickey.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator Lopez and and
Senator grant now before I ask
my questions if my might
actually Senator Brandt little
disappointing news on that
maturation of the brain
maybe on average overall twenty
five but women connect their
frontal lobes in their late
teens and early twenties and we
then don't do it until our late
twenties early thirties south
I'm sorry and so we average it
out its twenty five that too bad
for us
So I I do I do have a number of
questions and and I want to say
here
Senator Brandt you're you're
right this bill are I think it
was it said that it would take a
long time
certainly from a public health
point of view I think yeah and
the evidence is there that
raising the taxes will decrease
is small but I do have some
questions
Do we know our Senator Lopez and
Mr Siva.
The.
It or maybe in other states
And and the federal poverty
level is a hundred and thirty
eight percent for Medicaid
in but when it's below that is
there a lot of smoking that goes
on in the home I know we banned
it and virtually every public
place but those who are smoking
are they likely to do it in the
home as well.
I'm Mr chairman and senator if I
may drive promo would you like
to answer.
Hi.
Mr chairman and senator thank
you I don't have any data hard
numbers but I can see so I work
in a
thank you A. T. so finally
qualified health center and over
ninety percent medications or
Medicaid star meeting that
federal poverty level guidelines
that you can say it and I will
see a little of my families
smokers yes almost all those
patients names are screening
them the parents to see us and
our home so we can say in a
totally from patient population
in taking care of which is
Representative the people were
speaking about in regards to
this bill do you smoke inside
outside of the home page you
know there's dangers for us
smoke exposure.
Thank you Dr palm of that's
where I was going in terms of
the public health I just hadn't
heard it mentioned today
that there is a definitely a
secondary impact are generating
lung cancer through secondary
exposure to small and it's very
often in children who maybe
themselves never smoked but it
does come out later and small
cell carcinoma of the lung later
in life so the public health
impact isn't only to the
individual it's also to family
members and other people in the
household and I think we hope we
can keep that in mind the
I guess the other thing and I'm
wondering if
the
Mr Siva Dr palm of and babies Dr
see I'm sorry
is the and Senator Lopez Mr
chairman is the my
in terms of raising these prices
is our modeling in other states
that demonstrates the decrease.
Projected out in terms of COPD
lung cancer
Sure that was another call on
now how Senate bill eighty four
the is there a decrease in the
amount of the diseases that are
secondary to smoking and can
that be models out into dollars.
I mean I know we know
intuitively that if you don't
smoke you're not like you're
gonna get the disease but I know
again I often refer to the CBO
they would have and and maybe
this is too sophisticated for
our budget in the state that
some modeling on how much money
the state would say in health
care costs with the taxpayers
ultimately pay for in Medicaid
Medicare and certainly as we get
cost shifted in our commercial
our health insurance of the
impact there as well you have
any modeling that would identify
what number that might be or
some way to measure that.
Mr chairman and Center I think
up we did in your package I
think if you see I mean the this
model was created by the
American cancer a society in
cancer action network.
You know.
Currently in if you raise a by
two dollars like you know you
expect.
Five year reduction in number of
smoking affected pregnancies and
births by thirteen hundred of
fire health cost savings from
fewer smoking cost.
One cancer cases by two point
eight one million five year.
Health care cost savings from
fewer smoking affected
pregnancies and works by three
point seven five million in a
five year health.
Cost savings from fewer small
cost heart attacks and strokes
by five point nine eight million
and a five year Medicaid program
savings for the state you know
ten point eight five million.
In the long term health care
cost savings from adult and
youth smoking declines the
savings is four hundred and
seventy six.
Million dollars so that there
are projections Mr chairman and
senator.
Thank up I'll be glad to send
that to you if you haven't
received.
Thank you Dr Sita I would
greatly appreciate that Madam
chair of the Senator I'm not a
doctor so okay.
Sorry
I just assumed that that you
were and I'm I'm one I think
most people anyway never mind
college eyes for that is the of
one other question and I'm a
little confused in the F. I. R.
where the revenues that would
come from this where did they go
do they go to the general fund
to they go to the cancer center
is there some split I just
couldn't figure it out and
reading through the different
sections of the FIR.
And I dress that too Senator
Lopez and Mr chair.
Mr chairman where
the monies would be going to and
that would be to
New Mexico health sciences
center we offer the copper fence
for our comprehensive cancer
center to the department of
health facilities
and a rural county cancer fund.
Thank you Senator Lopez in just
a one last point of
verification
Senator Brandt you brought up
the subject of marijuana and
smoking
we don't have it in the state
but I think if you go to
Colorado the vast majority of
marijuana is animals these days
so there's there's less exposure
to spoke from from that point a
point well taken because that
marijuana smoke can be very
detrimental as well.
Thank you Mr chair and senator
for bringing this bill forward I
think it's a very very important
bill I understand we're not
voting today but it will do a
lot for the public health the
state and as was pointed out the
secondary impacts the financial
we're gonna go even beyond what
we what was stated that when I
ask my question thank you Sir.
Thank you Senator Hickey just
Senator Padilla.
I thank you Mr chairman and
thank you the major economic and
to Mr speaker who.
I spoke to probably seven times
a maybe not that many times but
quite a bit before we arrived at
the session I think one of the
things that I struggle with on
this one is and I tend to
support it but I also struggle
with the fact that
The tax going up and I know that
the targeted audiences is quite
primarily of and people that
live in in the area where I
Representative and and etcetera
and the majority whip
representative and in other
areas like that I I just I'm
trying to stop struggle with
that tax being put on on these
folks in on on this tax being.
Is there any data that shows us
that it doesn't negatively
impact
In a significantly higher taxes
on this type of stuff doesn't
need to have a dramatic effect
on the household income the
folks majority whip on you know
here is that we represent.
I'm a real struggle with that.
Thank you senator Mr sida.
But Mister chairman Senator
Padilla no thank thanks for the
question we we get asked all the
time.
I will try to find you some
research on that but anecdotal
information is when you when you
raise taxes especially like you
know people you know on Medicaid
and and low income communities
they tend to cut down on
smoking.
You know instead of smoking two
packs a day.
Maybe they'll smoke half back.
And you know and as you know as
a former smoker I can say you
know you make several attempts
to quit you know before you can
actually where people so if
you're on Medicaid you know
someone in your district no they
can access the services you know
through you know Human Services
Department and for the NCOs and
you know our objective is you
know this to change behavior and
then total information we have
is like people cut down on
smoking and whatever savings
they do not they do spend on
their families so I mean that
that's another positive thank in
terms of changing behaviors.
Appreciate that Mr chairman and
and that major economic Mr see
to so where does the number have
to be the first to truly make an
impact here I mean it is this it
is this what what you're
proposing here is is what's
truly going to turn the tide.
Mr Chairman up Senator.
The up you know I think we we
believe this is this is a this
is a good number to change
behaviors especially you know R.
E. cigarette usages you know
thirty four percent one and
three high school kids are
waiting and our adult right as
you know hi as well I mean even
if we can bring down our adult
smoking rates under ten percent
I mean that that is you know
thousands of New Mexicans you
know what smoking and living
healthy lives and you know.
People don't spend a lot of
money on on on cigarettes and
and those savings are directly
affected in terms of helping
their families buying other.
You know needs.
You know other groceries are no
better living healthy living so.
We appreciate that so Mr
chairman and and major economic
yeah I disclose this before I
didn't really have a
relationship with my father but
the little time that I did know
him he was a chain smoker and I
would literally whenever I was
with him right when I was a boy
I would ride with my head
outside of the car or the truck
we were in and people are always
asking why does your son ride
with his head outside of the
vehicle and and I would just
pipe up and say because he
smoking in there and I'm not I
don't want to breathe that smoke
and heat yeah when he was forty
six he walked into UNM hospital
could barely breathe and Anne
had holes just blowing through
his lungs as a result of that
and never walked out of their
lives so it's one of the reasons
I I want to help in anyway I can
on this but I also want to make
sure that we're all set there
were not just you know taxed
accounted for people either
because that's just not going to
help us either on the other end
so I I know Mister chairman I'm
gonna vote on this but died I
don't think we are if you want
us to vote on I guess I guess we
could but
I'm just trying to figure where
is the because we we talk about
this every year in Austin and we
talk about this every year that
I've been here at least on those
the majority whip of and I know
you've been here longer than I
have so I don't know you know
how long it's been talked about
but we need to to figure this
out and we need to set it once
and for all and and set and
forget it appreciate that thank
you Mr chairman.
Thank you senator Senator Kernan
or before we go to Senator
Kernan up I know the FY art
would it was pretty complicated
in terms of where it's going in
the calculations and I I like
good to have or committee
analyst to clarify something for
us Kelly if you're available yes
thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee of the the FY are
the modeling behind the FIR
indication there will be a
significant increase in general
fund revenue but it appears that
need in drafting the bill the
reduction in the distributions
to certain beneficiaries the
percentage reduction is to pay
such that there are actual
amount of revenue from the
cigarette tax goes down
and the General Fund gets a lot
more revenue but those
beneficiaries including the UNM
cancer center.
Actually get less revenue it's
it's not a whole lot it's not a
huge reduction in revenue but it
isn't an increase in and I think
it's important to keep that in
mind the new revenue from this
this this bill will go to the
general fund not to the current
beneficiaries.
Thank thank you Kelly SO would
so with that the of Senator
Kernan just briefly Mr chair and
senator.
We passed house bill six
Last year the year before but at
tell me.
What was a reduction or what was
the increase with regard to
cigarettes or maybe it was just
E. cigarettes can you just
remind me what we did in house
bill six related to tobacco.
I'm.
Mister chairman Senator I to be
honest would have to go back and
review Mr Seto would you happen
to have that information.
Representative Mister chairman
Senator Kernan I don't but you
know we we can get that
information.
Thank you very much and and I
know that I received a lot of
emails on that particular thing
I noticed part of the big
package Matt I just wonder if
that should be considered as
we're discussing this additional
increase and so I'm I would be
happy to get that information at
some point thank you.
Thirty four cents.
Okay
I don't have any other of.
I don't see any other hands
raised.
All the servers I indicated that
we're not gonna take action on
this.
Of you know the sponsor does
know that and and she's okay
with it so
I want to thank the committee is
a good discussion debate I think
of clarify some things in the so
with that I want to thank the
Senator Lopez for your for your
presentation your advocacy.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
and members of the committee.
Thank you.
Thank you we will now move on to
the Senate bill two eleven
corporate income tax rate
Senator of majority of.
Thank you Mr chairman members
let me state right up front
we're not voting on this bill
either
this bill gives us some very
important information all about
two different taxes that are
part of our our next and our
things that I think we need to
consider when we put together a
tax package one of those is the
corporate income tax rates and
the other is the gross receipts
tax rate in a compensating tax
rate and just for the members
compensating tax
is imposed ran a business in New
Mexico purchases items from owls
States and it lines up with the
gross receipts tax so I have
been saying and I think there's
some really important
information in here for us let
me start with the the gross
receipts and compensating tax
and center right you asked about
the right the state rates five
point one two five percent and
this legislation proposes to
reduce it five one eight seven
down to five percent and I was
very interested in finding out.
What that would cost you if you
look at the FY are
It's about sixty two million
dollars to reduce it by one
eighth of one percent and this I
think highlights for all of us.
The problem we have with over
reliance on gross receipts this
is a very regressive tax and
what we've done is we've
narrowed the base and we've
raised the right and we're gonna
have a hard time getting it down
but we need to get it down and
so now we can see what getting
it down by one eight this gonna
cost sixty two million dollars.
the corporate tax.
Proposal here.
Lays out in fact a reversal of
what happened in twenty thirteen
in the state of New Mexico R.
and again this this rules out
over the same type of phase in
that we that we faced out of in
twenty thirteen between twenty
thirteen and twenty eighteen and
it provides information about
what these different rates would
be it does impose a new our
corporate tax rate and I want to
be real clear these are C.
corporations these are not your
New Mexico LLC's and S.
corporations your New Mexico
small businesses there was some
messaging done by some of our
chambers of commerce that this
bill was hurting all these New
Mexico businesses I would
suggest that they will look into
the tax formation of the type of
companies that are issue because
these are C. corporations these
are companies that have done
extraordinarily well during the
pandemic many of them others are
perhaps not as much but this re
imposes a tax bracket over a
million dollars beginning in the
twenty twenty three tax year so
why do this why bring this up
what's happened since twenty
thirteen when we pass this bill
well the twenty seventeen
federal tax cut reduce the
corporate tax from a buy forty
percent from thirty five percent
to twenty one percent so at the
federal level there was a
fourteen percent tax reduction
in the corporate tax and so you
know our little effort to find a
couple of percentage points back
in twenty thirteen is dwarfed by
the magnitude of the tax
reduction that was given at the
federal level and twenty
seventeen.
We've heard a lot about
regulatory uncertainty and I'm
sure we're gonna hear that in
response to this bill I just
like to stress for a moment the
need for budgetary certainty and
we have to have revenue streams
that are stable that are
recurring and no one was a
bigger champion of that then
senator John Arthur Smith and he
understood you've gotta have
recurring revenue streams and so
this bill basically is designed
to introduce into the discussion
a way to raise some revenue what
also are it highlights how
expensive it is to reduce the
gross receipts tax and I really
do hope that is part of the
package we put together we raise
some revenue are but we also use
some of that revenue to pay for
a reduction in the gross
receipts tax and I think we need
to look at a targeted reduction
of some of the G. R. T. pyramid
these are things we hear all the
time so again this is not a bill
we're gonna vote on today what I
think it's important to have
this discussion and to
understand these different
pieces and I really do think
that these large multi state
corporations who got a forty
percent tax cut in twenty
seventeen can pay a little bit
more in terms of their fair
share to our overall pictures so
that's what the bill does and
I'm happy stand for questions.
Thank you I would order leader
at this time we will go to the
public for any input so we can
go with the opposition first.
All right Senate bill two
eleven.
First in opposition we have Amy
bear being.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
and members of the committee my
name is Amy parity and I'm the
registered lobbyists for the New
Mexico oil and gas association
compared to our neighboring
states with Arizona at four
point nine percent Colorado at
four point five percent in Texas
having no corporate income tax
the cost of doing business in
New Mexico is already higher at
five point nine percent well
senator Wirth still does
decrease the compensating tax by
an eight percent the savings
there is negligible compared to
the increase in the corporate
income tax higher corporate
income tax rates make doing
business in New Mexico more
costly and effective vestment
decisions making us less
competitive when businesses
consider our state versus our
numbers.
Thank you.
Next.
We have been Jason Weaks.
Jason Weaks.
All right now we have Ashley
Wagner.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I'm
actually Wagner director of
public policy for the New Mexico
chamber of commerce we do
appreciate the Sanchez remarks
regarding reducing G. R. T.
Karia omitting but we
respectfully oppose this bill
because as we look today to
diversify our economy and
attract investments into New
Mexico increasing the corporate
income tax rates will have the
opposite effect businesses
looking to locate or expanding
New Mexico might take because
because it will see these seeing
that we are not as profit role
to do so as our neighboring
states according to the fiscal
impact report in this
legislation is implemented there
will have been in ten years that
the corporate income tax rate
table change from one year to
the next over thirteen year
veteran.
Ending in tax your twenty twenty
six additionally adding in new
middle tax bracket may further
drive home this message and the
state will only see a moderate
increase in revenue from doing
so another thing to note is that
relatively few businesses are
organized as corporations in New
Mexico a tax hike like thank you
very much.
Next hello we have D. Anna are
to read a.
The N. Archuleta.
Okay moving on we have JD
Bullington.
JD Bullington.
Moving on we have Messi career.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee my name is Missy
Currier a registered lobbyist
for strategies three sixty
speaking on behalf of our client
Occidental petroleum with
respect to senator Wirth we ask
you to please oppose Senate bill
eleven in this case the tax and
revenue department did an
outstanding job cleaning up the
important tax politics policy
decisions relative to this bill
in particular I would like to
point out the fiscal impact
reports under significant issues
where the taxed Representative
department points out the
following concerns of course the
increase in corporate income tax
may negatively impact impact
business it will also make it
painful for us to bring in
additional business into the
state as we look to diversify
our economy as previously
mentioned corporations will not
only hurt now and in the future
which will only increase our
dependence on oil and gas thank
you for the opportunity to
testify.
Thank you very much next up we
have not Thompson's CSE thank
you Mr chairman members my
name's Matt Thompson registered
lobbyists for Apache
corporation.
In particular I well we oppose
Senate bill two eleven in
particular the exploration and
production industry built to
handle some aspects of
uncertainty including the
likelihood of drilling economic
wealth the volatile nature of
the commodity price and more
recently the regulatory
environment which we expect
operate historically the one
constant are models that we can
make a business plan around is
the tax stable however as
previously mentioned this we if
this is an act of the tax table
changed over ten years ten times
last thirteen years.
Additionally part of HB six in
twenty nineteen required
mandatory command combined tax
reporting changes because the
global pandemic we're still not
sure how much increase in C. I.
T. revenues see for those
changes.
Despite the rules goals of
legislators on both sides of the
aisle SB two eleven actually
increases dependency on oil and
gas industry because of the
large share of C. I. T. derived
from the industry as highlighted
FIR.
Thank you for the opportunity to
testify and we urge you to
oppose.
Thank you very much next up we
have T. J. Trujillo.
Mr chairman of the members of
the committee with all due
respect to my client
queens all American pipelines
opposes this particular bill I
won't in terms of the
Representative time I repeat any
of the comments that were made I
will tell you that I did have
one tax professional committee
your recently that New Mexico's
tax policy really through the
corporate income taxes.
Has been scheduled to go over
the past decade as mentioned by
one of the the individuals you
know it's the actors got down up
we've had some other changes
to combine reporting reporting
methods and and I will sourcing
forty second issues
with all that being said you
know what what the industry
looking for in terms of the oil
and gas industry as well as
other industries you have other
clients that are are are
concerned about this is the
ability of matters and with the
a decade of continuing change in
the corporate compact without.
Thank you very much.
Next up we have Jason Espinoza.
But the members of the committee
Jason Espinoza the registered
lobbyists for New Mexico idea
which is the statewide
association of economic
development organizations that
we do stand in opposition to
this legislation we're strongly
concerned with the effect the
provisions of this bill might
have regarding re increasing the
corporate income tax and the
negative impact you'll have on
business recruitment and
retention.
Early in the tax code is heavily
valued by business and economic
developers alike they want as
much certainty as possible
making long term business
decisions such as to where to
locate an operation Bastin and
expansion of business area
development magazine which is
considered leading executive
magazine covering corporate site
selection relocation twenty
second lists the corporate
income tax is a top ten list for
site selection factors even more
important today New Mexico needs
to consider its positioning at
related to reshoring onshore and
near shoring and the effect that
these types of laws can have on
that thank you chairman.
Thank you very much are there
any other members of the public
who wish to speak in opposition
to this bill at this time
your people reactions but and to
raise your hand.
Your
call is on.
Yes.
We can.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is very full
and president CEO for the
greater Albuquerque chamber of
commerce what factors of your
work you can see this will be
differently on the begin by
saying that the gross receipts
taxes job number it makes the
cost of doing business here
higher than most other places we
certainly appreciate this
legislation and its small
reduction in the G. R. T. right
after being however raising the
corporate income tax rate sorry
these are predictability will
homes the tax rolls this bill
holding their will go back up
actually there's nothing
predictable about that our
currency I do read is just fine.
It's where we wanted to be one
more point the impact on our
business location would be
significant racing wax would
produce relatively level
returned so we are ready to one
all when we take a vote on this
for thank you so much.
Thank you very much.
Patrick block.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee on Pat
block registered lobbyists for
the New Mexico retail
association I believe the
opponents who preceded may have
covered most of the important
points so I would just encourage
the committee to take a look at
the.
Economic Development Department
and taxation and revenue
department concerns of the FIR
it just seems like a nearly
thirty percent increase in the
corporate tax rate which is a
pretty tough way to get to an
eighth of a percent decrease in
the gross receipts tax and
we oppose the bill thank you.
Thank you very much at this
moment in time we will go to
those in favor of Senate bill
two eleven beginning with built
in Jordan.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee Bill Jordan with
voices for children we stand in
full support of the legislation
and I want to thank leader worth
for this bill and all of his
work over the years on corporate
taxes we were promised that deep
cuts to both corporate taxes and
personal income taxes would spur
tremendous growth in economic
activity instead we lost
hundreds of millions of dollars
to the general fund forced cuts
education workforce development
that would actually help us
thrive as a state.
You just heard that if we do
this this guy will fall from our
perspective the sky bell when we
cut taxes and as a result we had
to cut the quality of life
issues that really do matter for
economic development well
educated workforce
infrastructure and state safe
livable communities well this
increase in C. I. T. affects a
very small percentage of New
Mexico businesses the cut in the
regressive gross receipts tax
helps all businesses and all
backstops opens all.
Next.
We have lower right down.
Laura.
Okay moving on we have called a
cruel for.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee committee my name
is Carla crew Hafer I'm with the
center for civic policy and we
support it as B. two eleven this
initiative addresses some of the
disproportionate burden on low
income taxpayers and we applaud
this effort to date if the
divers of fire streams of
revenue we commend the sponsors
senator Wirth and we are to do
passing the committee thank you.
Thank you very much next up we
have ten Davis.
You Mr chair until Davis with
the New Mexico Center on Law and
Poverty is just mentioned
earlier on the last bill we need
stable sources of revenue it
would generate funds to invest
in vital services and repealing
some of the tax cuts for big
corporations in twenty thirteen
and reducing the regressive G.
R. T. is consistent with that
goal we are to support thank you
Mr.
Thank you very much finally we
have Richard Davis.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is that Dick
Mason chair the action committee
legal members of New Mexico in
this league stand for
progressive taxation from those
who can most afford and
secretary it's a diversifying
the economy our income
But I also want to speak with as
a form of copper planned did
plant relocations studies.
Property taxes is about fifty
six the last educated workforce.
I'm good and infrastructure
safety all of those things that
could be funded through
corporate and income tax.
I'm much more important
unplanned relocation decisions
so I urge you to support SB two
eleven thank you.
Thank you very much at this time
are there any other members of
the public who wish to speak in
favor of Senate bill two eleven.
Patrick block.
Patrick.
Mr chair I apologize I forgot to
take my hand down and we'll do
that now.
Thank you is there anybody else.
I would like to speak in favor
of this bill.
All right thank you very much
that concludes public comment at
this time.
Thank you thank you so now we'll
go to the committee for
questions I have Senator Griggs
Senator Padilla and Senator
Kernan.
Thank you Mr chair and that and
senator Wirth is.
Are you are you just basically
taking this back to where was it
to corporate tax level is that
is that what you're doing.
Mr chair Senator Griggs that's
how the bill was introduced I
think there's been some good
points raised you know we faced
it out over five years I just
introduced it the phase it back
in over five years but I think
two things that I I just want to
throw out
you know there's no reason we
can't come up with the right
into a one year implementation
the other thing the middle tax
bracket is a very small piece
that five hundred to one million
and as was mentioned by some of
those in opposition FIR I think
that's something that can come
out so again I think that would
address the whole phase phase in
issue but again I I did
introduce it to to mirror what
we did in twenty thirteen I
think it's information that
helps us understand what what
the fiscal impact is and how
that would roll out I I
certainly hear the the need for
predictability and so I think
that can be addressed.
And thank you Mr chair and
senator I want to one talk to
you a little bit real quick
about gross receipts tax.
you know in the in the fact that
the stage G. R. T. years is five
point one two five
Bill folgen Eddie.
Who used to run the municipal
league always told me that that
was that was not actually right
the the state's tax is four
percent and that the the
difference between four and five
point one two five belong to the
city and it actually does go
back to the cities along with
you know their local option and
and other things that make up
their total right
show that the question I guess
when we start talking about
dropping G. R. T..
Who are we dropping it from are
we gonna take we can take it
from the municipality will take
it from the county thank you
from the state
we take it from all three what
what is the thought process that
goes on when we're when we're
actually talking about dropping
G. R. T. Mr chair and this this
lowers the the five point one
two five to five and you're
right built in there and and and
I smile because I think about
bills legend Eddie who was who
knew this topic he feathered to
stop Ali and you'll notice in
the bill on page one line
nineteen is an increase
distribution to the small cities
assistance fund that is designed
to hold the small cities
Harmless from the impact of this
like why is on page two line
three there's a there's an
increased distribution to the
small counties assistance fund
and I think you know bill is
looking down on this and.
The the the intent here is not
to self harm you know our small
governments in your rate and
blind boy I'm I'm more sensitive
to that than ever given the
pandemic and the reliance on G.
R. T. so so it's my
understanding that that's what
those provisions are designed to
do but you know as we move
forward I want to make actually
sure that whatever we do and
reducing G. R. T. doesn't end up
you know having a huge impact
especially on our our
municipalities that are that are
are really burdened by just
having G. R. T. is the primary
revenue source.
and and think center for that
and that Mr chair the.
You know we talk senator Wirth
and I've talked about different
types of tax reform.
Over the years on trying to
trying to get the right the
right things done we're we're on
track and there's even I think
there's a bill that we might be
she and today even that's going
to stop hold harmless payments
for some folks earlier than that
the phase out actually is
as we do those things.
And then what senator Wirth is
proposing for small cities
that's one thing we've got other
cities that don't fit that
small.
Number and so we're gonna give
them potentially last G. R. T.
we're not going to protect on in
this in this bill and that that
will do nothing but harm them as
we continue to reduce the hold
harmless by.
So we've we've got to we have to
come back and look at things
that we've done.
Some of them are are gonna be
painful issues this is painful
to.
Certain groupings of people but
we've got to go back and we
really need to consider things
like the you know the tax on
food which was removed and put
back on and veto.
to where.
Municipalities can survive
because we go through again and
we were taking things away from
city.
What are we gonna do we're gonna
force.
We're gonna force them to raise
new taxes on almost everything
in order to pay for services
that those communities have so
while you may be maybe there's
redeeming features in this bill.
Of but there's a.
We have to do it different I
think and I I think we've got to
we have to really step away and
bring in more things to consider
so Mr chair Senator I you know I
appreciate you landed out there
for the discussion I I certainly
hope they did to it doesn't
passion manner that it is
drafted court.
Yeah Mister chair I appreciate
that Senator Griggs and again I
think there is no intent here to
do harm to our our local
governments what I think it just
highlights and you've
highlighted how challenging this
is I mean we have to reduce the
G. R. T. I mean we've just we've
created a monster that quite
frankly as all kinds of
challenges and and you're right
the hold harmless this is its
own issue and I'm pretty proud
of our city here in Santa Fe
because they do not oppose the
three eights yet you know I look
at the bill that's COVID we'll
talk about that a little later I
go wait a minute you know there
at this point with COVID they're
they're dying and they've got
you shortfalls in the Santa Fe
budget and yet you know the the
amount of the hold harmless is
being reduced so I I assure you
that you know to the extent that
some piece of this is part of
any discussion we've gotta make
sure that we're not harming you
know the local governments and
that that bill folgen Eddie
would would appreciate us both
for looking out for them and I
certainly that's not all the
intent and the extent you flag
some stuff I appreciate that.
Thank you Mr chairman I'm
finished thank you Senator
Griggs have Senator Padilla and
Senator Kernan.
Thank you Mr Chairman and Mr
leader so it with the G. R. T.
being what it is in this new tax
this new rate of this new level
or whatever what is what would
become the effective tax rate
for a business like that with
with with the G. R. T. where
it's at now.
So all Mr Chairman make sure I
understand your question.
I think anytime you know as was
mentioned by Terry Cole you know
the G. R. T. is a huge issue for
businesses the parenting is a is
a big piece and we've done some
pieces to that and all the
states not in this bill but I
really do think there's some
more work we can do with
paramedic and so reducing the
the the G. R. T. helps all you
know businesses and that's what
the and I agree with with Terry
Cole on that I also think it's
important to note that this is a
these are C. corporations so
it's a very it's a small group
of the biggest multi state
corporations that got a forty
percent tax reduction in twenty
seventeen now let's pretty good
this is a tiny little increasing
you hear you hear the response
you can you get that and again
and I I am having some combined
reporting.
Flashbacks because that that
bill eighty HSD yeah that's
exactly right and PTSD but I do
think these are important
discussions and I just you know
budgetary uncertainty is just as
difficult as regulatory
uncertainty and again I just
think we need to have steady
recurring revenue streams and
and this this committee is the
place to have that discussion
and that's what the bill does so
you know I think for most
businesses and especially New
Mexico businesses you know all
many pass along the G. R. T. so
there's no question about that I
don't want to mislead it somehow
that's a reduction what for for
all New Mexicans who pay it's
it's a big deal it really helps
and we've got to figure out how
to get that right down.
I agree and I do up to forty
percent something has got to
happen there and then
something's going to happen with
the G. R. T. I was just trying
to get to the bottom of what
what is the tax rate for the you
we can take our test fees our
large you know multi state this
of that but they're also big job
providers also and and we need
to remember that we need to make
sure that we we try to find a
way to make that work for them
to so if everything were to
happen right now G. R. T. were
to stay with that and what
you're proposing would stay with
that it would be what it that
let's just say this one in the
law where does that put us in
the neighboring states are work
for the region yes Mr chairman
and senator yeah that's a great
question and it's somewhat
misleading to compare well
Arizona's at this rate Colorado
this right taxes is here well
you know taxes basically
activation that will and that
personal income tax out exactly
right so you've got a look at
the overall picture and look at
New Mexico we're if not fifty
it's we're right at the bottom
in terms of property tax so
again it's it's it's tricky you
can't just pick out and say this
is this is comparison just you
know we're very unique in our
gross receipts tax because it's
not sales taxes on services as
well and it was brilliant one of
those lines way back in the late
sixties by Frank Jones was that
some last met years ago and it
was designed to have a very low
rate in the very broad based you
have
but you know you you know we
we've we've watched every year
there's an attempt to one of our
way that base and it's talk to
some of those make little sense
but I I think you got a look at
the overall picture look look at
our tax structure and I I do
think that you know one of the
one of our challenges as we
diversify our economy is also
making sure that we have a
progressive tax base knows that
can can contribute a little bit
more to sell it just doesn't be
aware of the that that you all
were leading some not pay and
others are saying.
And that when the gross receipts
the part examples that gets
those that can least afford it
the balls so you can look at the
overall picture no I appreciate
that Mr chairman Mr leader so a
couple years ago we had this big
all my gosh we've got to reform
our tax policy and this and that
it's a Swiss cheese in there was
all sorts of stuff flying around
and then we funded the study.
If you remember this and what
what did that study state but I
don't remember that's on us I do
this because it seems like this
was this massive up hill battle
and we here's our plan and then
you know.
Remember the else happening with
it after that but but what did
that study say about your
proposal your member so Mister I
don't believe that the artist in
the study look at corporate
taxes I could be wrong about
that so I need to go back and
look I think it was really
focused on you know exemptions
deductions gross receipts tax
and you're right we spent a
couple I can't hear couple
hundred thousand Bucks maybe
three or four dollars to do that
it was done I remember hearing
The presentation about that what
it's it's one of the frustrating
things and tax policies so so
challenging and and and you know
Senator Kernan nailed it the
other day because she said you
know we've got we've got all
this money so it makes it hard
to do and then we don't have the
money it's hard to do is just
hard to do no matter what and so
I really do think you want to
have a balanced package and I
commend the chair for what he's
doing in terms of hearing these
different bills and I hope we
can come up something that that
really does things that some on
both sides are gonna like and
someone both sides are gonna
dislike what that does both that
raises some revenues but also
addresses some of the really
regressive taxes and things
aren't working.
Thank you Mr chairman through
leader so what I would like to
see is I and the reason I was
asking about the neighboring
states in about the study a
couple years ago you can take no
matter what it is that we do and
how different we are you can
take our policy and you can find
a creative way the light lined
up and link it up with what's
going on in the region and in
the western part of the US and
versus the US whatever you can
do that I mean you can line up
data in in one one to compare a
bull format or another that that
links up I mean I I would like
to see that at some point I mean
because that way we understand
are we truly competitive or not
because we have to continue to
grow jobs here in and out and
we're we're going to we are
going to hurt ourselves if we if
we do something that's just you
know completely off base for
what's going on in the region of
the western part of the US or
the United States or whatever
I do we have any you know we
we've had a quite a few and I'm
glad that we renamed the
committees and and that this
committee has you know real
responsibility over tax policy I
guess you know now do we have
any movement on you know this
the whole effort on how we we
look at all of our tax policy
have you want to comment on that
at all yeah I I would Mr chair
I've been very honored to be
part of the revenue
stabilisation interim committee
and this year the Rockefeller
Foundation working funded a
study on that all was
exceptional and did exactly kind
of what you're looking for look
at different different areas and
different ways to look at our
overall tax.
I certainly think that that's
something that and I'll ask
on Kelly o'donnell I think can
get us a copy of that because I
think we should all all have
that and take a look at that
study I just showed you some of
the places where in comparison
to other areas where we're not
what we need to do I in terms of
revenues and places that we can
look at and so I think that
helps that will give you a sense
of how all.
It's the gathers I I would just
ask you Mr chair that we track
that down let's get that out to
our all of them something that
would help no no I I will go
ahead and do that in the of the
Kelly R. R. committee analysts
would you want to comment before
we.
Yes just one thought real quick
Mr chairman I I heard a Senator
Padilla say something that was
pretty interesting and any
reference the idea that we can
line up the taxes and compare
them and I'm gonna I'm gonna
tell story on economists but it
is true that we can line them up
and compare them but we're
comparing them often on
different features so I was once
told economics is the art of
saying with the glass is half
empty or half full so you can
line up tax rates and compare
them to tell virtually any story
you want unfortunately but there
are there are some comparisons
that we can look at in terms of
business and and households are
burdened but I'll share with you
guys only now thanks I
appreciate that Mr chairman
thank you Kelly and Mr leader
yeah I mean I you know we
receive about a three story high
printed one single space printed
list of things to read every
year so that was sent to me I
apologize I don't think I read
that when I try to read
everything that comes across my
desk matter what part of my life
it is but I would like to see
that because yeah I mean in
business we say this is you know
making a presentation this that
I want to fight the strength
rack and I can make data and
graphs tell you whatever sorry
wanted to tell you but on the
other side of the coin you can
link every pretty much
everything up to what it means
what we call it your New Mexico
what it really is in Colorado
you can link that up and and and
and drive it across and figured
out that we so I really would
like to see us do that before we
make some of these really big
decisions I think you're right
you know forty percent
ridiculous we need to do
something
and and then that will just take
it from there so thank you very
much Mr chairman.
Thank you Senator Padilla
Senator Kernan and then Senator
Paypen.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
thank you
Senator Wirth so have some
questions just make sure I
understand this all correctly
the current tax rate today for
corporations talking about C.
corporations correct what is
that tax rate today Mr chair the
current tax rate for those
corporations with taxable income
not over five hundred thousand
dollars is four point eight
percent and you'll note that in
all the brackets in this bill it
stays that way so NEC
corporation making less than
five hundred thousand dollars
will stay at four point eight
percent under the current law
for corporations that report
more than five hundred thousand
dollars is twenty four thousand
dollars plus five point nine
percent of the access over five
hundred thousand dollars.
And that's the current rate and
then you'll you'll you'll know
you know if you go through the
bill you can see how.
We kind of stepped back the way
we step down before on back to
where we were before so it gives
you a sense of what each each
step was in the way we did it
before going the other way in
this the.
So Mr chair tell me about over
one million dollars so this bill
all basically in January on
January first twenty twenty
three currently in under New
Mexico law we took away the
bracket over a million dollars
so this on that that's exactly
right it was five point nine
over five hundred thousand
dollars that's what it is now
writing and what it used to be
as we used to have three
brackets in this bill just
mirrors what we used to have
under five hundred thousand
dollars stays at four point
eight
in January first of twenty
twenty three well let me let me
go back January first of twenty
twenty two if you're over five
hundred thousand dollars is the
twenty four thousand and then
the rate goes up to six point
two percent of the amount over
five hundred thousand dollars
in in the next year we create an
additional bracket of over a
million dollars and as I
mentioned the rate stays at four
point eight percent for under
five hundred thousand if you're
in this bracket of five hundred
to a million it's twenty four
thousand plus six point four
percent and then over a million
dollars it's fifty six thousand
plus six point six percent and
and it gradually steps up the
way we stepped it down but it
does reimpose the million dollar
right and you know Senator
Kernan as I said one of the
things noted in the FIR is that
middle bracket of five hundred
thousand to a million there's
very few taxpayers there and so
I think if we did anything I
would take that out.
Yeah so thank you Mr chairman so
senator Wirth at the end of the
day after I believe that it
faces back and over five years
is that correct what would that
be at the end of the day in five
years we're getting a million
over I'm not the middle in the
bottom not cannot it's not so
we'd be exactly where we were
when we went the other direction
so on January first twenty
twenty six over a million
dollars would be fifty six
thousand plus seven point six
percent of the amount over a
million dollars okay thank you
for that and it's so just one
thing that I that was called to
tension at this in my analyst
so.
The federal right because that's
important because this is
combined reporting and you just
say corporations do combined
reporting acute all corporations
to combine reporting now.
So Mr chair so C. corporations
that are multi state right
multistate and other questions
and and yes I I think I know who
you're analyst is he's been very
involved in all those
discussions and was involved in
the bill of what the other
direction
yes we do now
you know we that that was put in
place in twenty nineteen so
there's an apportionment so that
portion of the introduce the
multi state entities business in
New Mexico is taxed and does
have corporate tax in a way that
used to be able to expense about
and that doesn't happen anymore
so it doesn't matter Mr chair
and senator Wirth when we look
at the federal tax which now but
is it fourteen percent
for corporate income tax I think
that's correct.
So not sure looking at Anil
analysis here.
Yes so you're you you know I I I
just know in twenty seventeen it
was reduced from thirty five
percent to twenty one percent so
you're you're now also your
analyst is probably right that's
right the spot on this stuff so
I'm not going to argue with that
so and Mister chairman Senator
there appears to be some
discussion at the federal level
that they might want to do the
same thing we're doing in other
words I take that forty percent
COVID insured back up to a
higher federal right potentially
twenty eight percent.
So if that should happen we know
there's been a lot of changes at
the federal level that affect
our state and ins this certainly
would be a huge impact so if
that increases to twenty eight
percent and then you combine
that with these corporations
that are multi state we could be
looking in New Mexico at about
thirty five point six percent
and so when you look at that
you know that that gets to be
pretty high and so I don't know
with as we go forward if we
might want to keep that in mind
at the potential of potentially.
I'm just getting to a point
where we're actually hired then
you just.
Right the average U. S. right
just just worried about what
could happen federal level we
know a lot of things are
happening there that would like
to consider that going forward.
That we just don't make it so
difficult for these corporations
and frankly I know oil and gas
spoke up today and you know I'm
I'm kind of the support of oil
and gas I want to I like to come
align myself sometimes with what
they're doing for our state and.
It's it's concerning to me of
course that many of those the
court I'm sick iterations are
are one gas in in could you make
Kelly some others who else is
going to be impacted
give me an example because I I
don't know and I just am curious
what else who else we're gonna
affect yeah Mr chairman you've
heard the the opposition New
Mexico retail association all
the big boxes that have done so
well during you know COVID
they are multi state
corporations and but another
thing we chase down so that
certainly would apply you do
have some banks you have multi
state banks Wells Fargo bank of
America those have also been you
know.
Lay in this in this arena and
are in different states in the
questions of those are kind of
examples is big big corporate
big corporations okay impacted
and I I meant to say one more
thing Senator you know the we're
talking about a rate increase
from five point nine to seven
point six it's one point six
percent and this guy's following
so I just I just I just wanna
highlights you know we're at
five point nine this takes it up
to seven point six and so it's
not like this is some you know
radical increase I just it
you've got a look at it in in
light of the federal and and
what and you're right there
could be changes there and it
and it may go up there we'll see
I don't know the answer to that
but I just I didn't want to like
that because it's one point six
percent increase at the state
tax okay thank you Mr chairman
thank you for that yes I'm
looking at the act the F. I. R.
it appears that I may be reading
this incorrectly that it would
generate by FY twenty five about
twenty eight million is that
correct well Mister chair that's
what the FIR says which is
interesting
you know so I I think what I I
look back at the FY are from
twenty thirteen we take when we
took the tax off and it said it
was gonna cost of seventy six
million and now it's only gonna
raise twenty twenty eight
million corporate tax is a tough
one to estimate and and all
those years of kick comparing
combined reporting having that
discussion and and I think
you're analyst in your
committee.
Yeah we've gone back and forth
on trying to figure out what
actually happened is hard it's
hard about
in and and I I Mr chair not
great Senator Wirth that retail
and they certainly did that.
Did well during the pandemic and
then you can look at some of the
others you know one gas sent
quite a bit of suffering there
with production down and so you
know it might just not it may be
the timing that I'm concerned
about just a little bit
wondering if we've got so much
money thanks to all and gas
frankly with production happened
price that well just seems a
little bit I don't want to use a
term that was used in in
testimony but it seems that
we're going one way here and
then another way here and at it
just it says it it isn't stable
and that's what concerns me I
think more than anything I know
that there was an analysis done
by the economic development
department that never made it
into the
R. F. I. R. and I would like for
Kelly or someone to go back and
see if they can locate that
before we vote on this bill I
think it's an important Alice's
act read it and somehow we
didn't get it we did get that
included so I'm I didn't want to
hear from the Economic
development department in which
reminds me you know we talk
about all of the state
corporations and.
What is still fall into that
would they be at the bottom
level to mid level would be the
top level so Mister chair it it
really depends on how they're
organized and one of the
challenging things with films of
course out of the corporate tax
that's where the rebates paid
for all so that's the other
thing that's a little bit hard
to figure out how much revenue
comes in from the corporate tax
because we take out the the
amount that goes out for the
film rebate but if they're
organized as a C. corporation
that and certainly this would
apply if there aren't LLC
limited liability company and
it's it's a New Mexico company
all those things and in terms of
how they're structured factored
in factor into whether or not
they they they apply I will say
in it and I should just be very
clear this will help all the New
Mexico mom and pop shops you
know typically are done as LLCs
or yes chapter S. corpse pass
those are done using the
personal income tax rate so this
in no way affects them it's it's
six hundred to eight hundred of
the multi state corporations
that we're talking about here so
it's not a little more actually
was a little it's not New Mexico
businesses primarily it's just
those that organized as multi
state under the C. Corp.
So maybe going forward and Mr
chair and senator there would be
times I know you cannot identify
taxpayers provide funding thank
you mentioned retail thanks no
oil and gas I don't know if the
tax department can do something
in aggregate that sort of
focuses on which of those will
have the greatest impact or will
be impacted in in the greatest
way I would be interested in
that and surely I think they
could make the address that shot
at making those top three or
four just kind of see where we
are impacting our.
Those corporations it really
provide quite a bit of money to
the state of New Mexico and just
seems like
You know it's just difficult
time right now we've got a lot
of money and and they're trying
to recover and so maybe maybe
out take a look and see if it's
the correct time to director to
do this but thank you for your
answers and I appreciate very
much your responses thank you
thank you senator.
Thank you and I have Senator
Coleman.
Thank you thank you Mr chair.
Because someone mentioned the
Rockefeller study which actually
Rockefeller Foundation financier
was conducted by the.
PFM group consulting company out
of a.
Philadelphia.
Hundred forty page report.
They have a ten page executive
summary make up.
Maybe.
A line of recommend tax
recommendations and for non tax
recommendations three of them
deal with the G. R. T..
One of the city increase the
motor vehicle tax rate well I
sponsored co sponsoring a bill
with Bobby
Senator Gonzales Senate bill one
sixty eight to the to do that I
got to this committee.
On Saturday.
Then also their number one
recommendation was to reinstate
the P. I. T. rate structure with
higher marginal rates at higher
income levels.
Well I have a.
I'm carrying a bill Senate bill
eighty nine it does just that
however.
Here we are over halfway through
the session and has in that the
first reading.
So anyway I just thought I'd
bring that up because.
They are.
And made several recommendations
some of which are we are we are.
We're implementing or trying to
and
Anyway just give something else
gift in the air just thought I'd
bring that up
As a.
Part of the discussion thank you
Mr thank you Mr chair.
Thank you a Senator tall man.
Your that that's all I have and
I appreciate the discussion I
did get a tax from Charles good
mac Macher who said he was
trying to raise his hand to to
speak in support and if they get
the chairs are I'd I'd just like
to give them a minute since he
was in the in the meeting and
signed up via email and it just
wasn't recognize so it's up to
you but I just wanted to bring
that up was alerted to me.
Okay I I don't have any
questions so I will allow some
of which to.
And Walker to make his one
minute comment and then we're
moving on.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
members of the committee Senator
Wirth
January fourteenth at the
legislative preview event of the
New Mexico Society of
associating in the excuse me
association executives and also
the New Mexico tax research
institute the question was posed
to secretary the taxation arises
revenue Schardin Clarke question
was is there any proof at all.
That the personal income tax
cuts for the corporate income
tax cuts of recent years
resulted in any new jobs being
created in New Mexico.
answer no there is no proof.
So we cut the tax rates
tremendously in the past there's
no proof it made any difference.
thank you very much our economy
thrived back in those days with
the higher rates he can do so
again thank you.
Thank you.
Yeah I I had a question about
the different types of of C.
core but I think that was and
for a budget Senator Kernan so
question and so forth so I don't
see any of.
Hands up from the committee as
we stated earlier we're not
taking any action on this on the
bank of a.
The R. Majority Leader for The
presentation good discussion and
debate and I think it really
kinda of clear to some things
and also a give us a of a trip
down memory lane about all these
discussions and so forth so I
appreciate that and with that we
will move on to thank you
Senator Wirth of work are you.
If you want anything also that I
just appreciate the discussion
appreciate the committee and
thank you Mr chair thank you so
we'll move on to the Senate bill
two nineteen do we have a
Senator Gerald Ortiz Y. Pino.
Thank you Mr chairman I I'm with
you today.
Mr chairman and committee
members Senate bill two nineteen
is a.
In many ways the extension of
the bill we passed two years ago
and was signed into law that
made it possible for route for
those the children are young
people who were brought as
children into the country.
By their families without
citizenship papers would have
been here ever since I've grown
up here attended our schools and
our universities graduated from
our graduate schools we made it
possible to years ago was a bill
that we we often referred to as
dreamers will.
For them to practice certain
professions which up until then
had been lied to them in the
state because of citizenship
requirements in order to obtain
licenses in those professions.
Those included law and medicine
teaching Senator Senator
professions we know that time
there were literally dozens.
Professions which is directed
citizenship barriers to to their
practice in the state.
And.
We try to find out if that time
how self defeating it was for us
to provide educations provided
scholarships the provide
opportunities for graduate
school we tend to have the
graduates have to leave the
state in order to practice their
profession so this year we come
back with the with another
building.
Seeks to build on that just
started and then add some
additional.
Actions which which
bill passes it'll take down the
barriers to the practice of
those professions.
By.
New Mexicans who lived here
their whole lives do not yet
have citizenship.
I would like to have my expert
witness who is a.
With the in in New Mexico and
and lost the.
And this is CNN Torrez she can
speak to some of this bill will
stand for questions.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
and members of the committee
thank you so much for the
opportunity to is that just the
two nineteen before you today
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino just
mentioned is Senate bill two
nineteen as an expansion of
Senate bill one thirty seven
that was passed last year
but before I go on and talk more
about some of those nineteen I
want to talk about a few points
A little bit of the background
story that senator Ortiz Pino
was looking.
And you know talking about a lot
of the users who benefited from
SB one thirty seven last year
the grown up in New Mexico all
of their lives they benefited
from New Mexico
public education and.
The thing that New Mexico spends
about eight to ten thousand
dollars a year and educating
youth and on top of that they
have allowed undocumented youth
to access the lottery
scholarship and to access to
tuition makes for to attend
state schools which means that
they've made a huge investment
in this population and now it's
time to get a return on that
investment
So.
So these won't be all come out
with thank careers as doctors as
teachers
as.
Respiratory therapist and as
many of you know there's a huge
Lack of professionals and in
those areas in the state we
really need those professionals
to stay in state and these
students who have graduated
recently they really want to
stay and they want to contribute
so having the lost path is yes
Sir or these bills half
is a huge deal for the
communities in the state.
So let me just go into the
specifics of SB two nineteen.
SB two nineteen simply expands
on the progress that was made
and masters well.
The law that passed last year
did not remove statutory
barriers to professional
licenses for undocumented
immigrants so that means that
there are number of statutes
that still prevent people from
obtaining their professional
licenses due to their status.
Just be to nineteen addresses
fifteen of those professions and
of those statutes and it simply
and then the second statutes by
removing proof of legal
residency requirements or by
allowing submission of a tax
identification number as an
alternative to social security
number and they will small man
amendments and those fifteen
statutes
it opens up professional
licenses for undocumented.
Professionals who are those
professions.
A number of benefits to getting
undocumented folks access to
professional licenses.
First there's ample evidence
that shows that and the reason
wages that would result from
fully employing trained and
actuals that millions of dollars
in tax revenue in New Mexico.
But
second granting professional
licenses to.
Is unable them to participate in
the economic development of
their communities and it would
enable them to become self
sufficient I would also argue
but it's fair for people
otherwise learn more otherwise
qualified to get eight.
Thirty mention opening of
introduction to this bill
New Mexico has already invested
a lot of time and money and
educating this.
A vast number of the people who
will benefit from this.
It's gone to school here the
complementary school middle
school high school
New Mexico has invested in the
college education supported them
all the way through all of all
right so they're ready to become
doctors in New Mexico
so it is fair to say that New
Mexico has significantly
invested and and a lot of of
this population and that this
bill would simply allow those
you the opportunity to pursue
their careers here thanks for
the opportunity to stay here
because I don't know if I
mentioned this before but a lot
of those youth we're actually
considering moving to another
state
and taking their skills
elsewhere because they couldn't
pursue their careers here.
So by passing bills like this
you keep the talent.
In the state
and you reap the rewards of your
thank you flunk educational
investment in a document that
you.
Thank you so much for your.
And you know if you have any
questions.
We'll send questions.
Okay thank you
a Ortiz Y. Pino at this time we
will go to public comment and we
will start with the opposition.
At this time we do not have
anybody signed up to speak in
opposition for Senate bill two
nineteen are there any members
of the public who wish to speak
in opposition of Senate bill two
nineteen may raise your hand
using your reaction.
Okay moving on to those who wish
to speak in favor.
We have Bill Jordan.
Mr chair members the committee
of Bill Jordan with New Mexico
voices for children we stand in
support of the legislation and
want to thank Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino and especially thank all
those young people who are
bringing this bill because they
want to stay here they want to
work here they want to serve
here.
These are young people who grew
up here we educated them in our
universities and community
colleges and then we say to them
sorry you have to move to
another state to practice this
bill is an obvious benefit to
those dreamers but most
certainly is a benefit for the
state that educated them we need
these professionals and when
you're on your support thank
you.
Thank you very much moving on we
have Adriel Orozco.
Hey my name is available it's
going the executive director of
the New Mexico in grand Law
Center I am speaking as part of
S. P. two nineteen as an
immigration attorney of and many
young immigrant professionals
who have grown up in New Mexico
and we're committed to our
community but prevented from
pursuing their careers last year
New Mexico signed SB one thirty
seven into law establishing that
is the policy of our state the
person who is otherwise
qualified as eligible for
occupational professionalizing
sure regardless of that person's
citizenship or immigration
status this is not only in
recognition of the tremendous
investment that our state has
made infants through the lottery
scholarship in offering in state
tuition but also recognition
that our state simply cannot
afford to lose anymore young
talented professionals.
There are more than eleven
states and growing they have
taken the steps remove the
unnecessary roadblock of
immigration status for otherwise
qualified individuals to pursue
their careers.
With the passage of SB two
nineteen New Mexico joins this
growing movement there's a
committee to pass SB two
nineteen thank you thank you
very much.
Next up.
We have not done that.
Members of the committee my name
is on that and I am an organizer
with the New Mexico treaty an
inclusive workforce means a
better future for New Mexico
there is a growing demand for
licensure among immigrants one
in six immigrants in New Mexico
has a college degree SB two
ninety will boost the state
economy by allowing immigrants
to fill job demands this state
will benefit from those
education vestments thus
promoting economic self
sufficiency within immigrant
communities the best and most
expedient solution is for New
Mexico to remove the pro Haitian
all together but in the meantime
let's acknowledge undocumented
immigrants here are striving to
be productive members of society
chair members of the committee
published by immigrants like
myself and others mechanism to
practice their careers in the
state thank you.
Thank you very much next up we
have Eileen Martinez.
Hello chair members and
committee I am I mean Martinez
and I'm an organizer with the
New Mexico Dream Team I am one
of the many undocumented new
Mexicans whose future has been
changed because of last year's
bill SB one thirty seven do this
bill New Mexico has an open the
door of opportunity for me and
thousands of undocumented
students who want to build a
future New Mexico I want to the
students who can now plenty
secure future New Mexico I will
contribute by becoming a social
worker here as B. two nineteen
will continue to make a career
path for undocumented students
to pursue a realistic budget in
the Caribbean Mexico
undocumented New Mexicans would
deserve to contribute to New
Mexico workforce SB to nineteen
as a step toward inclusion.
Thank you.
Thank you very much next up we
have a lien Castillon.
Will you on mute.
Yes.
Yes go ahead.
Okay chair members of the
committee my name is in customer
and I'm an organizer with the
New Mexico Dream Team I strongly
advocate for just the two
nineteen as a graduate from
university Mexico I've been able
to reflect on my time during
that come to understand not only
the importance of getting the
skills but the US state
utilization of such kids I'm
very fortunate to live in the
state and thank you madam
speaker is taking the
legislative ability to use my
skills to professionalizing
however we must distract
licensing for all I met some
recently caring is from people
wanting to help others to be
static together physical therapy
access especially since many of
your twenty twelve is the
necessary passing this bill will
provide more stability more jobs
more future graduates and best
of all the wonderful people
helping our community to be
stronger part I urge you to pass
as we do thank you so much.
Thank you very much and finally
we have Richard Mason.
Mr chairman members the
committee made a mistake Mason
I'm sure the action committee of
the league of women voters of
New Mexico leave on those United
States has a position that
should eliminate barriers to
employment for non citizens this
position to this bill is
consistent with that but also as
someone who's worked on health
policy in in New Mexico we see
the need for professionals which
that but barriers in a place for
people can tell that the so what
we support I'm AT SB two
thanking energy do passed thank
you.
Thank you very much we will now
move to members of the public
who wish to speak in favor who
are not yet spoken beginning
with Erika guidebooks.
Good evening chair members of
the committee my name is Erica
that was policy director at les
and we stand in favor of Senate
bill two nineteen and B. that's
a racial justice issue we want
to echo what has already been
sent and especially from the
Houston organizer's that are
working directly with it the
affected community and we urge
members of the committee to vote
in favor thank you.
Thank you very much except we
have Carlo crew over.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Carla
creating Hafer and on behalf of
the centre for CENIC policy we
stand and support of as B. two
nineteen New Mexicans com and
all sides concise and forms
including immigrant youth we
believe that allowing your
people to exercise their
profession I will help us not
only retain talent but reap the
benefit of our investment and
you we also believe that
we risk right at we risk losing
brilliant minds and talents if
we don't if we fail to expand
these licenses
and then I just also like to
personally live by the quote you
just never know and I just know
that there's so many brilliant
people out there who don't have
a social security but I will
greatly benefit our state.
Thank you.
Thank you very much finally we
have Nicholas go to the doctor.
Thank you Mr chair members the
committee my name is Nicholas
Cordoba I'm an attorney The New
Mexico central of poverty we at
the center stand in support of
SB two nineteen people increase
the nine states are critical
part of our community in New
Mexico.
Fortunately barriers exist their
pursuit of a better life for
themselves and their families
our state needs to health care
professionals now more than ever
and should therefore help all
New Mexicans who want to pursue
crucis optometrists physicians
physical therapists to enter
those fields without any fear
that their immigration status
will prevent them from doing so.
Our state has an opportunity
breakdown licensing areas for
immigrants in New Mexico
ensuring that every New Mexicans
who wants to pursue their dreams
in our state can do so thank you
urged to pass.
Thank you very much that
concludes public comment at this
time.
Eight thank you at the core of
we will now go to the committee
for of questions I have Senator
Griggs and then Senator Hotmail.
Thank you Mr chair in that thank
you senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
I have should have some more
technical type question Jim it
was the bill but you know on
page two we say the year is
going to be here I need to name
date of birth social security
number or individual taxpayer
identification number now I'm
I'm familiar with tens which are
taxpayer identification numbers
what is the difference between
ten an individual taxpayer
number what is what is that what
does that look like.
Mr chairman and senator raise
their identical they sometimes
referred to as individual
actions.
But the same.
Okay so Mister chairman Senator
start off with like eight five
dash mobile.
Right so.
Mr chair Senator.
Hello this is me what what's the
staffs for for an individual to
get a a can.
Yes that you know.
Will attend be readily available
to anyone who is who face that
dreamer category.
Mr chairman and and senator.
hello my Acer witnessed from the
emerging Law Center janitorial
sensor that question please.
This.
Mr chair Senator Griggs
for the opportunity to answer
that question.
I'm.
Members are given to people
regardless of their immigration
status it's number given by the
IRS to people who want to pay
their taxes in this country and
so in order to to get your IRA
I'm sorry your item number from
the IRS.
What you have to do is submit
your tax forms
to the IRS along with.
This is actual.
Document number the number off
the top of my page for you apply
for the item number is given to
you to pay your taxes and
doesn't matter if you're here
legally or not chair of the
social security.
Question for.
Let me see for your second Mr in
center and expert.
So is it kind of in an automatic
deal if you whether you fly
with the year your immigration
status is.
No for instance I yes and and
maybe maybe we're gonna know
that you know you what the
immigration status is are they
going to ask you that in order
to get the get the the
identification number they use
going to give it to you because
you just.
Mr chairman and senator hearings
a legend Deanna responded and.
Mr chairman members of the
committee
Senator Griggs.
Yes so in short when to get your
item number
doesn't matter if you have a
social security number if you're
here with a visa status and now
he's the status with the IRS
cares about is that you pay your
taxes and so as long as you're
willing to pay your taxes and go
ahead and report income to the
IRS
you are able to get an item
number
regardless of your immigration
status.
Okay thank you Mr chair Senator
and and Diana you know when I
had my business Mr plied for
this the ten before.
You for actually owed any taxes
so I you know I I don't know
with this is a little different
I don't I don't know how the.
The are they concerned maybe
they're they're not.
Mister chairman Senator on the.
Some of the things in this bill
what we're trying to do age is.
Right but then we have things in
the bill in the in the law not
in the bill I guess protection
law currently.
Did seem to you know to maybe
put people in a in a situation
that they may be uncomfortable
with us and for instance on you
know on page three the on.
Line seventeen section he is
talking about the insurance
superintendent and he can
required criminal history
background investigation of for
the for the applicant.
You're not trying to really you
know get too much of a response
but I want to go through just a
few things just so you guys can
see over and think about as you
as you go forward financials
page three on on page six.
We want the last four digits of
the individual taxpayer
identification number which
normally you want the last four
digits of a social security
number but you usually want to
hold ten I don't I don't know
that that's everywhere investors
here's the deal there.
In one thing that to Mr chairman
and senator I just want to kind
of gig Senator Ortiz Y. Pino on
it it's I don't remember which
way he voted on this but on on
page seven we talk about you
know you could be a bail
bondsman and I I didn't know we
have bail bondsman anymore I
thought we almost tried to get
rid of them the few years back
but that.
I I voted against that bill
lateral whether jurors or not
and
I supported the Mr chairman and
and senator they are managing re
but you never know they may then
section somebody may want to
become one some day and we have
a lot of the licenses them this
removes barrier for.
You use.
And and Mister chairman Senator
I I appreciate that response.
Well in on page thirteen and I'm
not I'm not sure really.
Where we are on on in that we're
talking about the board can
require fingerprints and other
information necessary for state
and national background check.
Then we wandered through the
through the bill and we we get
back.
Those are medical
those are for medical
professionals.
Yes Sir at and mission or
Senator Mister chair and I I
appreciate that I'm just what
I'm what I'm trying to point out
a little bit is are there things
that create barriers.
As as an individual tries to to
get a licensure these are these
things that that do that the.
When you move into this section
back.
Back on a.
We're on page twenty four at
that point and we're talking
about a commission and then.
As we go through the end of the
bill we talk about commission or
board and we talk about they're
going to require information it
deems necessary from every
applicant to determine the
applicant's honesty
trustworthiness and competency I
think it's kind of interesting
language.
Area and.
But does that does that put an
individual.
Who has
Who is not here with legal
status
tension we put them in a
position where they have to.
either lie.
At about there should issue
share.
And if they lie about their
citizenship is that put them in
a a different.
The call position when it talks
about honesty and and Mr Mr
chairman and senator I just I
want you to see those beakers.
There throughout the rest of the
bill I don't know that they
create a problem but I would I
would want you and your and your
expert witnesses to look at that
because I just you know I know
what you're trying to do I know
what what they bring to the
table in many instances I just I
want to be sure did not walk
into something that you put some
in a very awkward situation
because we when we're looking at
changing the law maybe we didn't
deal with it and maybe we could
and maybe we should deal with
some of those things that
Mr chair and and senator I just
your you find your thoughts if
you'd like but I I sure hope you
take care of of some of that
because I don't want you to.
Your somehow and we wanted
people get excited people thank
you you know then we're moving
ahead we're doing something and
then you run into shops and that
that stops the process and the.
Mr chair and and etcetera that's
really my only comments on the.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Griggs appreciate your having
gone through the bill so so
currently.
There are many there are many
barriers to getting a license
for any of the fields that are
included in this bill.
The only ones this legislation
deals with those dealing with
the citizenship issue.
So.
Thank you for licenses for these
fields and and you see the.
Does nothing that a a series of
our services from existing light
is being legislation in the
state of New Mexico where we
remove anything referring to
requirements and citizenship is
necessary to become a.
Bill months mentors stockbroker
or a real shame to Fraser or any
of the the professions that are
included in this document so we
we are trying to eliminate all
the more years you still would
have to pass an exam if there is
any exams that license you still
would have to show the
Representative educational
background you still have to as
you pointed out in the case of
the real estate broker.
Approve or were.
Verified they are honestly.
Whatever was good character.
That our bill only deals that
one issue.
Barriers to be a citizen to
become one of these
There are also regulations that
many of the boards that are in
statute and we didn't even
attempt to go through all of
those regulations because we
thought if we deal with the
statutes then we come back later
and deal with any kind of
objectionable regulations and
like me impeding people's
ability to use their education
to practice their field well so
We appreciate you going through
those in identifying things but
all we're trying to do is this
bill is the citizenship issue.
And Mr chair Senator I I I
appreciate that and I I would
take your word for that the
concern that I've got is that if
we if we put somebody in a
position where you're saying
they've got to show that there
there are.
But we somehow have maintenance
we're you don't disclose for
insurance that you're not a
citizen of the United States
thank you run a file of that
Amish honesty part of that and I
I would just you know I I don't
want you to your bill to run
into something that ultimately
stops people who can do good
things for our state because
we've you know we've got
potentially archaic language in
the law all that I don't know
how you prove somebody's honest
or dishonest but if we talk and
we're talking in an interview
we're talking about
you know how long have you been
in the United States and our you
know you got it check the box
like you do on some other things
are you US citizen and you
checked the box until we find
out that you're not does that
does that create a challenge for
the for the employee and that
and that's all I'm trying to
bring up Senators not just not
show merger deal of of whether
these these individuals are
qualified or not qualified
teachers.
Our system hanging out to dry if
we don't have to show up Mister
chairman Senator.
Thank you.
Thank you so.
I believe my experience wanted
to make a comment about your
questions and.
Okay Mister chair mmhm.
But a good sign.
Mr chair Senator
so.
Documented folk go through
background checks all of the
time they don't have to have a
social security number the
usually can just use their name
their date of birth their
address many of our clients the
monitoring so many of our
clients go through
fingerprints check fingerprint
checks background checks often
and this is something that we
don't first the other barrier as
senator Jerry or the thing I was
saying
We know we don't foresee any
other barriers for just
addressing the issue of
citizenship and residency in
this bill really appreciate your
concern regarding this being a
bear down the line
but we've gone through the bill
and my colleagues and I have
gone through the done we don't
we don't foresee any barriers of
course
people who want to get the
licenses will go we'll have to
go through different steps they
will many will have to apply for
nineteen number which they can
do though have to go through a
background check
and though those should not be
barriers
you.
Again thank thank you thank you
Mr.
Thank you senator.
Thank you I have a Senator heart
of meal Senator Hickey Senator
Tallman and Senator Brandt.
Chairman Senator Ortiz Y. Pino
thank you so much for bringing
this bill forward so if memory
serves me correctly immigrants
contribute to nearly thirteen
percent of our workforce and
contribute I want to say
something in the ballpark of a
hundred two hundred and ten
million in local and federal
taxes hello I don't have a
question I just want to stand in
support of this bill is been a
champion for the immigrant
community in Rio Arriba county
and the northern New Mexico and
I'm happy to be a voice
throughout the state of New
Mexico we need to remember that
an inclusive workforce means a
better future for New Mexico I
have a professional and
occupational licenses of the
grants that can be used in our
community as we can then look at
how they can help either the
medical field or even in schools
as a former educator I remember
the number of immigrant students
who wanted to have teachers who
spoke fluent Spanish now some
people would laugh and say my
northern New Mexican Spanish was
in the same or proper but there
are differences and so it's nice
to have a community that
reflects students within the
classroom now this bill would
definitely make sure that we
have those people trained and
qualified and in our communities
and it's important to know that
almost one or I believe it's one
in six adult immigrants in New
Mexico has a college degree and
so this would ensure that we
keep them in state and not
losing them to other states
where they could then work on
what they studied in school or
work with their occupational
license as a professional
licenses so Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino Mr chairman I just add in
support with this bill and I'm
thankful for what it does and so
no questions just wanted to
voice my support thank you.
Thank you.
For example if we're going to
Senator Hickey.
I'm sorry Mr chairman my
questions were answered about
softness thank you okay all
right now we'll move on to a
senator Tom.
Thank you Mr Mr chair thank you.
Senator bringing this bill
forward my questions have been
answered and I Mr chair when
you're ready I'm on I'll do it
ready to do our best thank you.
We have a Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman first unit
and so the.
Senator.
Mister chairman Senator Ortiz
Pino
those big support of your bill a
couple years ago if you remember
Alexion last year and so I
pulled it up and looked at it
and so I'm trying to figure out.
What we didn't six last year
that's why we're having to come
back and do this I thought we
had done this last year.
Mr chairman and senator rand
excellent question we did it for
those professions included in
the bill this now expands the
number of professions for which
the barrier of citizenship as a
requisite for licensure would
would be stricken.
We're just adding some
additional professions to what
we did last year Senator.
Thanks so Mister chairman Sir I
have the bill that we did last
year it's literally one page we
didn't actually include any
specific licenses and that.
Well.
Wallhead that the person is
eligible for occupational or
professional licensure.
The qualified regardless of the
person's citizenship and
immigration status so I'm trying
to figure out.
Since we passed that why we need
to do this.
Again I'm gonna do for to my
experts witness I believe the
issues simply isn't all those
barriers still exist in the law
and we need to clear them away
in L. M. X. for witness respond
to your question thank you.
Mr chair Senator thank you so
much for that question so last
year's ball when it passed it
removed the bear to getting
licenses for undocumented
immigrants regardless of status
right however it did not
supersede statutory barriers to
getting licenses so there are
statutes please at the moment
SO bar people from getting.
Professional licenses
and we are right now tackling
the statutory barriers in this
case we're not tackling all the
secretary traders were just
tackling fifteen of them
there will be we
are also traders as I said so.
Yes.
Okay those bears down the law
that passed last year it did not
supersede these barriers.
Okay Mister chairman.
That's that's got me confused
because I thought that we had
dealt with this issue
I I am a little bit no easy with
using the E. I and number I am
sorry that I.
Because it's really clearly I
mean we've already done this
with the social security number
but it was clearly not supposed
to be used for identification
purposes we run into this before
I will not try to help us all
live through some of those
issues in public affairs again
but
Mr chairman Jerry you and I have
look through this nightmare
several times in that specific
committee that I will remain
but
Right so I'm just.
How are we.
There there really isn't
anything you have to show when
you apply for it I tend to just
go online apply for it there's
no proof that it's really you so
how do we.
Are we making sure that the
person applying for the license
is really the person.
My answer would just respond to
that Senator Mr chairman.
Mister chairman Senator.
I'm
often have to go through
background checks routine
regardless and and often they
don't do it with nineteen number
sometimes it's just name address
birthday
also in your contracts if you do
these types of background checks
on the immigrant population all
of the history comes up I've
done it there is times and with
various clients
where.
Number sometimes it's not even
necessary to do a complete
background check so I understand
your concern
but I think the fact that
background check.
Fire.
Fire birthdays.
Address
you know I think.
That should address the concern.
Thank you Mr chairman US senator
per sheet that
So that would count where
they're actually doing a
background check for the license
and I'm guessing most of them
do.
We don't not you know not sure
if most of them do or not
Thank you apply for a license to
all the licensing boards do a
background check.
that is taking your word for.
You know.
Mr chairman and senator as some
of them as spelled out in the
regulations are in the statutes
in some cases to require
background checks.
Well do I do have a question and
answer for your earlier question
Senator that I think might make
it a little clearer Mr chairman
and senator the the question you
asked about the
Last year.
We're.
Just in the last year why do we
need this the bill last year
address professions that have
regulations the solutions in the
regulations so we we strip those
away this one is dresses of all
those statutory exceptions you
can just pass a bill this is a
movie were in state law this is
why now you have to go through
law by law and what.
Mr really getting the process of
doing.
Okay I see that as I'm scrolling
through the the bill on my I
keep looking to the left because
that's where my bill screen just
so.
in the so I'm trying to scroll
through on my monitor real quick
as I can remind myself okay I I
just you know just trying to
clarify a couple things as to
why we need to do this again it
like last year.
at some point federal
government's going to have to
address some of this as far as
being able to actually work.
because you can get those
licenses you can get everything
lined up but you still legally
can't work and so hopefully we
can get some of those issues
resolved
and I know if you're actually
qualified through daca you can
but this doesn't say you have to
be qualified through drive it
just opens it up for everyone it
also doesn't say you which we
did talk about you but it
doesn't say so and I have
nothing against seven just
making sure we know laid out
that we're not just talking
about you from anyone who is
here and has the proper.
Licensing training but sometimes
the federal government staff to
decide and deal with whether or
not they can legally work so
thank you and appreciate the
bill just kind of wondering why
we need to do this get so thank
you.
Thank you.
Senator Kernan and then I have
thank great for the second.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
thank you Senator for bring bill
at I guess I'm just warming up a
little bit on Senator Brandt
I want to be the need that I can
number in there I mean is it is
it necessary to do that.
Mister chairman Senator Kernan
is it identification number that
is used widely as an alternative
for people who don't have social
security numbers otherwise it's
real hard to it is you need to
use during this point of the
iTunes is your number nobody
else has that number and so
when you're using it's clear
that.
Interpretation.
The the person using or applying
for this license is precisely
that person can be shared around
or or passed on to somebody
else.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for that answer last year it and
I remember the purpose of that
last year and it is really
concerning the need that we had
people that were in medical
school and then at that point
couldn't get a license so we
resolve that issue is that
correct Mr chairman Senator.
Yes we did madam chair just in
Mr chairman and senator colonel
yes we did we we with last
year's bill of those barriers
that existed in the more
regulations were wiped out.
This bill deals with the ones
that are in statute and the
single bill last year could wipe
out for all of those different
statutes in a very very
cumbersome process to do so now
we are doing that cumbersome
processes and we're bringing it
back to you for the other some
other professions fifteen more.
So Mister chairman Senator next
year will there be additional
professions that we're gonna
need to look at.
Mr chairman I'll defer to my
experts on that
This moment there are no
additional professions that
we're looking at next year.
Thank you for that
So Mr chair Senator the the
issue of at the Medical Board of
course they still have the
authority regardless of what you
have an I can number social
security number whatever they
make the final decision as to
all of these boards with regard
to licensure in my correct.
Mr Chairman absolutely Senator
Kernan you're right okay well I
appreciated in I believe I have
no further questions thank you
very much.
Thank you Senator Griggs for a
second time.
Thank you Mr chairman I just
left my hand our regional
regional okay already so
Mr Chairman Senator Padilla.
One of the motion for it to
pass.
Okay I don't believe I have any
more hands up just double check
in so we have a due motion for
the past by Senator Padilla
second by Senator how to meal
second by Senator how to meal so
lane can you please to take real
quick.
Senator Brandt yes Senator grace
yes Senator Hamblen.
Yes Senator Hickey.
Senator Hickey.
Senator how to meal yes.
Thank you.
Thank you for your me.
Senator Hotmail your muted.
This.
Yeah answered at the same time
but I did so that was a double
sorry Senator Kernan yes.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator Sanchez.
Yes thank you Senator Tallman.
Yes Senator Wirth yes Senator
Padilla yes Senator Shendo.
Yes it's eleven with no one
absent.
Senator do you have a do pass.
Chairman members of the
committee thank you so much very
good discussion today thank you.
Thank you.
Of we will now move on to before
we of we're gonna do a hard stop
at six thirty.
Six thirty.
Related but the I've been.
From Cincinnati
fair so it's a little bit.
I was going crazy so with that
we're gonna move on to the
Senate to twenty six.
Thank you Mr chairman
For what you had such a long day
but I see your car in the
parking garage and I'll clean
the windshield that way you know
you what Is won't twist on your
way home
thank you Mr chairman the
ability to twenty six a pretty
simple I mean this is the hold
harmless
or municipalities and some miss
palace that it didn't increase
that incriminating tax revenue
have suffered and for Gallup R.
G. R. T. is so high currently
right now it's almost impossible
for us to increase that
increments or come back to the
state us to be held harmless
there's three other cities and
counties.
Las Vegas Los Lunas import talus
that would be eligible under
this bill for the ninety percent
distribution.
And so expert witness is why
sure and
A. J. forty from the municipal
league so but that will stand
for questions.
Do you want to you expert
witnesses to say if you're
Marshall just there for
technical is that which is a I'm
sorry for technical meet the
bills pretty self explanatory it
is it is really from the hold
harmless that we passed a couple
years ago and the only ones
eligible are those cities and
counties to invest improvement
and under the miss Holly ratio
and the only ones that would
qualify under the twenty
nineteen Census Gallup Las Vegas
Las the most important okay
thank you of so with that at
this time we will go to public
comment.
The I will start with the.
For opposition we currently have
nobody registered to speak at
this time but is there anybody
in the public who would like to
speak.
May raise your hand using the
reaction.
All right doesn't look like
there's anybody
who wants to speak in opposition
so with that we will go to the
one person who registered to
speak in favor my pleasure.
Well it was nice enough to come
is expert witness but the one of
the things I like to read if I
may was a response from our city
manager is not very long.
Your
vote Senator distance Senator
among us.
Is is as we have already limited
top paid positions we did not
fill stand Henderson's position
IT director who do the job of
the county where the HR director
who tired our existing staff to
suit their jobs in addition to
their regular jobs in order to
state funds to keep basic
operations funded we have also
laid off for public work
positions for.
Furlong fifty four positions and
handling I police officer
positions to use the funds to
raise their wages in order to
stop the bleeding of officers
other cities and the state
police to keep raising rates get
to keep getting raise our fire
department firefighter starting
rate thank you very much bye
there any other members of the
public who wish to speak in
favor of Senate bill two twenty
six at this time.
All right public comment thank
you very much.
So Mister chair could expert
continued at it's giving me a
little bit of information I I
don't think so he was he was
called as an expert originally I
believe.
So I don't know the committee
would like to finish.
Is a yes Mr chairman.
Where we we will go to court
well we did expert testimony and
the.
We can go to questions specific
once we get to that point.
Okay I I just think it is expert
didn't speak under expert
testimony and then only had two
minutes under public that that's
okay I will ask questions.
Okay so we'll now go to the
committee.
Or questions I have senator
Wirth and then Senator Kernan.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Center when you all some
this bill's been around for a
while.
For sure I get it I mean I
totally do get it.
My challenge with this is I live
in a in a city that certain big
time that did not impose the
three eights and I give a ton of
credit for that we've got a
really high right right here as
well and I just worry that you
know we're we're kind of carving
out a little peace and senator
exist goes right into your in
your wheel house about this hold
harmless that needs to be fixed
and I mean it's a two point five
million dollar hit the general
fund it's going to go up
and I don't know if maybe maybe
maybe this is something that
we've got to figure out how to
pay for it but I just I just I I
worry about.
Not doing this across across the
board I guess my question and
and I know and I know you've
been.
Mark you've been looking at this
but what would it cost how many
other municipalities are there
that have not imposed this is
That are that would potentially
could fall or something like
that I'm sorry to say I let the
J. ensure that I think you could
probably give you entered I
could.
Senator Wirth that they do for
the municipally.
As far as municipalities that
have not enacted the three
eighths
It's a larger list then you
would think right now the ones
above ten thousand that have
done it it's Albuquerque Rio
Rancho Clovis Los crucis
Farmington so.
Center you're right it would be
absolutely at a cost to the
general fund to do it.
But we're open to figure it out.
How to continue the targeted
relief the bill as written will
absolutely does targeted relief
for the minutes of counties who
have not enacted in really don't
have a tax based.
Like some of our bigger cities
that could afford that that
level of G. R. T. but I think
there's a way that we can either
freeze.
The current hold harmless rate
which is currently at sixty
three percent posted a fifty six
percent next year for the
remainder but it really comes
down to what can the state
afford we we can build the
framework as long as we have
direction on.
What we ask is yeah Mister chair
and I appreciate that I think
the hard part is that you know
and and look I don't have any
ill will whatsoever to the local
governments that went on imposed
a three eights but impose a
three eights and they're getting
the the hold harmless so it's
kind of a situation and I know
Representative Harper is work
the time on this too I just I
just feel like.
You know this is part of a
bigger discussion of how do we
come up with the money to to
deal with this.
With this issue so I I mean I
get I get what you're doing and
I certainly.
Have no ill will whatsoever to
the situation gallops and
but I do think this is a real
challenge situation for every
municipality maybe even more so
because of COVID and and and
this is just as as Mr fourteen
dollars when when the primary
revenue stream for local
governments and it continues on
what we discussed earlier is
just is is G. R. T. and you're
hit by something like this and
then you you know you make a
decision not to impose a three
eights in Santa Fe probably
could you know someone's many of
Santa Fe could certainly afford
it but on many others again it
really becomes regressive is a
terrible challenging tax so so
I'll certainly listen but I but
I do have some concerns about
and you know the the cost of
this and and whether or not
there some way we can can really
address the whole the bigger
bigger issues applies to you
know hold harmless and the and
the other municipalities that
have and have not imposed at
three eight so that's all I have
thanks for sharing.
Thank you Senator Kernan.
Thank you Mr chair and just a
quick question for one of your
experts because I I I don't see
it tell me tell me about the
population criterias so there so
evidently ending on the size of
the community based on
population which you just run
that by me one more time.
I think that Mr Senator sure
right.
Yes Mister chairman Senator
others.
The people in the community
center ten thousand are held
harmless when the legislation
one to place originally when
they took away the old agency
they did continue to hold I was
communities under ten thousand
this is Rick you need ten
thousand twenty five thousand.
And there are four
I committees would qualify
they're not done it's the three
eights Tax again that's for tell
us which has twelve thousand
Silver City which would be over
ten thousand with the new
Census coming out Las Vegas
which is fourteen thousand
lastly this is fifteen thousand
and Gallup twenty one thousand.
Okay thank you very much Mr
chairman Senator so I'm thinking
about some of the communities in
my district
that fall between the ten and
twenty five but evidently they
they impose the tax so that's
why they're not on this list I'm
you know I go back and I think
about when we did all of that
in I'm allow them to impose that
you know we can do that
legislation very well because as
it turned out we have people
that dad did both in New one of
my districts.
The city did the county did it
and then one of the city's force
the county to resend it so you
know we as a legislature
probably didn't do our cities
and counties.
Very good service by by doing
what we get so.
I guess listen further I I
understand Senator works concern
in Hobson Lake County they
didn't oppose it
And now we're we're fortunate I
mean that right now eleven to
seven in trouble and so I don't
know I think everyone's been hit
a great deal about G. R. T.
reductions Charlie problem and
so I don't know if that.
I don't know if this would be a
short term fix for a couple
years and then kind of go back I
don't know the answer to that I
understand problem so that's all
I have thank you.
Thank you of Senator Griggs.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
senator you should and you know
frankly to me.
This is not the solution.
The.
You know other communities like
you'll Alamogordo phrases I
don't think al gore's imposed
its action they've they've
struggled throughout the the
COVID time
while the well this could be
beneficial to to Gallup and
others for challenge of that and
that would be good but yeah this
is a problem legislature create
and it started it started back
in the early nineties when the
legislature took the tax off
food.
Then in order to to deal with
that we are ultimately maybe
does that agreement for hold
harmless payments and then we
decided where we need to we need
where at make it hold harmless
payments.
So.
That has put us in this
situation.
we took the tax all food because
we felt like the poorest of the
poor we're paying staff they
they couldn't afford well
frankly most of the questions
or got food stamps and other
relief for the working poor it
was tough on I am sure but as we
as we go through this thing what
what is happened.
Is the tax municipalities raised
tax on everything else.
Show if you're a if you're a a
poor family you don't have to
pay tax on on food but you got
to pay on diapers and you gotta
pay on on every other item of
Every other saying that you buy.
The smarter thing to me and I
this is this is hard when you
talk about it and I get it.
You put the tax back on food.
And I've got a bill number
election recall and I've got a
bill that is a it shouldn't out
there that puts the tax on food
and four percent.
Jolly she didn't put it on it at
your local option numbers right
puts on a four percent.
It gives.
Cities two point five percent
gives counties one percent gives
a state half a percent.
That's what it that.
It stops the hold harmless
payment.
So you recover the money that
you should have been getting are
from the food tax.
So that's that's the approach
that I think works I think this
approach.
This approach will have to be
changed at some point in time
anyway because of some point to
recover and and then want though
the want something done because
ninety percent is is not going
to be the right number that at
that point in time.
I don't know if anybody wants to
you know to fight that fight.
But I I still believe and have
ever since I I got up here you
know we talked about doing
different things and we talked
about what we let's leave it up
to the cities and counties to
impose those taxes
but the truth is it's a
legislature that took him all.
This legislation that are to be
big enough to either put him
back on to to fix the problem
that the legislature call in
ultimately what's going to
happen.
Can I ask Pam Stokes to just
give me some rough idea.
And if you impose almost all
your encourage initiating or
County and you want to pretty
close to to nine percent or just
top and nine percent.
Insurer later that's where all
these guys are going to be.
because you just can't keep do
one good gin servers services
for community of as as they
loses revenue from the whole.
Sure there's money as my soapbox
I've been on it for eight years
nine years of and it's hard it's
really hard but issues this is a
result of stuff that we've done
show up chair Mister chair there
you again that's my story and
I'm sticking to it I think we
can fix it if we just have the
will to do it show up so thank
you madam Mr chair thank you
senator Munoz wherever you are
and hopefully we can make
something work.
Good.
Okay thank you Senator Griggs
I think most of my questions
have been answered the dog seems
pretty simple in in language but
it's pretty complicated
implementation.
So appreciated discussion I
don't believe we have any more
of Hey.
So at this time what is the.
Pleasure of the committee.
I motion for two passed Mr
chair.
Have a motion by the Senator
Hamblen four do pass the.
We have a second I'll second
that.
We have a second by of senator
Sanchez.
Please make a roll call please.
Your Brandt.
No.
Senator Griggs.
No Senator have.
Yes Senator Hickey.
As.
Senator how to meet all no
Senator Kernan.
Yes.
Senator Sanchez.
Yes Senator Tallman.
Senator common your muted.
Sorry no.
Senator Wirth you know.
Senator picky.
Now.
Senator Padilla now.
Senator Shendo no.
there's three yeses and eight
knows.
So.
Mr chairman of the table.
So there is a
Able.
The bill fail.
What we just sit with the
filters failed Mr chairman to a
I want to run over again.
We don't need to we don't need a
table up sorry I'm sorry it's
it's it's a it's a failed
Senator.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee meeting
this is a problem we know that
the hold harmless was going to
pop the three twenty mark
in in the state's budget in and
it is it is an issue that the
legislature needs to deal with
the needs of deal with directly
we are we are responsible some
of support here but some of us
are responsible for what
happened to communities and we
need to figure out the problem
so we can get them back on track
so thank you Mr chairman thank
you committee members for your
time Mr chair reports etcetera
when yours goes can I also just
suggest that you know we are
going to have a tax discussion
and this needs to be part of the
discussion and again I think
it's a bigger piece and there
may be a way to do something as
part of an omnibus bill that
addresses this issue because it
really is a problem there's no
question we all kind of re on
that so I just want to throw
that out as well that that even
though this particular pieces
not moving forward it doesn't
mean that we can't have that
discussions are about aspects
and so I just wanted to make
sure that was out there.
Okay.
Senator Stewart this is a tax
issue that we need to fix for
the entire state and not not
piecemeal for one area or
another in and based on
population in trying to get our
bills passed a it is a statewide
issue and I think you heard it
from every corner of the state
so thank you Mr chairman and
committee members for your time.
Thank you senator Nelson.
Okay we'll move on to us Senate
Bill.
Two twenty nine healthy food
financing act Senator Hamblen.
Thank you very much Mr chair
we've been waiting for that as
we would.
Quite a bit.
I'm there is yes thank you Mr
chairman and committee because
this is a long overdue and I've
got a great group of people who
are here on the call will been
waiting and and watching the the
meditations of our committee
today Mr chair and and in
committee I'm talking to you
today about the healthy food
financing act and for many of
our rural communities especially
we find that too many families
in New Mexico lack access to
healthy food and strong local
job opportunities New Mexico
exports ninety seven percent of
our agricultural products and
yet we spend six point five
million billion dollars a year
buying food from out of state in
many of you know that I talk a
lot about let's keep it local
trying to keep money in our
community let's try and support
local jobs and when we're
talking about healthy food for
people this is also something
that is really important and
with the healthy food financing
act we're also talking about
racial ethnic and gender
prejudice that exists within
government grants and lending
programs and this is where the
healthy food financing act comes
into play to address those
concerns according to the US
department of commerce minority
business development agency
minority business owned business
minority owned businesses are
found to pay higher interest
rates on loans they're also more
likely to be denied credit and
are less likely to apply for
loans because the further
applications will be denied and
I'm speaking very much also from
my community in the district
thirty eight we have many rural
areas in the community that
could really benefit from this
and I think some of my
colleagues here in the committee
also can see where this can also
play in their communities so
adequately investing in small
scale diversified farming food
businesses and food system
infrastructure would make it
possible to keep more of that
money flowing through the New
Mexico economy and now this is
the interesting thing is that
the bill looks different from
anything New Mexico has tried
before because basically it is
the.
Right and it's been proven in
other states and one of my
experts will be able to talk
about that but I'm gonna go
ahead and talk to just briefly
about how the bill would address
the problem you see the
amendment that's up there will
address that as well but you're
a couple of ways the healthy
food financing act would address
the problem it would bring new
federal money into the state
since healthy food financing
initiatives are eligible for up
to two million dollars annually
from the U. S. treasuries
community development let's see
what is that financing
community development financial
institutions
in from that fund it will create
a healthy food financing
initiative with a fund of low
interest loans forgivable loans
and grants to invest in local
farmers food hubs and healthy
food outlets across the state
were talking about
entrepreneurship as well this
fund will be managed by team
consisting of the state's
economic development although
will address that issue in just
a minute one of more of the
community development financial
institutions of food access
organization and the equitable
food oriented development
advisory board finally before we
go to our our experts the
healthy food financing act is
really about giving all New
Mexicans the freedom to choose
what we eat to eat what nurses
us whether we do so by buying
those foods at the grocery store
or by growing them ourselves and
we know that is with the
pandemic many folks started
their own gardens what we're
doing is we're going to help
other communities and specially
communities of color help get
the financing to start that so
that they can do to support
their families make sure that
they have healthy food to eat
and also job creation and so I
have to experts here with us
today I have Kristin angular who
is the co executive director of
lost me of food center this is
an organization that I've been
working with for quite some time
and then also just for any role
any any other questions that may
come about is Tim Davis who is
the attorney as a public
benefits at the New Mexico
Center on Law and Poverty and so
you'll see the amendment that is
up here right now and if I can
welcome.
Kristen to go ahead and make a
kind of an opening statement and
then we can go ahead and talk
about the amendment and however
you want to go with this
discussion Mr chair I'm really
grateful for the opportunity so
we can bring Kristin and you are
up that would be fantastic.
Thank you senator thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee my name is Kristin
Aguilar and I have the privilege
in my role at less then to work
with small farmers food housing
value added producers on the
ground from across the state and
my job then is to translate the
very real needs and
opportunities from our
communities to our policy makers
and elected officials the
healthy food financing act will
establish a program that will
truly be transformative for New
Mexico.
This bill would essentially
establishes a much needed
mechanism for philanthropic
private and federal government
dollars to capitalize a
community investment vehicle
will help create and fund the
ecosystem a community wealth in
our state.
So using the healthy food
financing fund and the food and
farm system as a tool allows us
not only to address the economic
issues of poverty and lagging
economic development some of our
communities but also health
outcomes and hunger directly so
it's one of those win win
situations this is really a
vital piece in a larger puzzle
to move the needle for our
state.
In my organization works with
foundations and other
philanthropic entities on both
the local and national level
rents several national steering
committees focused on food
systems and community based
economic development and
routinely invited to participate
in national funding affinity
groups such as the sustainable
ag and food system funders
network and I will say there's
an incredible amount of interest
around HFI type funds right now
in general in rural New Mexico
food systems in particular so
there's a lot of momentum around
this if the state supports the
creation of this fund impact
investors will capitalize it the
state investment can unlock
easily five million dollars and
potential funding from various
sources including two million
dollars yearly from the federal
HFI CDFI fund the healthy food
financing act will support the
creation of the fund will be a
strong public private
partnership which I think you
Mexico really needs to focus on
we've been working closely with
the economic development
department to make sure the act
that we have pulled together
works for all parties and we
have partners in the CDFI
philanthropic an impact invested
investing sectors that are ready
and willing to make this work it
really is a fantastic
opportunity for the state to
leverage its resources to unlock
private capital that will
improve our communities through
community based economic
development I'll be happy to
answer questions go over that
amendments Senator Hamblen as
well thank you all.
And Mister chair I made time and
thank you miss you are for that
lane would you mind removing the
amendment just for a minute just
because I would like to welcome
Representative Rubio who is also
here she is the house sponsor of
this of this bill and has also
been really instrumental in the
conversations from the beginning
about why this would be so
impactful and how our return on
investment for this healthy food
financing act would benefit our
community and so if I can
introduce I would love to do
like a drum roll and a you know
a a seventies game show
introduction to senator Rubio
but she needs no no friends in
this of that but senator Rubio
thank you for joining us I know
that you have a couple of
committees that you've been part
of so Mister chair if we can
welcome US senator Rubio and
left at to give her an
opportunity to speak Senator
Senator K. one I'm actually
Representative Rubio but I'll
let the chair
With this before we go on I'm
gonna ask my vice chair to
takeover bid I need to get a
little break here so Senator
Padilla and so I'm Mr chairman I
saw that you called sorry about
that.
Thank you Mr chair and
Representative Rubio you know
maybe someday you'll come on
over to the other side I know
right now but I love having you
as my colleague in the in the
house and if you will please
Representative Rubio talk about
that the healthy food financing.
Thank you thank you senator and
thank you Mr vice chair and
committee members I have been
working with folks from
Macedonia for a number of years
now on this all the food
financing initiative which now
is is our act and just for some
context is that a few years ago
we did bring it to the
legislature we did introduce it
but in committee during the the
one of its first hearings we did
get a lot of really great
feedback from folks in in
committee and and so a lot of
that work we've been able to
develop and and really overcome
over the course of the last two
years particularly when it comes
to the technical issues we feel
like the bill as written is
really.
Really where we wanted to the W.
to go and so we certainly would
appreciate your support and and
and what certainly answer any
questions that you all have I
feel Center Hamlin
was very eloquent and articulate
in terms of what the program
consists of I think for
communities that I serve here in
southern New Mexico and having
grown up in rural New Mexico in
the southeastern part of the
state this is an issue of of
food justice which I I would
call but also in many of our and
other areas there's so many
desert's where it's really
there's a long distance of of of
where people can go and get
healthy healthy foods this is an
opportunity to really bridge the
gaps that exist within a lot of
our rural and isolated areas and
so I I want to really just bring
that forward and and raise that
because that's really one of the
reasons why I'm a big supporter
of this of this initiative and
so with that I'll hand it back
over to Senator Hamblen and and
I'm happy to answer any
questions if necessary but thank
you so much.
I thank you Representative and
Senator Hamblen do you have
other experts that you would
like to have before we go to
public comment.
Well I do have a ten here on the
but he will jump in just only if
necessary right now miss Aguilar
knows this inside and out Mr
chair all right well thank you
very much and we're going to go
to our as soon coordinator if
for some public comment first in
opposition and David and and
support.
Public comment we do not have
any members of the public who
are registered in opposition but
if there are any members of the
public here I would like to
speak in opposition of Senate
bill two twenty nine you may
raise your hand using the
reactions feature.
Okay moving on to those who wish
to speak in favor of the bill
first up we have Rebecca Lynn
Rowe.
This letter number a.
Representative Romero.
All right moving on
Erica Gaydos.
Miss Gallegos.
Thank you Mr chairman I am
filling in for is gay goes this
is Matthew Henderson executive
director of the education fund.
thank you Senator Hamblen for
and Representative Rubio for
caring this bill
On behalf of the five thousand
Ole members that I'm
representing today I just wanted
to speak in support of this bill
because of the countless members
who struggle with access to
affordable and healthy food
passing Senate bill two twenty
nine we think would really open
up a lot of opportunities for
people to access food for those
in their communities be on the
loan and grant process outlined
in this bill so we urge you all
to supported to pass.
Thank you thank you.
Next up we have Helga Garza.
Mr vice chair and committee
members my name is alga got a
son I'm the executive director
of our critical to the
cooperative network we are a
network and cooperative of forty
plus farmers that work together
in aggregation to meet larger
markets we are committed to
local investment building
capacity of our small rural and
urban farmers and we work
collectively in developing
community driven markets we are
asking for support for this bill
because it it is very important
in the balance that we argue
that building between consumer.
And farmer this bill is really
important to us because of that
equity lens it is really
important for us to keep a
balance in local production as
we streamline state agency
support as we streamline
procurement among the thank you
very much.
Next up we have a foreign
impacts.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Secora
nefesh and I'm a registered
lobbyist for covenant pathways
coming pathways is a
demonstration farm in the
checkerboard area of the Navajo
Nation and we saw what happened
when the pandemic hit and people
couldn't gain access to food
building New Mexico's farm
infrastructure is critical.
It's it's basic to everything
water and food so please support
House Bill to twenty nine thank
you.
Thank you very much.
Next up we have Pam rolling.
Mr chairman and committee
members my name is Pam Ryan
speaking on behalf of the New
Mexico food and agriculture
policy council and also
recommend farmers you we stand
in full support of healthy food
financing act we are so excited
to see this bill happened and
now and this is the absolute
right time for this kind of pool
of investment here in New Mexico
long time in coming
Representative former
representative of Brian Moore
and I worked on something like
this to the neck Policy Council
actually the teen years ago what
I do want to say is that this is
the right mechanism to create
and strengthen programs
businesses and infrastructure
for the second issue this in the
state to create security and
will really benefit rural tribal
and underserved urban
communities organizations like I
could go to a network and is
amazing project in holiness
Pueblo with a group of farmers
right now young farmers would
really benefit from this kind of
initiative so perfect timing.
Thank you very much.
Next up we have a lease of robin
Welch.
my name is Alicia Robinson thank
you for giving me the
opportunity to speak today in
support of us two two nine I am
speaking on behalf of lack of
such a community supported
agriculture which is a nonprofit
organization based in
Albuquerque's south valley that
needs more than two hundred
three hundred and twenty
families fresh and local
sustainably grown produce every
week during the growing season
we were to create a healthier
food system build
selfsufficiency among local
farmers and families and improve
community health by increasing
access to nutritious affordable
locally grown food and community
based nutrition education the
healthy food financing act will
not only help our organization
but also the farmers would buy
from our native black and
Hispanic growers as well as
other by pop and L. G. B. T. Q.
plus farmers and communities
continue to experience effects
of generations of discrimination
that have severely limited their
access to federal training Lente
and grant programs and private
sector lending programs.
Please ask we please ask that
you vote yes on this and.
Thank you very much next up we
have Mary Megan.
Marry Meghan.
Okay next up we have Ian
colbern.
My name is Sally thank Mr
chairman members of the
committee I'm covering for Ian
colbern on behalf of the
national young farmers coalition
for which I am a registered
lobbyist I'm also a farmer in.
I'm here in Albuquerque New
Mexico and in Sokoto New Mexico
and we stand in full support of
house of Senate bill two two
nine for all of the reasons that
have been stated previously
expressly are excited about the
opportunity to bring in new
federal money into the state
through the healthy food
financing initiatives this would
open up the potential to bring
in an additional I think about
two million dollars annually
from the US treasury's CDFI fund
and this as you all know I think
huge
could bring a huge amount of
potential for our growers and
food hubs and agriculture
communities across the state so
I hope and members of the
committee will support thanks so
much thank thank you and if
you've already spoken if you can
please lower your hand in the
virtual participants list thank
you please proceed.
Thank you very much.
Next up we have Jamie Phillips.
Good evening thank you for.
To speak and Joe support SB two
twenty nine that is a two birds
and one stone solution to both
health and economic needs and
disparities in our state as I
mentioned before I come before
you as an educator member of the
growing health and justice
coalition and a former farmer
who moved here to New Mexico to
pursue agriculture this
investment would repay itself
time and again for as with many
issues in our society and ounce
of prevention or investment is
worth a pound of cure and in
terms of equitable health
outcomes through increased
access to fresh local food as
well as economically bringing
it's a stable jobs to folks who
like some of the folks who
you'll hear to speak to and have
heard just need the financial
opportunity.
That other lending programs do
not provide this built a home
run and our state needs what it
offers I'll skip to the end here
and just recap we're talking
about a low risk high reward
steps towards greater public
health and more sustainable
local food economies keep people
out of hospitals and informers
thank you very much next up we
have Yvonne Deanna's.
Yes.
Okay next up we have Christina
all day bonding.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Christina all day bonding and
I am the co founder of the New
Mexico healthy soil working
group.
The working group
enthusiastically supports Senate
bill two twenty nine and you
know we we have very few
opportunities to leverage a
state investment for something
greater than of potentially a
five hundred percent return with
federal money.
This is one that goes directly
to the health and well being of
all New Mexicans we urge your
support for this legislation and
thank senator Hamlin for
bringing it forward thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you.
Thank you next up we have made.
Nate Jones.
All right next up we have Ernie
Rivera.
Earning Rivera.
Except we have Jamie Chavez.
Jamie Thomas.
Okay next we have Patty keen.
How do you can.
Can you hear me yes very
good afternoon evening almost
Mister chair members the
committee thank you so much for
allowing us to speak my name is
Patty keen I am a registered
dietitian and I am here on
behalf of the New Mexico Academy
of nutrition and dietetics which
is New Mexico's largest
organization interested
professionals and we support
Senate bill two twenty nine
which is in direct alignment
with our mission to serve the
public by promoting optimal
nutrition health and well being
for all New Mexicans your
improved access to nutritious
and affordable food as the
leading public health nutrition
professionals in the state we
expect that this bill will help
lessen the disproportionate
impact related chronic disease
on underserved populations and
address the social determinants
of health that can contribute to
these disparities and we also
welcome the opportunity for a
registered dietitian to
contributor expertise to this
work with the group and I'll
also directed the committee
members to the letter that was
signed by our president.
Thank you very much.
Next up we have Nicolette
McDermitt kitchen.
Thank you for the opportunity to
express support for Senate bill
two twenty nine my name is
Nicolette McDermott Ketchum and
I'm a member of the northwest
New Mexico Food equity task
force in Farmington New Mexico a
grassroots organization with the
purpose of building and equity
movement and food systems we
support Senate bill two twenty
nine because it aligns with the
values of our organization and
promoting access to healthy
foods for all of us who live in
New Mexico the echo will food
oriented development east side
brown paper twenty nineteen
states healthy sustainable
assessable foods can leave
crucial threats such as diet
related illnesses food
insecurity social isolation and
environmental degradation I
utilize I model is noted in
Senate bill two twenty nine
economic opportunities and
healthy communities can be
created by building on a
communities assets pride in
power by and with historically
marginalized communities thank
you again for the opportunity to
provide a public comment on
behalf of the northwest New
Mexico Food equity task force we
hope that you will come.
Thank you very much next up we
have don Gonzalez.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee my name
is Donna Gonzales an employee
for the New Mexico Astec
Association and a member of the
New Mexico a second commission I
am a farmer belonging to Thomas
all in my family farm goes good
for the community and school
systems I am here in support
young farmers of the state needs
to know that we are investing in
the good of our land water food
family in communities the people
and children of the state
deserve naturally and locally
sourced fruits and vegetables
thank you so much.
Thank you very much next up we
have mark Nelson.
Mark Nelson.
All right next up we have Rachel
Thank you vice chair and members
of the committee I'm Rachel
young I'm a registered dietitian
nutritionist also with the New
Mexico Academy of nutrition and
dietetics so I wanted to second
what Patty keen says we support
Senate bill two hundred twenty
nine because it helps to
increase access to healthy foods
across the state which is one
big step in helping us treat and
prevent nutrition related
diseases.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Thanks.
We have to land Yazzie.
Do and.
There's no way.
My name is Jerry Garcia we're
with the ship broke traditional
farmers cooperative.
Mr chairman and committee
members our people are hungry as
you know one I'll go for New
Mexico children live with the
uncertainty it today that they
may not get enough to eat in our
marginalized communities those
statistics are even higher as
our Navajo communities have been
hit especially hard budget
pandemic we see the truck loads
of food coming from some where
for distribution the one great
apprehension I have is that one
day those trucks based up Madam
the food supply is not limited
this it is unconscionable that
even in pre pandemic times the
majority of our food came from
out of state do we have the
ability to speak yourselves as
farmers we have foreign lands
and waters and we know how to
form as B. two two nine well
address food insecurity and
provide resources to our local
farmers to help feed our people
thank you please go in the
affirmative.
Thank you very much.
Next up.
We have Erica robbers.
Erica robbers.
Right next up we have Clifton
Chadwick.
Thank you the vice chair.
To speak in favor of the healthy
food farming excuse me financing
act the private and community
garden for over ten years with
about a dozen regulars and
always several more show up
harvest we grow in the north
valley we process personal
consumption in spite of
machinery that we use are all
grown food has low carbon
footprints since shipped no
further than from Los ranchos to
your northeast heights we've all
seen how entities like the
mixing bowl our New Mexicans to
engage in agriculture and to be
compensated for the value they
bring to our kitchens and
restaurants we also know ninety
seven percent of the three
second.
Are shipped out of state often
it prices driven down by the
model culture culture then we
import back at higher prices yes
B. two twenty nine will help
grow the components thriving
agricultural industry
particularly now we're gonna
need to apply the best science
to maximize yields with reduced
water imports.
Thank you very much next up we
have delays Diamond.
Please.
All right finally we have word
passage.
What.
All right are there any other
members of the public who wish
to speak in support of Senate
bill two twenty nine at this
time.
So you think.
Hi hi Committee and thank you
this is Ian Cockburn whose only
took my spot earlier when I was
unavailable and I'm back I'm a
young farmer here in Albuquerque
New Mexico farming unless an
acre diversified budget also
part of the leadership team of
our Albuquerque chapter of the
national young farmers
And so reiterating what Chile so
eloquently said few before me is
that we have the ability to feed
ourselves here in New Mexico and
that is not through enormous
mono cultured mechanized farms
but through small diversified
community agriculture with many
people returning to the land we
cannot do that without
capitalization and.
The supports holistically
working together and bill will
put us on a path to that future
so speaking to those
representatives of rural areas
who know a different type of
Albuquerque culture thing which
I represent.
Please imagine a future where we
have many more people on the
land we don't need GMOs we don't
need chemicals and we can all do
this together thank you for
thank you very much.
That concludes public comment at
this time.
Okay thank you very much for the
coordination there I did want to
ask the sponsor Senator Hamblen
I think you're too amendments we
need to would you like for us to
act on those before we go to
committee.
I'm absolutely will if if you
feel that that's important I
certainly you know the
amendments that we've talked
about and secular will also be
able to chime in here I'm really
a proactive measure many of the
things that were addressed in
the amendments were things that
came out of the FIR that we're
clarified but we can certainly
go ahead and start the
conversation Mr chair if you'd
like to go ahead and Senator
Hamblen is there one or two
amendments.
No there's one amendment we had
there was one of originally and
then the four page one is the
most current version that really
kind of combine the first
amendment and brought in some of
the things that the FY are
brought up and so we wanted to
make sure that we address those
because you know we've all been
sitting here for a long period
of time I don't want to I want
to I want to be more efficient
and and user time wisely then to
go over to amendments that might
be covering the same thing not
absolute I just want to make
sure we're respecting your piece
of legislation and so is that
what we're seeing on the screen
I see two pages here and you're
saying it's a total of four
pages.
Yes Mr chair there are four
pages right lane I think I saw
that we were going through that
okay so can we have a and a
motion of some kind for for
discussion purposes.
Mr Chairman yes Senator Brandt
thank you Mr chairman I received
the of four point amendment
when was this ammendment turn
to.
Mr chair Senator Brandt this was
something that was it wasn't
turned in twenty four hours in
advance so the this is certainly
something that actually I
believe Senate finance would be
a lot more focused on given that
it was from the the FIR that
these points came out so did get
released earlier today but not
in the twenty four hours that we
expect.
Mr Chairman Sir I'm not as
worried about twenty four hours
and as worried about trying to
fit through this.
For page amendment on the screen
that I do have available to look
at a hell of time even if it'd
been at the beginning of the
meeting I could have gone
through it
but this the first time I've
seen a four page amendment and
use yes the move comes committee
so not as an amendment and I
know your brand new so that's
all New.
But the this is pretty extensive
to be doing as an amendment to a
bill and not seeing it ahead of
time and not being in our
committee room where we can
actually look at them side by
side
also Mr Chairman I need to leave
and I know the Majority Leader
actually needs to leave I don't
mean to speak for him but we
actually have a security meeting
we're supposed to be on and so
I'm I'm gonna check out but the
committee may want to look at
either voting on this later or
center and when they want to
hold her amendment for finance
just habit retitled I thank you
Senator Brandt and yes we've got
about forty three minutes left
on the but until the hard stop
at the chair called earlier I
think I see the chair if he
wants to come back into this
part of the conversation how
would you like to proceed
Senator hand when would you like
us to move on the on the
legislation without this or what
are your thoughts.
Mr chair thank you so much and
Senator Brandt thank you so much
that was one of the suggestions
we wanted to really be on top of
this because we understand as we
are heading into the end of the
session we feel that this is
really important to be ahead of
so if if it is the wisest move
to move ahead with the
legislation because I do believe
that Senate finance will be a
lot more interested in this
ammendment so if we may for your
choice go ahead move on the bill
and will bring the amendment up
to Senate finance okay so should
we get through here you're gonna
withdraw your amendment for the
moment.
Yes Mr chair all right thank you
all right so now we'll go and if
we can pull the amendment off
the the screen there the Sanchez
chose not to proceed with that
so we'll go to questions from
the committee at this time.
And I still see Senator Brandt
with your hand up do you have a
few more minutes yes thanks no
but maybe not.
Okay we'll go to Senator Kernan.
Thank you thank you very much Mr
chairman thank you senator and I
think you probably did the right
thing because I didn't get that
I didn't get the four K. I do
see one other amendment.
I'm did you is your second
amendment that maybe you need to
also send of finance I'm not
quite sure what one no more and
and and Senator Kernan this was
really so we we have this
amendments and then saw the F.
I. R. so my team really had of
that and so this second
amendment the four page
amendment includes both of those
things with unnecessary got to
that amendment.
Perfect well that that explains
it in so we'll put those aside
because I didn't worry about the
F. I. R. with the suggestions
and and implied keep the dress
that okay Mister chairman
Senator tell me about of the two
hundred thousand it has it is
said in House Bill to do we know
have you taken a look at that
yet to see if that's been
included.
So Mr chair and and Senator
Kernan so obviously as a as a
new freshman Senator learning of
maybe you know talking and
getting the advice from those of
you who have gone through the
ropes and suffered some bruises
and some and some successes and
so there been some
recommendations to either put
some of my junior money which
I've allocated for to reduce the
poll on the appropriations and
then pull the appropriations to
now just a one hundred thousand
dollar request my junior money
will be half of that as well I
would like to stress Mister
chairman Senator Kernan the
return on investment on this but
also recognize that we're
looking at every single penny
that we spend right now so I
appreciate the feedback on that
okay thank you Mr chair and
senator I'm glad if you know
your commitment to putting money
in house bill in the junior bill
is very very good I'm tell me
just a little bit about what
kind of financial institution
would participate in this grant
loan process I'm trying to
figure out what that.
Sure thing Mr chair and Senator
Kernan that's where miss angular
would be able to just I don't
mean to juncture but I think
she'll be able to knock your
socks off because we've been
talking about this for a long
time and they've been putting a
lot of thought into this and
Senator Kernan I I believe that
you are possibly seen some areas
in your communities where this
would be really helpful so if we
can have the secular go ahead
and speak to the the the
logistics kind of the bones of
this this act.
Thank you Senator Hamblen Mr
vice chair Senator Kernan
committee.
Essentially what this is going
to do we're looking to partner
with a CDFI XO community
development financial institute
whose mission is already aligned
with really focusing on
community investments we've
talked to several CVS by who
have interest in Rehm spring in
particular is very supportive of
this bill and has the portfolio
in the underwriting experience
to carry such a large.
Find the reason it's so
important to call out a CDFI is
a partner for this program is
because that opens up a two
million dollar per year HSS five
requests from the federal
government so this those HFI
federal funds housed in the U.
S. treasury are included as part
of the farm bill and so they've
been around for over ten years
now
and what we really want to focus
on is making sure that the CDFI
when an R. F. P. goes out for a
program like this that the CDFI
really understands up community
wants and needs and so was
grounded in New Mexico and also
understands how difficult making
some of these loans can be I
mean there's a reason sometimes
that a lot of these higher risk
loans aren't happening through
banks or other traditional
sources right which is why I
really need to look at these
alternative mechanisms that will
allow us to pull in other funds
there's also a lot happening
around impact investing folks
are really interested in two
systems and using that to
catalyze economic development
communities and New Mexico as
unfortunate as it is that we're
last in a lot of really
important markers I guess the
one silver lining to that is
that we can be able to pull and
foundation and philanthropy and
private funds from outside of
the state to make sure that
really pulling an external
dollars so that we're looking
not only at economic development
at the community level and with
our local food and farmers but
also externally pulling in
dollars for like the more
traditional economic impact.
Okay great information that
explains and and and makes all
the sense in the world did you
already have in place of that
type of institution that's ready
to to to support this bill I'm
just very thanks in your right
probably did have a community in
my area that certainly would be
eligible we have a small
community they had a grocery
store nice nice building and but
it closed and so the only thing
left in that community I don't
want to call out a particular
name but it's one of the stores
where you know they're in all
the small communities and you
can you can buy cokes and chips
and all those kinds of things
but not many healthy states so I
can see that there is a great
need for that the other thing I
want to just mention is.
So my daughter after she
graduated college worked in on
an organic farm in northern New
Mexico committed possibility
points from may with that farm
that she was there for a year
and a half and it really had a
great influence on her life and
I understand
how that community system works
with the farmers and people that
contribute to give their lives
to do this kind of thing so very
supportive of that as well and
and then I found out last year I
didn't realize the huge impact
that I don't know if it's called
farm to school but it's where
local farmers and our schools
have been purchasing large
amounts of food grown in New
Mexico by local farmers and as I
talk to my nutrition that your
question.
I'm our nutrition at school she
explained how critically
important it is to have access
to those local farmers and I
assumed that this would expand
her our ability to reach out and
get that that that product so I
certainly support your bill I
think you can get it fixed a
little bit in finance because it
probably needs a little tweaking
their but that should not be a
difficult thing to do and
congratulations on your the CS
and then yours a great project
here I think it's just super
thank you very much.
Thank you.
Okay Senator Hamblen.
Thank you that yeah I I keep
calling you Senator Padilla
Senator chair Mr chair but I
know that Mr that they either
Mister chair Mister the Mr Mr
chair is is back in and and has
his hand up I do want to before
we if I if I may take a moment
is just to really recognize the
work that lost to me has been
doing Senator Kernan you've
talked about a lot of different
things that this organization
has really focused on but also
the thing that touches me the
most is just the number of
different agencies that are
represented in public testimony
today you know I'm and then just
as is a freshman senator just
the opportunity to meet people
through these committee meetings
mistakes that we think you know
I saw her testify through
Senator Woods you farmer the the
the farmer initiative and
thought how this would be so
wonderful for that and so I was
so tickled to see that she
wanted to talk about this and
just the different groups and
Representative all over the
state really shows that this can
have an incredible impact this
is not just for southern New
Mexico this is for the entire
state but I feel honored that we
have the organization loss imia
in southern New Mexico and in
district thirty eight to be able
to spearhead that so thank you
Mr chair for indulging me and
and I still would love to hear
any other questions.
Thank you senator and I think
you Mr chairman is back and of
his questions or if you want to
take back the conversation
I I don't have a a question but
just some brief comments the I I
want to think of Senator Hamblen
for bring this bill this is
exciting you know there wasn't a
it wasn't very long time ago
that in our village of payments
pueblo we pretty much grew all
of our food and I I think it's
communities we've gone away from
that and I think through this
process we can recapture a lot
of that and teach our young
people how to take care of our
grow our food and I know that it
food you know it doesn't grow at
the grocery store it doesn't
appear automatically you know
you actually have to plan for
your gated no cultivated and
what's it saying to it talk to.
And this is my grandfather do
and we walk around and sing our
own Pueblo songs and and the in
that and that's how we take care
of our food so congratulations
and there's a lot of excitement
I know across the state of this
bill and hopefully we can the of
get this moving forward so with
that I'd like to do with the
motion of for a do pass
we have a due pass
recommendation by Senator Shendo
but we do have a couple one more
question from Senator how to me
once I do we have a second.
Okay do passed by Senator Shendo
a second by Senator Kernan and
we're gonna give it to Senator
how to me for a moment thank you
Mr chairman the so Senator have
one thanks for bringing this
loopy that's all aside is a
young woman in northern New
Mexico who graduated from UCLA
and came back to northern New
Mexico to teach children about
our agriculture history and how
to grow food and how to sustain
on their own and so Lupita is a
champion and ensuring that seeds
are shared within communities
she's been teaching a number of
students in rural northern New
Mexico how to grow about the
aspect test system and so I'm
excited about this bill because
we're now sitting that these
students are understanding the
importance of growing their own
food which in turn has turned
into health and being health
conscious so thank you so much
for bringing this up and I'm
sure that on behalf of the
people that are I'm comfortable
in saying that she's excited
about this and so are other
rural New Mexicans in northern
New Mexico thank you thank you
Mr chair thank you senator how
to meal and thank you Senator
Hamblen so we have a Senator
hands up we have a motion to for
two passed by Senator Shendo we
have a second I Senator Kernan
if miss Renfro will call the
roll.
Senator Brandt let Senator
Griggs.
Yes Senator Hamblen.
yeah.
Thank you.
yes do.
How to meal yes.
Senator Kernan yes senator
Sanchez I was yes.
Sierra.
Yes.
Senator Wirth yes we okay yes
Senator Padilla tech yes yes.
The.
The.
You have what excuse did intend
yess all right center hand when
you have a do pass.
Thank you Mr chair Mister Mister
chair the senators for being so
supportive of this Senator
Kernan if you'd like to talk
more about helping a co sponsor
this given your impact and how
you feel so passionate about
this I'd love to have a
conversation with you about this
I think it has wonderful
opportunities to create a great
impact in all of our communities
and you know going from
nutrition and addressing
diabetes to healthy food to
teach people how to cook to
starting jobs so thank you all
for your support of this thank
you for Kristin and a whole lot
to me a team for being such
rockstars on this there's a
reason why this is such a strong
strong bill thank you everybody
I appreciate all of your support
thank you Mr chair thank you
Senator Hamblen all right right
back to you Mr Chairman for our
next order of business okay
thank you a vice chairman you
did a great job.
So with okay so we have thirty
minutes of Senate bill eleven
will be rolled over to Thursday
of Senator Pirtle has asked for
his bill to be also both of road
to a Thursday and we're going to
do one Senate bill one twenty
four Senator Tallman in the
bill.
And this this will be our last
bill for tonight.
Okay thank you Mr chairman this
is a.
Senate bill one twenty for
processing and payment the
pharmacy claims I have a
amendment Mr chair that limits.
The fourteen day reimbursement
requirements to electronically
submitted claims for
prescription drugs and related
fees.
This was requested by who
crossed you she'll and we
agreed.
I expert Gil Rodriguez will
explain.
Thank you Margaret this is the
general counsel for the New
Mexico pharmacy.
Business council.
Is Mr rod Regus.
Available yes Sir.
Yes.
Are you ready for me yeah go
ahead go ahead yeah good good
afternoon chairman.
And and members of the committee
my name is Miguel Rodriguez and
counsel for the New Mexico
pharmacy business council and
I'm here for Senate bill one
twenty four Senate bill one
twenty four concerns the
timetable for the payment of
certain pharmacy claims and as
the senator noted I'm pleased to
report that we work with Blue
Cross blue shield on an
amendment to address some of
their concerns.
As soon New Mexico law requires
a health plan to pay interest on
claim claims that have not been
paid to an eligible provider
within thirty days that's the
current law and with Senate bill
one twenty four will do is
modify that timetable to
fourteen days if the claim is
electronically submitted by a
pharmacy and if it is for
prescription drug related fees.
And Senate bill one twenty four
will serve to improve the cash
flow for New Mexico pharmacies
without increasing the cost of
health care.
And that it's important to note
that Medicare part D. which is
the Medicare prescription drug
benefit and the largest
prescription drug program in the
country.
At has a fourteen day timetable
let as is proposed by Senate
bill one twenty four also.
So this will green New Mexico
pharmacy claims in line with
Medicare part D. now we were to
be amendment that are BlueCross
BlueShield As suggested and is
incorporated in the current
language will I know the
distinction between one of
pharmacy services to provide
drugs versus one of pharmacy
services to provide clinical
services when the pharmacy is
providing prescription drugs and
and submitting a claim for them
the fourteen day deadline and
that's reflected in discussed
what will.
Will control however if the
pharmacy is doing something else
and sometimes pharmacies provide
other services aside from just
dispensing drugs.
Then in that case the pharmacy
will be reimbursed according to
the same time line is as other
similar providers which is
thirty days in New Mexico and
that was a concern that blue
cross wanted to make sure I was
addressed and current amendment
addresses that concern to their
satisfaction.
So thank you chairman and
members of the committee and I'm
available here if you have any
questions.
Mr chair.
This.
We can't hear you Mr chairman.
That's better okay all right now
I I forgot to mute myself so
Mr chairman Mr chair yes go
ahead Senator.
Yes the amendment.
Thank you.
I'm a member for purposes of
discussion Mr chairman thank you
senator of of the go ahead
senator Cormann.
Okay Google just like to.
I have a couple comments after
we.
I move the amendment.
Okay so so your expert witness
has explained the amendment is
there any opposition to the
amendment.
The non the you have an amended
bill so senator Cormann of.
Good yeah I just like to add a
few comments of sensually the
bill has been explained you know
we are.
For independent community
pharmacists are working very
hard every day to provide the
social services and they have to
end here all the.
Problems that most small
businesses have to end years so
this is being paid every two
weeks we'll significantly no
benefit to the the pharmacist in
general on the especially
helpful to the.
Making the locally owned
pharmacies more financially
stable.
so this legislation will shorten
is already been explained a
shortened time frame for health
plans to reimburse the pharmacy
for prescription drug claims or
inform them of the Nile within
fourteen days
thank you which is a change from
the thirty days so this is
really.
Significantly significant it's
very important
to these sets of small
independent community
pharmacists who work very hard
every day to provide essential
service so I would urge the
committee to.
To support this is so this bill.
So we've already heard.
And so we have with me today to
expert witness is one of which
we've already heard from we have
another one Danny cross
pharmacist and owner of the
southwest pharmacy in advance
medications in Carlsbad he also
serves on the board of the New
Mexico pharmacy.
Business.
Councils so is
Danny cross available.
Yes Sir this is Danny cross the
chairman and members of the
committee I don't want to go
back and just say everything
that everybody just said because
everything was well articulated
about the issue are they know we
know immediately how much we're
going to get paid on the claim
that the within seconds and it
really doesn't make any sense at
that we couldn't get the the
reimbursement that we got coming
for that within a reasonable
period of time the we're talking
large amounts of money that we
have on on out to pay for these
prescription drugs that are
waiting to come back with these
clients so without taking more
of your time I respectfully ask
members of the committee to
support this legislation it will
really help the cash flow for
small businesses such as mine
and small rural communities as
well as help provide better care
for our patients so I'll leave
off with that thank you.
Thank you Mr.
Mr cross that's all the.
Expert witnesses I have the Mr
chair and we cannot open up to
the public.
Thank you to senator Thomas so
now we'll go to the public and
we'll start with opposition to
Kerr.
There are not members of the
public who have registered to
speak in opposition at this time
but if there are any members
here today who would like to
speak in opposition of Senate
bill twenty four you may raise
your hand using the reaction.
All right moving on to those who
wish to speak in favor.
First off we have damn cross.
That's me that's my earliest
chairman Mr chairman members the
committee this is Danny cross I
am also witnessed said that came
at a later time so please I just
ask for you to support this
important legislation.
Thank you very much next stop we
have Dale tanker.
Dale.
Yes this is Dale can occur I'm
the executive director of the
New Mexico pharmacists
Association and I do want to
comment briefly that.
pharmacy submit their claims
when their patients pick up
their prescriptions the PBMs
adjudicate those claims so they
know they're valid at that
moment so it it the to to valid
claims and there's not any
reason they should not be able
to see to reimburse the
pharmacies in fairly short order
we do want to support moving the
claim claims time to fourteen
days to be consistent with the
chair that time frame thank you
very much.
Thank you.
Next up we have Mona got us.
I'm hello I would just like to
reiterate everything that
everybody else said and support
this claim thank you.
This bill.
Thank you very much.
Next up we have Connor do
little.
Connor do little.
All right moving on we have many
gonna go.
Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you very much
for sharing this bill this
evening I am into a
contabilidad of pharmacy
business council.
That.
The time is going to.
Help with cash flow also.
Right should ask are working
very hard the now taking on the
scene in their community and
expanding how they can serve
them are make us all state again
I do want to reiterate that we
appreciated BlueCross BlueShield
reaching out and we're very
happy to make a distinction that
what we're looking at is a
fourteen day period for those
prescriptions that are brought
to inspire patients and honoring
that since we have been allowed
to join and in being clinical
providers that we want to be
paid as they are so thank you so
much for your consideration.
Thank you very much next up we
have more leisure let's.
More live shows.
Moving on we have Matt Munson.
Matt Munson.
All right next up we have Miguel
Rodriguez.
It's not spoken already said at
no further comments for me.
Thank you.
Next up we have Dale manages.
That concludes were registered
is there anybody else who would
like to speak at this time.
Thank you very much that
concludes public comment at this
time.
Okay thank you us so we'll go to
committee I have Senator Griggs
and Senator Hickey.
Senator Griggs.
Thank you Mr chair and you know
I think this is important bill
for our small independent
pharmacies and I was hoping that
we didn't have anybody else want
to have questions with actually
Senator Hickey stand up but I
would Mr chair I would make a
motion to do patch.
Senator Hickey.
I will second that but I do have
a couple of questions Mr chair
and.
Senator Tom and and senator
Neville about the wording in the
bill I'm I'm looking at the blue
hi and it says fourteen is
receipt of the claim is
submitted electronically by a
pharmacy then hasn't aero staff
yeah and then
thirty days they've received
submitted electronically by an
eligible provider other than the
pharmacy this morning I got a
lesson in our judiciary from
Senator Servan tastes are in
terms of clarity of language in
the bill and
so forgive me for applying it
here but could you clarify the
our intelligence was an eligible
provider other than the
pharmacy.
We're going could you answer
that.
This is money.
So.
I'm.
I'm fine how are you.
What's important to note in the
amendment that you just received
is that the first thing you did
was strike the CENIC help the
public affairs committee
amendments so that maybe where
the confusion so what you had
with the comments contacts those
were taken out and it has been
more simply re worked with the
current amendments.
Make sense yes I'm maybe I'm
looking at the wrong or
something right that's important
we had to strike everything from
Senate health and public affairs
because okay to confusing so in
in re worked help eligible
provider is is handled okay so I
have three bills here
One nineteen one nineteen and
two eleven
So I just.
So I just wanna be sure that
that that is clear
because I don't otherwise I
guess it's just the original
bill the original bill what
we're the man just got put on
was as if it was the original
bill.
Okay so stay with the original
bills fifty regional bell and in
the current amendments.
So don't think the amendment in
contact from Senate health of
public affairs make no
difference they're not.
Okay
so there is no within fourteen
days of receipt thereof will
provider is a pharmacy very good
okay thank you
that one other one other a
judiciary type question
And that is in the definition
of substantially all information
in the clean fine.
R. it and eight section one a.
Representative sees one sub
Representative the seas will a
substantially all required data
elements necessary for education
of the plane I have the
misfortune of having had to live
with plans for the last eight
years
it's it's it's that kind of to
the side of the regulatory
health trying to do claims and
and the judicata correctly and
contracts and so it just
wondering substantially all is.
Not necessarily defined as
sometimes the claims don't come
cleanly through
Chairman so Senator Hickey.
The.
Where this is placed in in where
is in the part of the law that
handles all providers so that is
existing language they use the
internet for a while and so
I would be hesitant for us to
the work it without talking with
all of the other providers which
I really hope we don't need to
do that I I I hope you don't
either of Mr chairman senators
and ms mechanical
I hope you're not going in front
of Judiciary.
Thankfully.
Not okay all right.
Is that.
Mr chairman senators and as
mechanical that's good because
they probably would go through
all the other if that were the
face their but I I I can't I
certainly having worked in this
for the last eight years in
appreciate the the substantially
on that it will be worked out
and I do think it is actually a
a wonderful bill for the
independent pharmacists and
definitely you know understand
cash flow and so forth are is
very very important I once had
the who eventually the chairman
of that was my at one time my
direct boss are always said to
me cash is king.
And and in the small business
ashes so thank you for bringing
this forward and I am in full
support I just wanted to get
clarity thank you Mr chairman
senators and as Mike out thank
you Senator give Senator Padilla
thank you Mr chairman and
senator Tom and I I just want to
make sure I understand what
happened here because I think I
heard that you put an amendment
on and now she's back that's
back to back and then you took
it off how did you take the
amendment off between I think
there's only two committee
assignments so how did that
occur.
Then respond.
Mr Chairman.
Yes go ahead explain you'll
notice at the top of Mr
chairman.
Vice chairman to DS you'll
notice that the the top of the
amendment it notes state that
all of the Senate help them
Public Affairs amendment
stricken that's part of this
event.
Thank you Mr chairman and that
that's what's giving me a little
bit of heartburn because
I I but I I'm concerned that you
put something on to get it
through a committee and then now
you're over here taking it off
and I'm I'm sure that's not the
case everybody calm down there
but.
Hello don't start throwing
things virtually but but but
I've seen this happen by the way
and I'm not a fan of it I mean I
don't I don't think that's you
know that's a good strategy I
mean and and while you and
probably not going to get a
heaping helping those of help
over Judiciary they also serve
on the Senate floor like all the
rest of us and they're going to
take a look at this kind of
stuff but I I'm concerned that
you put emit an amendment on and
now you're just you know over
here taking it off and so what
gives.
Mr Senator Tallman.
This meant can you answer that
please I.
Share chairman Shendo and vice
chairman Padilla yes.
That was put on Senate
Public Affairs was a technical
amendment because we needed to
speak to having the change about
the pharmacy claims in multiple
areas of the bill so when it was
we worked on our drafter instead
of having
amendments re worded so that you
would have amendments strike you
have the regional bill with new
language you have strikes and
then you had the amendment with
language and it would have had
stripes that it was so
complicated that the amendment
from.
Senate health and public affairs
committee is not content the
content of it has not changed we
just had to restructure it
because now we were speaking to
the type of claim which is a
prescription drug claim rather
than just eight claim from a
pharmacist so since we were
bifurcating that prescription
drug claims and the clinical
claims we just had to re work
language that the objectives are
not different we did not change
the meaning of of this
legislation.
So Mister chairman if it's with
your permission I know we have
eight minutes and I promise I'm
not trying to kill time
can we have miss o'donnell
please at and I and I thank you
Mr chairman senator Tom an admin
that you and I are very good
friends and I trust you
implicitly I I have never had a
reason not to trust you but it
could we have miss o'donnell
just kind of walk us through
what was just said I want to
make sure that I'm not an
attorney can you walk me through
and and businessmen terms
please.
Mr Mr chairman the vice chairman
yeah the the end what what does
that is is correct the the new
amendments are they managed to
replaced the shack amendments
are much cleaner there might be
in there much more to the point
this fact amendments were were a
little clunky so readers that
this basically takes the ****
Amendment Fishback amendments
and frames them in a much more
understandable way.
I I began calling this committee
B. S. T. B. T. C. R. E. S. P. E.
C. T. committee so back
Your chairman now that Mr Donald
clarify that when I am much
clearer now and and I I I
thought that's what was being
said there but again in a couple
years ago we had a couple
senators try to drive a bill
creating just to get through one
committee amended the heck out
of it and then took those things
right off in the next committee
and that just was not cool and
those could those bills died
flat out on the floor so thank
you Mr chairman I I that makes
much more sense thank you that's
all and all right thank you
senator yes so I don't see any
hands up so that we have a due
pass motion by Senator Griggs
and a second by Senator Hickey.
main can you take grow please
Senator Griggs.
Yes.
Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Hickey yes Senator how to meal.
Yes.
Senator Kernan yes senator
Sanchez yes Senator Tallman.
Yes Senator Wirth.
Senator Padilla yes Senator
Shendo yes Senator Wirth is yes
I'm sorry senator Wirth.
So it's ten and one excuse.
Great you have a.
Then okay thank you Mr chairman
thank you members of the
committee.
Right all right thank you
members it's been a long long
day it is going to be long days
from now on and so forth so but
before we leave I just want to
let you know that
will rolled all these other ones
over on Thursday we may add one
or two depending on how fast
we're going but just to let you
know that there on Saturday.
Senator we're gonna be meeting
and we are going to be hearing
all for cannabis bills.
So all rights gonna be cannabis
day and I I understand your
point is right in his Cheech and
Chong van up.
Well that's my understanding so
he may wear to outfit to we
don't know what the.
Getting his the tie dyed today
Mister tie dyed
day miss anybody there days.
You
feel are anyway learn all right
all right committee members I
want to thank you all it's been
a long day and have a wonderful
evening and we will see you
tomorrow on the floor good night
all of we are Jr thank you
getting
goodnight goodnight thank you.
