That was senator brand excused
senator gregs here
saying that your hotel meal is
excuse senator lopez
senator sanchez senator meetings
excuse senator tallman
senator worth is excuse senator
hambling senator shandow we have
six for a court
okay thank you all right good so
we'll go ahead and get started
with their standard item house
bill one eighty four life in
health insurance guarantee
exchange or so.
Number thank you chairman and
committee this
bill one eighty one from the
house is the identical bill you
heard about a week and a half
ago when seventy nine that
passed unanimously i'm gonna let
my colleague from the house with
the official sponsored house
give you a brief summary and
then we have mike bat should
there be any questions.
Think you mister chair and
members of the committee how
spell one eighty one amends new
mexico life and health insurance
guarantee association act based
on a current version of a model
act developed by the national
association of insurance
commissioners forty one states
have already adopted these
changes
this will add additional
consumer protections by
expanding guarantee association
membership to include hmo's and
provide coverage to their
subscribers and providers
valuebook coverage that will
protect them from loss if
they're hmo becomes insolvement
and mike that is the
administrator for the new mexico
life insurance guarantee
association and with that we
will stand for questions.
Thank you so
I go ahead and quickly ago to
the audience anybody here
support of HB one eighty one.
If you ask him.
This money
then you'll need the microphone
for folks on the web.
Mister chair members of the
committee my name is rent more
of a registered lobbyist for the
american council of life
insurers and we stand in support
of the bill thank you
mister chairman members of the
committee marlow shows
registered lobbies for blue
cross the shield we stand in
support and i'm also a standing
and support for scott scanner
whose registered live is for a I
g in corbridge and we all
support this bill thank you.
Mr chat of the committee my name
is the iran occur i'm with the
office of the superintendent of
the insurance
hb one eighty one brings new
mexico in alignment with
national standards and ensures
that all applicable plans are
including the association or as
I think the sponsors
and urges the passages of this
bill thank you
anybody up anybody on so
okay anybody in opposition.
Okay any for the questions from
the committee.
The.
I moved to pass there no
questions mister chair emotion
for the past person in her
handling second by senator greg.
We're called
senator brand use senator gregs.
Yes senator had a meal excuse
senator lopez yes.
Senator sanchez.
Senator meetings is excuse
senator tomorrow yes.
Senator worth is excuse senator
hamburg yes.
Senator shandow yes we have six
yes for a due pass all right
thank you.
Next one up per house bill one
eighty six.
Are crash reporting damage
mount.
Thank you mister chair are
members of the committee
chairman you probably recognize
this bill
we got it to the house in the
senate unanimously last year and
you just ran out of time in the
senate floor but this bill does
is are currently low requires a
driver of a vehicle involved in
an accident.
Involving more than five hundred
dollars in property damage to
file written report with duty.
This bill would raise that
amount to a thousand dollars the
five hundred dollars threshold
was said in nineteen ninety one
which was raised from two fifty.
The federal model minimum
uniform cross criteria
recommends required reporting
for accidents involving this
damage to be a thousand dollars
or more and I stand for
questions I want to introduce my
expert witness.
Secretary ricky certain
thank you mister chair.
All right so
it's probably the most with this
bill
will go out to the public
anybody here in support of house
bill will eighty six.
Alright okay good yeah yeah
that's great all right anybody
support
anybody here in opposition.
The.
All right any questions from the
committee.
I'm over two pass motion for the
passport a little bit house
eighty six and a second by your
seven centures for colorado
senator brant is excuse senator
grakes
senator had a meal is excuse
senator lopez
senator sanchez.
Senator schmide's is excuse
senator tomorrow.
Yes.
Send it to work is excuse
senator hamble senator shandow
yes we have six yes for a due
pass
thank you thank you mister thank
you thank you thank you sector.
All right next up his house
center more your fifteen
broadband work group thank you
very much your chair and madame
vice charin committee I just
have one word for you
right
so the reason that this is
important mister chairs that
required request that the office
of broadband access and
expansion can be in a working
group that they are going to
find there is no appropriation
here to pull together some data
and information that
the
mtia is going to need from new
mexico to put us in line for a
potential grant in the in the
amount of six hundred and
seventy five million that is six
hundred and seventy five million
for the broadband work that
we're doing here in new mexico
they definitely want to see
action happening in legislatures
and there they look more
favorably on states that are
doing things like this in
addition all the other stuff
we've done we have now a formal
office on broadband as you know
that we all have acted on and
got done a couple of years ago
and that's all the legislation
does
the memories thank you
well to the audience in but he
here is support of house months
or send a memory of fifteen.
Go ahead.
Thank you thank you chair and
members of the committee and
shories wanting and the ceo of
new mexico rural electric
cooperative association and we
support this memorial and we
look forward to ford
collaboration looking forward
into the future to roll out
broadband with the office of
broadband and we are happy to be
part of that thank you.
Good afternoon good afternoon a
chairman shando members of
committee cardlessly seral and
the public service company in
mexico view him supports this
this memorial as convenience
working group will bring her in
the right parties to expand
broadband throughout new mexico
and do you know with in the case
of the piano utilizing our
utilities and for these reasons
where you support this mobile
thank you.
Thank you mister chairman
members of the committee jerry
nichols on behalf of the past so
electric for the reasons
previously stay that way support
this memorial thank you anybody
else
alright thank you go out to the
audience so anybody here in
opposition of center more
fifteen.
Thank you go to committee for
questions.
Senator
mr chair I move a due cast on
senate memorial fift.
Thank you I do have a question
the other question to.
Okay
senator I know that.
So what what so who would be
proud together with this group
splint a little bit because I
know with the other you know you
have electric cobs are somewhere
favor of the other bills and
were posted and you got there
going to travel I saw a little
bit about who is going to be
video to this table so
appreciate that mister chairman
and members of the committee and
I will tell you that on that
other peace legislation it's
really unfortunate that that
didn't move I could get any
further than it did we did work
out everything with the coops
and and we did work out
everything with the
i'm sorry the the coops and
their enemy cg that real
telecommunications cares but you
know we're just run out of time
over there so this is what we
elected to go with in it but the
whole tension of the first part
of your question the group is
going to be requested to focus
on
unserved underserved low income
and rural and student
populations and the reason that
was important with so that we
would capture everything related
to tribal communities at
regardless of what area they
they sit in you know anywhere in
the state all the way down to
the student populations at this
really basily benefits.
Okay alright.
Appreciate that answer still a
center tom.
Oh thank you mister chair thank
you for bringing this forward
of.
Is there a saturday plan in
existence surrounding this issue
I mister chair and senator home
and there is a statewide
broadband plan now as a result
of the office that we created
that I sponsored there is
additional work that needs to be
done every year because there's
requirements that come from ntia
which is the national
telecommunications
infrastructure.
There's act or somebody
on which I don't remember the
exact terminology i'm being
required to go vote on three
different measures and finance
right now but to set my own her
on fire mister chairman cause I
get like ninety texts here the
bottom line is that this that
they're going to be new
requirements that are coming to
the states every year to be in
line for the dollars that are
potentially going to come in at
the state the six hundred and
seventy five million dollars we
cannot let that go so mister
churns and so obviously so
experience help you get funding
yes mister chairman center yes
thank you
mister
senator hammer.
So admit looks I just want to
make sure i'm the last person
asking questions before we move
ahead anybody else.
The.
So I know that you have a place
to be and I was just wondering
if the tortis would have any
room in this office and just
kidding so so mr chairman made a
vice let me just tell you what
that's the whole reason i'm
doing this because my kido's
want to see her all the tire
tourists yes we have a tortures
named beaver i'm just messed
they must be they need to come
drive down
all right we do have the motion
for do passed by senator lopes
and a second by
tomorrow
gold row senator brand
senator greggs senator had a
meal is excuse center to locate
yes senator sanchez
senator schmedices excuse.
Senator tallman yes senator
worth is excuse senator hamble
senator sando yes we have six
yes
thank you
thank you
committee
you know this may be our last
one we don't know what we'll see
what comes on her
border tonight or early morning
but so at this time I don't
think we have any house bills
yet but we'll see what this lay
by your from now okay.
