So that is the plan members of
the committee then the.
We'll go from there so depending
on depending on the I don't know
I don't have the I haven't seen
the list yet on the public a
COVID.
Of we made to thirty minutes
each.
So I will look at their this
year and of that but the.
We'll go from there so with that
we have a.
We have Senate bill thirteen.
Ivey Soto needs he's got
somebody presenting on on his
behalf Mr Chairman well I go
ahead Senator yeah so just got
some guidance for others that
might be joining us today will
you give if we were to some
magical way.
Get get through the cannabis
bills in the pretty efficient
way do we anticipate going on to
other bills beyond that of one
of my plan is to do a hard stop
at two o'clock.
I thought we can get through
these
Hello no timely fashion then we
will move on to the other bills
thank you just want to give some
guidance to the other folks
might be listening in thank you
okay thank you members of the
committee with that
we will get started with SB
thirteen.
Good.
Good morning chairman gender and
committee members of the
Representative at terrible money
and I will be presenting today
for SB thirteen for senator
Daniel Ivey Soto.
And with that I will get
started.
Okay.
What legislative efforts to
legalize cannabis.
Stall out year after year.
After hearing that the approach
at this year's founded largely
the same as previous years I
felt the need to get involved
and that's why I wanted the
house version of SB thirteen
with HB seventeen with my co
sponsor representative Roger
Montoya.
The hallmark of what we are
trying to do is to not repeat
the same playbook with nearly
the same bill as last year and
expect a more stable favorable
outcome now with Arizona
legalizing cannabis with Mexico
close to legalizing cannabis and
with taxes now having introduced
legislation to legalize it we
simply cannot afford to wait
another year and try to push
through a very similar bill and
expect a different outcome.
When I agree to sponsor the
House Bill version of this bill
I appreciated.
That it took a different
approach it started with looking
at last year's book Bill which
made it further than any other
tenant can still has ever made
it and carefully remove items
that are not essential to
responsibly legalizing cannabis
for people over twenty one.
It is enabling legislation sure
simple.
Meeting and she will making what
should be left to rule making
and including what needs to be
in statute in statute.
There is a lot more alignment
and consistency with SB thirteen
and SB three sixty three and H.
B. twelve and there are
important contributions from SB
two eighty eight after all the
bills are based on the same
source documents of last year's
bill but the differences are
important.
I also want to say that from the
beginning my goal was to
collaborate with other sponsors
and stakeholders to create a
single bill that works.
Locally because this approach
with the pair down the the
essential at the thirteen is
built to collaborate.
I'd be willing to work with my
colleagues would drug policy
alliance with the cannabis
industry with other voices
importance to this conversation
to get a feel that is the best
final project with the best
chance of making it to the
governor's desk.
I would like my expert witnesses
to explain the big differences
that remain that I do you want
to say that I appreciate that
you committee substitute for
house bill twelve that began to
address some of the big issues
that I think presented clear and
present obstacles the bill going
the distance.
This includes removing earmarks.
First presentation I had the
earmarking funds is not the
right approach and it takes
responsibility away from
appropriators it is also
simplified the tax structure we
find the time line as well as
other component we would fully
accept as friendly amendments to
our bill including.
Adding the ability for players
to maintain a drug free
workplace removing financial
penalties related to cannabis
violations for you under
eighteen.
Putting up the mandate for
evidence based prevention.
The program in six to twelve
public education.
Guarding our tribal brothers and
sisters I would suggest going
further and adopting portions of
chairman gender as previous
legislation to bring equity and
parity with our pueblo the
Navajo Nation and asked
obligations as it.
As they are Sarmatians as it
relates to creating opportunity
in the cannabis industry.
In a recent confirmation hearing
to be secretary of the
department of interior secretary
designate congresswoman dead
Hallan said the cannabis will be
an important alternative revenue
sources to support education and
moving away from dependence on
the oil and gas industry and I
fully agree with her.
I would now like to turn it over
to my expert witness who can
speak more to the specific
differences and Senate bill
thirteen and then I would call I
would like to close the
presentation
then the ranger is my ex and Mr.
Send a committee members and I
just want to have a.
Us.
Sorry I just have a point of
parliamentary inquiry we were
not told that we could have
experts today my understanding
Mr chairman of the direction was
that it was solely the Sanchez
who would discuss the bills so
we did not.
We we I just feel like we're now
at a disadvantage but can you
clarify the point Mr Chairman
I'm just wondering what your
direction loss.
Go ahead.
Thank you Mr chairman and.
If I may just have a moment so I
can get my minor in order that I
may be able to present and and
that that that that we would
appreciate that because I was
unaware that I was aware that we
have.
Except what is the chairman my
apologies community.
Okay.
Thank you can I would just go to
my final remarks and you just
get to the point and and and
hopefully spare some extra time.
Mr chairman and committee
members again I wasn't prepared
in that fashion but.
Right ago yeah my
I'm here on behalf of senator I
think that the.
Two and let my keyboard to the
collaborative process of
creating one bill that all
parties can get behind but I
want to emphasize the need the
two most important things that
need to be in the bill.
First.
There would be a way for the the
state to manage production.
putting in statute that the
state shall not limit production
is very dangerous especially for
the first years of a program.
It will create opportunities for
only the huge well resource
companies will drive shutting
any opportunities for everyday
new Mexicans to enter and be
successful in the business.
And it will push oversupply into
the illicit market putting our
families in danger.
The governor has been very clear
that she thinks production
management is absolutely
critical and it must be
included.
The governor recently said and I
quote my County to be an issue
that is addressed I want to make
sure that we are creating new
businesses but everyone has an
equal opportunity there is a lot
of stuff going on here and I
have been advocating cannabis
legislation fail because it's
too complicated.
Second.
The industry representation on.
The policy advisory committee
from going through this process
and hearing cannabis bills
through committee there have
been many times with expert
witnesses understand industries
have been able to explain things
like the life cycle of the
cannabis plant like how much
water it takes to grow.
You can use different methods
how much electricity it takes
exception.
It would be a huge disservice to
the state can not allow
industry.
In the rulemaking process and
that must be included in the
final bill I thank you all for
your time and
I look forward to continuing the
conversation and working with
all the other sponsors to get
you that bill into the next
Saturday Mr chairman.
Thank you again I ask.
Thank you Representative Lujan.
So now we'll go to the Senate
bill two eighty eight.
Senator R. Pirtle.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
members of the committee good
morning on this beautiful
Saturday morning it's great to
be with you Senator two eighty
eight is very similar to Senate
bill five seventy seven that the
I carry two years ago and that's
the version that eventually made
it out of the house to the
Senate as a floor substitute I
believe it's where a few the
bills actually started their
framework but Senate bill two
eighty eight is one that so was
drafted into drafted with a few
things in mind in a few goals
the first goal with legalizing
cannabis I I believe is to put
the illicit market out of
business the there are one of
the reasons to legalize cannabis
is to ensure that the illegal
drug sales go away and that the
state has somewhat of a control
of the sale of cannabis and for
that reason might he's
legislation would put in
something called the cannabis
control commission I believe
it's important that if we're
gonna have something like
cannabis legalized that we have
the proper amount of oversight
we have people who have
experience and expertise making
the rules ensuring that our
children are not getting in a
hold of cannabis that the
cannabis is not marketed or
produced in a way that would be
appealing to children so some of
the specific languages that
would look like a commercial
candy so that you don't go to
the store and see you know Comey
bear that looks just like the
ones that you would buy a state
or local seven eleven so these
are the important things that we
want to ensure that the illicit
markets but out of business but
we protect the public safety and
protect our children give the
police officers the tools that
they need to do their job so how
do we accomplish this and Senate
bill two eighty eight well
Senate bill two eighty eight
would keep the tax rate.
Low so the tax rate in Senate
bill two eighty eight is a two
percent excise tax to the city
county and state and then on top
of that there would still be a
gross receipts tax depending on
where
the cannabis retail stores
located so potentially any
municipality or county could
receive up to four percent of
the sale of the four percent of
the sale
the tax on on the cell so local
communities would be able to
have this money as opposed to
some of the other legislation
where all the money goes to the
state and then we've seen how
that works especially in our
rural areas what it's like to
try to get some of that revenue
back into our districts so this
way we stay where the seller
heard those are the the
communities are gonna be
impacted so they can add more
police officers workshop ours or
really just telephone or spend
money on whatever the.
Think is best for the community
whether streets or
and infrastructure whatever so
we leave that decision in those
decisions up to local
communities.
So the reason keeping the tax
laws we don't want to do like
we've seen in other states where
they get the tax rate so high
that legal cannabis is priced
out of the market people
continue to just go to the
illicit market purchase their
cannabis so what happens is then
all the way and legal cannabis
now people are still purchasing
from the illicit market but the
police officers had no way to
tell where they purchased and or
where it came from so the
illicit market continues to
thrive because of the high tax
rate we have price the legal
cannabis out of the market so
that is very important we've
seen plenty of studies that show
you want to keep that tax rate
below at least eighteen percent
and so that's what Senate bill
two eighty eight is set out to
accomplish I believe it does
very well the other part of the
legislation that I that I think
is an important is this a lot of
the rural communities especially
where I'm from Mr chair and
members of the committee don't
want our our downtowns to turn
into the downtown that we've
seen in other communities and
Colorado and what I'm referring
to is something that's
considered the green mile so you
go into and to meet up and you
drive downtown and its
recreational cannabis store
after recreational cannabis
cannabis starting kind of steals
the identity of the community
and so in the legislation that I
propose it has a one mile
distance between cannabis
recreational cannabis
establishments so that we don't
end up with these downtowns that
are a hundred percent of
cannabis driven economy so that
we spread it out it's not
concentrated another important
piece of the legislation is that
within this bill we one hundred
percent protects our employers
right to HSD Rosie wrote
tolerance drug free workplace so
I I know that's very important
to to business owners it's
important to myself on that this
in no way is going to take away
an employer's right to a drug
pres.
Zero tolerance of workforce
Senator Candelaria actually work
on this language with us two
years ago to ensure that we
follow the Colorado.
Portion of the law that that has
held up to the scrutiny of the
Colorado Supreme Court so we
wanted to ensure that we have
that language in there and and
that that language was strong.
The other portion of this
legislation is ensuring that
police officers have the tools
that they need to help
ensure that that public safety
is maintained one of those
questions is a requirement that
there's a proof of purchase on
the on cannabis items so that
way somebody purchases from the
illicit market the officers and
then differentiate between the
two and say you purchased this
either from a legal recreational
cannabis store or no you
purchased this on the list of
market.
The other important thing with
regard to public safety is that
the are you training within the
legislation we cut out a small
portion so that we ensure that
every single police officer
within the state of New Mexico
research receives drug
recognition expert training and
so this will allow our officers
not just tell somebody's driving
under the influence of cannabis
but whether they're under the
influence of any other drug
hoping paying anything under the
sun so this is a very important
part of that we can use some of
the revenue from the legal sale
of recreational cannabis or the
police officers to receive the
training they need to be experts
in recognizing if somebody is
driving under the influence of
drugs or alcohol.
and and Mr chairman members of
the committee.
I to really feel like we have
something strong between all the
bills that have been proposed I
to propose the bill because I
felt like
something as important as
legalizing the sale of
recreational cannabis really
needed to have a bipartisan
approach so that we didn't have
unintended consequences and so
the main point of of my ability
but the illicit.
market out of business as long
as we maintain that goal I think
we come up with the best piece
of legislation I have said from
the beginning that I don't think
as a state that we should
legalize cannabis based upon how
much revenue that we're gonna
receive from the sale we need to
make the decision as a
Legislature existent policy or
bad policy and if we happen to
to bring in some revenues from
the taxation of the still of
recreational cannabis that's
going to be a bonus but we
really need to take a long hard
look at how we set this up what
the be framework looks like to
ensure that we achieve the goals
set out today by every single
one of the presenters and I
think if we come together we
will be able to have the piece
of legislation that I hope Mr
chair members of the committee
of light to just mention.
That the I would hope that we
can come up with a Senate bill
that when we send to the house
will receive some
bipartisan support I have been
told by and by members of the
house if we send them a bill
very similar to mine are exactly
the same as mine that they would
be
more than willing to support it
but unfortunately they were not
able to support the bill that
came through the house yesterday
for many reasons but I I think
if we work together we will find
a piece of legislation that can
be supported by members of both
parties so thank you Mr chair.
Thank you are senator Perot now
will move on to Senate bill
three sixty three a Senator
Candelaria.
Thank you Mr chairman and good
morning to you all my colleagues
members of the public with me
today also as senator Pete
Campos who is the and sponsor on
this piece of legislation I will
make I will walk the committee
through the details of the bill
that I authored
and then pass it over to Senator
Campos for any for any comments
or additional information if you
would like to provide to the
committee.
I agree with Senator Pirtle
wholeheartedly that one of the
major goals.
Of this legislation Mr chairman
should be to.
Establish a legal system that
can compete on price and
accessibility with the illicit
market and thus reduce or
eliminate the illicit market for
cannabis in the state of New
Mexico that is a good goal.
I submit to the committee that
the way we achieve that and the
way that we ensure the
competitiveness of a
recreational market is not
really depended upon zoning
decisions in the bill it's not
really dependent upon tax
issues.
Because those issues don't
really directly affect the price
of medical cannabis nearly as
much as the artificial limits on
the production of plants that
already exists in New Mexico
law.
I will submit to the committee
that the plant happen license
cap limitations of Senate bill
thirteen our moods for purposes
of our discussion in the Senate
these provisions were already
tabled in the house the house
and the Legislature were asked
and answered and I think that
house rightfully decided that it
would be very bad policy and
repeating the errors of the past
to continue imposing an
artificial state imposed.
Limitation on the number of
plants that can be ground or the
number of licenses for folks
that can produce.
So let's look at the evidence as
I mentioned Mr chairman.
the state of New Mexico already
has a limitation on the number
of plants that can be ground.
there is a strict limitation
upon licensed cannabis producers
imposed by the department of
health that plant cap limitation
exists nowhere in the Lynn and
Erin compassionate use act it
exists only because the
department of health implemented
a rule saying that the best way
to manage plant production is by
a cat.
I will say I disagree with the
representation earlier by the
sponsors of Senate bill thirteen
that there is not there's really
no way of managing plant
inventory without a hard cap on
the number of plants because New
Mexico right now of all the
states that have legalized
recreational cannabis or have a
medical cannabis program New
Mexico is the only state with a
plant cap limitation so what has
that gotten us in the medical
cannabis program number one it
means that medical cannabis in
New Mexico is far more expensive
than in other states it's basic
supply and demand economics as a
result of New Mexicos plans cap
one gram of medical cannabis
costs approximately on average
ten dollars in New Mexico.
It costs eight dollars and
fifteen cents a gram in Arizona
and five dollars and ninety six
cents in Colorado and I don't
know Mr chairman that the
numbers from your from Arizona
and Colorado include taxes so we
can see what the artificial
limitation on plants in the name
of economic protectionism has
done the result Mr chairman of
the high prices and limited
supply in the medical cannabis
program has also meant that the
program exists in a constant
state of under supply of
medicine it means that producers
have to engage in dangerous
business practices at times as
was demonstrated by the recent
case in Santa Fe we're a
producer was trying to suck
every last molecule THC out of
material in an unsafe fashion
those sort of practices don't
exist if the system we set up in
the legislature follows the
markets and allows the market to
decide the appropriate supply of
medical cannabis if the
Legislature allows in turn then
the market to decide the
appropriate price of medical
cannabis if we repeat the same
mistakes of the past and impose
in this legislation and amend
house bill twelve to include a
plaque Capper license class
limitation I will assure you
that what we will see is higher
prices.
Decrease supply decreased
innovation decreased economic
competition and decreased
innovation specifically the
things we do not want and so the
legislation that Senator Campos
and I.
Bring before you is consistent
with house bill twelve in that
it does not impose a cap on the
number of plants that a licensed
producer may grow nor does it
impose an artificial limit on
the number of licenses I will
note that an important
difference between our Senate
bill and be current house bill
is I believe in Representative
Martinez please correct me if
I'm wrong and Representative
Romero please do as well as an
approaching this kind of as a
workshop to discuss the details
of our bills
It is that my Senate proposals
and accomplices proposal also
provides for an on coupled
license for cannabis consumption
areas meaning that for example
let's say you had a resort that
wanted to purchase a standalone
license to have an area in your
resort where people could
consume cannabis that is
specifically permitted under my
proposal I believe in the
original versions of that house
bill at least you could not get
that stand alone cannabis
consumption license you have to
have it as part of the whole
package would either authorized
you to produce manufacture and
have an area or rather just
manufacture and have in the
area.
The next important area where I
think there is large consensus
between our legislation and the
house bill is on the tax rate
the proposal from that we are
bringing would impose state
gross receipts tax on the
purchase of cannabis.
it would not impose state gross
receipts tax on wholesale
transactions between producers
and manufacturers I think that's
an important feature of the
structure to prevent against
the sort of your meeting in the
G. R. T. structure we contend
with in the state
the house bill currently imposes
gross receipts tax and an eight
percent state excise tax my
legislation would impose and
nine percent state excise tax
the house bill imposes or allows
local governments to impose a
four percent municipal tax and a
four percent county tax in the
unincorporated areas of the
county those taxes are not
staffed so it's an either or
my legislation Senator Campos
this legislation mirrors that so
basically the house and Senate
versions are one percent off and
the question is is that
additional percent of taxing
capacity go to the state or the
local governments I strongly
strongly urge and submit to the
committee that additional point
needs to go to the state of New
Mexico we are dealing with
significant revenue instability
ourselves I believe that
conservatively two three years
into this program if we set the
right at nine percent which is
added to the state's five point
one two five gross receipts tax
rate we can realistically look
at between a hundred to a
hundred and fifty million
dollars of new revenue to the
state I think the revenue
estimates provided by LFC today
are on reasonably low I
understand the need to be
conservative but I also
understand the need to base our
revenue projections on
reasonable and data based
projections of what the market
is going to do.
Next I will say regarding
Senator portals Bill I
completely agree the zero
tolerance provisions in senator
Senator portals Bill are also
finding my legislation.
there is no your marketing of
cannabis revenue in the
legislation that we propose all
gross receipts tax and all
cannabis excise tax would flow
to the general fund I submit
that that is appropriate I think
it's best that are
appropriations are made through
the transparent and regular
process of appropriating but I
disagree with Senate bill
thirteen and its companion house
bill seventeen because I do not
believe that questions of social
justice and equity our.
Stratis issues to this debate I
do not believe that those are
issues that need to be swept
aside or that are not essential
to being addressed in this
legislation so the legislation
that Senator Campos and I
present to you mimics the
expungement and released
provisions of the house bill but
the legislation we propose goes
one degree further in addition
to restructuring the criminal
penalties for simple possession
of cannabis the legislation also
restructures the criminal
penalties for simple possession
of all controlled substances
making the simple possession the
act simply processing even the
revenue residue of a controlled
substance a misdemeanor instead
of a fourth degree felony the
best data that we can collect
and it's taking quite a bit of
time Mr chairman because through
this process I have learned that
we do not have the capacity to
really get good data about our
prison population.
and as we consider that criminal
justice data continuing the work
by Representative Eli and
Justice Travis I think we need
to start seriously connecting
the data sets within the
department of corrections with
that broader continuum but the
best data that we can collect is
that New Mexico spends nearly a
hundred million dollars a year.
Let that sink in nearly a
hundred million dollars a year
incarcerating in state prison
members of our families and
communities who suffer with
addiction and whose highest
level of felonious offense is
the simple possession of a
controlled substance.
Those persons would be better
served by being treated with a
misdemeanor being kept in their
local communities and being
adjudicated through the
magistrate for much metropolitan
point.
Lastly Mr chairman.
What I submit to the committee
as we begin the conversation
moving forward is that there are
important elements of Senator
portals legislation
that should be considered
specifically this zero
tolerance.
Revisions I really want to
commend Senator Pirtle for
really coming to the table in a
non partisan way which is I
think how we should approach
this issue to try and come up
with good policy and so I do
think that there are some
important elements of his
legislation that that merit
serious discussion that's my
initiatives.
What I think makes the most
sense Mr chairman.
Though is because the house bill
has already gone through the
process is that Senator Campos
is in my bill is basically
merged into house bill twelve I
think they are the most similar
both in values in their approach
as I mentioned neither bill has
been arbitrate plant captain are
there bill has an arbitrary a
license clap both bills look at
social justice as essential to
this proposal and not something
that's extraneous or something
that can be quote dealt with by
rural.
so I think it makes both I think
it makes sense to table Senate
bill thirteen I think that the
essential elements of that bill
have been adjudicated already in
the house and the house is set
that is not the approach the
house is willing to agree to and
I I don't see it worth a
tremendous amount of the
Senate's with the tremendous
amount of the Senate's time to
rehash.
Those debates especially in
light of the data I've discussed
today and so I think between
Senator portals Bill Senator
Campos bill my bill and house
bill twelve there is there is
growing consensus
I think that there is consensus
at this point Mr chairman but
there should be no plant cap or
license cap
I will yield now to Senator
Campos I've taken twelve minutes
and I yield to him thank you Mr
chairman but I wanted to focus
on the details and find the
committee as much information to
facilitate this comparative
discussion as possible thank
you.
Thank you Senator Candelaria
Senator Campos thank you very
much Mr chairman of course
members of the committee and
individuals who are online this
morning listening to the
concerns the issues and of
course the attributes these
bills bring forward I first of
all want to thank you compliment
Center comes and ideas for.
Educating the as we go along not
only in terms of cannabis but in
terms of as we work together and
more backgrounds are the
simulate when it comes to
economics and dealing directly
if you will was business so
within that he provided of
course the quantitative.
I'm an offer a little bit of the
qualitative when it comes to of
the realize experiences.
About twenty five years ago when
I was working with the National
Guard we had a program that was
entitled stand down we went
across the state of New Mexico
and urging people to just say
no.
When I served as mayor of the
city of Santa Rosa was also the
police chief and within that as
I continue to see people our
schools you will our created
instruction in essence what
would happen to them is their
careers were damaged it created
if you will a loss of income
loss of stature in the
community.
And as we move forward of course
other issues dealing with things
like illness and and then of
course in them supporting their
families so the real life pieces
are that as senator kind of
ideas so eloquently pointed out
as we move forward what we want
to do is to ensure that we have
a safe product quality product
that we want to ensure that the
supply and demand is met but as
we move forward that there will
be a few wealthy proper
monitoring so that all the
safeguards are going to be in
place as we do move forward and
what for so that with our
population we continue with a
healthy population we continue
if you will to consider message
to diversify and stabilize our
economy so we can build stronger
budgets for years to come and in
particularly for the out years.
With all those things being said
I just leave you with a couple
of comments.
With what Senator Candelaria is
talking about with the issues
that we are bringing forward
we're very cognisant of what
needs to happen within that as
we bring the bring for us
together to create a piece of
legislation that definitely will
take us forward what we're
looking at is number one to
ensure that with supply and
demand that that is going to be
helping context when we move
forward in terms of taxation
that there will be an
equalization or inequity peace
within their so that the
benefactors are the people of
New Mexico county and city
governments and state government
as well when it comes to health
and safety that we collaborated
we coordinate with the O. H.
with DHS with our school systems
with so many people that are
very much invested within the
future of what we're talking
about.
Within that it means a lot of
work.
Oversight and most importantly
to ensure that the well being of
our population is protected.
Lastly in closing I would say
another one of the qualitative
or did that pieces is that here
in Las Vegas for about three
hours away from Colorado so with
that in my twenties I how are we
controlling if you will the
transportation and distribution
of said product of the cannabis
today that's why as we move
forward we not only need to be
competitors we also need to make
sure that the safeguards are in
place with that again I want to
thank senator Candelaria for
allowing me to be part of this
particular piece of legislation
and I want to thank you very
much for is to dredge as I move
forward to to better understand
what is needed when it comes to
recreational cannabis thank you
very much Mr chairman members of
the committee.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator Mr chairman and closing
there are two they're just to
comparative point so just leave
with the committee the first is
between the house and Senate
bill and we are consistent and
not imposing gross receipts tax
on medical sales I forgot to
mention that that's an important
part of this discussion I
believe the other part of this
is Mister chairman Senator
proposal for you transfers all
functions regarding the medical
cannabis program from the
department of health to the new
cannabis regulation Division I
do not believe there is really
strong reasons to leave the
medical cannabis registry with
the department of health.
and I think it just makes a lot
more sense for reasons I can
answer in questioning should
move that registry keys over to
the new cannabis regulation
division thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Senator Candelaria and
the Senator Campos we will now
move to Representative I have
your Martinez welcome to
dissent.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee I'm
joined today by my co sponsor
group sentiment at a metal who's
on this woman who will walk you
through some of the high level
because of our bill I just
wanted to take a quick minute to
thank you Mr chairman for
allowing us time at this hearing
you know so soon after passing
the house I'm also want to
recognize the work of of
everybody involved
in in this effort including
Representative Lujan Senator
Candelaria Senator Ivey Soto
Senator Pirtle
look you know I think we all
share one goal and that is to
get a bill to the governor for
his signature and we're all
committed to working together
over the next few days to ensure
that we get a good bill up to
the governor finally Mr chairman
and members of the committee you
know we we we do have to a I do
have to mention the historical
nature of what we're about to do
you know as I said on the floor
last night this is a big deal
this is a big industry that
we're about to create and we get
the chance to design what the
industry will look like ahead of
time that hasn't happened with
the other big industry in New
Mexico right whether it's oil
and gas or any other industry
here we're usually playing catch
up right or regulations are
playing catch up in this case we
are designing it from scratch
and I think that that's a really
positive thing that's part of
the reason why so complicated
you know that's why most of
these bills are over a hundred
pages long
you know it's it's it's a big
deal
but I do want to elevate
Senator Candelaria as work on
this issue
as as he mentioned Senator three
sixty three is a very very
aligned to what we're doing our
bill is very light to what he's
doing and I also want to elevate
the good work of Senator Pirtle.
I don't know how many of you
remember but the the first time
cannabis passed the chamber of
the legislature it was a it was
a.
Eight
it was work that the that
Senator Pirtle and and myself
and Representative Maestas
Representative Daymon Ely and
that senator Morris got that
bill off the floor you pretty
dramatic fashion I might just so
you know all of you have great
ideas and and it's it's just a
real honor to be able to present
our bill in front of you here
today I'm a pass it on to my co
sponsor to walk us through some
of the highlights and that again
thank you for the opportunity so
chairman and senators.
Thank you a.
Thank you Representative
Martinez no move to
Representative book Romero.
Thank you Senator Shendo thank
you members of the committee and
all of the sponsors in cannabis
legislation this is an exciting
time and again nothing new here
so I don't want to be
duplicative of what I think
senator Candelaria covered in
much of the similarities in our
bill I did just want to touch on
why we feel that this that we
have a very strong piece of
legislation here and what our
bill does cover so course where
we are New Mexico right now we
are desperate for
diversification in our economy
our bill provides for a robust
opportunity in an equity
equitable way allowing for both
urban and rural residents to
access this new opportunity and
of course we're actually
targeting a communities that
have been disadvantage not only
by the criminalization of
cannabis but of course being
able to ensure that the every
New Mexicans who wants to be in
this business can.
Reducing the harm that comes
from the criminalization of
cannabis it is you seen
throughout our bill again we do
set up Senator funds that have
racial equity components
protections for those would
incriminate t's finally we state
the reason believe for saving
the state money in the long run
when we look at tax and we put
in place a very sound regulatory
component as far as making sure
that we keep this product out of
hands of children but also
reinforce our support for public
safety health and safety
initiatives throughout and and
of course consumer safety
Senator and
Those members of the committee
so what you'll see through our
our bill is way which is what we
learned from the thirty five
states to legalize medical
cannabis in the fifteen states
have legalized recreational
cannabis is that we need to
really focus in on racial equity
and protection for the medical
cannabis program in our state so
we'll have we've removed at
gross receipts tax from our
medical cannabis program which
is consistent with our values as
New Mexicans and not taxing
Medicine
they set up a patient's subsidy
program for low income medical
cannabis patients and of course
as I touched on we have this
community reinvestment fund to
support communities of color
who've been disproportionately
affected we removed the earmarks
however consistent with the
values of we believe and and
this Senate and ensure that we
can focus on how we build up of
the in from the industry from
the bottom up.
we have two separate license
tracks in our bill of a
corporate and my group business
license and we of course want to
support New Mexican owned
businesses and producers but we
don't exclude entirely the
possibility of outside capital
coming into the state being that
our entrepreneurial community
has always struggled with that
so very strategic in that way
about it as well.
I'm again the bill would create
a very smart and highly
regulated tax system part of
that when we regulate we want to
ensure we know what the product
is where is now with the illicit
market we don't know what is
what is in a cannabis product
are touted to be a cannabis
products this regulatory system
would ensure that not only when
someone the by the account of
this product nose with Senate
but the tax revenue that comes
into that we we would be we're
very strategic about ensuring
that we can tap
take away the market share from
the illicit market and the sweet
spot from all of the research
and again from the fifteen
states and Washington DC have
legalized is about sixteen to
twenty percent so we set up our
our tax structure eight percent
excise tax and then of course as
a senator Candelaria talked
about and municipality and
county tax up to four percent.
And then of course gross
receipts on top of that so we
just want to also just highlight
the fact that we do have very
conservative estimates of the
tax revenue that we do believe
coming in you know three hundred
million in sales translating to
about fifty to sixty million in
tax revenue for the state
approximately eleven million
jobs I'm sorry eleven thousand
jobs I don't want to overstate
it and we don't have people even
if it's a state but eleven
thousand jobs but heck you know
everyone's invited we're very
very welcoming community and
then of course no plate no plan
account based on the fact that
We want to protect the medical
program understand the demands
for first are the medicine and
then ensure that we we set up a
robust system so that we're not
limiting production before we
can ensure that everybody gets
access to that medicine I look
for to questions and thank you
Representative Martinez he spoke
for three hours on the floor
last night about this so we're
very excited and motivated to
get this through your chamber
Senator Shendo thank you for the
time.
Thank you Representative Romero
so at this time we're gonna go
ahead and take public testimony.
Well
we're.
So so depend on how it goes
right now.
Would.
Committee what what I like to do
is just allow folks to speak
once you know and reference
which bills your supporting and
not supporting of in the
interest of time so I appreciate
that and we will.
You folks the.
About a minute and a half.
Mr chair.
A question for you Sir.
Yes Representative.
My my what we're able to
participate may they be included
in public comment.
Yes they can.
Thank you and that would be
Rachel.
And.
And your and land good one.
That's the one part.
Thank you.
Okay.
All right so the car if we can
the.
Thank you Representative Lujan
if those members who you just
mentioned can raise their hands
at the end of this public
comment I will call on.
Now for those members who
registered to speak in favor of
Senate bill thirteen first up I
have in favor Munoz Stein.
Moving on I have Katie Cravens.
Yes hello and thank you so much
my name is Katie Cremins.
Owner of the tax compliance and
bill Manson P. dot com I want to
thank sponsors Senator Ivey Soto
I'm in support of SB thirteen
Canada cannabis regulation Act.
the state has to maintain the
ability to responsibly manage
production the unlimited
unlimited plan account and the
other cannabis bills cannot be
permitted in my opinion it only
drives a black market and I
believe it is a public safety
matter to keep cannabis
distributed legally and safely
in a licensed facility.
It would be dangerous to not
allow industry participation on
the cannabis policy advisory
task force we have a wealth of
experience and lessons from the
medical cannabis program and
other professionals like myself
who offer experience from states
who have been participating in
adult use cannabis for many
years we really need to rely on
those who understand this
industry and how it can best
grow New Mexico thank you for
the opportunity to speak.
Thank you very much next up we
have Lydia as **** a Shannon.
Moving on we have Fernando
Trujillo.
Madam chair and then recently
became speak today thank you.
Thank you very much next up we
have Larry love.
Hello can you hear me yes go
ahead thank you very much I'm I
just want to say that the
protection of the medical
programs is very very important
that actually yesterday I tried
to find some suppositories very
very sick medical cannabis
patient and was very hard to
find they have low doses and
medical products have already
started to disappear off the
shelves the other thing so
protecting medical and and
hopefully giving a choice to
these Allen PPVs to either be
medical or rack the ones that
use medical we will know that
they're in it for the medical
patients the other thing is home
grow is very important and what
iterations legal said a few
weeks ago about kids are.
You know getting involved at a
young age I understand that
would but it shows in other
states that children aren't
smoking more cannabis since
legalization protect medical
home grows important thank you
very much.
Thank you very much next.
We have Brian Rogers.
Hi good morning the committee
members and distinguished
community guest we very much
appreciate the opportunity to
speak with you here today and
we're here today speaking for a
small family farm in eastern New
Mexico we acquired this land is
part of the homestead act in
nineteen oh six which is Free
State and we're now on the
fourth fifth and sixth
generations are involved on the
same piece of land in this
community and we're here today
not to support SB thirteen nor
any of the Senate bill
specifically but to support
house bill twelve which you just
heard about you know for
hundreds and potentially
thousands of years indigenous
peoples local communities and
small family farms here in the
land of New Mexico we've known
how to productively and
sustainably develop the land on
which we live you know cannabis
has always been a small part of
that story.
However living off the land has
become harder and harder if not
impossible in an industrialized
the New World cannabis
legalization in New Mexico find.
To change that story so we're
here supporting HB twelve we
wanted to respectfully thank all
of the people that have been
involved in this the governor's
working group agency Kaltenbach
at the DPA Representative
Martinez Santo Lujan and others
we believe the micro Business
framework is incredibly
important and if the micro
businesses can be capped at
ninety nine plants we believe
that could potentially be
expanded two hundred ninety nine
or two hundred ninety nine in a
meaningful way.
Thank you very much.
We have called in.
Mr chair members of the
committee thank you for having
this discussion Munnings colt
and dean of just speaking as a
private citizen today
I support cannabis legalization
in general all the bills have
good aspects and some concerning
aspects the broader aspects I
want to bring up of concern are
the unlimited plant counts that
would.
On a disproportionately favor
out of state according to Big
box cannabis coming in we want
to see you know support New
Mexico businesses New Mexico
growers develop New Mexico's
economy not send canvas profits
out of state.
The second concern is
there is still.
Penalties of felony and
misdemeanor penalties for
violations of these bills I
think that still holds on to
this prohibition mindsets I
would respectfully suggest civil
penalties.
Or some sort of
sentencing guidelines.
Historically speaking it has
been people of color.
The local socio economic status
with suffered the worst
sentencing for nonviolent
of canvas violations so I'd
suggest some sort of
review on those criminal
penalties thank you.
Thank you very much next up we
have the needs your Romero econ
for.
We have Jason Barker.
Good morning committee chair and
committee members I am speaking
in favor of house bill twelve
and Senate bill three sixty
three.
I think as the bill Sanchez
clearly put those are the two
best options for legalization.
These are the only two bills
truly addressing the adequate
supply issues currently in the
medical program.
Allowing social justice
protecting medical users while
enabling the state to see an
economic benefit.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
That includes all of the members
of the public who registered in
advance are there any members of
the public who wish to speak at
this time please raise your hand
in the future or just raise your
hand.
Then we wonder.
Good morning chairman sent to
committee members my name is
spend the winter in the
executive director of the New
Mexico cannabis chamber of
commerce the state having a
mechanism for managing
production is not the same as
setting artificial plant counts
in statute in fact it's quite
the opposite it allows for
production management to be
closely monitored by the state
we know that unlimited
production especially in a novel
recreational market has huge
unintended consequences in other
states Oregon California for
example the illicit market has
been permitted to run wild the
vaping crisis from a few years
ago was a direct result of over
production too much legal
cannabis was produced there
wasn't a consumer base for it
and it dumped into the illegal
market which then spread
untested dangerous drugs across
the country.
Organ last year was forced to go
back and pass legislation to
create a way for that state to
manage production noting that
and we need to do the same for
our state.
Senate bill thirteen stipulates
for a yearly independent study
to help maintain market
equilibrium producing enough but
not too much unlimited
production limited.
A limited production will make
it impossible for small and
medium businesses to enter and
be successful in the industry it
will essentially create massive
inequity and on balance in a new
industry in New Mexico thank
you.
Thank you very much next up we
have Rachel Spiegel.
Good morning chairman members of
the committee I would like to
speak in advocacy for the
consolidation that allows for
industry representation within
the advisory committee right now
the industry voices being left
out of any proposed legislation
that allows for Committee
engagement and advisory
committees need to hear from all
the stakeholders it's extremely
important that we come together
and that we do not create an
echo chamber as we derive policy
that has to meet not just
theoretical but actual practice
within the environment and in in
the field and I think that it
would be short sighted to create
an association an advisory
committee I mean that does not
engage with with that that kind
of this chamber of commerce or
operators within the space thank
you.
Thank you very much next up we
have land good men.
Your.
Got it.
Thank you madam chair.
And that members committee fully
support what with data and then
the insurance said and what
Rachel Spiegel said that only
takes time to repeat that.
I think the key is I have a I
received one of the first
licenses in New Mexico I'm the
oldest producer certainly
chronologically at that seventy
seven but also one of the first
five right in the regional round
of two thousand nine.
Have worked closely for all
those years with the department
with the secretaries with the
deputy secretaries with drug
policy to craft what we've slide
rule and regulation the best
medical cannabis program in the
country we need to be flexible
we had to change constantly to
move things and change things as
it was shifting I think it's
critical absolutely critical
that we don't Mexico to fight
into statute now what must be
flexible to change in the future
in order to create a stable
market that does not create
access to provide and that is
well regulated we need to come
together there's good points and
all these bills we can make this
work but we must have industry
representation when we
consolidate these bills from
professionals to understand the
consequences.
Of of the of of what we're doing
so thank you very much
appreciate your time.
Thank you very much next up we
have Jordan Wellington.
Thank you committee chair
committee members my name is
Jordan Wellington I'm part
partner in the firm yes
strategies we advise governments
industry associations campaigns
of businesses on cannabis policy
across the country and
internationally
we're here on behalf of Maggie's
farm company I've worked with
since I left the marijuana
enforcement division in Colorado
in two thousand fourteen
Maggie's farm is is a unique
cannabis business as a matter
get outdoors and harvest as per
year you're certified clean
great basically eating organic
we can't attic due to federal
prohibition.
We're incredibly excited about
being able by the New Mexico
market as a family business we
believe that the southern
Colorado and New Mexico region
is the best we have all division
in the entire country and firmly
believe that one day New Mexico
will be a leader in the cannabis
and right I'm not only supplying
the product New Mexicans who
posted over legalization
potentially naturally.
Maggie's farm has been in
Colorado's programs used from
the second access.
And it's been a long leader in
the program we would like to
note are support for H. B.
twelve today we think this is
the perfect blend of drug policy
and social justice reform at
which is a critical component to
legalizing marijuana we also
we're strong believer that the
timeline in that bill
prioritizes patient access so
it's reasonable timelines for
regulators and would allow us to
start cultivating our crop next
summer at changing those
timelines would not only harm
patients but also harm
businesses and.
Thank you very much next up we
have Emily Kaltenbach.
Mr chair members of the
committee.
Are you.
We are healthy and the
organization your legislative
representative over one.
Or members we've been working on
the application or maps.
The reason we are aware of the
blind.
Is that we need to right the
wrongs of what the
probation on communities of
color New Mexico of local
communities you need to make
sure that we stand that
responsible regulated system
The tax our roads for children
we need to protect the medical
cannabis patients we need to
include vital protections
against discrimination for
people who use cannabis like
losing health benefits
for their children by using
number eight the people we need
to make sure that there is
comprehensive reality based drug
education in this bill are we
need to make sure we're second
are adults on responsible use
and we need to make sure that
we're setting up a system that
favors small business and family
farmers in the state when I want
to note that in house bill well
my business licenses get a head
start that is critical we also
need to make sure that people
who have been charged with
cannabis in the license in the
industry I think there are
benefits are across the bills
but I need I want to look for
most important date.
Is that we thank you very much.
We have Jerry Ortiz EP now.
You are muted morning.
Chairman and committee members
thank you for for taking
comments from the public on
these issues like many of you
I've been getting lots and lots
of emails on the subject and I'm
always surprised by how many
people seem to think that by
legalizing we are going to be
seeing something new interviews
into our communities that we are
introducing dangerous drugs into
our communities.
Cannabis is here has been here
will always be here one form or
another what we're trying to do
with this legislation.
Is not X. then the use money to
regulate the use make sure the
people who use it have
protections as to the quality of
and she ended up in the hands of
the distributors now for the
drug cartels the gangs the the
black market we would like is
for this to be recognized for
what it is something else can
use responsibly keep it out of
the hands of kids and their
provisions in these built into
them.
Make sure that in the future
this in administrative can
really flourish.
I'm really delighted to see the
efforts in consolidating the
good points from all these bills
something we can pass on the
Senator very soon thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you very much.
Elected members of the public
who wish to speak on behalf of
Senate bill thirteen Senate bill
two eighty eight our Senate bill
three sixty three at this time.
Thank you very much that
concludes public comment at this
time.
All right thank you to current
school at this time we will go
to the committee I have Senator
Padilla.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
to all of the sponsors and
both the Senate and the house
and what a tremendous amount of
work you you've all done and and
I've been on the multi year
exercises with legislation as
well and that's always a fun
time for all so thank you very
much for your hard work that way
I do have some some questions on
So I heard earlier about that a
council that may be coming
together with one or two of
these pieces of legislation and
there's some concern on
the ability to have industry
participate are there types of
industries that you're you're
including or or or not including
can you walk me through what
this counsel might look like and
who would have access to it who
would be appointed to it who
would do the appointing and and
how how does that work because I
think that having industry
involved is going to be super
important here I'll be able to
bring resources capital
etcetera.
Where once take that Mr chairman
Mr chairman and senator all
distorted I think Representative
Martinez on the details and
Representative Romero but in
broad strokes I believe Senate
bill three sixty three and house
bill twelve.
Contemplate that the
appointments this committee are
made by the director of the
newly established cannabis
regulation division.
I I have no I mean be clear I
think the senator has an
excellent point I think he's
correct I think that for me the
sweet spot though is ensuring
that we have different market
participants but not
specifically enumerates certain
trade organizations right I
think we need to have a kind of
an easy open playing field for
who gets to Representative
industry before the commission
and I yield to to Representative
Martinez Mr chair.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you senator yeah you know I
think I think the the the the
way we've structured the the
advisory I think is
in a way that reflects I think
the needs of public health
ideas to continue to inform how
this how these new industry
takes off I think the the the
question of having it is
representative I mean I think
that's a fair the at the fair
question read and I I think it
in our bill we actually added
and one of the socks we added.
You know somebody with expertise
in business economic development
Dr partnership because that's an
important voice to have but I
think we would also you know I
don't think it's out of the
question to ask somebody who
comes from either the medical
cannabis industry itself or
generally speaking the cannabis
industry you know including you
know the the recreational
industry so you know to to me I
think it's it's an important
piece I don't think it's fatal
one way or the other quite
frankly and and I think that is
this process moves forward
that's probably something that
we would take into account.
And just to add to that we have
wrestled with Mr chair the idea
that a licensed person would be
on the board I think that's
where we have sort of figured
out we were where we might want
to draw the line where they
actually could benefit because
they were part of this council
and a and a license holder we
might want to at least kind of
set that or for something like
that at that we would love to
hear from this body regarding
their thoughts about it as well
in closing Mr chairman I'll just
note for the Senator the Supreme
Court United States actually
recently addressed this sort of
issue about the composition of
boards that regulate a regulated
industry what the Supreme Court
said is that you know regulated
participants can certainly sit
on that regulating board they
simply cannot comprise a
majority of the votes.
Thank you Mr chair I would I
would add that I am very happy
that everyone having this
conversation in the quality this
is something that needed and to
point out that Senate bill
thirteen is the only bill that
would allow for
For that in a report on that on
that committee there
again I do think it's important
that we're having conversation
it just shows that we are
willing to come to a compromise
have a question thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman and I'm
not
What Senator Senator Stewart
with the I I believe Senator
Pirtle yes yes the time and go
ahead thank you Mr chairman
thank you senator this is a
quite interesting having this
many people talking about so
many different things so I'm
just a waiting my mic turned and
I appreciate the opportunity if
you look at that Senate bill two
eighty eight starting at the
bottom of page eight is where
within my piece of legislation
we describe what the cannabis
control commission will look
like and we found it we thought
it important to involve the
three departments that are going
to be involved in the regulation
of cannabis and so we have the
secretary environments because
these are going to be products
that people are ingesting and so
that's their their expertise but
it's in an advisory role we also
have the secretary of health
were member in an advisory role
the secretary of the New Mexico
department of agriculture in by
re roll and we thought we
thought important to ensure that
the bureaucrats we're there to
voice their concerns with the
they didn't have a final vote
and how these things were going
to be controlled it's a five
member public member appointed
board and we only require that
three of them have of certain
backgrounds one is commercial
cultivation of cannabis non
cannabis crops one member who is
currently or has previously
served as a certified law
enforcement officer one member
who is currently was formally
licensed pursuant to the medical
practice act for the osteopathic
medicine act in the last two is
is really up to the governor to
ensure that the that whoever the
governor is appoint somebody
with expertise but we don't want
to limit ourselves on who the
governor can and cannot point so
we want to leave that open and
that would be open to people
with expertise in in in the
industry thank you Mr chair
thank you Senator but.
The it used to be on the floor
yeah thank you Mr chairman I
guess might be all of these guys
the appointees are the boards I
don't think I've heard that
movie maker I'll be back start.
Mr chairman that would be the
director of the cannabis
regulation division at least on
the proposal we set forth.
Nodding Senator Pirtle
Representative Lujan.
Mr chair and in Senator Padilla
money is the governor with the
advice and consent of the
Senate.
Senator it might it might RLD.
Okay interesting
so.
Follow up and to Senator Pirtle
and really I guess SB thirteen
point on.
I'm sure that someone with this
right now I see so we could send
our committee analyst by the way
that some the nominal I want to
highlight her Senator Mr
chairman Kelly did some about
that some fabulous analysis
force thank you this is very
helpful this is one of the
issues that I'm really on the
fence on I'm still let all the
sponsors know that I think it's
pretty well known that I'm I've
been on the fence for a couple
years on this issue trying to
figure out what to do with it
a lot of reasons but I I think
somebody else is that the border
the industry representation is
is and two eighty eight is not
required but it could happen is
that.
You don't require that there be
industry Representative but but
it representation but it's it's
open it could occur if you need
if you if the governor so chose
to.
The to appoint someone from
industry.
Mr chair and senator that's
absolutely correct and as
Senator Candelaria stated so the
the with on a five member board
we have to members who we don't
specify what their background
has to be and we would expect
the governor to appoint somebody
with expertise on to the board
to ensure that we have the best
work possible and and as we've
seen on the rules committee
every single governor that I've
experienced does a very good job
of ensuring that the the proper
people with the proper expertise
whether you agree with
everything that that they do or
not has expertise in the area
that they're being appointed to
and we thought it important as
it has big of an issue as as
regulation of cannabis is that
we create a new board or a new
commission that has the advice
and consent of the Senate
whereas within our L. D. if the
secretary of regulation
licensing does not have to go in
front of the Senate for
confirmation so we thought it
important that the Senate
maintaining some oversight as
this moves forward thank you Mr
chair.
Mister chairman Senator Padilla
if I can just chime in real
quick I actually think Senator
Pirtle is right on this and I
think I'm just gonna sort of
endorsed this idea that the
membership of the commission.
I think we do need to have space
for industry as I said Mr
Chairman I just don't believe
that we need to cherry pick who
is that industry Representative
by designating a specific trade
organization and it needs to be
left up to merit and I think the
idea that a body that has such
regulatory authority over what
is really going to be north of
the billion dollar industry very
quickly I think the Senate
should probably be involved in
that thank you Mr well we're all
sinners I'm sure we all.
Yeah yep and I don't know
Representative Lujan one time I
was not.
Madam speaker.
Yes thank you Senator I just
wanted to to add on and Senate
bill thirteen
the committee consists of the
following individuals at says to
membership who work as law
enforcement officers one
representing the state one from
the local government here
Representative from the
department of health three and
medical cannabis licensee.
Four two commercial cannabis
licensees I am a member of the
judiciary correct recommended by
the Supreme Court number six a
representative from the New
Mexico department of agriculture
seven a representative from the
department of environment eight
if you members recommended by
the speaker of the house.
And you the number of my night
two members appointed by the
president pro tem.
And and a member.
Representing cannabis consumers
and eleven A. commercial
cannabis microbit.
That.
Yeah that's what the
representative there thank you
for the question thank you very
much so
Governor going to be able to
help me and and and wipe out the
entire working reappoint who
they would want to do I I don't
want to if we decide to go down
this road Mr chairman we decide
to make this thank you hi my son
all the time this decision we
are working your family every
now and then
design armistice and I just
would hate to just jerky
industry around every time the
governor.
How does that relate each wanted
nor all these.
Governor in four years it is
always part of this action
alright somebody off and and
just all the pieces of here all
the messes with the industry in
New Mexico so how does that
relate your call is.
Nobody to.
Well Mister chairman I think I
think I think the senator has a
point and I think if if we are
concerned about preventing those
sort of wild shifts I think one
of the best ways we do that is
by most likely staggering the
terms to some degree on whatever
board has a regulatory authority
say crosses over given it for
eight ministrations to some
degree and I do want to endorse
I think in light of the concerns
you're raising Senator portals
proposal that the appointments
B. by nomination and consents
that that has some merit for us
to discuss.
Because we've that those issues
essentially during the Senate
confirmation process as a
Senators been part of that
process for now nine years with
all of us chugging along thank
you Mr.
Your Mr chair Senator I wanted
to find it specific right spoke
with so I apologize for not
answering right away but on page
nine
subparagraphs C. hello member
shall serve staggered four year
terms except for the initial
public members appointed to the
commission the governor.
Hopper the governor shall select
two members whose initial terms
are two years and three members
who initial terms are four years
and so they will serve out those
terms and and depending on which
ones become available or
sometimes our our resignations
in the governor can then appoint
someone to finish the term but
then we'll have to reappoint
would that turn this over is how
it works on other boards and
commissions that the governor
has the authority to appoint
members to.
Are you on your.
Yes Senator share a center.
I would I I liked what Senator
Pirtle dissent in the staggering
I think that would be something
acceptable to be put into this
approach I think it you know
Senate bill thirteen have a
pretty balanced approach but I
liked it she includes a
staggering thing that that
expropriate thank you.
Thank you
Representative Martinez
Representative I don't want to
comment on the job.
Mr chair Senator we are on page
nineteen of our bill.
I'm hearing some of the comments
today about you know designating
the length of time some of the
inclusion of additional members
I think we we're very much open
to that we you know we can look
at the list I would prefer not
to read it starts on page like
the bottom of page nineteen
through page twenty and twenty
one about what that Division
would be responsible for however
hearing some of the discussion
surrounding appointment who's in
charge and the length of time we
do not have anything other than
our director pointing but we
don't specify lengths of time
but we are absolutely wanting to
be more specific about that.
Thank you all Mr Chairman
Sanchez I just again I don't
want to jerk around the industry
if we don't you know if we if we
can set this up the right way to
begin with I'm gonna tell you
that I think you all know that
of the six or seven major swim
lanes and I swim in the
legislature CYFD is simple and
that organization district
around every time the governor
comes and goes and and I'm just
doing my level best to reform
the heck out of that place and
make it something that is is
sustainable on the children of
New Mexico forever but but what
we have a cabinet secretary come
and just going the complete
opposite direction we got no
traction I would hate for this
massive decision we're about to
make all right into that if we
can avoid at this time I'm gonna
move on Mr chairman to another
subject but but before I do that
I just want to say that I would
like for all of you but I don't
think we're gonna vote on this
Mr chairman collects that basic
correct.
But yes that's correct that
we're not gonna take action
today we're gonna have all the
sponsors get together and bring
it back next.
Bring something to the
committee.
I don't know if it's gonna be
one through whatever they're
going to have to decide that
with the fact excitedly okay
yeah you know you all know that
twenty days in the legislative
session I'm currently starting
on your on your but I would like
for you all maybe call with some
point in talking about this
industry isn't permissible for
an industry Greitens three fire
department is working on this
council that is a question is
wrong in the answer I I need to
find a way to get that done
because I'm not having St Paul
Biderman support is going to be
at that level the success or
failure
On.
Whether seven some years you
know you know I'm I'm I'm a
business owner is closed in on
it this is quite some time now
and when we talk about taxes are
going to.
Have the state I don't buy that
that discussion of this much are
you all right now discussion I
had with several of you along
the way others this.
The reason I say that is you
take part in the neighborhood as
an example you all and there's a
four way stop.
You're going into the
neighborhood every night you're
leaving the neighborhood every
day.
One gas station on one of those
work orders and it's so
convenient just to stop that one
gas station on the way home the
way on the way out of your house
one.
What yes station your your bond
claim in that area and they're
able to charge whatever the heck
they want and they're able to
right now.
out of our out of control not
regions people are going to go
down you'll find a way to get
gas in the car we're back on.
But suddenly want another gas
station pumps other corner
opposite about and suddenly you
know there's no competition here
suddenly prices down the price
Margalla gaps in the Alamo no
problem I'm not buying it this
is going to be a massive you
know it's going to be around one
I do agree with there are just
on on that it's going to be what
we are maybe purported to be
concerned about that because I
was not going to have to deal
with we.
Not everybody is in the string
right way we're gonna have all
some of the issues going out as
a result of having gas station
there so I would say the first
gas stations probably Colorado
you are metal ones and the
second gas stations by the New
Mexico or that's going to go
please help me feel more
comfortable this is not just
going to be something that turns
into an operation get your I
don't really see and
Representative and realize
Representative.
Some Mr chairman and senator if
it's appropriated you know I I
would really appreciate if we
can hear from your committee
analysts miss o'donnell on this
issue.
This will be great also as as
the center Padilla mentioned I
hope everybody got the committee
on her.
In a real good chart together
that kinda sorta out the three
of Senate bills and what they do
and don't be so quick to good
matrix so with that Kelly are
you on.
Yes Mr chairman members of the
committee US senator Candelaria
I are I am on of I I and I and I
agree with senator Candelaria
that the our estimates of the
potential tax impact of the
legalizing cannabis under under
the rules there stop order under
the tax schemes are spelled out
and they're sensually very
similar tax schemes and all the
bills well enough three sixty
three HB twelfth and H. B.
thirteen the tax mechanisms are
very similar I I spent a number
of years working on demand
estimates for recreational and
medical cannabis in New Mexico
and I think we both really
robust model of the market the
potential market
and I think that the the
estimates that can at least the
original just came out of TRD
and LESC of of the fiscal impact
for these provisions were.
We're about fifty percent at two
low
I think they've been revised
since then at least one of them
has they come up a bit but
really.
Looking at the experience of
other states and and and the
performance of this demand model
over the last couple of years
because we built this several
years ago and it has perfectly
track to the increase in medical
card holder purse and the size
of the medical market with those
with those factors in mind I
think it's not unreasonable to
assume that that
Recreo tax on adult use cannabis
would in the first year generate
about twenty five million
dollars I believe that that the
current estimate the last one I
saw for up to the LFC was closer
to twelve.
But I think it's two twenty five
is a reasonable expectation for
the first year and I think by
your I would be open to the
hundred hundred fifty million
dollar range.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Candelaria in Kalyan yeah I just
want to right now we this work
and we really need this kind of
stuff I would not more.
And you please coach others on
getting.
so when I see the houses here
and I'm looking at no exempt
medical G. are you going all use
your the
we that number I'm not
disagreeing with you about this
under what year were wants to.
What what what we have two
eighty eight I'm sorry three
sixty three.
Thirteen on the Senate side
sounding.
Our medical why did that come
into play in this your.
Mr Chairman
Let me just address it real
quick from the tax structure
proposed in three sixty three
which is Mr Donald mentioned is
pretty much the same as house
bill twelve
under Senate bill three sixty
three the sale of cannabis
commercial sale of cannabis
state gross receipts tax would
apply to that in the
recreational market
the state would get about forty
five point one two five and
local governments would get
their local share of G. R. T. on
that transaction right in
addition the state would impose
a nine percent.
state excise tax which brings
effectively the state share of
taxes the state imposed tax on
every purchase to about ten
eleven twelve thirteen fourteen
point one two five percent the
structure also allows them to
local governments to impose
their own excise tax on top of
their local option gross
receipts tax of.
Three percent for cities and
three percent of counties.
Regarding the imposition of
gross receipts tax on the
medical program.
the court of appeals recently
ruled that and I believe
correctly that.
Medical cannabis and I am a
medical cannabis patient and I'm
gonna tested this with all
sincerity.
Well maybe for me cannabis is
just as important as my health
regimen as.
Going to the gym or other
medications so the court of
appeals observed that cannabis
purchased under the legionary
compassionate use act is
medicine it's no different right
and so since we don't tax
medicine with G. R. T. the court
of appeal said the state cannot
impose gross receipts tax on
medical cannabis so the approach
taken by house bill twelve and
three sixty three is consistent
with that guidance so the the
sales in the medical would
continue to be untaxed.
Mr chair Senator
I think your your questions very
spot on in in the the director
has been clear that the medical
cannabis program
needs to be protected or is that
is something that every single
sponsor understands to be very
important hi I have not seen
this is on wheels
overview but I I.
Pretty sure.
Of the my bill does the same
thing keeping the tax off of
what has been decided to be
medicine for that reason so that
way if if it is for medical
reasons that the medical program
will continue to thrive and be
at an advantage because it is
taxed there is no tax whereas
the recreational cannabis now
which bill you choose is going
to be anywhere from thirteen to
twenty percent and so that's why
it's important to look at the
tax structure and how we do this
it's very important that we
maintain
that we want to put the illicit
market out of business and I
don't think we can do that if we
tax it to higher rate so I think
that's one of the very important
parts and the biggest
differences between all the
bills before you today thank you
Mr chair.
Thank you Mr chairman I don't
know.
Sierra metals.
The COVID.
Yeah Mister chairman Senator
buddy yeah that's a fantastic
question you know I think of as
I said in my opening remarks you
know the the taxing the taxing
framework is really important
and I agree with the the the the
the two other sponsors here in
school before me in in our bill
we we tweaked it a little bit in
house tax
so the numbers a little bit
different from from Santo kind
of that is built we we went from
nine percent to eight percent
state excise tax and an increase
the local excise tax to four
percent from three percent so
it's just a wash but it was a it
was a concession at the made to
local governments so that they
can access a little bit more
money the G. R. T. as you know
applies the same way so our tax
structure is right around the
twenty percent now why the
twenty percent you know we've
heard from experts from the tax
foundation which is a
nonpartisan tax policy think
tank presented a couple of
different times to the revenue
civilization Tax Policy
Committee and I believe to the
LFC as well I'm in their in
their analyses of states where
legalized adult use cannabis
twenty percent was a
recommendation for a framework
that raise enough revenue to
address some of the issues you
raised earlier.
But not in the but not so high
that it somehow keeps feeding
the less than market so you know
I think if if when this is all
said and done you know whatever
whatever bills forward if we can
stick to that twenty percent I
think we'll be in good shape
obviously as a legislature we
always have that taxing
authority right so in two three
five ten years whatever it might
be we might come back and adjust
up or down but for now twenty
percent seems to be that magic
number.
Or is permanent chairman if I
may just sorry Senator editing
interrupt I I I made a mistake
early.
I really apologize is Dr
o'donnell and she is so humble
that she doesn't but Dr on her
up on her soon but I feel really
crappy for not referring to our
buyer proper title because you
need she deserves it and she's
earned it the the only thing
I'll share with the senator is.
There are risks to the revenue
projection.
Issue right the Senators
absolute right.
I think that though we haven't
talked about what I think is the
most the most significant
downside risk to the revenues
the state of New Mexico can
generate from a recreational
market in the first five years
of implementation you know let's
look at that framework right.
We as I mentioned in my opening
New Mexico currently limits the
total number of cannabis plants
that a medical cannabis producer
can can grow to one thousand
seven hundred and fifty right
less than half for I believe
just about half of the thirty
four licensed producers actually
grow up to their one thousand
seven hundred and fifty so we
have a problem where the plant
count limit is inefficient in
the sense that it limits the
production of productive
producers right but has no
penalty for producers who are
growing.
The amount that we say we need
for the market place and so I
think the biggest threat to our
revenue is the fact that
industry has been artificially
prevented from building the sort
of supply chain the sort of
infrastructure and making this
sort of investment that it's
gonna take to put the number of
plants in the ground to have a
robust market to generate the
kind of revenue we're thinking
about and the one of the
proposals of Senate bill sixty
three three sixty three Senator
to address that risk factor is
it has a different
implementation date that removes
the plant count limit and
prevents any plant count limit
in the medical program
immediately why because we need
to allow those thirty four
producers the ability to start
building a market place if we
don't do that and if we just
create an artificial date in the
future where new rules come into
place we're starting.
You know it's a we're we're
behind the eight ball we've let
the race go forward so that's
one of the approaches my
proposal takes to address the
revenue concerns Senator that
you are very correctly pointing
out in the end the risk model I
think this is the major issue
though that is just not been
really discussed yet and.
Being a medical cannabis patient
being a medical cannabis lawyer
I will tell you that is where we
are going to stumble out of the
gate if we don't remove that
artificial limit now we are
setting ourselves up for
failure.
That
you thank you.
Senator and I I'd like to say
that again a lot of our our tax
information is aligned with the
bills but you address that
revenue to the Representative
that Senator Candelaria with
that I think that
and it's projections are much
lower than what we thought I
think that the issue here is as
the balance have
have that balance we have the
thank you.
By the based on.
I think that.
Anything by those projections
that it demonstrates the it
over.
Over producing over over
planting is that good back for a
long day but that you have one
gas station and then another gas
station comes along and then
there's the competition I think
that there's healthy competition
of million industry but I think
that we have to have a balanced
approach to pay attention to
that.
And that you are at a higher
grade.
The market in this state that
that thank you Mr chair.
The.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
pearl you one time and I didn't
know if you are not thank you Mr
chairman and senator these are
all great points
you know I think we've talked
about.
Angel revenues well how do you
calculate what the potential
revenue will be off of something
that sold illegally that nobody
knows how much volume is out
there but one thing I can tell
you is if if the state creates a
system that prices legal
cannabis out of the market we
will ensure that we don't
receive the revenues to help
battle the negative impacts of
that having legal recreational
cannabis can potentially happen
so as long as we stay focused as
as I mentioned in my opening
statements that the goal should
be to keep prices low key
competition high so that the
illicit market goes away we're
receiving a hundred percent of
the tax on all sales of cannabis
we want there to be zero illicit
market sales of cannabis I think
every every single sponsor would
agree that that's that's one of
the goals that you know that's
what we need to do and that's
why we're digging into the
policy and although there is
going to be revenue coming to
the state because of taxes I
think that's just a by product
of deciding whether or not this
is good policy for the state of
New Mexico now that being said
there's other things within my
legislation that will ensure
that we keep prices low in one
important thing is is access
into the market as we see with
the medical Kandace currently in
order to have access to the
market you have to build or rent
or lease a space just specific
for your products all over the
state so we see you know small
producers having to put a brick
and mortar everywhere what what
was important to to me whatever
crafting this is to have
competition so if you have a
dispensing license you're
required to sell
on consignment the products of
other people so that way gas
station to gas station you have
just one store will they.
ISIS will be kept low because
the competition will be high and
that the small producers will
have a way to get their products
into the market to ensure that
we keep prices high so that we
ensure that we keep the illicit
market out of business thank you
Mr chair Senator one form that
actually is what I'm a little
worried about so you know I
think without a limit on the
number of licenses house number
one on the number of plants or
whatever
Would you would you could
possibly wind up with is is
overtime restart your time
cornering the market and in the
large organization and over the
entire thank and I'm concerned
that they would be squeezing out
the entry level
or you know might not have all
capital thank you arm the big
whatever.
Someone make me feel better
about that very concerned about
that so Senator I think most
importantly what Senate bill but
house bill twelve dollars with
Senate bill three sixty three
does Mr chairman.
Is it allows for an unlimited
number of small producer
licenses and that is for the
testimony we actually heard from
the small producers today who
came from Rogers farms and you
know others that they're fine
with this model.
Because here's the reality New
Mexico needs a couple large
industrial scale players to meet
the market demand.
And then have a low barrier to
entry for everybody else right
and we don't keep them out and
by requiring those those those
sort of craft licenses of up to
ninety plants which let me just
provide some context if you're
doing an industrial grow you can
get about three point five
ounces of usable flower or plant
now how many grow cycles do you
have any here.
Maybe three point five most
likely for and I really want to
lift up Senator that the revenue
estimates in this economic
issues were raising.
Are are really based on economic
models bill by Dr o'donnell
right it's not like shooting in
the dark it's based upon
empirical data that we can see
in the medical cannabis program
right I just want to be very
very clear
Limitations do not benefit
patients I speak as a patient.
That count indications do not
benefit the market place because
we see that the price is too
high in New Mexico why because
we are the only state in the
country to use a plant count
limit to regulate cannabis no
other state in the country uses
that approach why.
Because instead of a monopoly
what you get is a duopoly you
get a very limited number of
firms to control the market
place.
They set the price and we are
trying to undo the duopoly right
now of the secondary market for
liquor licenses.
That's a prime example of what
happens.
Right duopoly is just as bad as
monocle.
So the folks who are advocating
with all due respect for plant
count limit limit on licenses as
a patient it has not worked for
patients.
As a senator I strongly
recommend to this committee it
is bad policy and that we rather
look to other states for
guidance on how they control the
process I will close by noting
Mr chairman that the proposal
and help in Senate bill
thirteen.
That the government come
together and set a market price
for a commodity ask us would we
really want to trust the
government to set the market
price of any other commodity do
we want to trust a committee of
the legislature just at the
market price of the yes no we
don't why because it's really
inefficient and the pip count
limitation all it does is
benefit producers who want their
license to have a valley they
want that piece of paper to have
a value.
Right not to get value by
actually engaging in economic
activity thank you Mr trump
thank you senator for the
question.
Senator if I may follow that up
with with how Senate bill two
eighty eight is is different
it also does not have a cap but
we don't do this dual licensure
set up where if you're under
ninety plants and and you want
to do ninety one that somehow
your popped up in in your cost
per plant goes up quite a bit
Senate bill two eighty eight is
is much more simple where it's
not cost per plant regardless of
how many plants so if you're a
small grower and let's say it's
ten dollars per plant yet ten
plants your your license is
going to be a hundred Bucks if
it's ten dollars a plan you want
to have a hundred plants then
your license as a thousand Bucks
and so on and so on so that way
we don't have an economy of
scale or or somehow punish
somebody for having one more
plant in the allowable in the in
the ninety plant limit but that
as you grow your business then
you pay more for your license
it's a very simple way of doing
it is the most fair in my
opinion but it should accomplish
the same goal as what's the
other two bills are trying to do
which is ensure that we do have
our little almost farmers market
Styal cannabis producers that
are able to grow a small amount
that doesn't cost a fortune to
get their license.
Thank you Mr chairman did not
many others this one minute
I just wanted to add a couple
things to about the set up for
the industry in addition to
Senator combat ideas comments
just that be illicit market when
supply is low does step in on
any sort of price situation so
we're talking about why we need
this to we need to set up we can
come back later and decide the
plant term is something that we
need but if we're setting up the
market and we want to be sure
that the list of market isn't
stepping in on price this is the
time to do it and then evaluate
any sort of repercussion and
finally I think what we're open
to as well on the microsite and
some of the feedback that we've
heard is that we may increase
the plant Carroll on our micro
business license because of the
way the fees will work out and
the way that we see the the
price parity being important to
the licensure fees so something
that we you may want to extend
that we're still we're working.
Thank you Representative Lujan
Mr Chairman.
And and and thank you again Mr
chair
Senator and I I appreciate again
appreciate this conversation
that needs to happen and as you
can see we're we're kind of
moving the margin here again and
and I want to think of
Representative Romero for those
comments
so in SB thirteen it's the only
bill that doesn't take away the
state's ability to responsibly
manage production if you want an
equitable marketplace where
small and medium sized
businesses can be successful the
state have to maintain the
ability to manage that
production
in SB thirteen calls for years
we independent study to ensure
market growth of Graham I'm
limited production will create
monopolies by artificially
driving the cost into the ground
and that we we know that kind of
the existing others and you
we're not advocating for plant
count limits were you know I'm
advocating here today for the
ability for the state you to
manage the production like organ
according does based on
legislation they passed last
year so this conversation is
going in that direction I think
that were that's why this is
important that we're all after
table today talking about this
there thank you again and and
also to you Senator Pirtle
Senator Jacob R. Candelaria
these are all components that we
need to need to bring together
so thank you
Thank you
Representative so I know my
other members might might might
all members of this committee
have some questions I don't
want.
What's the plan here I have a
few more questions in terms of
just someone explain to me what
a consumption area I'm trying to
I think I know what it is I and.
Our Denver arm eighty eight a
year ago and I was there about a
year and a half ago in.
They have consumption you're
you're why would not.
John Mr chairman under the
approach thank you for the
question Senator and all all the
more sustained on this one under
the proposal I believe of house
bill twelve and Senate bill
three sixty three B. consumption
of cannabis is just in the world
or in a public space restaurant
are.
You know it is subject to the
same sort of regulatory schemes
tobacco largely but with an
additional requirement that the
outdoor consumption has to be
within a designated cannabis
construction area that is a
licensed area by the cannabis
regulation division so it is
contained
in that sense Mr chairman it's
kind of this zone where there's
no criminal penalty if it's
consumed within the cannabis
consumption area but if it's
outside of that area there is
potential criminal liability
under the approaches taken in
the bill on my bill then Senator
Campos is bill takes a slightly
different approach in that an
entity can apply to regulation
licensing for a standalone
consumption area I think New
Mexico is an amazing place in
the future for cannabis related
tourism and so by having a
standalone a standalone cannabis
consumption area you allow
resort let's take a look at the
ending who doesn't want to get
into the business of
manufacturing or producing
cannabis but can apply for this
consumption license invest a
couple million dollars make the
most amazing out your you know
sponsor cannabis relaxation
space and charge a bunch of
money to access it that is
beautiful economics in my view
Mr Chairman sorry it's just
really exciting and and that's
why I think you know our we have
to have this discussion also
about the broader economic
implications of legalizing
cannabis one of the reasons that
I am a strong supporter of home
grow as mentioned by one of the
witnesses is because I also want
the secondary industries that
are going to grow up that are
gonna help millennials like me
grow up to my six plants right
they're gonna lease the space
we're gonna give me education
they're gonna take care of my
babies right they're going to
help me hard.
This them and they're gonna
store than for me right that's
really that kind of down market
implication that really does
excite me as a policymaker thank
you Mr chairman thank you for
the question center Mr chairman
and senator I I agree
wholeheartedly we agree
wholeheartedly with senator
Candelaria and and he's points I
do have to excuse myself have to
chair a house tax committee
meeting now at eleven but my.
My two members of tax
Representative Lujan will stay
here and do they think so thank
you Mr chairman it's it's an
honor this is my first Senate
committee that percent of this
year's so hopefully many more to
come thank you very much thank
you Representative.
Just for the committee purposes
I have Senator Brandt Senator
Kernan Senator Griggs Senator
Hamblen senator Cormann I think
what I'm gonna do is I'm gonna
have each of you asked two
questions.
We'll circle back at the end and
if your question your third or
fourth has not been answered.
Then you can ask that question
because we can stay on no.
All right all day on this
committee and I think you know
as I said we're not gonna take
action I think we're trying to
get a feel for these four bills.
And then
have the Sanchez go back and see
if they can work out and and and
bring something back to the
committee so with that I'm going
to Senator Padilla used for but
the.
I have just one more and then
I'll stop okay yeah so this one
is just we appreciate your
concern that I've had all along
yes
So for a very personal reason
and someone very important to me
I would not not not welcome back
to work but that's all about but
it is very close to me and very
importantly started on
on
on cannabis and marijuana.
At the age of about sixteen or
seventeen
winds up that by the age of
twenty two and this is a long
time ago but that you know there
was different market different
that's different that everything
was different vacuums over
twenty years ago
so how how do you
I'm very concerned about that
one of the driving forces what I
the way I do about you know what
works and what you're you're
with legislation Wirth services
where where does the money come
from to provide services sure
that we don't wind up the
situation livestock.
I I don't know Mr chairman all
you want to for time purposes
and we just have to responses.
That'll be fine.
We're going tomorrow.
We struggle to hear them the
majority of that question but I
can speak to
the fact that if we work towards
putting the illicit market out
of business that will help
prevent cannabis from getting
into the hands of those who are
under age so as long as we keep
that focus that we we
really put out that we want to
put the illicit market out of
business those are the people
selling to kids and children.
The legislation I brought
forward and I assume that every
other piece house a fee
structure or punishment
structure for selling cannabis
we're providing cannabis to
under age very similar to
alcohol and I think that's
that's important that
as a policy as a state we say
absolutely you do not purchase
cannabis for under age.
But as long as we ignore this
the subject and we keep cannabis
in the dark then it'll continue
to be sold to the children in
the state and that is the
important part and I think
that's one of the reasons why
I've been involved with this is
I think that if we can get
cannabis out of the hands of the
illicit market out of the drug
dealers we can help it won't
completely eliminated because
people do illegal activity we've
seen that over over but it will
help get cannabis out of the
schools in out of the hands of
children and I think as long as
we focus on that we can
accomplish that together thank
you Mr.
Is.
Thank you
my computer and my phone I'm
having audio issues today so we
can't issue there's lots of
other things that we can get you
that simplified tax structure
and and SB thirteen puts more
direct funding into communities
can you as they see fit whether
it be evidence based prevention
programs or treatment centers
are our community you know what
they need to that so that what
this bill does thank you.
Thank you our number one you
want to John yet Mr chairman
thank you the Senate bill three
sixty three house bill twelve
have comprehensive drug
education components right and
and I really want to thank the
senator for sharing this
experience because we bring all
these experiences to any
discussion we have in the
legislature and it sounds like
it's quite painful
understandably.
My observation as I think
education is the linchpin here
is the prevention development
cannabis like any other
substance is a substance that
can be used.
to to treat.
Or to attempt to treat some
underlying Thomas some
underlying pain right that leads
one to a place of addiction.
and.
Just like alcohol cocaine any
other substance
I think the issue is that
education piece and really
helping people understand that
in grappling with mental health
physical pain
that addiction is addiction
right you can put substitute
cannabis for food for alcohol
for any substance you turn to
the right so that's why I think
the strong points to your
concern Senator and both house
bill twelve and Senate bill
sixty three is the framework for
comprehensive drug education the
public schools.
Mr chairman and senator yes so
just to be specific house bill
twelve I'm sorry I house bill
twelve excuse me actually
explicitly creates a public
health advisory board which
looks at the use of cannabis
patterns and of course collects
data throughout the system that
we designate in the department
with annual reporting including
information on you the access to
cannabis road safety driving
while impaired workplace safety
percentage of emergency room
visits on outcomes involving
cannabis use of educational
needs for youth and adults
consumer product safety and the
percentage of poison control
center call so we're very
prescriptive about ensuring that
public health component is
explicit we monitored and
including the fact that we are
also quite specific about how
advertising and marketing will
work in particular on how use
are exposed to
any cannabis related products we
want to be sure that those who
are twenty one and older or
those who are who who may be
targeted for for for advertising
but absolutely as senator
Candelaria discussed we want to
be very very sure that children
and schools are educated on
this.
And on on responsible use how it
how it will work as they turn
twenty one the absolutely
prohibit that use it for years
in our in our schools and and
that's why our fund is created
to be able to support that again
we've we've got rid of that your
marks but we hope that our
legislature will appropriate
responsibly into what we see the
educational component meeting.
Well appreciate all the comments
again this is an issue that I
want your a lot more about why
cast my vote on this issue this
is something that is very very
internet and then my family and
I hope you're wanting all of you
on that thank you Mr chairman I
think you have others on the
list
I don't see you online now I.
In the move from where you are
you are sorry yeah I'm listening
okay so thank you senator but
the
Okay I have Senator Brandt
Senator Kernan Senator Griggs.
Thank you Mr chairman and the
chairman may I suggest maybe in
the future we know we have a
long list of bills like this man
who set a time limit for
everyone on the number of
questions especially if we're
gonna that later on a restricted
number questions everyone else
gets to ask.
Just a suggestion
I know that's the way they do it
DC they give everyone a certain
amount of time and that's all
they get so
Joel ladies and gentleman I
would I have a couple of
questions well I have a lot more
that whenever you're restricted
to a couple of questions
how does your bill open up
access to new producers and not
unfairly advantaged Kirk
producers.
Mr chairman I'll basically
saying that I think the senator
I'm I am committed to as open
and well functioning market
place possible in this bill
under both scenarios and Senate
bill three sixty three and house
bill twelve the currently
licensed thirty for medical
cannabis producers will have a
six month head start in as I
mentioned earlier setting up
sort of the infrastructure for
the market place after that
point.
Anyone who can put up the
capital who can put together a
plan and who can successfully go
through the licensure process at
the new cannabis regulation
division I can't obtain a
producer license no
discrimination everybody's
welcome of course you have to
meet the threshold in the bills
one of which is you have to
demonstrate F. water rights and
enough access to water right so
it is not part of launch the
seconds important issue of that
I think is important to mention
is.
Senate bill three sixty three
house bill twelve also insure
that small craft producers can
access a license can get a
ninety plant license can build
their business around that and
Mr Chairman as I said earlier I
want to really dispel the notion
that a plant counts as necessary
to protect anybody but certain
producers who don't want to grow
up to their allocation because
they see more value as I said in
holding a piece of paper rather
than producing engaging in
market activity thank you for
the question Sir.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator rapper that question as
as you know
that's one of the main focuses
it has been the main one of the
main focuses of legislation and
I've brought or whether it was
two years ago or this year
and that is to ensure that the
barriers of entry into the
market are low.
and so instead of creating this
multi tier license system.
It's based upon how many plants
you want to license so a small
producer if they only want to do
ten plants and and or even one
plan
they will be scaled in the price
in the we'll be scale based upon
that so that we don't create
unfair per plant price of a
license the other thing is is as
you know and.
Many of the members may remember
and and some of the new ones may
not
we propose the state operated or
stay contracted store to ensure
that small producers it would
not be any prejudice or
discrimination against somebody
or or something along those
lines of entry into the market
being able to sell their
products but the state operated
store was not that popular in a
lot of people didn't quite
understand how it works in other
states with regard to alcohol so
we just simply require that if
you have a dispensing license
you're gonna operate the brick
and mortar store that you must
offer on consignment the
products of small producers and
so that way we don't exclude
people that want to enter into
the market and start and a small
scale they don't have a million
dollars you don't have access to
this crazy amount of capital
that it that it requires to
enter the market so this way we
ensure that the small producers
are little craft
dispensers are able to enter
without having to go through a
special licensing program or
anything along those lines they
can just do it because the
regulatory framework allows it
it doesn't inhibit the entrance
into the market thank you Mr
chair.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator
We see in the thirteen it has a
very similar to a schematic as
the other bills in terms of the
microlights Mrs and the current
industry sitting at this the
strong foundation this is where
production management is so
important to ensure we're
building more licenses not
you're likely to join a huge
amounts of cannabis which is
what we'll get with unlimited
production thank you Mr chair
thank you Senator.
The only thing.
I would like to add to this
conversation and and the the
other ideas that are being
presented it.
This is this is this is such a
great time to bring those all to
table and and not I think the
other Sanchez here today thank
you.
Just going back to the question
Mr chair on the head start and
protecting our current producers
is that there is a six month
head start on the license and so
we want to just key in on that
and then to we'd really love the
consignment idea Senator just
wanted to say that's really
great.
So I I appreciate you endorsing
Center programs bill I think all
that right now we are seeing
that that is the best bill on
the board
if you can take back to a
certain Representative Martinez
not to name any names but I was
also on that bill two years ago
and so he's he's slightly has
offended me but actually I I
don't have that set of skins so
so and I don't honestly so no
offense to the current growers
but I don't care about
protecting the.
they actually have a huge head
start in this game.
effecting massive head start
this game if you're if you're
running a marathon is twenty six
miles they have twenty miles
already done before you've let
everyone else start.
So they only got sixty miles
left to finish when you let
everyone else leave the starting
gate.
Senator Brandt is twenty six
point two miles and I've done I
above.
Well Mr chairman you must
actually run those I've always
told people if you see me
running run faster because
something is chasing me that I
didn't wasn't always the case
but it is now I want to draw
everyone's attention I think
that there's this article really
surprised me and one of our
fellow Republican senator sent
this to me and I know that
everyone knows how liberal of
the state of Oklahoma is.
Yes I so liberal.
But if you look in a magazine
called the Oklahoma watch in
their January twenty twenty
addition.
It says how recreational is
Oklahoma's medical marijuana
market this is actually a really
interesting article about what
is happening Oklahoma.
With basically a free market on
marijuana they made a medical
program.
But the it starts out I think
welcome to the wild west of we.
So if you have a chance to look
that up on your on your phone
and read that article I think is
really interesting and really
talks about a lot of what we're
looking at here now they've done
under medical kind of medical
program except you don't have to
have any pre conditions to get
the medical license and they
have no license quotas to grow
in a very inexpensive price to
get in.
No one thing Oklahoma has on us
Senator Candelaria is you know
is they have water.
Rios we don't so they don't have
the all the water issues that
you've brought up and and good
issues but I think we all read
that article I think you find it
very very interesting and how of
Oklahoma's price of marijuana of
cannabis sorry anyone else was
used marijuana Sir so we bought
whatever you wanna call it Mary
Jane I think we've all had all
the terms as we as we have lived
our lives
Oklahoma for a very liberal
state as it is I'm sorry it is
actually very conservative state
I think it's actually really hit
the nail on the head when it
comes to cannabis now I'm not
saying we should still keep with
a medical only program.
But as we're looking at opening
up to recreational
We have a look at the fact that
they really are not regulating
at.
To the extreme that we are
trying to and my guess is there
is no black market Oklahoma
because it's not worth being a
bright taken those rescued
Oklahoma because the prices have
come so low.
That you wouldn't know it
wouldn't be worth the risk of
going to jail for right and so
that's why I think that's one of
the points at least it was one
of the points that me and and
cliff and Mark Moores was trying
to bring two years ago.
So.
The other thing that I think it
is you look at Sir pearls Bill.
and I did not sign on to the
bill this year but if you look
at Sir pearls Bill.
The he doesn't specifically have
home grow in there but the cost
for a license to grow is so
inexpensive.
That let's say I wanted to grow
three plants because of my
chronic pain issue and everyone
knows I have chronic thank.
I could just pay I think it's
ten dollars a plant is that
right those are pro you shake
your head anyway it's it's
something pretty inexpensive to
where I could pay that and grow
those three plans now and be
able to take care of my own the
if I want to do that or because
I probably wouldn't grow very
strong.
Breed and because I know how to
do that very well I probably
just go buy it but it gives the
option for people that want to
do it really doesn't cost it's
not cost prohibitive for you to
do home grow that way.
I think one of the other things
you see in in Sir per roll is
and and this came out in the
discussions is not really a
question but we were talking
about the makeup of the board.
in some of the bills are
prescriptive that require the
industry in their.
We're as I think Jacobs and
cliffs don't rule them out they
can be on it if they want to or
if there are pointed to it I
think that's the right approach
I also think that the right
approach in Senate bill two
eighty eight is that is not this
massive bore.
You know some some of the other
bills have these just gigantic
boards that you know honestly if
you've ever you know served on a
forty person interim committee.
you realize how bad it is to
have these massive boards or
massive committees because
nothing gets accomplished you
can't stay focused because
there's just too many.
cooks in the kitchen you're just
as you're Graham are there or
grandmothers used to put it the
only that many cooks in the
kitchen and that's one of the
issues R. Pirtle spill really
limits that the five people that
is very manageable to be able to
get in and just get the job done
and that's what you need I also
don't think that those boards
are going to not accept the
advice.
Of the industry if they're smart
if they have half a brain
they're gonna have the industry
come in and testify before the
board on on different issues and
that's probably required as they
set rules anyway as every board
has to do that so.
C. of.
How does Jacob and anyone else
that wants to address it Center
Connell area.
With the change in the federal
level and hopefully a change
coming I'm hoping in the next
couple years with federal law
around
cannabis
will they have to be any major
changes to our research
because I am guessing if the
federal government changes that
makes it legal them we could
potentially maybe even get into
exporting of some point is that
something you've contemplated
all our fault about it all.
Mr chairman that is an excellent
question I want to thank Senator
Brandt not just because he's a
good friend but because she
deserves to be thanked for it is
you know you've also approach
Senator this issue from a from a
position based on data and
looking for looking towards
making good policy and and use
remorse R. Pirtle also really
went out on a limb to do that
and show some leadership and
that's our role here on on sort
of this side of the bar you know
when you have a seat on the
floor that's our job right
um you raise an excellent
question and so in Senate bill
three sixty three.
special three sixty three
includes a provision which
contemplates federal
legalization right which would
and I'll just be very specific
and what I mean by that that
would be Congress and the
federal government permitting
the interstate or international
sales of cannabis right
the legislation basically states
that should that happen or
should the department of justice
issue formal guidance as they
have in the past that will
permit in first state and
international sales then the
governor would be required to
enter into agreements with any
such jurisdictions to permit the
sale of New Mexico grown
cannabis so long as certain
conditions are met and what are
those conditions are health and
safety very limited very limited
grounds on which the chief
executives can deny or refuse to
enter into agreement why because
I think ultimately Senator
I agree with your assessment of
the situation and.
Sometimes the legislature needs
to get out of the way of the
free market.
Especially when it comes to
commodities and I mentioned
earlier the the proposal set
forth in health and Senate bill
thirteen
essentially empowers us a group
of bureaucrats to determine the
market price of the commodity of
medical cannabis and that is
just I think a recipe for
protectionism and not a recipe
for the robust market place that
you have discussed so my
legislation does contemplate it
I think it's a little different
from house bill twelve in that
in house bill twelve the chief
executive has the discretion
whether or not the insurance of
those agreements I'm saying that
it should be the policy of New
Mexico that the governor does
not have discretion that we want
our agricultural products to be
sold in every corner of the
world why because that brings
dollars from every corner of the
world to rural local and the
state to call.
Thank you sure thank you Senator
Candelaria I actually didn't
know that was in your bill so
that's a that's great I was just
contemplating how that might
work.
I think the way you handle that
is perfect so since Center
portals built the best bill
overall we should move that
section in to serve a purpose
built to to address that because
I I actually really like the
prescriptive nature that you
have put into that for the
executive I think that that that
will work really well I actually
hope that the federal government
will deal with this issue and
leave it up to the states like
the constitution really says you
know those that those things
should be left to the states to
dictate and I'm really hoping
I love your you're free capital
ideas on on how the market
should work and really
appreciate that thank you for
that there are few things I'm
really looking for in whether or
not support cannabis bill one of
those I'm going to mention in
the if I have time Mr chairman
we get back to me I mean
mentioned some more but it's not
I'm more than willing to sit
down with any of the Sanchez on
these bills the talk about kind
of my you know my break points
where it's going to be yes or no
overall I think we need to
legalize the sell off campus I
do I think it's time thanks
timed in prohibition.
Thank but there are some things
that have got to be in there or
not in there for me to do it and
one of the things is we have a
mass in our state when it comes
to our liquor licenses is it
absolute nightmare in our state
with our liquor licenses and it
has really hurt the business
growth of our state in a wide
array of liquor licenses as
we're talking about marijuana.
Because we are opening up a
whole new businesses gonna
require licenses and the last
thing we want to do and I will
not support any bill that makes
the liquor license I mean a
marijuana license either
dispensary or for production a
commodity like we have with the
liquor license they cannot
become a commodity it must be
open to anyone.
Who wants to get into the
business thank you Mr chairman
pursuant to appreciate the
appreciate you let me ask a
couple questions thank you and I
have a Senator Kernan.
Thank you Mr chairman of course
this is been a really good
discussion and I want to thank
also.
Dr o'donnell for the spreadsheet
CHI provided to us that's very
helpful and maybe going forward
as these bills are.
Continuing in progress that we
can just maybe that she R. S.
medicinal items to that so that
we can really get a good
comparison of all of these.
Indications we've talked a lot
about how the tax.
Hello this is not a regulate and
so I kind of want to just
discuss or get more information
maybe not today but again I
think we need to consider the
usage of water and I brought
this up in another committee and
the if you think that pulled up
on the internet I actually it it
isn't highly intensive with
regard to water but there is an
issue somewhat with water in so
just trying to figure out how
these plants are grown on a
small level where you just have
pots and buckets and whatever
you growth and then maybe you
have sort of a drip system how
that is done.
But when we moved to the large
industrial growers and we have
acres I'm just kind of a
comparison of what that water
uses would be so I think that's
something we need to know as we
move forward in trying to
determine whether to cap whether
not to cap is.
Sometimes related to to the
water usage and certainly I come
from an area that we use a lot
of brackish water to to produce
oil and gas clean it up and
review said not all of that but
I would wonder if there any
guidelines on that type of water
they can be used if if we can
use water that is
maybe not fresh water but I know
in our area we have several
options first and they're
beginning to dig deeper and use
some water that maybe isn't as
fresh and clean but wonder if
that could be used I'm just I
think that's an important piece.
And I want to make sure in the
legislation that there is no
exception given to how you
access the water that we use
current law.
With regard to the state
engineer the permitting of water
and also I know operating that
first bill public water can be
used so lasting just tie tie
into your your public system
then in use that water which I'm
saying you'll be paying for that
what you what if you had a
permit in and have to to drill a
well and use water or bottled
water for someone and I really
don't this isn't a question this
is just something that that I
think needs to be included in
the
overall look at all of these
different bills to make sure I
don't think it's fair to give
special access this and the
state engineer to use water I
want to make sure that we're
continue with what's in law in
who owns water have a use of
water and counts permitted so
that's really not a question I I
really just you can get back to
me on that but I think that
should be included the second
thing that I want to talk about
is my concern along with Senator
Padilla.
In our children and someone
mentioned that we would have an
extensive education program in
our schools I taught school for
for many years and sometimes we
we had people come in and talk
about not using drugs and doing
this and doing that and it was a
half hour just simply down in
the cafeteria.
I'm gonna tell you that that is
not really the responsibility of
our school system they have
enough on their plate and so you
know we've got to figure out as
a society how we're going to
protect our children and what
we're gonna do I know we talk
about the illegal market and
it's out there and it's already
being accessed you know I I
don't know that.
That's really going to make a
huge difference I still think
Colorado I don't think they've
been terribly successful in.
Completely eliminating that
illegal market and so I I worry
about brain development I know
Dr Hickey said not too long ago
that.
For for boys and young men and
their brains don't totally
develop until they're twenty
five years old.
And for women you know maybe
it's a little bit a little bit
younger but I I didn't worried
very much about what we're
opening up here for our young
people and you know when you
have parents that have access
to.
That cannabis and and they will
and they will use it in of
course people have access to
alcohol as well but I think the
in game with with that drug use
is a little bit different than
alcohol so I share that I have
those concerns and I I'm not
convinced that we can
legislative put into any of
these bills the kinds of
protections that we need for our
children and just disable
schools you go do it so I don't
really have any questions I just
appreciate the conversation and
I really think Senator Pirtle
still has some things in it that
money
in some way encouraging maybe
Ted to take seriously.
The opportunity to vote for this
bill IBM I think we have to have
those things in place with
regard to our small communities
right across the border from
Texas we're gonna have hundreds
of people coming over buying
marijuana from my community and
I will see a strip at one store
after the other at the state's
going to generate a lot of money
from from the border communities
and it's going to go to Sam
thank but you can leave our
communities in a very difficult
position when they come into our
community and and it's just not
gonna look the scent so I hope
that those of you who have the
bills that are probably going to
get through well please take a
look at those considerations
because it's not just about how
much money we make it's about
how the saying is delivered and
our communities don't change
some terrible much that we're
really sorry that we passed any
legislation at all with that
I'll stand in my comments thank
you Mr chair.
Thank you Senator Kernan I have
burned Senator Griggs.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
thank you know all of you all
today for for bringing your
bills to bring in your approach
to solve an issue that we know
exist.
However one of the things about
it it all we talk about and we
spend most of our time when we
talk about
the issue of of legalizing
cannabis we spend most of the
time talking about the front we
spent very little time talking
about the back and the results
of what can happen and have
happened in other states and
what and their experiences on
how to do with it and while I
appreciate and I I certainly do
get your arms around the fact
that you think that all right
the
The illegal market is there we
know which there we know people
accession use drugs daily we
know that in fact we know that
at.
But we somehow believe that
there's ultimately is a better
way.
And while it could be well it
could be I'm not yet convinced
that either of these is the is
the best way although I'm pretty
much resigned to the fact.
That one albums coming forward
maybe more than one this coming
for.
But I know.
I notion Senator Pirtle has
young children and he's
concerned about how things can
work out with with his kids I've
got grandkids.
That are the age of his children
so I'm concerned about it as
well and I'm I'm concerned some
have one summer on concerned
that and I I would appreciate to
all of you responding to the
fact when we talk about allowing
and and we do under medical
today we allow individuals to
grow their own plants and
Senator Candelaria you brought
that up moments ago talking
about your own your own plants.
How do we at that point in time
insure or are we just
comfortable with the fact that
the individuals who will grow
their own plants will not allow
under age children ready access
to those plants so can you guys
just kind of tell me how you
perceive that to work under
under your bed.
Thank you censure and.
I wanted very seriously and and
and no flippant way sort of
compare this issue to the issue
of gun owners.
We allow adults to own guns and
hold them in their homes and we
really impose no legal
obligations at all to ensure
that those guns do not fall into
the hands of children why
because we trust in personal
responsibility.
we recognize a personal
responsibility is ultimately the
greatest check on society for
the protection the raising the
development of children.
in the legislation let's talk
about hunger specific.
Under the legislation that I
proposed an adult over the age
of twenty one can grow up to six
plants
a
Household right six states
comprised of more than two
adults can only grow up to
twelve.
Those plants need to be licensed
and tracked by the regulation
and licensing division cannabis
regulation right so that model
is sort of exactly what exists
now as a senator as you
correctly pointed out medical
cannabis patients can now grow
up to four plants it's
interesting to note Senator that
because of the plant cap
limitation the medical market a
qualified patients like myself
has access to only about less
than half of the medical
cannabis plant just to support
my medical needs whereas if I
had a personal production
license I could have access to
for plants which is tremendously
more medicine than I could get
as a qualified patients so the
current regulatory system we
have is really inefficient but
regarding children specifically
the legislation I think Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino said it best if we
do this right in the market
prices low enough the risk
analysis for drug dealers to be
involved in the cannabis
Business and push the product to
under age questions is very well
it's lower than it exists today
because they have a monopoly
right now they have to complete
with a state with a
comprehensive regulated market
the particular hunger of plants
as I mentioned must be licensed
and tracked by the cannabis
regulation Division so if there
is diversion of those plants
right that is left up to the
regulating agency Furthermore
the under both house bill twelve
and Senate bill three sixty
three
the existing law which makes.
Trafficking.
Cannabis to under age person.
Remains a fourth degree felony.
that is a very different crime
than simply possessing cannabis
so if you are engaged in the
unlawful transfer of cannabis
the law does provide a penalty
but ultimately Senator as I
mentioned well I think we have
crafted the sort of legal
framework there's a
philosophical question at play
here which is.
You know do you do we do do we
think that there is ever a law
that can fully regulate
responsible behavior and present
every single instance of misuse
of cannabis known because we
can't do it with the car we
can't do it with tobacco what we
have to do is put the right
parameters in place that
provides the right penalties
when someone crosses over the
line right but beyond that we
have to do I think what we do
with everything else in this
chamber we set the law but we
have to trust and believe in.
The personal responsibility of
persons and when they fail to
demonstrate that personal
responsibility our system of law
imposes right full penalties
upon them but I appreciate the
question because it goes to I
think the fundamental sort of
philosophical issue right I'm
not sure we can ever satisfy it
with the legal system as a
senator and as a sponsor of the
bill do I think that the system
that is presented here provides
this comprehensive approach to
preventing and reducing the
underage use of cannabis I do
thank you for the questions are.
Just would like to add to that
just a moment Mr chair so on
page forty six of our bill we
talk about both the illicit
market and then of course the
regulated market and in both
cases of course you cannot
access under twenty one access
the product whether it be legal
or and it would be illegal
regardless for anyone under
twenty one to propose asset to
sell it etcetera so I just
wanted to be clear about that
additionally of course we set up
a fund in our built explicitly I
know to Senator Kernan is
comments on education on
responsible use once you
approach the age of twenty one
and in agreement with her on the
cost of doing that we had
originally appropriated directly
into that fund but of course we
remove the earmarks but however
we we still feel strongly that
when we do come to appropriating
for you know educational
purposes is what responsible use
is which again to reference
everything that is already been
stated cannabis is not new to
our state the illicit market is
still there it's still alive and
well the education is key and
ensuring that folks do not this
does not fall into the hands of
of adding additional problems to
our state thank you Mr chair.
Mr chair and senator I think
this is one of the main focuses
on the legislation that myself
of course in New.
Brandt.
Really.
It was very important to us two
years ago how do we do this and
protect public safety and to
protect children from that so I
think every piece of legislation
brought forward today as the
section regarding selling to
minors I don't know that one of
them doesn't happen at so I
think that's that's the most
important the other portion of
the legislation Senate bill two
eighty eight is it specifically
puts out that it will be in a
childproof package so that if
it's accidentally left out we
don't see what happened in
Colorado when they first
legalized.
Cannabis and you would hear
about all of these kiddos having
to get their stomach spot
because there is just the back
of of candy looking product that
the child ingested.
The ten or fifteen pieces up and
so learning from them and
learning from other states we
have to ensure that we have
child proof packaging so there
are accidental ingestion of
cannabis and then the other is
so that it's not marketed in a
way that would be appealing or
would be mistaken as a cannabis
product I've seen pictures from
California where looks like a
bag of chili cheese fritos in a
little bit a small
label on the bottom of the bag
says contains THC that's not
what we want in New Mexico and
that's the point and the job of
the cannabis control commission
is to ensure that we don't have
that but to speak to to the
children in school every single
person.
In this zoom meeting having gone
through high school new people
who either had it used it where
to get it how to get it and all
of those things and it's an
illegal substance so the way
that we keep it out of the hands
of children is putting the
illicit market out of business
and as long as we focus on that
I think we can achieve as well
as we can keeping it out of the
hands of kids I don't think
you're ever going to because
it's a fourth degree felony to
sell alcohol to minors and there
are still some irresponsible
adults that do it but most
people would agree that in high
school it was easier to get your
hands on cannabis then it was on
alcohol because the punishment
was higher and I can attest to
that because you would see it
more often people were walking
around school with cans of beer
or or fits of whiskey or Jan but
there sure was drug bust from
time to time when they would
bring the dogs in New sniffed
blockers and fifteen to twenty
kiddos would get in trouble for
having to that screen but yet
alcohol was not on the campus so
I think as long as we focus on
putting the illicit market out
of our business then we can
achieve the things that that our
biggest concern to you and
myself Mr chair and senator.
Okay okay.
Thank you senator so back to
your question Senator about the
the home grown personal
protection is not included in SB
thirteen we see that specially
and and you don't use markets
especially in Colorado in the
early days grows significantly
contributed.
To deal with the market after
discussing and create a big
problem for law enforcement.
Also we think is present a real
and present obstacle to getting
legislation finally passed.
I'm not against the home grow
but surely think it should be
something that we that is
brought before the legislature
in the future after legal
marketed more matured.
Thank you Senator Ortiz.
Senator Griggs in just a
response I would be remiss I
have not seen any data.
Or any study from a reputable
organization that has made a
clear connection between home
grow and the persistence and
growth of the legal market so we
can all come with are believed
to the table but I think we need
to back them up with data and
I'm just to be very Frank on
this point.
It's not there.
Mr chair and and senator
Candelaria I'd be happy to
provide that data on G. on I can
get that thank you Mr chairman
you have to date at the top of
your head if I may ask can you
share that with us now I I don't
I can't I think you have them
but I'd be happy to hear that
and get that to you yet thank
you Mr chair thank you senator
Mr Chairman just one additional
point on our house bill twelve
guarding storage and of course
keeping children safe we do
explicit we talk about in a
private residents not being able
to access that product you it
must be locked and must be
removed from the public view
thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
thank all of you for the
responses because I think that
is one saying that she chapter.
And if there's data that be
great for everybody to have a.
Our show they can all at least
have a beings to address what
the data sheet.
Show Mr chair you know there's
been some other comments or
comments about you know green
mile and and and other things
I've got a highway fifty four
that runs right through my
district comes directly out of
war as el Paso comes around
border Goshen or it's it's it's
a major drug corridor in the
country.
but it's right there.
I expect for this if this law
were passed I expect to
community of chaparral they're
gonna be stores pop up all of
all around chaparral is an
unincorporated community
so I I don't know how all that
work all that would work in
everybody's Bill.
Senator Pirtle has a one mile
the can't be closer than than
one mile and while I don't I
don't know that I disagree with
that outside of cities I think
that you know that she needs.
Better regulate what's in their
cities and we do and I think
that is a yes.
A deal that we ought to look at
to to maybe adjust in Senator
programs bill and maybe the
others because communities may
want to allow it but they may
want to allow it over here and
not over here our show I think.
We need to look at that Senator
Pirtle and I think if others are
similar to that we we do to you
know to talk about that as well
we go real quick initiatives
going to be probably a question
about the the taxes the twenty
percent and and Senator Pirtle
years age much less than that.
we talk about and and and I
heard testimony throughout the
day we talk about the stage I am
the H. five point one two five
or something right there at the
state actually takes.
That one point two five all for
that return to directly to
municipalities Georgia the the
net tax to the state is is four
percent our curly is right there
but
Show this to the state while
they collected and it goes to
them they send that back to
cities along with the city's
Of me whatever we call on their
local option tax.
So the to look at that if you're
trying to base revenue off of a
five percent number
Thank you guys frankly when you
look at a twenty percent number
whether it's an excise tax
question G. R. T. here flat
excise tax hello we believe you.
That.
The black market can't readily
get under the price of a
regulated market number coming
up thank you get under six
percent I'm sure to but twenty
percent looks to me like that
would be relatively easy to get
under.
To my understanding that the
black market in Colorado still
thrives pretty well.
and I don't know whether it's
based on dollars or not but just
you know I mean I I know there's
there's a rationale ideas for
for picking the numbers we
packed.
But the do we really believe
believe that issue for all of
you to say that the black market
can't or won't.
Get under your number to such an
extent that it affects the
amount of revenues to the state
on your.
Estimates show are if all of you
to do that that would be the
last question I ask and.
We go on to the next Senator
after that Senator Shendo thank
you Mr chairman and members of
the committee you Senator
Griggs.
I can you know as as best we can
you know we're based upon the
experience of other states based
on our own experience in our own
market place.
I do believe that we can have a
recreational market that out
competes structurally in terms
of price in the long term any
illicit market and greatly
greatly reduces the size I think
it would be irresponsible any of
us to say that the illicit
market will ever go away
completely let's look at alcohol
and tobacco in New Mexico there
is still an illicit market for
alcohol there is still an
illicit market for tobacco of
cigarettes sold in New Mexico
that don't bear our our tax
stamp and that is aged for the
felling but it still happens a
lot and so I think our aim here
is not to expect that any
legislation can absolutely
prevent any black market
transactions but which
legislation sets up the
framework that puts this in the
past where that black market is
as small as we can get it and
has out competed in terms of
price as possible and the major
when we get there Senator as I
said earlier is not by certainly
the tax
because you know well tax has a
direct implication on price
doesn't set the prices not on
stoning.
It's on.
Production.
And if we want to see
continuously higher prices in
New Mexico we can repeat the
mistakes of the past and put a
limit on license and limit on
plans as as I mentioned earlier
the price in New Mexico is about
ten dollars a gram for cannabis
in Colorado it's about half that
why.
Because there's not this kind of
market protectionism going on
that keeps the price
artificially high.
So I do believe that house bill
twelve and three sixty three hit
the twenty percent sweet spot
tax rate Senate bill three sixty
three as I said takes a slightly
different approach in that the
state excise taxes nine percent
the local option excise taxes
three percent I will note
Senator and given your
experience in municipal
government the local option G.
R. T. also applies to the sale
of cannabis on top of the local
gross the local access and on
top of that one point two five
right so there's there's the
stacking of revenue between
regular G. R. T. and the
imposition of the excise so I
think by putting those
restrictions in place we get to
a place where we're doing as
close as we can I think Senator
Pirtle has some good
recommendations
on this point that are
consistent with that sort of
free market approach to
regulation
I will note that the main
difference between senator pros
approach to zoning senator and
Senate bill three sixty three at
least is Senate bill three sixty
three does permit local
governments the right both at
the county level in
unincorporated areas or cities
in incorporated areas to
implement zoning rules regarding
medical cannabis they cannot be
rules that are implemented in
such a way that essentially
prohibit the sale but Senate
bill three sixty three does not
include the specific one mile
prescription as is required by
Senator Pirtle still but in
philosophically they are aligned
in the sense that local
governments should have some
degree of zoning authority and
discretion around where these
are located as I know my commute
my local neighborhoods want that
same discretion as well they
want to be able to go to was
owning board they want to be
able to make their case they
want to be able to appeal it I
think that's appropriate let let
the normal process proceed thank
you for the question Senator
thank you up Senator
I'm gonna call on a or our
analysts.
Dr o'donnell comment on this
area Mr chairman members of the
committee I just wanted to
emphasize that the estimates of
the market of the.
Size of the legal market if we
were to in excess of
legalization.
Assumed that a significant
portion of cannabis is going to
remain in the illicit market and
over time the legal market comes
to our absorbs more more of the
illegal market but I don't but
but I just wanted to clarify the
revenue estimates are not based
on the assumption that every
illegal purchased becomes a
legal purchase impact we assume
that those two markets co exist
for you know a significant
period of time with the the size
of the illicit market decreasing
gradually over time.
Thanks.
Mr chair if I may.
Senator Pirtle.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator grace that question and
that's you know something that
I've I've tried to make the
point almost on every single
topic is if there's something in
my bill then it's to accomplish
one of one of three things.
Public safety.
Protect children or put the
illicit market out.
As much as possible and so when
you look through all of the
points that have been made with
with regard to my legislation
that I've proposed with the
consignment to ensure that their
strong competition to keep
prices low we want to keep taxes
low so that we ensure that that
competition with the black
market stays high and so that we
can ensure that as many sales go
from illicit illegal market
sales to legal market sales were
we regulate what's in it passed
the sides you know all of the
things that people are putting
in their body so that the state
can can help ensure that people
are putting things that aren't
always Mr dangerous to them so I
I think as you look down.
Down the list of other things
within my legislation that is
the main goal almost on every
single one of all now when it
comes to local control I will
say on page twenty two he looks
section nine
we specifically put in except as
provided in subsection of this
section a low local jurisdiction
may adopt reasonable time place
and manner rules and do not
reflect with the cannabis
regulation act I think it's
important to note that you know
I think it's the City of of
Trinidad within a lot of
actually putting a requirement
that in order to open a
dispensary in their town that
you had to take a historical
building bring it up to code in
order to to sell so these are
the things that are local
governments can do and make
those decisions that are best
for them and ensure that they
can can have a say in how this
is done and then I I believe
mine is the only piece of
legislation that allows local
jurisdictions top out
they have six months to opt out
I believe opting out is an
important part because it allows
non action to the fall off in.
which is important and I think
that's one of the reasons why
one of the key the taxes at the
local level we want the money in
the hands of the local people
where the sales are being made
so that way we can improve these
communities and we take the
state out of it and let these
local communities make the
decisions what's best for
themselves and so that's another
important piece of the
legislation that that I'm
bringing forward is that local
control keep the money as local
as possible so that they can use
that money to to do whatever it
whatever they they see fit
whether it's hiring more police
creating of of programs regard
with regard to mental health
they can make those decisions on
the status not dictating that to
them.
Thank you Mr chair.
Mr chair of.
Senators if I may just add to
what of course senator Clemente
ideas spoke about Senator Pirtle
as well
first we love the green mile of
group of Senator Pirtle however
and close discussions with law
enforcement the opt out would
not be advantageous in
particular because of a
checkerboard approach to how the
illicit market is run so the opt
out provisions unfortunately do
not improve public safety and do
not improve our ability to
monitor not only be listed but
the
of course the legal market so it
creates actual barriers for our
law enforcement to understand in
particular targeting the illicit
markets in those areas that that
have opted out we did have that
discussion just on the floor
last night
Mr chair and and Senator Griggs
additionally just to sort of
discuss that it was that market
and and its share overall until
we eliminate
basically until we legalize
federally we cannot eliminate
the illicit market overall and
and and that really takes the
national approach for us to be
able to do that however if we
legalize locally we can start of
roading Medicine market as
senator Candelaria discussed
that that that said on the issue
of neighborhoods and
congregation of businesses are
we do have the same local
control provisions is Senate
Senate bill three sixty three
and and ensuring that they can
make those rules we think it can
be more robust in regards to in
particular low income
neighborhoods that have
traditionally housed a lot of
these but by businesses that we
do not want to see congregating
additionally you know in those
areas so that they get pushed on
like for instance I mean the
City of Santa Fe on to the south
side and we've been definitely
taking of precautions to to
ensure that it is but I think it
can be more robust and I do
appreciate Senator Pirtle.
Approach to that and I think we
can we can be more prescriptive
about ensuring that doesn't
happen in certain communities
but again we don't think the opt
out will help with public safety
or the illicit market at.
Market share thank you Mr.
Chairman thank you for our for
allowing me to to answer
questions you know general
county to Russia is poised to be
probably one of the largest
growers are all for health
centers.
Couple hundred acres or more
after and their plan is to
initiate production is as soon
as possible I certainly hope as
we as we continue to debate on
this we continue to debate on
other bills we up we remember
the comments that we get that we
make about local control and how
important it is to let local
communities use their
there're facilities are revenues
as they so choose so thank you
Mr chairman.
Thank you now we'll move on to a
Senator Hamblen and then Senator
Tallman.
Thank you Mr chair can I get a
thumbs up that you can hear me
I'm calling and I'm I I.
Awesome thank you very much I
appreciate that Mr chair the
committee and just the Sanchez
for bringing forward this
legislation
I do have a no more than two
questions but some comments
there are some things that I
like about all of these bills
and then there's some things
that are concerning to me about
the bills I do have the concern
that I don't want to look like
candy for kids but I also want
to point out that there is a
high probability that if a kid
is using drugs it is for deeper
and more complex issues of that
have been acknowledged and
addressed and so I would like to
to point that out
I do appreciate Senator Pirtle
I've been up to Trinidad and of
love what they've done in their
community because they are
saying we want those tax dollars
and their choice was to build
the infrastructure of their
downtown.
And to prepare that
infrastructure and make that a
tourist destination I agree that
that should be something that
each of the communities can have
because each of us as we know in
New Mexico being such a diverse
state is that each of our
communities have different needs
and different things that need
to be approved on and we can
choose where those tax revenues
go to that I feel that our state
as an overall it isn't as a
bigger picture will benefit
from.
I'm not convinced that small
businesses will get the shaft in
this you know Oregon changed a
lot of control over production
because it would kill small and
medium producers and this will
create monopolies by large
producers and I am against this
I as you no I'm talking about
small businesses and
entrepreneurs I am worried that
we have our corporate producers
that will wipe out and speak our
small businesses because a
Senator Brandt talked about
they've already got twenty miles
already a lead in the marathon
and we have six miles left to to
catch up for small businesses so
I am concerned about the the
weight heavily on corporate
businesses and making these
restrictions put in place to
have small producers have access
to licenses and be able to grow
so my question is what is the
reason for the state to not have
the ability even if it doesn't
use it to manage the production
what what why is is that a
reason that we shouldn't have
the state do that in any of the
sponsors are I love to hear
comments on thank you Mr chair
Mr chairman and senator Hammond.
Saying that the state should not
impose a plant count is not the
same as saying the state should
not by rule manage production
manage the amount of cannabis
that is being sold in the market
place manage
it's growing requirements I
don't know again New Mexico is
the only state in the country
the only state in the country
that uses a plaque as a way to
quote unquote protect small
business or a way to quote
unquote
you know Sir patients and I'm
just really speaking from my
heart is a patient might have
doesn't benefit patients.
He keeps the price high so what
Senate bill three sixty three
does is it says that neither the
state the state cannot impose an
arbitrary plant count limitation
the proposal of that of of of
Senate bill thirteen says that a
government committee should
essentially me and establish the
market price for cannabis we
don't do that with any other
agricultural product why because
the government is not the right
arbiter of setting the market
price for cannabis let me just
emphasize again.
We do not need a plant cap to
have the sort of management
that.
Proponents of Senate bill
thirteen are asking for
regarding small businesses I
think the strongest piece
Senator portals Bill Senate bill
three sixty three house bill
twelve is that it has very very
very low barriers to entry for
anyone any business to get into
the business.
The.
Ninety plant small business
producer licenses is the
approach taken by
House bill twelve and Senate
bill three sixty three Act
ninety plants if you're
achieving the industrial
average.
Of three point five.
I'm just three point five ounces
per plant per harvest and let's
say you're able to harvest each
of those plants four times per
year as a small business you're
able to produce one thousand two
hundred and sixty ounces of
usable flower that's not
including the bot I mean the
trend or the kief which can also
be processed and sold as
extracts we all know that there
are sixteen ounces.
Right in a gram.
So we are talking a scale where
you're allowing small businesses
in very low barrier to entry.
And out and a protective place
in the market and I think that's
kind of the difference between
Senator portals Bill and Senate
bill three sixty three and house
bill twelve.
House bill twelve and Senate
bill three sixty three can
create essentially a defined
license specifically reserved
for craft producers the smallest
of the small businesses you know
I will tell you after two years
if we legalize this I plan on
probably starting my own craft
business right I I have no
desire to be an industrial level
producer right but I do want to
sort of be as someone said the
farmers market of medical
cannabis I want to make the most
you know amazing chocolate
you've ever seen.
Senator portals Bill basically
protects the small guys by
having very very low license
fees right so instead of
creating a separate license
that's reserved for small
producers with ninety plants are
below and I agree that that that
plant count could go up if we
think that that number needs to
go to one hundred one fifty
that's fine in my view because
the small producers are not
going to be able there's just
not enough acreage.
For that many small producers to
meet the over our industrial
supply so what Senator portals
Bill does is he just has very
low barriers to entry very low
license fees and substance
certainly if you're a small
business you can go to the
cannabis regulation Division and
say I want to out license for
thirteen points.
Right under the bill before you
the question is in Senate bill
three sixty and house bill
twelve are you license for up to
ninety plants or you license to
grow ninety and about.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
center for the actual question.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator Candelaria I don't know
if any of the other sponsors
want to address that
Representative Lujan and Senator
Pirtle.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you senator I think you know one
of the beautiful things of of
New Mexico is its rich history
in agriculture agricultural
production and and senator
Hammond that's something I
really appreciate working with
you in this short time is is
your knowledge and in
agriculture with farmers markets
and and the desire that you have
for the small producers to be
able to participate you know I
think that's a noble noble thing
and and I share that with you
and that's where I think what
we'll see come into play with
regard to cannabis production is
co ops amongst farmers that you
actually have groups within
agricultural areas whether it's
the pick is valued at around the
CEO or you know wherever it is
you'll have co ops of small
producers come together and
produce smaller amounts but then
have strength in their numbers
in their production and so I
think that's one beautiful day
we don't exclude that in fact
the original copy of the bill
that I have would have required
co op so that we would have that
strength but it was met with
quite a bit of push back but we
didn't prevent it so I think
that's where we'll see a lot of
strength from our small
producers and and then again
with the consignment piece of
having a dispensary these co op
for the small producers they
cannot be discriminated against
or prevented from entering into
the market as the small producer
without that huge capital
investment and so I think that's
a very important piece and it's
going to be that kind of farmers
market mentality to the
production of cannabis and it's
gonna be a really niche market
for that the the organic home
grown pesticide free cannabis is
going to be a huge huge part of
the market a lot of people may
be discounting and I I and I
know you understand that point
really well with with your
experience with.
Farmers markets and everything
along those lines so you know I
know that there's going to be
businesses that are larger more
commercial but when it comes
down to it there's going to be a
huge demand for this organic of
pesticide free niche market hand
cultivated quality chocolates as
senator Candelaria mentioned
this artist and part of the
market so I think you're as long
as we keep entry barriers low we
will ensure that that part of
the market thrives so that we
don't just have these large
three four five years in the
entire state but yet you know
maybe thousands of people that
are able to produce work
together for co ops form
alliances and and be successful
doing so thank you Mr chair
thank you senator grow thank you
Mr chair I know Representative
Lujan and also Representative
Romero also wanted China.
At.
Thank you Senator
HB twelve and and the Senate
mayor bill bill here
specifically say that the state
cannot manage production the
governor said that she doesn't
really want to add on the
production Senator
When you're exactly right that
organ change this law because it
drove a huge increase in legal
market.
you're correct to be concerned
that any unlimited plan account
would create monopolies you know
that I mentioned that before and
the the two or three biggest
medical producers would take
over the market and cut out
small businesses and we're right
again we need to protect our
small businesses without
production management the craft
businesses won't be able to
compete with the monopoly.
manage production by either pack
counts or square footage New
Mexico should you think.
Thank you thank you
Representative.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Senator Hamblen for questions
and welcome I haven't I haven't
yet got to speak with you.
Since you joined thank you
I did just want to touch on two
points the first just being on
and pack packaging marketing at
Center were explicit about not
targeting children at all and
and regulating that area even
despite what you had discussed
and thank you for recognizing
that the underlying traumas that
may lead to drug use however we
just want to make sure that we
have set parameters in place to
not target children
secondly we just wanted to be
clear additionally about plant
count and and I think the set up
of the businesses that we're
trying to we're trying to meet
the demands and I'll just go
back to but we were stating
earlier is that when why we're
giving the businesses that are
already in businesses sort of
the early adopter
approach to building up able to
meet the demand when we look at
the timeline of how we want
legalization to take place in
the state so we give them a six
month head start but this is
only the front end Mr chairman
and senator so that they so that
we can start with meeting the
demands but then while we
continue to understand how the
regulatory market should look we
just don't want to stifle any
possible growth up front and
that's why when we're setting up
a brand new industry and do not
have a good handle on the market
interest or approach and then
while we're still trying to
protect the micro industry
through I think all of our bills
that we're talking about here
bring senator Neville thirteen
is just to be able to
to to keep that in into account
and we can always we approach
this and of course with
Representative Martinez and I we
he always talks about our bill
is a work in progress of course
we discuss the ideas that we
think are very very interesting
today and so you know as as far
as adaptation goes in for this
legislature took to way and once
we have a better handle on our
market is why we're approaching
this with the of robust
regulation but not stifling
growth opportunity to meet the
demands Mr Chairman.
Just let me.
I just wanna be very clear I
I've been living this issue for
for three years and really with
a lot of the good folks around
this this table
putting a lot of time into it
and.
I think it's been Representative
twice at this point at the
governor best basically required
a request put a line in the sand
that any cannabis bill must have
a plant count limit and I
personally and far as I know
that is not been those stated or
the signal from the executive
but I do think it would be very
helpful for all how is the
executive is actually taking the
positions that you know let's be
Frank Representative Lujan
you've Representative twice now
the executives taking and so I
just have to say very clearly I
haven't heard the same
ultimatums maybe others have
but she used to at least to me
thank you.
Thank you everybody for your
feedback the only other thing
that I have as a comments and
then I will of the code for for
Mister chair is when we talk
about the advisory committee
you know I I I do see that there
are you know there there
certainly can be a lot of cooks
in the kitchen and but also
understand that those voices
need to be represented I can
tell you that from a perspective
of somebody who represents the
small businesses that if we are
creating any policy or
regulation or guidelines and
those small businesses are at
the table you are not going to
get by.
I do feel that small business
representatives who are growing
commercially you need to have
that voice at the table because
nothing will stall what we're
trying to do all the good work
that should be coming out of
this that if we don't have their
voices at the table so I would
certainly encourage as you get
together in the room an arm
wrestle and thumb wrestle and
throw darts at the wall to
figure out how to come out with
the best of compilation of all
of the legislation that that
always be considered and I
appreciate your time I
appreciate the the committee the
commitment and the passion that
you put towards this I know this
is not something that is just
come out yesterday that all of
you have been working on this
for a long time so I do look
forward to seeing the outcomes
you know it's the focus for me
is small business and
entrepreneurs and and to if it
favors corporations and large
producers it's going to be a
concern for me so I just want to
let you all know that I
appreciate your work on this and
and appreciate the incredibly
animated and passionate
discussion that we had today
thank you very much Mr chairman
thank you committee.
Thank you Senator Hamblen and
can you all hear me.
Yep okay so we're gonna go now
to are sure to be back here in a
moment we're gonna go to senator
Clemente if you're on please.
Thank you Mr chairman thanks.
everyone who's worked so hard
to.
And the all four separate bills
to get helping us to get to this
point.
Will all the.
Cannabis is sold in New Mexico
have to be produced in New
Mexico.
Mr Chairman Senator Tallman yes
as of now interstate sales are
not.
Lawful under federal law as I
mentioned earlier Senator grants
question I'm Senate bill three
sixty three does provide a
framework if and when the
federal government permits
interstate and international
sales and and I don't want to be
shy when I say I mean listen to
everyone watching here across
the country you don't get your
green Chile from New Jersey why
can't your cannabis from
anywhere else that New Mexico
and that's eventually the market
place we also want to tap once
interstate.
Is available why isn't Mexico is
home to some of the best
agricultural products in the
nation and I look forward to the
day we're selling wholesale
across the country.
Thank you Mr chair Senator the
reason I bring it up is because
California and Oregon have a
head start on us and they have a
reputation of growing quality of
product so.
that's the reason I bring it up
also up Senator drugs are ready
at.
Address this question is
wondering why there's such a
difference between us Senator
Pirtle six percent.
And the.
Senate bill three sixty three
and H. B. twelve that that
twenty percent of.
I know the G. R. T. is not
imposed on the medical cannabis
let the imposed on the
recreational.
Mr chair and senator I
appreciate that question and so
somehow that was that was missed
would not give an exemption on
the recreational sale so on top
of the six percent but to to to
excise to the state city county
on top of that will be the gross
receipts tax so depending on the
right each community could
receive up to four to five
percent
tax and and so we were trying to
keep as much of that tax as
local as possible but the gross
receipts tax would be on top of
the excise tax that is put
forward within two eighty eight.
So correct me if I'm wrong if
the twenty percent plus the four
percent local plus eight
percent.
G. R. T. you're talking thirty
two percent
Senator so within two eighty
eight it's six percent excise
with gross receipts on top of
that so that's going to be
anywhere between thirteen to
fifteen percent tax on Senate
bill two eighty eight the other
bills are a little different
than mine but that's where the
tax rate in Senate bill two
eighty eight would be Mr chair I
I'm sorry you missed Senator
Pirtle I was.
Referring to the two sixty three
and twelve is that correct to
state.
It could be as high as thirty
two percent if if you it and
the.
The local.
And the G. R. T. to the twenty
percent you could call you're
talking thirty two percent Mr
Chairman now it's it's help line
so let's assume you go to a
cannabis dispensary in
Albuquerque to buy recreational
cannabis you will pay on that
transaction gross receipts tax
right in Albuquerque that seven
point eight seven five percent.
Of that five point five percent
will go to the state right the
other units will stay with the
local government either the city
or the county that has imposed a
local option gross receipts tax
so that takes this tax rate in
Albuquerque to seven point eight
seven five percent Senate bill
three sixty three that imposes a
nine percent excise on top of
that that takes your effective
tax rate on the sale that we're
discussing just sixteen point
eight seven five percent right
that nine percent state excise
goes straight to the general
fund.
Then the legislation three sixty
three states that local
governments may impose a three
percent local option G. R. T.
which in Albuquerque would take
the effective tax rate to
somewhere around nineteen point
five seven five percent the main
difference in the tax structure
I just outlined to you between
Senate bill three sixty three
and house bill twelve is that
house bill twelve cents that
local option excise tax at four
percent while setting the state
excise tax at eight percent and
Senate bill three sixty three
the Senate Bill excise tax is
nine percent and the local
option excise tax is three
percent but both pieces of
legislation essentially target a
tax rate that gets you to twenty
percent on the transaction
Mister chairman Senator.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator for that explanation of
how you get the twenty percent
thank you all for the.
The media it can range from
twenty eight percent to forty
percent twenty eight depending
on that whether or not the local
government business taxes impose
and the whether or not they
there is a sale think so it's a
minimum of twenty eight and can
go as high as forty so and they
have a very robust.
black market in California
because of the high tech so you
don't feel.
That twenty percent.
Is going to.
Present this you can't prevent
alright anymore on a sales in
black in the black market.
I do feel lucky if you're
confident that you're not going
to have a robust
Robust black market a twenty
twenty percent Mister chairman
Senator I do feel confident in
that and if I may Mister
chairman to the senators point I
think Dr o'donnell mate may
really be able to to provide
some additional information as
we look at your hands regarding
tax rate if I may Mister
chairman.
Mr o'donnell are you willing to
drive about how you're going to
come.
Mr chairman members of the
committee up you know in in
looking at the at the various
tax rates that states have
imposed on cannabis you know
over the last several years it
does appear that that the state
rates are converging towards
twenty percent some states set
it to low to begin with and
decided to raise it some some
states realize they tended to
high and decided to lower it but
the convergence does seem to be
around twenty percent so it
seems like a very safe place to
start at least.
thank you callin also want to
publicly thank you for putting
together the excellent overview
which is a very helpful thank
you for a for doing that thank
you for the.
Is there any one other quick
question.
Senator Clemente I just wanted
to after that the insulated to
twenty percent is the is the
maximum impact created because
this is like what Senator of
content that is designed to the
spot included in SB thirteen
Valentine's day.
If I may thank you Senator
Candelaria chair
I prefer I prefer green and
thank you for the this bill New
Mexico surely for production.
And we're sure New Mexico a
little bit more green and have
that conversation Colorado that
are treated better thank you.
Okay thank you are also is there
any.
Hi Mr chair and we're watching
it is it is going to be any
money specifically appropriated
for education enforcement and
mental health services
associated with this with
cannabis.
Mr Chairman Senate bill three
sixty three includes no you're
marking a resident the gross
receipts tax revenue that we
collect is a stable go to the
general fund as will be at
cannabis excise tax revenue and
then it is up to us as a
legislature in our annual
process to make exactly those
sort of investments I think
we've come a long way since I
first got into this legislature
when it comes to approaching
addiction as a public health
issue I really want to lift up
the comments by Senator Hamblen
when we talk about addiction we
really need to talk about the
underlying behavioral mental
health trauma issues and we have
we have more work to do in
funding those programs but there
is no earmarking is Senate bill
three sixty three that would
permanently divert a source
percentage of revenue to any
program that would be left up to
our normal budgeting process
thank you for the question thank
you Mr chairman thank you
senator having lived in six or
seven different states.
I am here to tell you that.
Mental health services are extra
weight extremely underfunded
here and we certainly no one can
accuse us of.
Adequately funding and mental
health services so I was very
concerned about that thank you
Well that hours later have some
other questions about the we got
to get moving on thank you
everyone who's been working on
this thank you for your your
your answers and the everyone
have a wonderful day thank you.
Mr.
Respond to Senator Tallman just
from our bills perspective we do
set up two separate funds Mr
chair Senators moment of the
cannabis regulation Fund which
explicitly talks about the
public health and safety
elements and also keep community
grants re investment fund again
in partnership with the tax and
Rev Department we were and it's
not good practicing good policy
to earmark money that doesn't
yet exist and that's why you
won't see a specific amount
however I think this legislature
would want to.
Basically look at the
opportunity when we start seeing
revenue coming in next year
hopefully on the the new markets
that are created and then start
appropriating and so thank you
Mr chair thank you
Representative Senator Pirtle I
think in the comments.
Thank you.
Mister chairman Senator there is
a small portion earmarked within
my legislation but it's just a
very small portion that will go
to department of public safety
because the big concern
especially my community is
trying to determine like with
alcohol where we have
breathalyzer tests and in blood
tests we can tell somebody's
under the influence of alcohol
right now and we have standards
that that have been put in place
what other by the courts are by
statute that that show that
and and with cannabis it's hard
the test can show that
somebody's used it recently but
we don't have a way to do a a
blood test for a saliva test
currently and so we want to make
sure there's money that goes to
a program that does research and
development on trying to come up
with something like that to
protect public safety and ensure
that we can
provide those yes that will
produce the results that that we
really need in order to protect
drivers on the roads and then it
also gives the money to the test
for the drug recognition expert
training as well so that all of
our police officers can get that
much needed training.
Thank you.
Thank you Senator Pirtle and
Representative Romero Senator
Candelaria thank you senator Tom
back to you Mr chairman I don't
see any others on the list.
Great
I have a.
I think a lot of the questions
this is been really good of.
Having flashbacks of my first
session back in twenty thirteen
when I carry the.
We do a Senate bill of two
twenty one with this New Mexico
insurance exchange act that we
have for bills to a house and
two in the Senate and the.
Thank you for myself I first the
session and the.
So it's similar
with this legislation very
complicated and important I know
that
One of the bills that I had
with regards to.
In our government agreements
with tribes.
I know that I uh introduced a
bill we're meant a little bit.
and each of you or does that
contain the.
that language in the bill speak
to that.
Mr Chairman quite simply Senate
bill three sixty three does
include the inter governmental
agreement framework that you
step forward and incorporates
and expands that into the
recreational market okay
appreciate that.
Mr chair as does ours and house
bill twelve and we thank you for
your leadership on that and and
basically that it mimics your
legislation previously expanding
into the recreational market.
That Mr chair
we.
It looks the from the amendment
of including this and any other
questions of your own previous
legislation that you that would
bring to equity and parity I'm
that we need to have thank you.
Your.
my eight legislation does not
contain the language that you
are asking thank you thank you.
Thank you okay this is been
really thank.
Really good discussion I really
encourage of.
I think we learned a lot from
the questions in just a
conversation I know it's a lot
to have a that many sponsors but
I think it also allows for you
to hear you know and the
committee at once at one time to
hear your responses and you know
by you know of all the various
suggestions and and comments and
recommendations being made I
think it's really good.
So I really would like to
encourage this poor Sanchez now
hello and work together and come
back you know to this committee
on on Saturday we're gonna
dedicate Saturday again next
week and hopefully we can move
of the legislation out of here
to the judiciary so with that I
want to thank all of you.
Yes.
Mr chairman thank you I think
this is been one of the most in
depth sort of targeted and
policy based discussions and
thank you so much.
Thank you for this hearing.
Thank you Mr chair just as far
as a next step go just for my
clarity are you thinking about
hearing another.
For a vote like are you what's
your timing on all this and I
had talked about next Saturday
Mr chair we're just trying to be
ready for you next time when
we're when we all after we do
all Haidle to set a deadline for
all of that Mr yes my my plan is
for you guys to take the next
you know six days.
And hopefully you guys can come
to some a compromise and I don't
know if it's going to be a bill
to built I think a preference
would be a bill but that's
really up to you I hope you guys
can agree on on on or put into a
piece of legislation together
for this committee to move out
so Mister chair I think an
important notice to come up with
bills and not only it's on this
committee but will law passed
through Judiciary that's another
that's another step that so we
have the
aware of that so this this
legislation as we work together
must get to Senate Judiciary and
I would really like an
opportunity to get a bill back
to the house that you know some
of my Republican colleagues in
the other chamber would feel
comfortable voting for thank you
Mr chairman just in terms of
housekeeping hello my proposal
will be just so it's clear
everybody is that Senate bill
three sixty three is Natalie
merchant to house bill twelve I
have no pride of authorship here
you know I think the issue is
finding the right place on these
policy issues so that is just
mind working recommendation as
one of the sponsors and all
consolidate this on this of
course but that would be just
starting out the recommendation
of the make to this committee
and I think we discussed
Senator Pirtle and I have
already plans to have lunch on
Monday so thank you all very
much.
Mr.
We're of the of the process if
we committee some house bill
twelve it does have to go back
to the house through the normal
processes is that correct that
way that the house members would
have an opportunity to vote on
this legislation and be on the
record the bill that they want
to be on the record on yes yes
yes.
So Mr chair if I could tell.
Earlier so I'll just tell you
give and as you point out
Senator Pirtle the need to go
through Senate Judiciary I would
strongly suggest that we use the
amendment process and not to a
committee sob because having to
go all the way through
committees in the house process
just has the potential for us to
do get almost all the way
they're in route time so I just
we should all talk about this if
it's a sub you gets referred
through committees and and given
things move a little bit slower
in the house
you know the differences it
could be done on a.
Could be done on a concurrence.
Both or it could go into a
conference committee I just
think there's lots of different
pieces that we just need to be
careful as we move this and so I
just I'm always hesitant we had
this come up the other night
actually Senator Pirtle you had
a bill.
Where where there was some
discussion about doing at a
substitute on on the side on
this side it just it doesn't
happen very often that way
because it does add multiple
steps and that can be a
challenge so I just throw that
out.
Mr chairman we just hopefully
I'm just gonna pray that the
Senate chairman of judiciary
exercises discretion and allows
this bill to be heard in a
timely fashion I mean I think
that's the real big issue is
let's not play politics here
let's get let's get the
discussions going that need to
happen and get that bill done
thank you Mr leader.
And your chairman as well.
Thank you Mr chair if I may I
just want to thank you for the
opportunity the opportunity and
I appreciate this opportunity to
get as we got the we today and
here
really
not be written off here and I
would really Mr chair task
Senator Candelaria to consider
working out with that with the
sponsors for Senate bill
thirteen as well and all the
other Sanchez and and really get
get you get through the gate to
the grid of this as we did today
some of the conversations and
really bring for that that piece
of legislation in there are
strings together are are what
make us a stronger for New
Mexico and for everybody that we
represent thank you your vote to
any ideas I think the challenges
all due respect many of the
ideas that are presented in
Senate bill thirteen I simply
will not cannot agree to because
I think they're bad policy it is
my door open to discuss where we
can find common ground
absolutely.
Mr chair if I may invite myself
to lunch on Monday known today
but
I'm saying that you know being
that we have gotten house bill
twelve through one chamber and
you have we have learned a lot
were so happy or very happy to
talk about the lessons learned
through our seventy member body
and and that that sort of key
points as far as what was of
interest and of course bring
that to the Senate but being
that we have moved through a
single chamber and with the
timing on everything to we would
love to be sort of the way the
the the way to pathway to to
success for the governor's
office in partnership with
everyone here and inclusive of
the of the ideas that we did
discuss already being open to
and wanting to move it forward
thank you Mr chair and thank you
everybody for your patience
while we continue this process
thank you thank you.
All righty
Mr chairman if I could just for
a second and and Senator Brandt
ahead as an actual member of the
committee if I could get a
moment to speak all right right
you know I I didn't realize
coming into today that we were
actually going to.
move forward the Senate bills I
understand we can't move forward
the house bill because it isn't
in our committee yet.
I feel comfortable there are two
bills at least in this committee
that I could tentatively support
going forward to Judiciary so
they can start working on them
their start getting on the
schedule there
it doesn't say on our agenda
that they're not going to be
voted on so I don't think we'd
be breaking any rules to vote on
on I would yield to the majority
leader on that but I would feel
comfortable doing in a
recommendation on three six
three and two eighty eight so
that they can be worked on
before Judiciary I think it's
pretty clear that two eighty
eight is the leader right now
it but three sixty three is very
close behind.
So I'm I'm happy Mister chair if
you yes Representative yearUnder
thank you Mr chair so I think
the thinking was and this was
what was announced on in terms
of a process
is that we are going to kind of
hear the presentation of the
four bills and you're right it's
a little funky to have the house
bill here but what what I think
in the discussion with senators
serve on days is that are in the
next week basically the sponsors
of these four bills.
Need to see if we can get to one
bill and percent of bill you
know and make a decision to this
committee so that we don't end
up in a situation where there's
just multiple moving pieces and
and and you're right it kind of
moves one step forward but the
challenges it's got other pieces
left behind and so I think that
thinking was to use the next
week to try and get all these
folks to work and then com
Saturdays a week from today
we've got to make the decision
and is it one bill is it to
bills is it three bills you know
my preference would be in my
whole and I've really sent the
signal to those different
parties is try and figure out a
way that we've got one bill we
can move forward
you know from my perspective as
someone supports this that would
be you know using this senator
Candelaria said use the house
bill that's already passed let's
do an amendment was the shape
that bang with see if we can't
get something that that all the
parties get on board with and
then one bill goes to Senator
office and Senate judiciary has
two weeks
to kind of work on it some more
with that one bill versus having
multiple bills going and getting
in a situation where we've got.
Bills flying all over the place
and I just worry that with that
scenario we're gonna end up
with.
We there's a good chance we end
up with nothing because we just
can't get all the pieces lined
up and so I just think this is a
better chance to to have a very
targeted way to do it and if
they can't come up with
agreement you know Center brand
I think then absolutely with
that we make a decision and
we're gonna push whatever goes
forward we can push one we get
pushed to we could push three
bills the Senate judiciary and
make them do all the work but I
I really this this is one of
those super hard things that
that and I and I'm just going to
send the signal right now at all
the all the folks working on
this they're gonna need to spend
the next week really well.
And just I would say to get a
wrong but it's going to be
get on soon and just try to come
up with a solution themselves
because that'll make our job in
a week that much easier if it's
if I'd agreements reached if
it's not then we'll do what we
need to do.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
your leader I appreciate that I
I do have concern though that
you know we we haven't seen the
Senate bills until today with
twenty days left
and it almost like we were
sitting here waiting for the
house bill to get here
yeah we have some really great
ideas in fact I think better
ideas on the side
you know we talk about the the
house passed it but it was
definitely
participate.
There was no bipartisan support
of that bill we're I think we
have some built over here that
house bipartisan support you
have at least three members in
this chamber as one of those who
supports it yeah I mean you had
many discussions about this in
your office and in line
about this issue in a someone
who supports that there are
certain things that I cannot and
will not support the House Bill
and there are other things that
that I I like very much so you
know we need to bring something
I feel like there's two bills
that have a chance of going
forward at this time of that
Senate bill two eighty eight and
Senate bill three sixty three I
will obviously you know.
Obviously but but all all you'll
take the consideration what
you're saying
but I'm concerned that we're
going to have what thirteen days
left next Saturday.
Judiciary is backed up well
beyond measure although there
some house bills being heard in
there that you know they haven't
heard the you know some of our
Senate bills but that's alright
I understand how it works
national priorities were this
was supposed to be a priority
issue in the area of twenty days
left and we're just now hearing
it so I appreciate it all all
leave alone at that.
I feel like I needed to make my
voice heard on that I think
there's only two bills that have
a possibility of getting my
vote.
and there's one that I strongly
favor I will mention at the two
eighty eight
I think is very close to what I
could support there are a couple
of weeks I'd like to make to but
I will get that with the server
portal and senator Candelaria
and I think that I can support
this issue with the right pieces
thank you.
Thank you Senator current.
Well thank you very much Mr
chairman and I want to follow up
just a little bit on the
conversation with regard to what
to do with the spells I'm a
little concerned because what I
think I heard was that
we were more interested in in
may be rolling yeah and one of
the bills to the to the house
bill and I think it's going to
be critical that the people
doing the negotiation taking to
consideration
Senate Bill.
Two eighty eight and and I don't
want to just assume that.
Over lunch you're gonna be able
to work this out though I'm glad
they're going to get together
but I can't tell you how much I
and.
I'm supportive of what Senator
Brandt said that.
Maybe the work should be done at
the next level I'm not sure but
I hope that when they come back
on Saturday that I'm seeing some
pieces of two eighty eight in in
in that bill I don't want to
just merge one Senate bill with
the house bill and say we're
done I think we really need to
include many thanks for some of
the things that I'm saying in
the other Senate bill so I think
we do thanks at pretty well over
here and I'm counting on the
Sanchez both to sit down and
let's see if we can't make sure
that this has the fingerprint at
the Senate on it as well thank
you.
Thank you Senator Kernan I I
think the message has been
pretty loud and clear to to the
Sanchez I think it's been a
really good discussion education
across as well and so I think
there's some of of of they got a
lot of work ahead of them and so
I think I hope I get a light but
it's wonderful answers so much
as well.
With that thank you Sanchez have
a good afternoon Mister chairman
I always invite us.
And Mister chair if we have to
you know to go Herbert turtle
and I and a game of worse than I
am I'm totally okay with that
okay the I think this game is
office so you might be you might
be the time that's great as long
as we can.
Some sort of agreement Mr chair.
Up so so with that committee
members of.
We have some of.
Before we move on.
Last week hi I'm I met with our
our.
A ranking member.
And provided some bills.
We both looked at and she also
had other colleagues look at.
That we really didn't feel hat
any issues and those are your
bills that are listed on the
bottom ninety nine eighty all
the way down to four oh four.
So I wanted to move those along
I think there's a consensus on
the.
Okay so what I like to do is go
bill by bill.
Have a motion on each bill.
There is no opposition.
I would just move right along.
if there is an opposition from
any of the members on these
bills that will pull up and then
we'll put it back on the
calendar.
So.
Senate going to take a look at
these of us Senator Kernan do
you want to speak a little bit
before we.
Thank you thank you Mr chair and
I did have a look at these and
also I just got a.
Senator Brandt and also Senator
Griggs we all took a look at
that we're comfortable with all
of them if that if that everyone
else is will live long if
someone is not we certainly
don't mind pulling it out thank
you okay great so
so can I have a motion on Senate
bill ninety nine as we move to
to pass the Senate bill ninety
nine as amended.
Right any opposition to that
motion.
The non revenue pass on Senate
bill ninety nine as amended.
Senator in our is anyone absent
are excuse I cannot tell I
believe we have everybody on.
One two three four five six
seven eight nine ten you're
right eleven okay thank you.
Who can have a motion on Senate
bill two forty one.
The new passing Senate bill two
forty one a second.
Any opposition to the motion.
The line will be passed on to
forty one.
You have a motion on Senate bill
two eighty one.
Thoman moves.
Senator common move
Representative second second.
Second by Griggs any opposition
to the motion.
The line we have to pass on to
anyone Senate bill to anyone.
Motion on Senate bill two eighty
seven.
Yes.
It was the second any opposition
to the motion.
The non waiver of the pass on
Senate bill two eighty seven.
Senate bill three twenty eight.
Committed to pass.
You have a second.
Thank you.
By Senator Brandt and sorry Mr
chairman what what number did
you call out just now.
Three twenty eight I answer at
three twenty eight water and
sanitation gross receipts
Senator Gonzales.
I must have an outdated agenda
the right answer.
We have a motion of any
opposition to the motion.
The non we have a due pass on
Senate bill three twenty eight
have a motion on Senate bill
three sixty five.
Two thousand three sixty five
Senator Brandt second by Senator
Tallman.
So we should share yes.
Senator project yes Senator
Padilla that.
There was a second page to the
agenda today maybe he can get
the second page
That might have been it thank
you very much Mr okay yeah we're
on second were on page two now
okay thank you okay I seconded
Mr chair.
Okay so that was the second on
Senate bill three sixty five.
Okay yes.
Any opposition to the motion.
The non we have a due pass on
Senate bill three six five.
Move on to Senate bill three
seventy nine can have a motion
motion I'll just pass on Senate
bill three seven nine.
a motion by Hermio who have
second.
Thank.
Written by Griggs any opposition
to the motion Mr chairman I
would like to be shown as voting
no on this particular bill with
no reason to discuss okay all
right so Lane you know we're.
We have a due pass motion on
Senate bill three seventy nine.
OK a motion on Senate bill three
ninety four.
Yes.
Representative current.
Second.
Second by Senator Brandt.
Any opposition to the motion see
non revenue press on Senate bill
three ninety four.
Okay now we're moving on to
Senate bill for for us so move.
But Trohman Senator Corman
second second.
Senator Kernan opposition to the
motion Mr chairman I would also
like to be shown voting no on
this bill members and discuss.
All righty so we have one in
opposition we have a deep pass
on Senate bill four oh four.
Thank you members of the baby
thank you
A ranking member for a the
working with your colleagues to
get some of the bills are moving
forward
at this time what will go on
back up to the agenda and I like
to bring up of Senate bill one
eighty nine only because we've
discussed that before we ask the
sponsor to amended and so
Senator of doing are you on the
call yes Mr chair I'm here okay
right go ahead and the presenter
a amended.
Bill.
Thank you Mr chair this is the
bill that was before this
committee last Saturday although
that that feels like it was a
year ago
And it is a significantly
shorter bill now in the sub
that's before you because we
took out basically everything
having to do with the banks and
the and what we left in was just
the part that creates a clear
path forward for bringing a
civil claim to address financial
exploitation of vulnerable
adults and I have an expert here
with me attorney Greg McKenzie
and he can very briefly kind of
run through what what that the
bill as it as it stands now does
Mr mackenzie.
Thank you senator Mr Chairman
it's a privilege to be able to
addresses today we could talk
about this bill for quite some
time I know we're limited on
time but I'll try to hit the
high points now.
I.
Students.
One okay this.
In any event in New Mexico we
have had an increasing problem
with elder abuse and
practitioners in this field Mr
Chairman had been dealing with
this for a number of years
beginning last year the senior
citizens law office convene a
task force that was comprised of
a number of stakeholders that
participate all and all the law
issues and and all will be use
programmable adult issues
in particular touching on the
question of exploitation those
folks included representatives
from aging long term services
The New Mexico district court's
office of the Attorney General
the state auditor district
attorneys association regulation
licensing A. R. P. disability
rights New Mexico several
sections of the New Mexico state
bar The New Mexico guardianship
Association a representative
from the National Academy of all
law attorneys The New Mexico
just developmental disabilities
planning council and The New
Mexico our ministry of office
the porch and the the work of
these individuals was really
designed to try to tailor a
solution to the growing problem
and so what the product of that
task force Mr Chairman was.
Ation of a proposed criminal
bill and a proposed civil Bill
SB one eighty nine is that
proposed civil bill and just
Senator Duhigg noted we
originally had a number of
provisions in this proposed bill
designed to promote the
provision of information
financial institutions and unity
for providing that information
to relevant agencies but that
has been taken out what is left
now is a bill that does seven
principle of pens and all of
which when taken together our
game changer for New Mexico the
seven things that this bill does
number one this bill creates a
civil right of action for
financial exploitation of
vulnerable persons it defines
financial exploitation in
detailed definitional language
in the statute and it defines
individuals who risked would
receive protection under that
statute as eligible adults and
and by the way this definition
is not age tested it refers to
all individuals who may be
susceptible to influence or who
might be taken advantage of in
the way that's contemplated by
the proposed bill I and we can
get into that the details of
that if you like but but further
kind of hitting it from thirty
thousand feet in addition what
this bill does is it sets the
burden of proof which is the
nature of us as practitioners
had in this field without proof
of preponderance of the evidence
it provides for a definition of
undue influence and I
importantly yeah rostrum we
awarded punitive damages.
The second thing this bill does
is that it creates certainty in
the area of law presently the
law that is available to
practitioners to try to right
wrongs in this area is limited
we've got conventional legal
theories such as conversion that
sort of thing and we also have
one two employees law that that
law is mostly centered on a
series of cases that are dealing
mostly with post mortem
disposition of property and very
little modern law and so what we
have done here is find certainty
in the law with good definitions
and we find a series of remedies
to people who are victims of
exploitation numbers remedies
include allowing for the
recovery of property stopping or
in joining a suspect transaction
are returning profit seeking
compensatory damages and
boarding or rescinding a
transaction.
The third major thing that this
bill does is that it encourages
the involvement of independent
legal counsel and it does that
by sending a signal in the
statute that if there is
independent legal counsel
involved that is an indication
although not dispositive that
the transaction is arm's length
transaction.
and significantly is is scared
strength to a pre litigation
demand letter when we invade the
when we when we created the task
force one of the concerns are
participants identified is the
fact that demand letters sent to
perpetrators of undue influence
or perpetrators of all reaching
in cases like this we have a lot
of cheap
this proposed bill
Add the cheese by allowing a
demand letter to say that if you
don't sure the problem within
fifteen days then we have the
right to sue for punitive damage
claim against you.
the major thing that this bill
does Mr chairman senators is
that it lowers barriers to
justice one of the biggest
problems that are participants
identified is the economic cost
of trying to rectify in elder
abuse claims I'm and that with
this act would do is it will
allow attorneys attorney be
shifting which is not something
that is typically available in
most civil claims to address the
concern that we've heard in the
review of this statute
is the District Court would have
discretion to award attorney
fees but that can be a big
hammer in a case like this it
can also allow more people to
access the court's directive by
exploitation who otherwise might
be afraid that they can't afford
it.
number six this bill does not
include on that body of law that
we have in New Mexico that's
been developed since about
nineteen twenty four in the
state dealing with post mortem
undue influence cases because
this bill is specifically
designed to deal with
exploitation cases we do not and
wrote on that body of law and
then finally as I mentioned
number seven this wall would
award the punitive damage the
punitive damage award against
perpetrators of exploitation
provided that the requirements
of the stature Matt hopefully
serving as a deterrent to this
kind of conduct in providing a
safer place for New Mexico's
board Roald Dahl's with that I
stand for questions but that's
the of you from a view of the
bill from thirty thousand three.
Thank you are Senator do it.
Mr chair I I have nothing more
to add where we're ready for
questions from the committee if
there are any your great no I go
to a committee we since we
already had public comment on
this would go straight to
committee.
Saying that Mr Chairman on over
the past.
Thank you have a do pass motion
by Senator Padilla the second
story is this a committee so.
With that I will.
The months so.
Thank you actor motion and
restate your motion Senator
Padilla.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator Brandt move it do not
pass on Senate bill one eighty
nine and I what will they do
pass on Senate committees of
Senate transportation business
and transportation Senate tax
business and transportation
committee substitute for Senate
bill one eighteen.
And would ask for if you pass
thank you Mr or something like
that.
We're going to bring okay.
there any opposition to the
motion.
No your review press thank you
very much Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee and
this this bill was really
improved because of the hearing
that you all gave us last week
so I really appreciate you all
doing that and thank you so much
for bring it back up Mr chair
and I just thank you.
Like go ahead I just want to
thank senator doing for pulling
back in the committee really did
the right thing here and holding
this back and Mr mackenzie good
to see you and thank you for
working on our is it really does
need to be addressed so we just
need to move this bill through
through the process and we'll
get it scanned on the floor as
soon as you get through second
Judiciary which I think is where
it's gonna sell thanks thank you
for thank you know move on to a
Senate bill a.
One eighteen Senator per are you
still with us Mr chair if if it
would be okay with the committee
of if Senator Diamond could go
first and then I will follow her
okay so that long morning I need
a few more minutes if that's
okay with with the chair I will
move to a Senate bill.
To do.
Senator Diamond our young I am
thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee this is
a very straightforward bill so I
hope to just blast right through
this this is SB two fifty two
the space flight in our informed
consent bill I'm joining you
here today from Sierra County
which is home of spaceport
America here and as you guys
know we are at a very critical
time with spaceport America but
we do have four key tenants that
are that are here virgin
galactic is you know we have
AeroVironment which is built to
some test site out here for the
sun glider we have spent months
which is doing some really
amazing things if you can get
out here and up aerospace so
what this legislation does it's
it's is it is intended to keep
our core tenants here at
spaceport America are
impertinence is what referring
to mass and also to attract
others I'm gonna quickly just to
skim through this bill on what
it does number one it broadens
the definition of spaceflight
companies to the space flight
informed consent at a number to
it removes the provision of an
automatic repeal so the sense
that and this bill really
maintains current law so that is
space by entity is not liable
for injury or death of a
participant resulting from
inherent risks of space I.
What the bill does not do it
does not excuse companies from
negligence or willful or
reckless disregard for the
safety or space I have
participants and it does not
limit any liability regarding
injury or property damage to non
participating third parties by
removing that sunset provision.
The bill does not contain an
appropriation it does not come
at a cost to the state I do have
some expert witnesses with me
today I have a Representative
day Hochman Vigil who was
carrying a more bill in the
house and really is is a at an
expert about this in her own
right we also had mystery
shopped Vendela from virgin
galactic is on the line to
answer any questions and we have
a Christmas Alicia keys are
secretary of economic
development who can tell you all
the great things or genetics
based what America so with that
said I'm gonna give
Representative Hochman Vigil
just a few minutes so she can
she can participate at her
comments as well.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
members of the committee and
thank you to the Senate sponsor
with this mayor bill Senator
Diamond I I think that Senator
Diamond cover the bases pretty
well I think it's important to
note that Mr chairman members of
the committee that the space
flight informed consent act is
already and comments by law
we're just making one quick
little tweak to a definition in
section two in or removing the
sunset because the technology
that's being house at spaceport
America is no longer in its
infancy and it's now time to
enter this this and street these
industries in this technology in
New Mexico with that I'll turn
it back to you Senator Diamond
thank you thank you very much I
also like to introduce our guest
from virgin galactic mystery
should rental are if you're
ready.
Your muted.
Can you hear me now.
Yes.
I have to do is toggle one
switch on and off and it works
technology.
Thank you senator thank you Mr
chair and committee members who
attention on the topic I'm here
to support any questions and
discussion that we have here and
I just want to echo Senator
Diamond and representative
Representative Hochman Vigil is
remarks that this bill is
important to spaceflight
companies currently doing
business in New Mexico by
providing these businesses
certainty and transparency with
regard to spaceflight
participant liability as
mentioned it also supports
encourages growth in this
industry New Mexico which I
think is a very important part
of this bill it keeps the stay
competitive with others that
house similar companies and
similar at at language in law
and that's seven other states it
would signal to other companies
again what we already know so
well that New Mexico is business
friendly and attractive option
for cutting edge businesses to
set up shop and to create growth
and creating this hub in New
Mexico for future commercial
space by transportation thank
you very much for your attention
on the topic.
Thank you.
Thank you sherry sauce online is
secretary Alicia keys this cues
if you like to add a few remarks
thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I'm not going to
turn my video because I have
been cleaning my house this
morning.
Want to sing.
That.
This legislation is about
protecting our investment in the
Grove based industries and
bringing more more of these jobs
New Mexico sorry my dogs also
going crazy.
There is an aerospace ecosystem
in New Mexico a space valley
current are of related
businesses stretching from Los
Alamos through Turkey to to
their consequences and Los
crucis the governor has targeted
the secretary for growth to
diversify the economy and to
higher jobs to the state the
global aerospace economy exceeds
three hundred fifty billion
dollars.
Has over sixty companies working
in the space industry we have
students that New Mexico tell
you.
Work aerospace sector and stay
in New Mexico as the sponsor
mention this bill extends like
actions now in place through
informed consent and there are
seven other states where they
are now launch activities that
have similar legislation without
a sunset so the amount of
worldwide attention that New
Mexico has received from our
aerospace industry is incredible
this bill insurers Mexico
continue.
To compete these companies and
other states and the jobs thank
you.
Thank you Secretary and with
that said it's it's as
straightforward as that gets it
just allows us to maintain to
currently operate in the manner
we're doing so now so we stand
for any questions Mr chairman
thank you thank you Senator
Diamond at this time we'll go to
the public comment.
Madam chair Senate bill two
fifty two.
We do not have any members of
the public who registered in
advance to speak against the
bill are there any members who
wish to speak against the bill
at this time.
Okay we will now move on to
those who registered to speak in
favor of the bill beginning with
Jason Espinoza.
Chairman members of the
committee Jason Espinoza
registered lobbyists with the
New Mexico technology council
always stand in strong support
of the legislation thank god
both Sanchez and secretary did a
great job of explaining the
reason why so I want to add on
but thank you for the time thank
you.
Thank you very much next up we
have Eric Montgomery.
You may go ahead.
Thank you Mr chair my name's
Eric Montgomery I am with the
board of directors for New
Mexico idea the statewide
economic developers association
we stand in strong support of
this legislation it created an
excellent regulatory framework
that allowed for virgin to
operate within New Mexico this
piece of legislation with the
sunset clause however has
hampered us
it has created in an endgame and
in predictive unpredictability
in economic development
recruitment for space for
tenants we need this to go away
to continue to see success and
we'd appreciate a do pass thank
you.
Thank you very much next up we
have Ashley Wagner.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I'm
Ashley Wagner director of public
policy for the New Mexico
chamber of commerce we strongly
support this bill because it
minimizes uncertainty around the
state transportation and makes
our liability environment column
and more competitive with other
state thank you Mexico more
attracted to spaceflight
companies looking for operating
locations this is in line with
our economic strategic action
plan we released in December
where we recommend numerous ways
to speed up our economic
recovery and diversify our
economy thank you so much.
Thank you very much next up we
have Terry Cole.
This is JD Bullington speaking
on this on behalf of the chamber
can I speak but have a Terry
sure.
Thank you JD Bullington with the
greater Albuquerque chamber of
commerce the chamber support
Senate bill two fifty two
because the chamber wants to see
space job space in a vacation
and exciting space development
and here in New Mexico therefore
we need to extend reasonable
liability protections to space
flight operators because we
can't make it harder to be a
space flight operator here than
it is elsewhere we believe in
promise attentional spaceport
America if we want space to be a
competitive growth industry for
us we have to be a welcoming
place to do this kind of cutting
edge business thank you.
Thank you very much finally we
have Juliana creating.
To me and I come.
All right.
Other members of the public I
see Michael Gonzalez.
Good afternoon.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee Marco Gonzales and the
Richard this for virgin galactic
and I just wanted to say that
there were two other groups it
we're trying to get it but could
into New Mexico new space and
also New Mexico spaceport
ambassadors groups that support
the bill for all the reasons
that have already previously
madam so I appreciate the time
Mr chair madam chair Mr chair
and members of the committee and
thank you for your time this
afternoon.
Thank you very much are there
any other members of the public
who wish to speak in support of
Senate bill two fifty two.
That concludes public comment at
this time.
Great of no we'll go to the
committee.
Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman there's a
whole lot of things I'd like to
say but instead I will move it
to pass.
It
I can Mr chair best motion by
Senator Brecht and then the
second by Senator Padilla.
The.
Any opposition to the motion.
I don't see any so we have a due
pass on the Senate bill two
fifty two.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members thank you Mr chairman
members thank you.
We're back up to a Senate bill
one eighteen Senator Pirtle you
ready now thank you Mr chair
thank you members of the
committee hopefully did you
receive the amendments Mr chair
for this piece of legislation.
okay I'll go ahead and explain
Mr chair and then whenever we're
done in the times appropriate we
can go over the amendments if
that's okay with you Mr chair.
Senator thank you Mr chairman
thank you members of the
committee before you I have
Senate bill one eighteen is the
food accessibility Act
this came about during the COVID
we really learned a lot of the
weaknesses within our economy
and in places that could use
some improvement and as we
noticed lots of the grocery
stores running out of food and
things like that it really
brought.
To my attention how dependent we
are on food that comes from
outside of the state and so we
brainstormed ideas on how we
could improve food accessibility
within the state and we look to
some other states that have done
just this proposal and they've
had they've done so with success
Wyoming is one that proposed
this in two thousand fifteen and
although it removes quite a bit
of the government regulation
there has not been any reports
of food borne illness
in resulting from this new
policy what this is intended to
do is really improve our farmers
markets and the excess of food
at those farmers markets removed
that red tape you know we all
remember the last time Senator
Hamblen knows I I brought up the
grandmother's apple butter and
and those types of things that
we really enjoyed well you know
that's something that you could
purchase if this was the past
you can go purchase of a really
nice apple butter or or
something along those lines but
itself and at a farmers market
that's raised and produced
right here in New Mexico so I
think it's it's something that's
really gonna spurts in economic
development one of the biggest
things in the states that that I
must bring attention to is the
hundreds of new businesses that
were actually open because of
opening this up and so within
Wyoming Nevada and North Dakota
when they opened even further
than the twenty nine other
states that have expanded they
went a little bit further they
really noticed a larger growth
within small businesses little.
Have shops and things preparing
these jellies and jams and other
foods.
But that the farmers markets the
numbers of farmers markets
actually grew seventy percent
within the state of Wyoming so I
think that's a very important.
Part of this but it its main
focus is really increasing the
access to food from the
concerned and informed in
consumer that understands that
it wasn't repaired in a licensed
kitchen and and the reason
that's important is is the fact
that it's very hard to receive
one of these licenses very
onerous and this just allows
access to in informed in
consumer that the that the food
was prepared and that way and so
with that Mr chair I will
Bring the amendment if if the
times appropriate.
Yes we do have them women on the
screen can folks it.
And Mr chairman I'll move of the
amendment for purposes of
discussion thank you Senator
Padilla.
And thank you Mr Senator and I
received a no rack out of the
conservation committee with the
understanding that I would do
some work to improve the
legislation with the concerns
that came up from Senator
handling and and other members
of that committee and it was
that the signage wasn't specific
enough as to what does it mean
for informed in consumer so we
thought it important less but
what that sign will look like so
we thought a twenty inch by
twenty inch sign informing the
consumer that these products
that we're not prepared in a
license kitchen was large enough
it would suffice and that's the
minimum so obviously places
could do a larger sign and the
other was this bill compared to
the other three did lack
something that was not on
purpose it just for some reason
did not get in the bill whenever
it was drafted but that the
environment department will
still have the ability to best
to gate any accusation of a work
illness from one of these
products so the other states
have that but I must mention
that there hasn't been any
incident cents Wyoming has done
that's been six years now so I
think this
legislation is is well overdue
but this ammendment definitely
help set and ensures that there
aren't any unintended
consequences or that it achieves
what it sets out to achieve
thank you Mr.
Thank you any of any discussion
on the amendment Senator is one
of the thank you Mr chairman I
appreciate that thank you
senator portal on the amendment
I I don't know with your
permission Mr chairman I would
ask our fellow committee members
Senator and what did she have
any input on.
How this wound up getting
drafted this amendment.
Senator Hamblen.
I'm Mister chairman Senator
Padilla no I did it was just
basically what was discussed in
the conservation meeting in the
conservation committee I feel
comfortable with this amendment
and I think it's just you know I
think Senator Pirtle you and I
are going to be on the front
lines of advocating for farmers
markets and are home grown
businesses but also to recognize
that we want to make sure that
people are safe that the
business owners are safe that
they don't run the risk of
putting their customers of their
clients at risk and so I feel
comfortable with this ammendment
and feel that you know when we
talk about is important to the
informed is the key word here
but I do feel that the signage
is really helpful in that
process because not everybody's
going to ask twenty questions
before they purchase a jar of
apple butter so I do appreciate
these these efforts and and and
grateful for the amendment thank
you Mr chair thank you senator
and with thank you Mr chairman
that's all I have Senator
Representative.
Service chairman I would move to
pass.
For for a due pass to have a
second I'll second for the
amendment right Mr chairman yes
yes.
The opposition to the motion.
On the amendment.
See none of Senator you have a
amended bill so Senator Pirtle
on the bill.
We're back in the bill Senator
any question from the committee
on the bill.
Seeing Mr chairman over the past
the remote recording press the.
Your second by Senator G.
Kernan.
Any opposition to the motion.
The non Senator you have the
best Senator borough thank you
Mr chairman thank you members of
the committee I've taken up
plenty of your time today.
I'm gonna Montes
Whether there Mr chairman.
Up in okay
Do we have.
Jooss on.
I am on Mr chair.
Bill two sixty two thank you
notes.
Thank you Mr chairman my wifi is
not that good so I may go in and
out and refer to my expert
witness Senate Bill two sixty
two deals with least employees
and what happens in health care
plans with a Senate placed into
different state of the
superintendent of insurance well
as.
Tearing them full time employees
but they're actually certain
other company out of the state
so with that all all referred
expert witness mo Chavis.
Yes Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is mo Chavez
and I'm here serves an expert on
Senate bill two sixty two on
behalf of the national
association of professional
employer organizations as the
former insurance commissioner
for the state of New Mexico I'm
very familiar with this issue.
As senator Munoz said about a
year ago the office of the
superintendent adopted a rule
dealing with the regulation of
the worst multiple employer
welfare arrangements Defense
health plans like if the chamber
of commerce got together put
together health plan
unfortunately the rule did not
expressly exclude PDL's these
professional employer
organizations the least
contractors as a result the
rules written almost exclusively
with H. P.'s health association
health plans in mind appeals
were unable to comply with the
rule and immediately ceased
offering PTO sponsored health
plans this resulted in the loss
of comprehensive and affordable
healthcare coverage for
thousands of New Mexicans we do
believe this was an unintended
consequence so P. O.'s are not
association health plans they're
not me was and could not
register such with the office of
the superintendent PO's are
single employer plans and cannot
solely offer health insurance P.
O.'s offer pay roll payroll work
comp and health insurance you
see a lot of contractors
throughout the state of New
Mexico USDJPY yells they're not
health insurers like Blue Cross
or Presbyterian this legislation
here's the problem and treats
PO's as the vast majority of
other states already do so as a
single employer welfare benefit
plan which products are fully
regulated by the office of the
superintendent we've talked to
superintendent of insurance and
he is okay with our bill as
evidenced by the fiscal impact
reports Mr chairman members of
the committee I stand for any
questions.
thank you Mr chairman the.
At this time we'll go to a
public comment.
For Senate bill.
Sixty two we do not have anybody
registered to speak against the
bill are there any members of
the public here today who wish
to speak in opposition of Senate
bill two sixty two you may raise
your hand at this time.
Seeing no hands raised we will
move on to those in favor of the
bill with Jason Weaks.
Good afternoon Mister chair
members of the committee two
weeks of a registered lobbyist
for the EP in its capacity as a
PO eighty P. handles payroll and
manages employee benefits that
among other things include
health care benefit packages
basically is a PO eighty P.
contracts of the business to
take care of all the ministerial
aspects of employment employee
management so the business can
focus on the content of its work
PO's was we called the New
Mexico implenia policing
contractors are critical
component of our economy in New
Mexico PO's pay wages to Mexico
workers of about a hundred and
thirty nine two hundred and
seventy four million annually
businesses that utilize PO's
grow to seven grow seventeen
nine percent faster and have ten
to fourteen percent lower
employee turnover however as a
result of the OSI's rule from
twenty twenty adopted to
regulate association health
plans PO's which in no way
function like an insurance
company or an association health
plan unfortunately fall within
the framework of that rule
slide inversely subjecting P. as
the rule of the unintended
consequence has as Mr Chavis
pointed out second PO's New
Mexico started dropping their
health coverage which is
negatively impacted the
businesses that utilize P. as in
the state treating peels like
health insurance companies
unnecessary because they're not
insurance companies on this bill
is critical to the continued
operation and availability of
fully functioning P. as in the
state because PED does need to
be exempt from the outside order
in order to ensure that they can
continue to offer quality fully
insured health insurance
benefits to their employees as
in the past with all that money
eighty thank you very much are
there any other members of the
public who wish to speak in
favor of Senate bill two sixty
two.
That concludes public comment at
this time thank you.
Thank thank you we'll go to the
committee.
No comments on the to do that I
don't see any hands going up so
Senator Padilla we have a due
pass motions Senator Padilla to
have a second.
Senator Hickey any opposition to
the motion.
Senator you have to pass on
Senate bill sixty two Senator
many of us thank you Mr chairman
that now my wife says I can go
finish cleaning the stalls at
the barn so I appreciate your
time.
Arbitration we're going back.
Well I'm gonna get inside
shower.
One of our state well chilly
today thank you.
Thank you so we'll move on to
the Senate bill two ninety nine
to help us into more.
More.
Senator Morris more timely on.
Not to Senate bill fifty eight
Senator Tallman.
Well thank you Mr chairman thank
you members of the committee I
believe the.
Mr chair I have an amendment.
We do have
We do have the amendment.
Okay I have a expert witness you
know explain the amendment
secretary of taxed rate of the.
Schardin Clarke you should.
Are you available.
We were I'm here at Mr chairman
and senator Tom and I'm here.
Go ahead secretary okay thank
you members of the committee
pleasure to be here with you
today the amendment makes makes
technical corrections that were
noted by the taxation and
revenue department basically at
this are the size of the
electric vehicle credit varies
based on the taxpayer's AGI
registered gross income based on
AGI the credit might be twenty
five hundred dollars or five
thousand dollars and most of the
language in this ammendment just
has to do with making at
flexible we don't always have
the current year's tax return by
the time we're asked to certify
the credit so this allows us to
use the most recent
and then there's just some
language that is fairly standard
this is amendment for I'm just
talking about basically that if
if the tax payer amends their
return and that changes what
size credit they would have
wristband eligible for from five
thousand down to twenty five
hundred because their AGI rises
unless they did that to
intentionally or knowingly
misstate their AGI to game the
system with this credit we will
not clawed back from them and
that's the entire amendment.
Thank you Secretary.
Turning back to the Mr chair.
Thank you gov.
We probably have more of a
motion to.
The amendment for purposes of
discussion Mr chairman thank you
Senator Padilla.
Any questions on the amendment
by the committee.
Thing that I'll move adoption of
the amendment Mr chairman.
We have a motion for adoption of
the amendment we have a second.
Thank you.
Representative Briggs.
The opposition to the motion.
The lower hearing on Senator you
have an amended bill so we're
back on the a bill Senator a
moment thank you Mr chair and
members of the committee this
so.
This bill has four major
provisions number one provides a
up.
A tax credit of up to twenty
five hundred dollars
for the purchase of a battery
electric or plug in hybrid.
I could feel co.
Up to a maximum of with the
Connecticut state the forty
eight thousand dollars in the
price of this.
Tax credit will extend for a
five year period from January at
twenty twenty two to January
twenty twenty six.
And
Hit.
And also the second majority of.
Provision of.
Also the.
As I said is three twenty four
twenty five hundred for most
vehicle purchases however.
There is a a.
A lower income households with
an adjusted gross income of.
Under fifty thousand for single
taxpayer.
And very filing jointly.
With that AGI of US seventy five
thousand or less.
The credit.
Increases to five thousand so
for most house so the B. twenty
five hundred for lower income.
associate the five thousand
dollars number two.
Major provision is it provides a
three hundred dollar a.
Tax credit for the installation
of a electric charging unit.
And number three it.
Provides for a in your.
Registration fee of a hundred
dollars for electric vehicle and
fifty dollars for a plug in
hybrid a plug in hybrid electric
vehicle affected by January one
two thousand twenty two.
In the fourth major provision as
the bill requires a taxed
Representative to compile an
annual report.
Representative evaluating.
The tax credit this report will
be presented to the.
Revenue stabilization and tax
policy interim committee.
So those are the major the
provisions of the.
Of the bill Mr chair and I have.
Nedra mercy.
From the energy and natural
resources department who are
maybe on board and wishes wishes
to make a few comments thank
you.
Yes thank you
hi Mr chairman and members of
the committee thank you for
allowing me to speak today
I am standing
For the energy minerals and
natural resources department and
we are for this bill I'm EMNRD's
climate and clean fuels program
promotes alternative fuel
vehicle usage in the state to
reduce transportation emissions
and this bill is passed
incentivizes dealerships to
bring EV's are electric vehicles
on to their lot which will
encourage investors to invest in
ET infrastructure in the state
and along with that will bring
our jobs.
and also if this bill is passed
I'm it especially helps the
lower income residents in New
Mexico two four ET thank you for
your time.
Thank you.
Let's hope the.
That's the extent of my expert
witnesses Mister Rowe chairman
again open up to.
The public you know public
comment now.
Senate bill fifty eight.
You not have any members of the
public who registered to speak
in opposition are there any
members of the public who wish
to speak against Senate bill
fifty eight at this time you may
raise your hand.
Seeing no hands raise we will
move on to those who wish to
speak in favor of Senate bill
fifty eight beginning with
Michael Santa the cabinet
secretary of the New Mexico
department of transportation.
Next up we have coal ten Deon.
Hello can you hear me yes.
Mr chair members of the
committee thank you for letting
me speak today in school today
and I'm speaking as a private
citizen in the market for the
navy are looking to upgrade my
twenty five year old gasoline
vehicle I do like
the idea behind this bill
however I would ask for some
consideration for the used car
market I would wish I could
afford a brand new.
Vehicle let alone a the V. one
I'm searching among the use
markets I would love to have
some thirty seconds.
in that regard and I think that
would also help lower income
people convert to an easy as
well thank you.
Thank you very much.
I think Thomas Allman.
Yes.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Sierra but for bringing this
bill forward my name is Tom
Solomon I co coordinator of
three fifty New Mexico the New
Mexico chapter three fifty dot
org the group devoted to
fighting for state climate and
on behalf over eight thousand
members I'd like to stand in
support of this bill emissions
climate emissions from the
transportation sector are now
the top source of greenhouse gas
warming for the planet and
everything that we can do to
accelerate transition to carbon
free transportation with
electric vehicles is the right
thing to do and a specifically
tax credits to help lower income
families four electric vehicle
even though the costs are coming
down rapidly is also very
positive for the state so for
all of those reasons and others
I stand in strong support of
this bill thank you.
Thank you very much are there
any other members of the public
who wish to speak in favor of
Senate bill fifty eight.
Seeing no other members of the
public public comment is over at
this time thank you very much.
Thank you.
Our renewable to the committee
for questions.
Senator majority floor leader.
Thank you Mr chair just so just
a question this is a tax credit
with a couple million dollars of
impact so I just think
consistent with our policy I
would just ask that we we keep
it here I I certainly support it
and I do have some.
I do have but but I do want to
see if we get some changes to
the amounts and kind of continue
on the discussion that we had
for the first question Mr chair
what what is your plan for this
this bill.
I'm from Bernalillo thanks for
the reminder I did look at it
was a two million dollar impact
and as we've done with other
bills we gonna hold it right
here not taking action.
Thank you Mr chair and I
appreciate that and it's you
know we just need to be
consistent and so you know and I
think that's that's a good a
good position to take so my
question Senator Tallman is
would you be willing you know to
reduce the the amount the the
annual fee for it's currently a
hundred and fifty eight hundred
dollars for electric and fifty
for hybrid
I think it's I think Center
Hamlin brought this issue up the
last time we all visited the
general sense is that fifty
dollars is the equivalent.
The that puts in the same range
as gasoline vehicles and we
don't want to have a
disincentive so I just wanted to
get your thoughts on.
You know whether when we move
this that's that's an additional
amendment that you might be
willing to look at.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
thank you for that that.
Question.
Any other center was asking me
that question I'd say no but
some to choose I'll say yes.
Well.
You made the chair fall this
this seat there so not no I
don't I don't want I don't want
to have any different different
response
you think it's a serious it's a
serious issue and and again
we've got a little bit time to
look at it and I also think in
fairness I don't want to you
know do amendments on the fly Mr
chair unless they're real simple
and even pretty good about that
too so I just want to give you a
heads up that this is I mean I I
again I I really support what
you're doing here and I think
it's super super.
Critical that we move forward
with this on both fronts one is
I do and I know Senator X.
doesn't like the tax credit and
he's going to get into that by
like the tax credit I think this
is an example of we can help
accelerate the transition to
electric which is happening for
sure but for lots of reasons
that's a policy decision and
then again likewise on the feet
it's it's a question of of what
the proper amount is and so I
just wanted to flag that
For you and again I I I guess
and maybe Center hamlet also did
weigh in on this because I know
she brought up I think there's a
study that says the.
The equal fee for guests be able
be it would be I think it's
fifty three dollars that I get
that right Center Hamlin from
your testimony before.
You're you're muted yes Mr chair
Senator Wirth yes it was is
fifty three dollars seem to be
and I don't have it right with
me right now but the two three
dollars seem to be like the
ballpark affordable rate for
those folks in the space.
Yes Mr chair I'm sorry Sierra
you have anything on that.
Well.
Being.
Sarah minded individual and the
one who's willing to compromise
not happy about it but
but the important thing is that.
I'm I'm willing to compromise in
order to get this a bill enacted
the this year since this is the
third year I've been now working
on this and that and I I trust
that you you will help me do
that thank you.
Yes Mr chair I'm not going to
make an amendment on the fly and
fairness to everyone but I do
think I will get.
Just some amendment an amendment
on that issue drafted and if
there's any other little tweaks
make sure to get those to the
committee so everyone can take a
look at and then if this once we
get to that point of moving
forward I personally would like
to include this in a in a tax
package that we do
but when we get to that point
we'll have something in front of
us will get a chance to think
about it so I just appreciate
you bring in the bill again
Sierra and do think this is
something we need to do.
Thank you thank you for the
support to Senator and of and I
am appreciate your help in
getting this bill an act thank
you.
Senator Padilla Senator Griggs.
I have no comments Mr chair
Senator Griggs I took my hand.
Thank you Mr chairman and I
don't know that Senator Wirth
wrong I just love tax credit
should.
Now now I'll meet in this and
and the thing I want to I want
to mention straight straight up
gasoline vehicles are I think
our lowest and and that are
secretary Schardin Clarke could
probably say that I think our
our lowest registration fees
like twenty seven dollars and it
goes up to like sixty five or
something and those are our our
normal light duty vehicle
registration fee.
So when you throw the gas tax on
top of that that they pay and
then you want to turn around and
say well okay let's give you
know electric vehicles less
let's push them to fifty eight
almost like you know they they
don't really then do.
Eric you just let them drive on
the roads and and not let them
pay squat show are so I think.
That's why and this particular
bill sure Coleman and I I know
you're trying to encourage
electric vehicles but I think
it's same time what we do is we
don't let them pay their fair
share.
By given the tax credit and then
route reducing the fees I mean
it just you know if it's worth
it to you.
To not have to pay gas tax go by
the electric car.
If you'd rather buy a gasoline
car that the that is a little
more present need to the by that
sucker
I just got a look at this one is
a you know I I think center
Thomas trying to encourage the
purchase of a of electric
vehicles which you don't have to
pay gas taxes at you next your
registration fees are low I mean
I I don't know I just I just
can't support the bill because I
don't see where it offers as our
State any real benefit so.
But other nap Senator Wirth I
love tax.
That's all I have Senator a
Senator Shendo thank you senator
Senator Kernan.
Thank you very much Mr chairman.
Probably know where I stand on
this but that I didn't I didn't
understand what you're trying to
do and you know just the other
day we passed a bill of clean
fuel standard and the purpose of
that bill was to reduce the
amount of hydrocarbon in our
fuels and.
Basically yeah we're expecting
many people to come in and build
their refineries that are going
they're going to produce the
blended fuel that.
this Senate bills Levin proposes
and and so on one hand we're
encouraging investment in she
will and in the on the other
hand we're giving tax credits
for electric vehicle so we've
got to figure out which we want
I mean if if if we're gonna
encourage investment in blended
fuels on one hand and on the
other hand we want to.
Give credits for electric
vehicle tuning in increase those
numbers I just think we have to
come to decide I I don't know
how you can be for about I'm
that's all I have thank you.
Okay thank you of.
I don't see any hands up so Mr
chair.
Hallman three first response to
senator to
Groups.
I don't totally disagree with.
What what he's saying about the
amount of a of the.
The for.
To register elector vehicle but
in the interest of
Of getting this and act and
willing to compromise also.
I think most would agree this is
a temporary fix once there's a
preponderance of elector
vehicles on the road this is
fees going to have to be a lot
higher than fifty dollars in
order to thank help maintain our
roads are gonna have to really
to a major a revision of how we
are finance the the repair and
maintenance of construction of
our roads and highways and
bridges so this certainly is the
temporary thing and what this
gonna to take at a major look at
in the future thank you.
Thank thank you senator so thank
you for the presentation of
Chris I will hold this bill over
so we're visit again in the
future you can the work with the
central.
Appreciate that okay now we're
moving on to a Senate bill one
seventy nine.
Senator you Mr chairman members
of the committee Senate bill one
seventy nine what us old nursing
and rehabilitation hospitals to
the list of institutions that
could be funded through a mill
levy at a county or municipality
level under the hospital funding
act now the bill was right in to
allow the county to issue the
bond for a skilled nursing home
counties that wish to do so
could now issue bonds that would
fund construction to skilled
nursing and rehabilitation
hospitals meeting the specified
criteria if the proposed voters
choose to do so now if they
chose to do that it would result
of course in an increase in
local taxes and it's important
to note that there would be no
fiscal impact on state funds
what happened right here in
Espanola is our only nursing
home in the valley which
happened to also be the only
nursing home in Rio Arriba
county closed with the non
competitive clause.
So when it closed no nursing
home could come into our county
and reopening of re open the
facility that was existing the
county then went to bond and ask
the voters if they would support
bonding for a new nursing home
in Rio Arriba county which would
would be the all the nursing
home eighty percent of the
voters agreed and the bond was
issued however there's some
language that needs to be
changed and I've sent a small
amendment to you and so it's two
parts of the bill the hospital
act amendment narrowed where we
could use a Census numbers to
narrow the application of the
bill is specific to Rio Arriba
County and it won't affect large
population area causing unfair
competition with the private
sector and the second part is
that validation of all public
securities still covers
statewide and so we do have
amendment should be with you and
so that's exactly what the
amendment does and what the bill
does can I have a cell a movie
please Mr chairman of the
amendment for purposes of
discussion only thank you
Senator Padilla.
Okay I know Senator you have you
have the the big amendment and
then the very small one.
Yeah well.
We're going to present sure and
so I'm gonna I'm gonna go over
to Frank Kopel who's with me who
will help to better explain the
amendments Frank are you here.
So explain the both amendments
it's two parts of the bill so
what the does is it narrows it
down so that we can use that
number and their the application
to Rio Arriba County Frank are
you there can you hear me now at
the end of your now we can hear
you Frank go ahead.
Can you hear me now I guess we
can go ahead okay yes thank you
What this ammendment does is it.
All Nero's as senator Hermio
said to Rio Arriba County the
authority to issue bonds either
revenue bonds or.
General obligation bonds for a
skilled nursing.
And rehabilitation hospital.
That would only be allowed in
Rio Arriba county under this
amendment because there are.
Twenty two or twenty three of
these facilities for example on
the Albuquerque metro area that
are being operated by the
private sector and the.
This bill does not want to
create competition or allow
let's say Bernalillo county to
do governmental financing in
competition to those private
enterprises.
And so that is the effect of the
amendment with regard to the
hospital funding act.
With regard to the public
securities validation Act which
is the no material in the second
part of the bill all beginning
on page nine that public
securities validation Act is
existing law.
And it has been enacted and
reenacted by about eight or nine
times since nineteen sixty one
and what that does is it
basically says that with respect
to any bond issues in the state
of New Mexico.
State or local any errors in
those bond issues are validated
in that.
Public security is validation
Act is good for all public
securities in New Mexico and
helps with the overall bond
rating of the state of New
Mexico.
Thank you.
Thank you.
any questions on the amendment
from the committee.
Yes yes Mr chair may I ask a
question for your return to
thank you very much and so I
really I really like your bill
and that the amendment I'm just
curious that don't know a lot
about this so I understand why
you would want to exclude
Albuquerque but what there be
other parts of the state where
there might be just need or the
opportunity I'm not saying that
the public either municipality
or county could take a building
and re reworked that building
out for this purpose for
rehabilitation I don't want to
exclude counties that might do
that it might not present a
competition that might certainly
be useful for that particular
County so I'm just curious if
say for instance in Lee County
if we had a had a building that
we wanted to re purpose could
are County our our municipality
has a bond that would be able to
purchase that and move forward
with some sort of a project.
Mr Chairman Senator Kernan
that's a great question and just
from based on what I know now
what we would be the first
county to do this but I'm gonna
defer to Frank Kappeler who
might have more information
Frank and Frank make sure that
you address the chairman before
you answer the question thank
you thank you Sir Mr Chairman
all and the Senator Kernan.
The with this amendment on the
bill it would only be Rio Arriba
County that would have this
opportunity and the so if for
example in Lee County you
identified a property and wanted
to do that we would have to run
a technical amendment to this
bill to open it up to the county
and the that would be on.
A fairly simple legislative
process to do.
Well thank you Mr chairman and.
To be honest with you we do have
the potential for having a
projects such as this we have a
we have a hospital building that
will in about two years no
longer be
necessary because a new hospital
is being built and so I believe
the city has the property please
stand and potential we can take
that that building and and do
something with it very much
along these lines so so I hope
that going forward everyone
remembers that may come back to
this committee and ask for
technical change for my County
and so I'll support the
amendment that we should get
stateLee county in there too but
I guess that's not the time to
do it so but I do see the
importance of this and hope to
take advantage of that in the
future thank you very much.
Chairman thank you Senator
Kernan thank you Senator of a
majority floor leader.
Senator Wirth.
You're on mute Senator.
All right sorry about that.
I just want to follow up on the
amendment on Senator Kernan is
question because I want can you
just explain again why we're
limiting this because isn't this
just another I mean I'm just
thinking for the City of Santa
Fe are County.
You know they don't have to do
it the voters don't have to
approve it but why would we not
give them the option to do it I
just wanna make sure I
understand why why we're trying
to limit This just to Rio Arriba
got it Mr chairman Senator Wirth
what happened is we went to bond
and we're ready to get the
skilled nursing home bills
without bond money but
unfortunately there's some
language in there that's holding
up the bond money and letting
the county to move forward and
so we're trying to get that
cleared up since the county's
ready to go in the bond money is
already here this would then
allow us to move quickly on
getting this the only nursing
home in Rio Arriba county
constructed yeah Mister chair
and I'm totally good with that I
want to help I have no issue
whatsoever with that it's just
that what this ammendment is
doing all is basically setting
this option is only available
for real read a lot why don't we
make it to be available Lea
County in Santa Fe County and
let them decide I guess that's
what I'm having trouble what's
the reason what's the reason for
the amendment.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator I would defer to my
expert witness frankly there yes
Mr Chairman all Senator all
Wirth the
G. G. O. bond could put up
Thorley that was exercised in
Rio Arriba county and his weight
awaiting funding.
Is a G. O. bond authority that
is subject to the vote of the
people.
The hospital funding act also
contains revenue bond authority.
And so.
If this bill were to be
statewide for all the counties
which.
The sponsoring I know it doesn't
have a problem with but if it
were to be statewide for all the
counties there wouldn't be
anything to stop a county or a
municipality from using a
revenue bond to finance one of
these facilities.
And that would mean that
government money would be pledge
to build one of these
facilities.
And all of the costs would be on
the revenue bond up.
Revenue and that.
Would be competing with existing
private operations and so I I
offer that and C. E. R.
explanation for.
Having narrowed it to Rio Arriba
County thank you I have a I
think Kelly wants to I miss
Kelly to the COVID of this
drive.
Sure thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee my
understanding about the
limitation to Rio Arriba county
really had to do with the fact
that there are twelve counties
that have already funded
hospitals to the hospital
funding act and there was some
concern about bond impairment or
dilution of the the revenue base
for those for those existing
facilities.
Yeah and I can Mr chair I get
that you you sell Center army
your your facility is ready to
go it just needs this one tweak
and the concern is if we open
this up it's going to raise a
whole string of other issues
included up killing the bill
you'll get what you need so
that's why Senator Kernan higher
going to have to keep an eye on
this we just did I know in Santa
Fe
Elka studio built a major new
facility and there was some I
think lead on money and various
incentives used as part of that
project I'm here but I
understand now again I don't I
don't wanna I think this is a
very important bill for your
community and so I don't want
to.
You know have something go
through the end up getting the
bill kids so I I get it I'll
support it but I do share
Senator currents.
Very very correct analysis that
this is something that just
feels to me like should be a
tool for for local governments
to make a decision about whether
to use or not thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator Wirth thank you I'm
Senator Griggs.
Thank you Mr chair Senator Wirth
pretty much talked about would I
wish we think and so I don't
have any questions.
Right so we are still on the
amendment.
So adoption of amendment number
one Mr chairman thank you
senator but they do have a
second level.
Mr chair Senator Hamblen minimal
impact in any opposition to the
motion.
The non Senator or neo does he
have an amended the bill so
we're back in the bill.
Thank start I I explained
exactly what the bill's going to
do so if there's if you want to
go to public comment we can do
that now or questions from the
committee thank you Mr chairman
do we need to act on the second
amendment.
yes yes we do because I think
thank you for paying attention
to that yeah we do have to
amendment right so move adoption
of amendment number two unless
the committee has some.
Committee.
That amendment this is a
inserting a word.
I will I'll second Senator today
is motion but I want you guys to
know that my first year in
Senate Judiciary we argue to an
hour and a half over forward
show I just you know just
because it's a word Senator Mr
chair there's no telling what
that it is some time
there was a reason why I left
law school.
Yes.
Okay so we have a motion for a
do.
If you pass on the second
amendment.
Great that was the.
Or if you.
Would you made the motion and
Greg second is that correct okay
all right good all right okay
we're back on track so any
opposition to that motion.
You know.
You have an amended bill we're
back in the bill any questions
we will go to public comment
right now.
We do not have any members of
the public who registered to
speak in opposition of Senate
bill one seventy nine if there
are any members of the public
here with us today who wish to
speak in opposition of Senate
bill one seventy nine you may
raise your hand.
Okay we will move on to those
who registered to speak in favor
beginning with Christopher
Burmeister.
Next up we have Arian showers.
I see you are here for you are
muted Aryan showers.
Okay.
Other members of the public who
wish to speak in support of
Senate bill one seventy nine you
may raise your hand.
Okay that concludes public
comment at this time thank you
very much.
Thank you now we're back on the
of the bill the questions for
the committee.
I don't see any hands up so
sing with the best thank you
Senator Padilla for The
presentation.
Representative believe that was
Senator Hamblen.
And the opposition to the
motion.
The number chairman Mr chairman
the second was by Senator Kernan
learning okay.
I think I said state senator
Mister chair if you miss the two
of us I'm alright with that.
I'm in good company was at
current and.
but I think I think I said
Senator Kirkland what are.
All righty.
Since I don't see no opposition
to that motion you do have a for
the past on Senate bill one
seventy nine.
Thank you senators and the
residents are very by county
will be very thankful as well
that we're passing for this
committee thank you I I know
that we were I was thinking
about stopping at two but that
these three bills are coming up
I don't think they're very
complicated so I want to keep
movement so we're going to we're
going to send a bill to for.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee center Michael
Padilla presenting Senate bill
two oh four essentially this is
a bill that had unanimous
support and consent throughout
the entire process back in two
thousand nineteen bill literally
died in last fifteen seconds of
that session and we brought the
bill forward again this year
with the additives are amended
components to it throughout the
process the process in two
thousand nineteen so very very
clean bill would essentially
have a expert here Catherine
Nicholas she's the executive
vice president of external
affairs for
for a company called sacred wind
communications who we all know
very innovative very forward
thinking company master to speak
on technical issues should we
need that component here but
essentially sacred when was was
founded after the
telecommunications act two
thousand five with was it was
implemented or passed and
implemented by by the
legislature
they as a result they receive
just a thorough you know
costs disaster to report and
analyze and and deliver their
information to the to the public
regulation commission to the
tune of about a little over one
million dollars Mr chairman
between two thousand ten and two
thousand fifteen that's just one
example the average rural telco.
real telecommunications company
Mr chairman members of the
committee are looking at twenty
five to fifty thousand dollars
on a biannual basis so this is a
pretty big you know issue for
them they have demonstrated
through white space through
Microsoft a programming through
point to point to any number of
ways to deliver broadband into
the region that they serve into
their constituency but if they
don't have this large you know
expensive they would they be
able to use that for additional
innovation and and service
delivery the bill that's really
three things it brings fairness
and puts them in the rural
telecommunications act it cost
cuts waste and it improves
productivity and and Mr chairman
members of the committee and
showing your your a letter of
support from Jonathan as
president of the Navajo Nation
on this particular piece of
legislation I just want to get
to know that this was forwarded
to all of you probably about two
weeks ago and then I also have
another letter here from the the
president eastern Navajo agency
counsel Johnnie Johnson and
that's another letter of support
here as well so I just wanted to
make that mentioned because I
know that we're already after
the the bell I'm asking this
Nicolau to to comment only if we
have technical questions thank
you Mr chairman.
Thank you.
So no one more time Mr Chairman
moved all the way through the
legislature up until its moment
of death in two thousand
nineteen in a park bipartisan
unanimous fashion thank you.
Thank you and I will go to
public comment.
Senate bill two oh four we do
not have any members of the
public who registered in advance
to speak against the bill are
there any members of the public
who wish to speak in opposition
to Senate bill two of four at
this time.
Jason Espinoza Espinoza did I
see your hand.
Okay.
Not seeing any hands will now
move forward to those wishing to
speak in favor of a bill
beginning with Jason Espinoza.
I chairman members the committee
Jason Espinoza registered
lobbyists of the New Mexico
technology council we stand in
strong support thank you.
Thank you very much next up we
have much.
Funded linings.
Your mission doing members of
the committee I am a take this
on the on as executive director
for the New Mexico exchange
Kerry group the enemy sieges a
telephone industry association
of eleven incumbent role
companies providing voice and
internet service to customers in
rural areas in New Mexico.
We support Senate bill to for
for all the reasons stated we
want to think Senator Padilla
response in the legislation Mr
chairman members of the
committee I appreciate your time
this afternoon and ask for your
support of Senate bill two oh
four.
Thank you very much next up we
have mark Fleischer.
I know you want to be to be
brief so I will the reason I
give you the the same point of
argument covered
I would like to mention that
this is the one of the poorest
areas in the state of the amount
of connective itty was very
small particularly when started
the tremendous job of connecting
the Navajo Nation both with
telephone service and with
broadband service in your.
Adding additional costs to one
of the poorest communities in
the in the state I hope no votes
in favor of SB for up to four
thank you.
Thank you very much next up we
have Johnny Johnson.
Not only have Dennis Conner.
The study.
Okay go ahead.
Good afternoon Mister chair or
table Senator Shendo members of
the committee under Johnny jet
all of the above you're gonna
have a whole Committee truck
there's also truckers going to
rot.
I'm in support then we'll take
the level nation toward the
center bill cool for all your
support.
Incredible.
I will be here highly pressured
thank you.
Thank you very much next up we
have Dennis community.
Mr chair and senator.
Additional because America would
like to thank the senator for
brings legislation that we
totally support thank you for
your time.
Thank you very much are there
any other members of the public
who wish to speak in support of
Senate bill two will for.
Thank you very much that's
consult Ashley Wagner.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I'm
Ashley Wagner the director of
public policy for the New Mexico
chamber of commerce we are in
strong support because broadband
deployment that covers the
entire state has been one of our
top policy priorities for many
years COVID has shined the light
on this issue even more.
Please.
Our nation needs reliable
telecommunication services and
internet connectivity to thrive
also in line with our economic
priorities is finding ways to
make New Mexico.
Working.
This bill eliminates unnecessary
regulatory costs incurred by the
PRC.
More structure and better serve
the application with high speed
internet thank you.
Thank you very much this
concludes public comment at this
time.
Thank you Mr chairman and I just
wanted to give a very brief
opportunity for Catherine
Nicolau from sacred when just to
wrap up our committee thank you.
Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you so much for
hearing the spelling of it is
after two o'clock degree we
communications is the only rural
telco in the state that doesn't
receive on going PRC USF support
and it's simply because of the
date that we opened for business
so every dollar that secret when
spends on a regulatory process
and that other companies don't
have to spend money on is a
dollar that does not go to our
customers voice and broadband
infrastructure so we thank you
for hearing this bill we think
the sponsor for carrying it I
think you've heard from our so
the supporters as to why and for
the sake of time I do stand for
questions thank you for this
opportunity.
Thank you Mr thank you thank you
senator for the effort this I
will go to the committee for
questions.
I don't see any hands going up
years when a so so move.
second there is a motion by
Senator twelve one four of.
Motion and second while.
Current.
Learning okay good any
opposition to the motion Mr
chair I I don't know that we
have all the members here so we
might need to.
Just excuse some of if there
okay so what I'm gonna do is a.
May not secretary do Raul roll
call that we lease will know who
the.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen.
Yes.
Senator Hickey yes Senator how
to meal yes Senator Kernan yes
senator Sanchez yes senator
Clemente.
Yes Senator Wirth yes Senator
Padilla yes Senator Shendo yes
ten with Senator Brandt excused
thank you Senator are you have a
do best motion incident.
We'll go for Senator Padilla.
Thank you all very much Mr
chairman members of the
committee thank you thank you
move on to the Senate bill one
oh six.
Senator souls.
Thank you Mr chair and that
you're moving quickly I wasn't
sure that we were going to get
on I do have my expert witness
with the Senate bill one of six
is.
Bill of that deals with driver
education programs are not ones
that school but these are
companies that have driver
education programs and all it
does is it updates the surety
bonds that they have to pay
their budget you instances where
schools after taking money from
students have gone under or
close and there was not enough
in the surety bond they had to
pay students backed the tuition
or expenses that they've had is
just upgrades that I do have
somebody from the department of
transportation who oversees
these programs as an expert
Franklin is on if you have any
specific questions but I believe
it and again yeah I wasn't
expecting to be on so I'm at
home without the bill right
front of the but we've all it
really does is it changes from
five thousand dollars thirty
bond to a fifteen thousand
dollar surely bond but in my
expertise kinda just verify that
that's that's all we're doing.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee
Franklin Garcia with the
department of transportation.
Our duty does have oversight of
the driver education program and
this does confirm that we are
increasing that five thousand to
ten thousand to fifteen thousand
which is the more will Maez bowl
out that would be fair for
covering the insurance.
People have paid into the
fabrication programs the school
board to quotes.
Without question.
Mr chair that's it.
The public comment.
For Senate bill one oh six we
did not have any members of the
public register to speak in
opposition are there any members
of the public who wish to speak
in opposition to this bill at
this time you may raise your
hand.
Seeing no hands we will now move
to those who wish to speak in
favor of the bill beginning
with.
Michael Santa.
Thank you Mr chairman I'll be
quick this is just a bill to
protect the parents and the
students to take driver's ed and
that company goes out of
business there's been some
issues with not having enough
money to pay them back when the
driver at school is no longer in
business and they've already put
money into it so it appreciate
your support and between in
Franklin would be able to answer
any questions you have thank
you.
Thank you very much are there
any other members of the public
who wish to speak in support of
Senate bill one oh six right
now.
Okay.
Comment at this time thank you
very much.
okay right now I am I am on mute
it all right any other questions
from the committee.
I believe the leader has
question senator Wirth.
Mr chair no question just move a
do pass wordpress all the second
that was senator Clemente.
can you please call roll Senator
Brandt.
Senator Griggs yes Sir Senator
Hamblen yes Senator Hickey yes
Senator huh Neil.
Senator Kernan yes senator
Sanchez.
Yes senator Clemente yes Senator
Wirth yes Senator Padilla yes
Senator Shendo yes ten four and
Brandt is excuse.
Thank you Senator you have a due
process Representative thank you
very thank you very much Mr
chairman I appreciate it thanks
for getting this done and get it
off my calendar thank you as
well as yours thank you Mr
chairman of the Center souls can
tell us where we can get one of
those shirts I really like what.
Already know what we want to a
Senate bill three point five
which is my bill in the interest
of time is going to turn it over
to us sent a secretary Santa to
explain it's just a additional
collection of damages so
secretary.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee
basically what this bill allows
the department to do is to
negotiate we have a situation
where the driver has damage
property on a roadway so take a
fire simple car catching on fire
the damages the pavement
underneath a lot of times or to
get reimbursed we have to file a
claim and in some cases or folks
are willing to negotiate a pay a
lesser cost which we would
accept we're not able to do that
without filing a claim or or
going to court on that kind of
sums it up it just gives us the
ability to negotiate I think
this can help the person that
was involved in the crash and
the fire for damaging our guard
rails or any other part of our
assets in gives them some
flexibility in us to negotiate a
cost and we both can agree to
with me today for any technical
questions is Mr Erin Franklin
who is well when attorney with
our legal office in M. D. O. T.
that kind of sums it up mentions
chairman thank you.
Thank you.
So at this time of of public
comment.
Percent at three twenty five or
did not have any members of the
public who registered in advance
to speak in opposition are there
any members of the public who
wish to speak in opposition to
this bill at this time.
Okay moving forward we have
Michael Santa to speak in favor
of this bill.
Okay are there any other members
of the public who wish to speak
in favor of this bill.
Thank you very much this
concludes public comment at this
time.
Thank you so go to committee
Senator Kernan.
Thank you Mr Senator do you want
to go ahead and take over I will
go now lets you Senator Kernan.
Thank you very much and that so
Mister chairman I think this
question would be for secretary
Santa at I noticed in the bill I
want the idea of being able to
go to negotiations thanks for
filing suit.
But we also have the added
A number of additional
Well it additional thanks I kind
way street road bridge structure
at currently are those things
not and included I mean if
someone damages at a bridge so
you would have no option unless
this bill passes are these
amendments to the bill passed I
think the bill passes as it
changed.
Mr chairman and Senator Kernan
I'm gonna let if it's okay with
the chair R. twenty answer that
I believe we're just trying to
make things more clear but he he
he prying those up and I do what
it was and what we're trying to
do with it now so Mister
Franklin that's okay Mister.
Thank you Mr chair up members of
the committee Madam Senator
it in answer to your question R.
it is it's really a point here
for the first part of this bill
to be an issue of inclusivity so
that we remove any sort of
questions worked out of the the
entire first sections of the
bill and those are if you look
at a through E. or a through F.
rather you're looking at what is
on reasonable use and
unreasonable use under certain
conditions so it's not to say
that damages could not be held
accountable under those we're
just trying to simplify this so
that there's there's no reason
for doubt we're talking about
a reasonable use under certain
conditions thank you.
Thank you very much and so now
You have and I said this would
happen and and and.
Accident situation where at.
A person is involved in an
accident that did damage to a
guard guard rail appreciate your
some other property that that
would need to be repaired so I I
assume that the negotiation
worker between an insurance
company if that if that drivers
insured
and if they see if the person is
uninsured how would that how
would that work for the
uninsured driver to cover
damages.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee settlement Senator
the way the process typically
works now is that if we have an
insurance company involved our
our accounting services would be
involved in trying to settle the
damage claim at the value that
the department has placed the
damage claims act if there's no
insurance company involved then
the accounting services would be
reaching out to the uninsured
operator or owner or both of the
vehicle at stake in and take a
similar course of action.
Thank you.
Okay so thank you very much so
basically.
What the bill does it just
allows for negotiation prior to
I would say is that correct.
That is correct thank you.
Thank you very much.
Thank you Senator Kernan leader
worth.
so I am seeing I'm getting call
somewhere else on the skip my
question thank you thank you Mr
leader are there any other
questions by the committee.
Seeing then Senator Shendo did
you want to wrap up before we go
to a vote I am here now.
Leader was we can still hear
you.
Are you here for that's going to
be here for us so here's one of
the.
He's muted go ahead etcetera
etcetera Mr Chairman.
Though for the comment or do we
have a motion by.
The action by the committee.
What would.
We have a motion for a do pass
on Senate bill three twenty five
do we have a second.
I share.
We have a second by Senator
Hamblen is there any opposition
to the motion.
Saying then you have a do pass
Mr Chairman back to you.
Okay thank thank you thank you
Senator so I think that
concludes our our our committee
meeting today I want to thank
all of you for staying over at
least we are retired calendar
so I appreciate it and so you
have to go over the rest of the
afternoon looks like it's open
up there so.
Was I just wanted to say Mr
chairman thank you for catching
us up we knew we were get that
part behind it you really did a
great job of catching this up
today and and to our at ranking
member also thank you thank you
all right.
Where is the afternoon so we'll
see you on Monday thank you
doctor.
Have a good afternoon thank you
for we're we're done.
Return.
Thank you.
