Well.
and Senate bill one ninety four
we've got some questions about
the next steps on that so we're
going to hold on to that until
Senator Shendo comes in but we
will start with Senate bill
three thirty six and then right
after that will be Senate bill
three nineteen with cinnamon yes
I thought I saw him come in the
room as well and then we'll move
on just for the sake of time I
do hope that we try to get out
of here at six but I also
recognize you for my own
purposes would like to have all
of our bills heard today so if
we can kind of keep that in mind
and will love move on so Senator
Padilla Senate bill three thirty
six use of racetrack funds for
insurance before you start we
are webcasting in my correct.
I thank you very much go ahead
and go Senator Padilla thank you
very much madam chair and
members of the committee and was
happy to give you a little more
time on your agenda they and
thank you so much for allowing
us to one fifty five on Tuesday
so today I'm here with you on
Senate bill three thirty six I
think we all know that we have a
a beautiful and powerful history
with horse racing here in New
Mexico it's something that
reaches just about every
community in New Mexico so today
you know why I was approached by
you know several entities within
the industry that had a ton of
feedback related to how we
handle things like jockey
insurance and something called
his set our racing integrity and
safety act which New Mexico has
been attempting to improve our
racing safety for as long as
I've been here for about eleven
years and and also within the
industry I I do
of have racing in my family
history and it's it's a
beautiful sport and beautiful
animals but essentially what
we're doing here today is we're
taking work that's been put
together by all three major
entities in the industry at
seven at three to four week
effort and really thirty to
forty year but I am proud to sit
here today madam chair members
of the committee until you that
the breeders the horsemen and
the race racinos if you want to
call that I just kind of asked
him all go to their corners find
out what they really need out of
this thing then very slowly
bring them back in to convert
the conversations and
communication and we do believe
that we have found a workable
solution everybody feels very
comfortable with no probably
hear that if you allow for some
public comment
but essentially what we're doing
is we're taking the twenty six
percent gaming tax that affects
this industry and madam chair
and members and we're
reconfiguring it to modernize it
for the purposes of safety to
ensure the jockeys have the
insurance that they need and
then also that the the racing
intact our racing integrity and
safety act or his is completely
here to here in the state of New
Mexico I did invite the
executive director of the horse
racing commission to be with us
to.
A. and he has a few comments is
gonna walk us through this
process so I also want to say we
are not all proposing a tax
increase of any kind period for
simply looking to reconfigure
and modernized how a portion of
it is used and I have is he here
with me and and and he's going
to to walkies executive director
of our recent committees and
walk us through the steps and
has a couple other comments.
A good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my
name's is mile trail A. K. A.
Izzie as most people know me by
the executive director of the
New Mexico racing Commission for
approximately seven years before
I get started I I certainly want
to thank Senator Padilla the
sponsor of Senate bill three
thirty six for taking his time
in such a busy time to sit down
with industry stakeholders and
come up with a solution that
works best for some of our
biggest concerns which is the
expenses of jockey an exercise
rider insurance and his of the
horseracing integrity and safety
act as Mitt Senator Padilla
mentioned hi this is a
reconfiguration of the the
gaming control act which will
modernize the twenty six percent
gaming tax and
Moving forward six tenths
percent to a individual.
Fund if you if you would to pay
for the jockey and exercise
rider insurance and the
horseracing integrity and safety
act and I'll just call his a
from now on those too burdensome
are bestowed upon the.
The industry out of necessity
here so was enacted in December
of twenty twenty it's been slow
to break out of the gate no pun
intended but we're looking at it
starting March twenty seventh
here with the anti doping
program of that legislation
currently the safety program is
in play and the agency looks
forward to it and for seen with
all the federal legislation
those two burdens on the
industry come to the tune of
approximately two point six
million dollars if Senate bill
three thirty six is not passed
the unfortunate reality is that
the industry stakeholders such
as the horsemen and perhaps
jockeys and exercise riders will
have to supply one their own
insurance and then also pay for
his
out of their pocket books this
is industry supported and bill
with the horsemen and the
breeders the racetrack operators
and the regulators of this
industry the gaming control
board and the New Mexico
horse racing commission as well
as the jockeys guild who is
based in Kentucky so
we certainly respectfully
requests to pass on this bill
today committee members madam
chair and that I stand for any
questions.
First we're going to go to
public comment just by a show of
hands who in the audience is in
favor of this bill.
Hey let me know it looks about
twelve thirteen okay let's have
a just for the sake of time
what's have three from one side
and three from the other you all
can do rock paper scissors
whatever you need to do please
come up but will have three from
the left side three from the
right side come up and please
use the microphone state your
name
and you'll need to hold the
button down on the microphone my
life there you go madam chair
members of the committee good
afternoon John Thompson I'm a
registered lobbyist for New
Mexico horseman's Jennifer you
gone I'm gonna give you all two
minutes and I will time you okay
just for the second time I will
not get chair Preciado heads up
for selected thing Senator
Padilla for being flexible and
sent us to our corners as he
stated I'd also like to thank my
my good friend Mr weeks we've
been through quite a few of
these and helping us negotiate
these these these are issues
that on the surface may seem
simple and they're most
certainly not madam chair there
they are difficult to work out
there's a lot of emotion a lot
of history involved in these
issues we look forward to
continue to work together as
this bill moves through the
process really they'll probably
hit a bumper so on the way we
have to go to Judiciary next so
appreciate the sporting and
create the senator and the the
other folks thank you thank you
Sir.
Good afternoon my name is Pierre
am story madam chair and centers
thanks for time today I mean
A person here in New Mexico a
renovation our here for many
years I'm a reader New Mexico
and I want to thank Senator
Padilla and The New Mexico our
reader Association also New
Mexico horses Association and
the race tracks for getting
together sitting down and
working this out this gonna take
a huge burden and a lot of
pressure off of the industry in
the whole the horsemen and the
breeders gets just keep intact
their twenty percent purse Fund
the regulation that hisses
putting down on us is regulatory
and I think the this bill fits
our needs to be to pay for those
fundings and again I want to
thank you for hopefully
supporting this with us and as
far as a horseman in the
breeders I've talked to many of
them and we're supporting this
bill thank you.
Thank you.
Madam chair committee members my
name is Mary Bartlett closer
there you go I'm sorry I merry
barber and I'm from the New
Mexico horse breeders
association and I would like to
think Senator Padilla for
bringing us together and coming
up with a solution the original
bill was unacceptable but now we
are in support of this bill
thank you very much thank you.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee Jason Weaks some
register lobbyist for
Albuquerque downs race track and
casino again the the general
sentiment is to think Center for
Padilla for bringing everybody
together that couldn't be more
true he truly did get everybody
together downstairs some adverse
parties quite frankly but we do
make up a total a very important
industry to the state this is
the first time that I've seen
industry come together to
support one bill like this I've
been doing this work for the
industry for about ten years it
is a total complete and
hopefully long term solution to
an issue that has been going on
within the industry for quite
some time his can do ahead over
the last couple years and so we
came to the legislature and we
think that we've got a really
good solution in place that
addresses all the parties
relevant concerns and allows us
to move forward in a safe and
productive manner and and and
really grow and make this
industry as good as it can be in
the state thank you thank you.
Hi is there anybody deadline in
favor of SB three thirty six.
As indicated
All right anybody in the
audience in opposition of this
bill please show your hands.
I see none nobody online.
All right thank you very much
now it's up to the committee are
there any questions from the
committee to committee so the
committee seven all right.
Three separate is and it's it's
in and I just want to say madam
chair on the sub and of you I
want to move it in the pricing I
don't have that.
Thanks committee for nine years
with change part of it.
All right so before we have that
discussion so I will but do not
pass on Senate bill three thirty
six and two passed on the
amended the Senate bill.
Any opposition to that.
I see none okay thank you madam
chair and and members at the
center how to be a so
essentially this up took which
you heard from a lot of these in
interested parties baked it in
and and is that is the we know
who just column is used to start
buddy or friend all of us so
what is the described to in
terms of how the modernization
The modernization of that the
gaming tax will now be
administered that it's it's it's
in the configured to to serve
serve everybody that you heard
from today
that's what the sub this part.
All right thank you very much.
Do we have any questions from
the committee.
The no questions is that all
right we have in the past and
Senator is that a second second
from Senator Kernan.
when we take the role.
Senator grace yes Senator had a
meal.
Yes Senator Kernan.
Yes Senator Lopez yes Senator
sentence yes Senator Tallman yes
Senator Hamblen yes.
Yeah all right seven zero you
have to pass.
Already next up if we go at this
pace we actually may hit every
single bill but I probably just
jinxed it we are now at Senate
bill three nineteen age
appropriate design coat Act
Senator meals is he here.
Did Senator manuals he's coming
are.
All right we do have or the
Senator one else is on his way.
And then we will do Senate bill
two seventy three after that.
All right center when the US.
Here predecessor was able to do
a bill presentation in about
fourteen minutes.
Well
I move for do best motion I
think out.
All of the committee decide but
I think this would Senator
Kernan is set for okay all right
senator Munoz years thank you
madam chair Senate bill one
three nineteen
knishes but it is father of
young kids that grew up private
technology New Mexico age
appropriate design cove is a
critical step in safeguarding
children's online privacy Madam
chair they can navigate the
ditch awards safely in
appropriate properly as a parent
and a father I know first hand
knowledge of countless hours
spending a children
whether school or entertainment
and scary reality that our
children are particularly
vulnerable to privacy violations
and other dangers when using
online services.
That's why the age appropriate
design code is vital it sets a
specific requirements for online
services to protect children's
privacy such as the disabling
location tracking data sharing
to third parties it also ensures
that services for for children
are easy to understand and use
very clear that the pricing
prohibits on business using when
personal information on a child
the way that is detrimental the
child's cycle physical and
mental health will be.
Really the bill also is that
requires Xander's online
products to ask questions to
designers the products in the
physical world hello we'll have
hello they asked for their
foreseeable risk and harm occurs
all from the design of my
product how can I mitigate harms
to children.
The products The for safety
standards command that the that
the products we use in the
physical world my cars to cribs
to kitchen appliances are
generally safe it's time we do
this for online products in the
same standard.
I cannot express how much the
requirements mean to young
children contracting them online
and I can go on and on but I
will tell you the story and I
think bring this one home.
a few years back we had
Sixteen.
And and kids are gonna do what
they're gonna do sometimes you
can stop them sometime we stop
can't but that bill's going to
make them a criminal for sixty.
And so that's one of the
protections of children's on no
knowledge that you need to
protect them from so it it it's
the same thing here just because
of the fact that all handed over
to.
Hello good afternoon madam chair
and committee members of office.
My name is Nicole brochure and I
am the head of U. S. affairs for
five rates an international NGO
dedicated to building in the
world children and young people
deserve when it comes to the
internet we know that the status
quo isn't working for our youth
in addition to addiction we're
seeing shockingly high rates of
teen depression harassment and
child sexual abuse this is not
an accident the digital world is
one hundred percent engineered
and designed to offer optimize
engagement in the name of
profit.
He's designers are tasked to
maximize the time spent on their
service maximize reaching drawn
as many people as possible and
maximize activity buying courage
courage and content generation
an interaction.
This is this these design
decisions result in seventy five
percent off the top social media
platforms using a I to recommend
children's profiles to strangers
including adults ninety five
percent of apps marketed to or
played by children under five
contain advertising including
advertising that is age
appropriate.
Sixty percent of schoolbased
apps share kids data with third
parties and research shows that
one in three teen girls report
having body image issues as a
result of their time spent on
Instagram.
In each of these examples design
choices to maximize profit or
driving addiction harassment
eating disorders self harm child
sexual exploitation and gender
based violence all for profit S.
P. three nineteenths approach is
based on international work that
we know produces results and has
long been a part of our business
culture product safety if the
risk of harm to children as part
of the platform's design then
the solution comes from the
platforms redesign.
SB three nineteen requires
businesses offering online
products to undertake a risk
assessment in order to identify
foreseeable risks of harm to
children arising from new data
management practices and then
they are required to mitigate or
eliminate that harm before
offering their products to the
public.
This bill contains three
elements that represent a true
paradigm shift when it comes to
how we look at tech one it
defines children as under
eighteen years of age.
Two would directs it applies to
online products that are likely
to be accessed by children
rather than those direct rather
than those directed at them so
this would capture Instagram it
would capture take talk it would
capture these places where we
know children actually hang out
instead of actually making
Sesame Street safer which we
don't need it also requires
protections by design and
default which is incredibly
important because parents
children they're not
technologists they're not
attorneys they don't know how to
activate these protections.
It is based on fifteen standards
that together create a
thoughtful regime of child
privacy by design we know the
model works since the age
appropriate design code came
into effect in the United
Kingdom in two thousand and
twenty one we've seen a wave of
change the changes to the design
of tech products each which have
improved the lives experiences
children's and teens.
Instagram now prevents adults
from messaging children they do
not know it is also turned off
location tracking by default and
introduce prompts that encourage
children to take breaks from
scrum.
Google has made C. search the
default browsing mode for
Children and turned off
YouTube's autoplay function take
talked recently made accounts
for those under sixteen private
by default and stop sending
notifications for all users
sixteen under after nine PM
recognizing the importance of
children sleep.
These are just three of the
hundreds of modifications each
page make children and young
people safer by design I write
things the Sanchez this
committee in the state of New
Mexico for considering these
design protections for use and
I'm available to answer any
questions.
Much all right now we go to the
prom.
Right we have for those in the
for the one that I.
I.
The state.
Thank you good afternoon madam
chair and committee members my
name is Greta mac in any and I
am I the CEO of a social well
being tech start up called blue
fever I am probably in the
process of becoming a resident
of New Mexico all the moving
Albuquerque where my husband
currently works at UNM.
I'm here today because use data
privacy and online safety has
been at the core of my personal
mission and professional career
for the past twelve years I've
been an entrepreneur in the
youth mental health and wellness
space focusing my time on
building solutions at the
intersection of mental health
well being media and technology.
Most of my time is been spent
understanding adolescents and
their challenges their
aspirations and their needs five
years ago I co founded blue
fever and we've serve hundreds
of thousands of teenagers and
young adults by linking their
well being needs to resources
that can support.
as was said very eloquently
before today's young people and
generations to come or not only
growing up in the physical world
like we all did but they're
growing up in a digital world
and they have a digital self and
this world is one of no
potential but also one of no
harm and just as we design
safety in our children's
physical lives and we have basic
protocols like having a fence
around the school or doing fire
drills we need these mechanisms
we need to design for those in
the landscape of the internet
and for the safety of their
digital lives because the
reality is there developing
critical components of their
identity online.
Designed as a regulatory
approach turns regulation on its
head and rather than trying to
play catch up with all these
problems that were stated before
I'm in bend looking at residual
impact design puts the onus on
companies to begin with the end
users well being in mind an
innovative checks and balances
to prevent harm from happening
in the first place I understand
that my grandparents tell me
when they first started to drive
a car there weren't seat belts
and the returning signals
at hard to believe and when
safety restrictions were imposed
on the automotive industry it
did not inhibit innovation it
made the product better this too
is possible in our industry I've
done it as a CEO of blue fever
and I know countless other tech
founders who are designing with
data and data privacy mental
health in mind from the
beginning please don't let big
tech mislead you that this will
crusher industry passing this
bill will encourage the industry
to do what we do best innovate
we can innovate and keep young
people safe and I actually
believe that safety is a key
component in innovation and are
used to serve to be safe and
healthy and I I urge you to
consider this bill as a down
payment on our future that will
bear social and economic returns
for years to come thank you.
just for time's sake if we can
keep him to two minutes that be
great thank you very much go
ahead good morning madam chair
in Congress and my name is Tracy
cap I am thankful for your time
as well as your action on this
topic I'm a mother I recently
relocated to New Mexico I'm for
engine only from Michigan and I
work in safety every day
I ate and the safety
environmental manager so I know
what it is with OSHA and laws
and how we protect adult at work
to be safe and I believe that
passing this bill will help
protect our children my son
Brady was fourteen when he was
cyber bullied
there was a page created called
monkeys of Laura bush middle
school please send pictures of
monkeys and the page only had
black children on it that is
just one of the things that
harms that social media has done
and because of that I just
decided to cause an advocate for
other parents and other children
so that we can protect our
children online and it is open
my eyes to a different world I
have met with mothers who have
lost their children from social
media there's mothers whose
children have been sex sorted
from social media who'd been
bullied whose children have
become extremely depressed
because of the things that
they've seen and done anorexia
all of these harms that are out
there to our children and they
can carry it right in their
pocket I just want to let
everyone know that when my son
was cyber bullied he did not
have social media and that is
how powerful it is we need to
even when your children are not
online or we be sent limits are
things their friends have it
it's right there and I just want
to
say that with their ways that we
can protect our children by
passing laws like the age
appropriate design code here in
New Mexico and how tech
companies accountable for their
products and how they handle
children on their platforms we
protect consumers and almost
every other aspect we recall
food that is unsafe we hold
companies accountable for that
we need to do the same with our
children as well as their
future.
Years I think if we pass SB
three one time in the scene with
the U. K. is done we can really
set the foundation to improve
what's happening with our
children thank you.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is James Grayson I'm the chief
deputy at the attorney general's
office the attorney general's
office is strongly committed to
protecting children in New
Mexico and that includes our
data privacy and for that reason
this that the attorney general's
office support Senate bill three
nineteen thank you very much
thank you.
Right there folks online who are
in support can you go ahead and
let's how many are online.
Share this I.
I just for the sake of time I'd
like to thank all of them but
let's go ahead and hear from two
of them.
I'm gonna let you randomly pick.
So the pressures on you.
I just think that for do it to
on that.
Then if you will you yourself
please and we are trying to
stick to a two minute maximum in
public testimony go ahead.
You madam chair and.
Recreation work pediatrician
here in Santa Fe Representative
Mexico pediatric society the
state chapter of the American
academy of pediatrics and we
strongly support just three
nineteen.
People it's already been sent
forward sentiment notices
written so well that was printed
in The New Mexican responding
to just to.
But the president Biden whose
former state if you recall we
we has to send children into
platforms are countable for the
national experiment they're
conducting from our children for
profit.
Mexico has the opportunity to
lead provision protecting our
children online.
I see well meaning over.
Children over exploitation
to support this.
May nineteen thank you.
Thank you.
Next up one more place.
Can you all hear me we can.
Wonderful thank you so much my
name is Alyssa Barnes and I'm a
parent to four children to work
who are in there and to who are
under eight years old well I
have the pleasure of not growing
up with the effects of social
media none of my kids have with
our oldest kids we struggled as
parents to understand how to
best protect them from harmful
content on social media
platforms such as body image
issues violence and sexual
content that was meant for older
age groups we found ourselves in
a loss of how to properly
protect our kids from all the
rhythms while also providing
them with the secure sense of
privacy in their home as the
years have gone by this issue
has only worsened my little like
to watch age appropriate YouTube
videos one day my kids click on
the video that was suggested to
them by YouTube and much to my
surprise it was content for
teens that was absolutely
inappropriate for my five an
eight year old.
We quickly turned it off and now
my screen every video the kids
want.
The problem is as announced
single parents there are times I
can not be as vigilant such as
when I'm cooking dinner doing
laundry and so forth and as my
kids get older and have more
access to social media outside
the home they have the potential
to be further exposed at the
parent it is my responsibility
to be engaged with my children
but it should not and cannot be
my responsibility alone as
social media hasn't ever present
part of daily life at this point
social media platforms have a
responsibility to prioritize our
children for profits I urge you
to pass SB three nineteen and
pulled social media platforms
accountable to do what they
should have already been doing
protecting our kids thank you so
much for your time today thank
you.
All right now on to those who in
the audience who are in
opposition by show of hands okay
one two two folks come on
This one's in our.
That process.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Jason Weaks
registered lobbyists for the
Albuquerque Hispanic chamber of
commerce and the New Mexico
hospitality association we very
much appreciate the intention of
this legislation we do think
that it is important to protect
children on the internet and
regulated how they see the
content that they ingest from
the phone that they access from
their parent or the tablet that
they used to play games on
however as drafted we have some
issues with this legislation
because we think it's going to
be much broader we think it's
going to apply to as drafted
just about every website that we
access on a daily basis
definition state child is that
is likely to utilize or see
content on the internet and
child is defined as anybody
under eighteen so literally just
about every website is going to
fall in that category is going
to require some pretty specific
tools to be developed to not
just regulate social media
content but all content on the
internet and requiring that
anybody who uses demonstrate
their age by providing some
proof of verification of age
which then invoke some privacy
issues so while we really do
feel like this is well
intentioned legislation is also
modeled after some California
legislation that was passed but
is now currently being litigated
we think there are some first
amendment concerns as drafted we
also think there's probably
there's potential preemption
concerns and those are all
playing on the courts right now
again what we presheaf the
concept and really do appreciate
with the Sanchez trying to do we
have to stand in respect for
opposition of legislation thank
you thank you.
It.
Madam chair members of the
committee Jason Espinoza
president and CEO with the New
Mexico retell Association
similar to Mr weeks comments and
we certainly understand and
agree with the intent of the
legislation just given the way
it's free and it's overly broad
and were afraid of that at all
impact really our retailers in
terms of all the most of the
Mehmood we have websites digital
websites as a portent or comment
on this language would also
apply to us not just social
media so we do have concerns
with the way extraction and and
again the litigation concerns as
well thank you.
Right we have one person online
go ahead what we are trying to
stick to a two minutes Max so if
you will focus on your bike and
go ahead.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Chelsea
Canada and I'm the director of
public policy at the Mexican
chamber of commerce we
appreciate the intent of the
bill but respectfully oppose SB
three nineteen we share the
concerns that we were already
stated but I just want to
highlight a few points according
to our research driving New
Mexico's future the top concern
of stakeholders and businesses
in the state was the need to
improve the overall regulatory
business climate we support
policies that create a
regulatory environment equal to
or better than our competitors
and this move is counter to that
whole currently California is
the only state that passed this
law and it is being challenged
in court there's also current
federal law that has a similar
similar goals the children's
online privacy protection act is
a comprehension federal scheme
to facilitate parental control
over children's online
activities and to protect
children's privacy we prefer not
to see a state specific approach
that affects our ability to be
competitive by putting another
restriction on business outside
of what other states are doing
most web analytics companies are
nationwide or international
would they be fermented from
operating in New Mexico this
policy would put us at a
disadvantage and potentially
drive tech companies from the
state other than affects our
members this could also affect
efforts done by the station for
tourism and our recent
legislative event last month the
New Mexico department of tourism
secretary announces the New
Mexico will be the first state
in the nation to be on the
tourism exchange further
expanding access to New Mexico's
tourism industry to travelers
across the globe this policy
could potentially remove the
benefits of this tourism data
exchange for the these reasons
and more respectfully
oppose proposal thank you.
All right thank you so much now
we go to the committee.
Senator had a meal thank you
madam chair and so thank you for
the Senate sponsor and so I was
reading up on the California
field and that one of the
questions that was typically
asked and I want to ask about
this bill if this bill applies
to practically every website on
the internet is that because
without the what happens with
the New Mexico bill do we target
every website.
How does that work.
Chair more sure if you'll make
sure that microphone is on there
just.
So it is a technology neutral
piece of legislation and the
protections follow the child
meaning.
The protections of the bill
apply to our children spend time
online whether that is social
media whether that is gaming
whether it is Netflix are you to
right like the only harm the
harms that children experience
well social media is very much
in the spotlight right now
aren't the only places and the
fear from a public policy
perspective is if you limited to
social media than it's not
future proof you know ten years
ago we couldn't have predicted
where social media is going to
be now and so the the bill is
designed to follow children
where they are online so it
would apply to.
Any website or application that
is likely to be accessed by
children and there's a
definition for that and it is
routinely access by a
significant number of children
the reason that language was
chosen is because it's a
percentage was added so you have
to be thirty percent children it
likely wouldn't hit YouTube and
we all know the dangers that are
coming from you to they've been
spoken about today and so it has
to be routinely access but a
significant number of children
the other thing I would like to
point out.
Is that.
If there is no risk of harm to
children from your data
management practices the bill
requires nothing of you.
And so it really is about
looking at your products and and
seen what risk of harm there is
mitigating that risk thank you
madam chair just one more
question if you don't mind I
have a number of constituents
reach out most from Los Alamos
County who asked what this will
ensure that children would not
be tracked.
Will insure that children not be
trafficked from.
So this bill is not a cure all
for everything that is happening
that on the internet right is it
is raising the floor and the
floor protections some of the
changes that we have seen are
you know platforms stopping the
direct messaging of no adults to
children and that is often the
first step you see when children
are recruited online to be
trafficked and so there are
protections like that but does
it absolutely care trafficking
no that is that is something
that has to be a number of laws
working together to address the
problem but it absolutely will
make children safer thank you
madam chair no further questions
just one comment I want to
welcome I can turn Margo from
Santa Fe high we finally get
connect thank you madam chair
thank you any other questions
from the committee.
Senator Kernan thank you.
You know I.
At the end of the bill because
anyone who has a daughter or
granddaughter which I have that
has found now and you do worry
at all the things that she could
access and so on her phone and
her mother place to.
After seventeen it really does
track every single thing maybe I
was on the phone while it
notices about everything that
occurred.
She's eleven so it's always
going to be harder
that.
But I wonder okay I wish this
were written in a way that but
again may not understand what
you're trying to do that when
you talk about life that means
you've got when we need it is
really to provide previous
termination and so you complete
the assessment and
Do the assessment and.
Could you repeat that I just I
think some of the language the
state so when you use the term
life.
The have you said you have a
definition it's accepted that
still in determines yes.
So so the definition of I guess
I need to back up a little bit
maybe in talk about federal law
and so the federal standard
under Coppa is actual knowledge
and so the way a lot platforms
has been able to avoid
responsibility for making their
products safe is they do not
have an actual knowledge that
any of the children are or any
of the users on their platform
our children we heard about this
a lot with the Francis how can
face blower or Facebook
whistleblower testimony
a lot all the time we see a
reasonable person standard rate
and see if you know we're should
have known that something was
the case and the likely to be
access standard is is flushing
out that reasonable person
standard to these platforms no
or should they know that someone
is a child.
Senator.
So the assessment is complete
and is it just I for is it there
in case someone Mexican point
and then check to see if that
website is completed the
assessment and if that the
Attorney General to take a look
and see if they have followed.
Yes.
Correct so in the in the.
The creation and construction of
this legislation we have
consulted quite a bit with with
the tech industry themselves and
you know we it was considered
that the data protection impact
assessment would be something
that was publicly available
subject to the public records
act
industry did not like that
because it could expose create
secrets right and so the the
decision the decision was made
in crafting the legislation to
allow them to hold it and have
to turn it over to the Attorney
General upon request and then
the Attorney General would look
at their impact assessment.
Trying to determine if they have
mitigated the risk of harm any
risk of harm they had identified
and if all of that have been
done then the bill provides a
ninety day right to care before
any liability attached to the
company.
Madam chair and senator so
same subjected to me so the
Attorney General is someone who
would make a decision on whether
the assessment.
Was completed correctly whether
they violated what they said
they were going to do you know I
just I really want something
that I can support because I
think it's so important that I
can see opportunity and
certainly not this Attorney
General but there's one that.
Maybe his or her views different
for many of us in babies will
consider
something not acceptable when.
Mexico City we have people that
will block from difference.
I mean I got pulled by focal for
everything and just because I
didn't agree with what
supposedly was no and I don't
know it's an opportunity for
that very same thing to happen
the New Mexico how can you
assure me that stuff.
Madam chair and senator we can
make sure any action by the term
in general because we never know
what they're going to do right
all we can do is say after
reading compliance of in trying
to get whoever to comply
Facebook whoever Instagram to
talk in and if they don't comply
days in the terms of the sick
other resources for non
compliance and probably funding
issue for compliance that's a
very that's a very hard thing to
do especially in the era of
electronic devices to talk is a.
Trillion dollar company they're
never going to get a wager
battles in here figure out how
to win that war in court and if
you can that work for.
So when I stepped.
This is the start of the page.
In
Ability is.
Perfect.
How many children and teachers
and maybe I.
Or is broader than enemy could
be as.
Madam chair in center.
Currently right now and and we
use this in my company to track
retail locations right the state
Senate CYFD and early childhood
education your phone as a as a
digital ID right you have your
privacy offer on right Beijing a
privacy off I can track you
individually by ID number not by
your name from where you going
to Walmart store if you make a
left hand turn if you go back to
the milk I'll if you go back to
the fishing rods I'll we can
track every movement as you
leave the store we can tell you
whether you went home for the
wildlife Burger King and we can
tracking everything about your
personal name but with that and
so that's what really tracking
is so when a kid gets on a at
correct me if I'm wrong their
digital ID is tied to the right
the kid registers twenty or one
year old kid named George and
goes from New Mexico but is
actually a twelve year old kid
from Nevada right there's no way
to do that accountability until
a parent files complaint says
this is wrong and I got my kids
but the eighteen year olds that
do file a complaint.
And so do I complain will
probably file individually to
make sure that their children
are blocked.
It's a I'm not a digital expert
I don't have to talk because.
And so.
That's how much data is out
there you can imagine I can they
can almost tell you what's going
to pick up off the shelf what
did you track.
Right here in New.
Is.
One last question.
That said slide sixteen.
They also fall under this have
you everything was already out
there have you go back and sure
so that the answer to that
question is not very exciting
but it is towards the end of the
bill and I will find it there is
a section that says if you were
offering a product that was made
available to the public before
this date you have until this
time to correct to do your
impact assessment however if you
don't have if you offer a
product in the past but it's no
longer available you don't have
to so there's there's a catch up
period for drugs that are
already available and then a
ramp up period for for drugs
that people are going to be
making available in the future.
I have seen this goes to
Judiciary.
Thank.
Thank you.
For.
Come up with something that they
would.
you know madam chair center
It's interesting how legislation
works right compromise are
trained in that but in this
digital world
child protection and how do we
handle that I believe that then
that is neutral and believe that
this is over there now I think
the Instagram this is a neutral
or in support so they've kind of
changed around.
So that
they were posing in the
beginning but I think now
they're neutral correct mean
there's there's this right they
can ask questions for meta
UNM with Instagram lobbyist is.
Thank you for that information
the the the the.
There are some.
This is the.
And we also work or have thank
you for the information
Yeah.
So often times so thank.
We come here.
The the this is a state of what
we're.
We like what you're trying to do
we realize is a problem this
kind of resistance.
So we
So currently so time after time.
We heard.
We are in businesses
this is trump's trying to.
Paso distillation of.
Public so.
I support which
this is.
It is a site for credit problem
and to point out on the fifth of
the total today's weather.
It's a.
This tragic it so that was
something.
Thank you again for.
If we're trying Mr industry
would not sell the.
These are the worst things
in Taos New Mexico Senator
Gonzales district there is a
school for just kids that
addicted to digital media or
digital advertising I have no
social skills and they're up
there Intel's to come in
southern part of that's all
always kids that are addicted to
their phones due to social media
to technology and they have no
social skills and capability
because the parents seven from
the TV or the of us intend or we
but that's a long time ago.
And and that's where they
learned from.
But I've learned to my children
running and in the in real life
situations is show mom all flip
phones.
Is it other experiences and had
is what I didn't give my kids
technology because I think you
have my kids played outdoors but
when they went to other plants
in children's knew how to play
Representative ten.
Right now the kids we have a
place to stay my kids have no
social skills in that game world
right and then it was
interesting for me as a parent
what hello I thought was best
for them right how the lack that
social skills when it came to
other kids and how they interact
with the.
I've seen the good the bad and
my kids with.
K. perfect right.
but we have to try and and
sometimes adults
uses for security in the for
entertainment and then to for
entertainment purposes.
I sit there for hours looking at
Facebook.
Not even look at the clock in
the city I've been on it for
forty five minutes but I did
that and I like the.
Several of the key a guide
helicopters and and all of so we
got to start somewhere but the
whole world changed.
And if we don't keep up with
changing the world and tried as
retentions
We have a couple.
Thank thank you.
Portion of the issue I.
When I was a lesson.
We have party one of the
following.
Yeah there's there's.
All right thanks Sierra we got
Senator Griggs and then Senator
Lopez.
Thank you madam chair and
senator thanks for bringing this
some of these are important
things to talk about but I guess
our our analysis talks about the
the lawsuit in California.
Washington California based on
what they say is the Jack I mean
the exact same Walters and this
one is more in California
lawsuit was filed in December so
obviously there have been any
any real movement are but Madam
chair of center has your band is
here any is there anything you
guys would like to comment about
the the law should show for the
for the fact that if you're
still going on in there in
California what's going to
happen in New Mexico.
Do we believe.
If we pass this which is exactly
like that.
Well Senator anytime you
infringe on the business right
or they think it's an
infringement in they think they
can win in court.
they're gonna take it to court
over the California bill passed
unanimously more carcasses of
California and there's over
three hundred members of the
house and the Senate with zero
no votes
But when and the company thinks
that they've been damaged that
is a right to sue in court right
and in the way that tick tock is
the main file or in that case
and everybody knows a
congressional tictoc story
what's happening but you're not
gonna stop the lawsuit and I'll
give you an example I met with
the virus secretary yesterday
and asked him why does it take
five million dollars to
implement a real.
He said because the when I start
implementing the rule I know I'm
going to court and I need to
know that what my real does that
I have the funds and the ability
to back it up in court and so
everybody's gonna have the
ability to and that's what
they're gonna do.
And we welcome that suit thank.
Madam chair and shatter the
average the.
Senator Kirsten programs going
to Judiciary I guess next.
I mean when we know something
like this is probably happening
do we do we need to run it by
financial we need to get to
figure out that maybe we've got
we've got something coming our
way and we need to be ready for
that do we what do you sessions
I don't know you're the chair
financial maybe you would.
Actually that.
The you know Senator after today
at it's a very interesting day
for me with what's happening in
finance and give me some the
room over here for a minute
thank
I don't think it is going to
finance because there is really
no you know the ninety thousand
dollars appropriation that that
may tie that over a three year
cost to set up the operation but
it's not a recurring cost it's a
couple water out of the ocean
fix fix a problem
for children.
Madam chair representative
earlier sometimes during the you
under the right thing is can be
expansion and I hope that as we
as we move forward with that we
find out just what all of that
might be here maybe the
carriage.
It's really cold staff to deal
with the.
And in.
I think there's gonna be a lot
of things in the bill just in
looking at that when you get
ready to try the enforcer of the
difficult but you'll hear that
probably in the next so I think
place to have the issues they're
not thank you sure thank you
madam chair and thank you
secretary
mention centered three other
states are doing this currently
they're tempting to pass
legislation it's Maryland
Minnesota Nevada New Mexico for.
I can count today.
Thank you chair finance.
I think thank you senator
Senator Lopez.
Thank you madam chair senator
thank you for bringing this
measure forward
I have a soon to be eleven year
old.
And she's grown up with the
internet.
My twenty two year old in.
because quite at the level that
we are at now and of course when
I tell them we have computers my
day they're like oh my god so it
is a whole other conversation.
But not every parent or person
guardian is able to sit down and
figure out exactly what's going
on in this New World that we
have.
I catch my soon to be eleven
year old and certain things is
like oh my god and then she has
to sit instructed me is just to
what she was watching.
And as you said Senator all of a
sudden from whatever she's been
on I started getting notices of
my computer and I'm like well I
mean I I know there's a
connection I get it but it's
just this instantaneous.
And.
Some of the things that are in
in the social media are.
even for myself it's like well
what what our children could be
seen and there's so much as for
what the testimony was that AC
and I hear from Santo for
girlfriends and these are only
ten girls and it's really.
The scary as to what else can be
coming down the road as they
grow older so
and madam chair but I've always
said to is we have to start
somewhere yes it may lead in the
court yes it maybe challenge for
that's kind of what the process
seems to be
if there's any to any limits
that are placed on it but I
think madam chair this is a good
start for us to begin to really
understand what business wants
to do great but there's also I
believe some way that we have to
rein in and if this age
limitation I don't know I'm
still figure out what I allowed.
But I can't control you.
Thank you mentioned.
But anything else in the
committee.
What is the will of the
committee.
The person Senator Lopez we have
a second.
Sierra in seconds and if you'll
take the role please.
Senator Griggs.
Senator had a meal yes Senator
Kernan yes Senator Lopez yes
Senator said just yes senator
Clemente.
Yes Senator Wirth.
Yes thank you Senator Hamblen
yes.
Eight eight zero you have in the
past.
All right next up.
Is Senate bill two seventy three
Senator Hickey and Senator
Hemphill your health insurance
mental health coverage it is
three thirty we do have a slate
of bills that we would like to
try to get through so for those
of you who are presenting if you
can keep that in mind.
Thank you.
Is.
Senator Hickey we I believe we
have a committee serve on this
so we're going to move on the
committee sub first.
And then have your presentation
on that if you will.
Madam chair.
But do not have that ability to
seventy three and a do pass on
the substitute for Senate bill
to send any opposition to that.
I see none all right Senator
Hickey go ahead and move on
Senate and Senate bill two
seventy three committee set up.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you senators for hearing this
bill I think I touch base with
each of you yesterday and gave
you a highlighted the version of
the bill the actual built about
forty pages that's because you
have to cover each part of the
insurance code there's actually
the substances just about eleven
pages
it's not so much it it's a
complex bill although if you
look at the FIR and all the
definitions and changes that
goes on and other bills it is
complex
but it's also a pretty wide are
far ranging Bill that in and of
itself is leading to a paradigm
shift in how we deal with and
think about health care another
name I might have for the bill
would be the head gets re
attached to the body finally in
US healthcare another title
might be
Primary care is mental health
care for mental health care is
primary care and it's time that
we as an industry and society
came to that recognition and
took away the barriers that
currently exist particularly
through health plans to getting
access to that mental health and
substance use care that people
need let me know that this
parallels in many ways but adds
to federal legislation
legislation started really
mental health parity and
addiction equity act by our own
senator Domenici in two thousand
and eight it has kind of a
backwards approach to this by
essentially.
saying that restrictions to
mental health care can be no
greater than restrictions to
anything and medical surgical
care since then there have been
several other federal acts the
cures act the cares Act at each
appropriation bills since twenty
twenty has had a section in on
mental health parity and at and
so I realize that it was time
that in order to really get this
in place and enforced it had to
be pulled together and pull
together particularly at the
state level this started with my
bill back in nineteen twenty one
I passed that did not require a
co pay or deductible for
behavioral health services of
medication and that that that
was great then I began to hear
from so many people well am I
really appreciate that we don't
have the financial barrier but
guess what I can't find anyone
to deliver that care they're
just not in the state and we all
know what happened back in I
think twenty thirteen twenty
fourteen and we haven't quite
recovered from that but the
demand for healthcare in the
country is getting so right that
the competition for providers is
phenomenal and let alone after
COVID and so forth the burn out
of people who are in behavioral
health so if we're going to have
any impact on mental health and
substance use we have to get
trained providers professional
licensed professionals at all
levels in all areas to the state
to work with people.
Mental health is not yield
Piece of medicine I mean there
are some medications for it's
really intended personal project
it's the the people of heard me
say
you know if you could reduce
substance use and and if
successful treatment to one word
what would it be connection
engagement it's center personal
we have to have the people they
have to be they have to be
trained up so that's what
initially let me to look at what
the federal legislation was
saying about this I then last
year did get three hundred
thousand dollars in H. House
Bill to to bring in consultants
to study what other states are
doing in about seven other
states have gone in depth into
behavioral health and and I'll
talk about some of the learning
said that they have had but with
that and with the O. S. side
with page to handle my expert
from the OSI who is a expert in
health plan compliance and
Dr Robert Schwartz
That's a attorney Dr
professor emeritus from UNM in
health law one of the leading
health law experts in the
country we work this summer with
Georgetown consultants in the
school of public policy there
who have been looking at this
for a number of years and also
looking at the other states so
that's how we put this together
I don't need to repeat and go
over with you the opioid crisis
I talked about fentanyl this
morning and and how awful that
is getting and how people are
turning to it for self
medication for stress you know
the statistics that we are twice
the national average on alcohol
mortality alcohol related
mortality you know we're one of
the leaders in the country in
aces and one of the things that
this bill does different from
the federal bill is allow family
and couples therapy to be
covered without some extraneous
reason in other words the more
we can do do conflict household
that's under stress the fewer
aces our children are going to
experience and then the last
potential path to future mental
illness so
there are a whole number of
features of the bill but to save
time I'm I'm gonna hope that you
were able to to take a look I'm
I do want to point out a few of
them.
Number one
I have spent my career running
health plans medical groups
hospitals health systems I've
been on every side of the
equation and essentially when
health plans set up prior
authorizations or potential
barriers to what might be
perceived as I needed care they
basically set up their own
standards and and they they do
the to the field and in
orthopedics G. I. what have you
but they haven't really focused
and they really don't have much
staff in the wave of mental
health behavior health
professionals this bill
parallels federal legislation
requiring that the any.
prior authorization utilization
review follow the norms their
staff pleased by the behavioral
health professionals sociais
Haitians and you can see them
listed there on your bill
the another key feature of the
bill is that
you know when you're dealing
with substance use and and
eventually sometimes with mental
health there is what I call the
golden moment.
Someone who's had a.
Difficulty with alcohol is been
out all weekend and on Monday
wakes up and says I gotta I
gotta go.
Says that to the family and in
the old days you would have to
call up to go to and where one
really needs to go is to a RTC
really have a treatment center
and but you have to get a prior
authorization to do that and you
know what that golden moment is
gone in about twelve hours when
they've kind of said well maybe
it's not so bad in there they
start using again so this bill
basically allows the entry into
mental health and also and
particularly substance use
services.
As you go to your primary care
com up and go get in there take
advantage of that golden moment
that and and mental health a an
amazing statistic that came out
in the middle man study and
average of eleven years between
on set of symptoms and diagnosis
of bipolar schizophrenia serious
mental health issue there are
moments during that time in
which people are beginning to
see different behaviors having
anything getting in the way of
that being diagnosed then just
eight six extends it and the
longer to the diagnosis from the
onset of symptoms the worst of
the disease and its impact.
For the the end of the.
Thank
yes
so the
I think one of the the other key
piece of this is the fact that
federal legislation that we used
in road and more specifically in
the bill is that.
Health plans have to demonstrate
process sees that they are doing
everything within their power to
hire or not hire but it sure
through compensation comparing
to other states using medical
surgical pay scales to be sure
that the compensation for
behavioral health professionals
is adequate to attract and
retain and the handout you have
there shows you nationally how
much lower for the same
diagnoses behavioral health
providers are paid then medical
surgical providers for the same
thing so that's really the the
key to to the bill the other key
is is we checked with the other
states.
If you don't have the people
want to work with the health
plans so they have a huge amount
of work to write policies in
utilization review to prove that
they're not being anymore
stringent and access to mental
health that's a huge job you
have to have people from the O.
S. hi there working with them
hopefully working as a team to
get those policies in place
those policies have to be
produced on demand by a patient
or provider the and then once
that is in place then that will
be compliance of the complaints
were providers are not paying
their.
In one of a number of things
you've got to have the staff to
do the oversight and ensure
compliance with the regulations
are so the it again there
there's so many other pieces in
the bill that really easy access
and easy for the moment of the
health plan certainly can on the
I continue of exercise prior
authorization we want to be sure
that people are getting to the
services they need when they
need and with that I'll conclude
manage.
Okay thank you Sir thank you do
you want your experts say
anything or to do a very brief
if I can stress brief
introduction that the great yes
if I could start with page do
Hamel from the OSI.
Sure my name is Paige to handle
and I am an attorney and the
health care policy manager with
office of the superintendent of
insurance and I helped
coordinate the project to look
at other states best practices
in assuring mental health parity
and mental health access and
that process is what helps
generate the bill I oversee a
lot of various regulatory
compliance areas within OSI so I
am here to provide technical
assistance on any of those
questions thank you so much.
Thank you very much Jim Roberts
wartime a the more just
professor of law at UNM and now
a regent it at the UNM and I
very much appreciate the
opportunity to be here today
I've become especially
interested in the mental health
issues over the last couple of
years because I've seen the
problems that arise among
students and I can see that
these problems in the next
generation are really
extraordinary problems and the
problems that have been
exacerbated really seriously
exacerbated because people
cannot find care it simply isn't
being provided I know that from
my work as a region they also
know that from my work with
family members and so the
purpose of this bill of course
is to ensure that mental health
care really is available to
those people who needed in New
Mexico with the knowledge that
of course that will be make a
substantial difference not only
the status of mental health
physical health as well.
Great thank you very much but
now we go to the audience who
the audience is in favor of this
bill by show of hands.
One two three okay I can go
ahead and get the three of you
up here to go ahead make COVID.
If you will state your name I am
trying to keep comments to two
minutes.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Larry Martinez I'm up a
registered lobbyist for
Presbyterian medical services we
are probably the largest
provider of behavioral health
services in the state of New
Mexico right now and we stand in
support of the committee
substitute for Senate bill
seventy two seventy three
because we believe that every
barrier to receiving behavioral
health care needs to be
eliminated when someone's got a
physical malady they go to the
clinic or the doctor without any
prior approval and the
overwhelming health care
problems we're facing these days
is B. R. behavioral health ones
and those related to addictions
and I want to commend Senator
Hickey for bringing this forward
this will true.
Get behavioral health on parity
with all other health care and I
think if we can really address
those issues it will greatly
reduce the demands that are
being placed on the system in
the physical health care area
thank you so much thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee Jim Marshall Martinez
and the executive director of
equality New Mexico over the
statewide LGBTQ civil rights
organization and as folks have
heard me say in this treatment
and many others queer and trans
folks faces significant amounts
of shame and stigma about our
identities and the way we walk
through this world specifically
should be noted that forty eight
percent forty eight percent of
queer people have considered
suicide at one point in their
life eighty two percent of trans
people have considered suicide
in their life where folks
experience sexual assault and
sexual violence at a rate of
twenty four percent and trans
people at such a high rate that
the CDC refuses to release those
numbers because they've
consistently believe they were
over reported which we know not
to be true.
We to do everything we can in
New Mexico to minimize the
trauma and re traumatize ation
of queer and trans people and
that means removing every single
barrier to behavioral mental
health care services whenever
possible thank you.
Thank you madam chairman madam
chair and members of the
committee Charles good marker
speaking for an M. B. C. action
fund and we richer support for
this bill to of course we all
know as as the senator himself
said New Mexico children
experience the highest level of
adverse childhood experiences
among all states in the nation.
Helping to reduce that whether
it's direct care to the parents
for direct to the children
either way will help the
students have a brighter future
so this bill could be considered
and not very legitimately be
considered an education success
bill in the future of New Mexico
success bill same thing in terms
of our development we hear
employers talk about a lack of
appropriate workforce
availability this will help.
Developer state economically as
well so thank you very much.
Thank you now we go online are
there any folks online your vote
are in favor of this bill one.
All right let's go ahead the
that in favor please on you your
Mike we are having a two minute
limit you're welcome to started
anytime soon madam chair members
the committee thank you and
updated eight active director
New Mexico solutions and current
president of the New Mexico
health providers initiation we
stand in full support of this
bill and thank Dr Hickey for
introducing it New Mexico has
been a leader for actually many
decades and supporting maybe
health care is unfortunately the
law is only as strong as the
enforcement of it and we have
all struggled for many years
holding managed care
organizations accountable to
having different rules for
physical health compared to
maybe health or substance use
problems we think that this
would be a game changer and
would increase access to release
but services statewide thank
you.
Thank you so much now back to
the audience is or anybody in
the audience that is an
opposition of this bill.
Right can you go ahead and the
two of you stand here.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Brent
Moore I'm a registered lobbyist
for America's health insurance
plans and we stand and
respectful opposition to the
bill
Senator Hickey and a hip of in
communicating for quite some
time regarding the status of
this bill and we've been working
through concerns that we have
with the bill we remain opposed
to the revised bill and I would
say first and foremost one of
the things that is challenging
in New Mexico is the provider
shortage everyone is well aware
of the provider shortage
problems that we've had over the
last ten years that remains a
challenge that is difficult to
solve with this piece of
legislation so that is the first
point related to this bill in
terms of this bill as you see it
today in the committee sub it is
a complex bill there are lots of
moving pieces with it and the
interrelation of federal law is
is a challenge with the major
points that.
I would agree that I will
highlight for you major issues
that we continue to have with
the bill first and foremost
there is an entanglement of
network adequacy standards with
provider reimbursements so it is
a standard by which of the bill
the singles out rates as a
primary factor by which plans
will be judged in assessing
network adequacy that's a very
difficult thing when you start
tying two different worlds
together network adequacy is
something that we look at and we
try to maintain adequate
networks the the aside looks at
that our networks and tries to
ensure that when you start
trying and reimbursement rates
you're you're blending two
worlds and that becomes very
difficult in addition the bill
places severe limitations on our
utilization management.
It's our plans work very hard to
make sure that there are
barriers for access to care when
people are in critical moments
this bill goes further and
places limitations on our use of
utilization management would
like to try to address those in
with our continued use of
utilization management the last
and third point that I will make
is that the bill.
it uses a mandated use of
specified benchmarks and
standards for medical necessity
we had offered language to
Senator Hickey that was from
Georgia that would use evidence
based standards as an
alternative we believe that's
the correct way to go when
you're looking towards standards
and benchmarks we'll continue
the discussion with Senator
Hickey to try to get the bill in
a place where we can implement
it but as it stands now it's a
very difficult bill to implement
and we stand in opposition thank
you.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee Marla shows
registered lobbyists for Blue
Cross blue shield of New Mexico
and in the interest of time I
would just like to say that we
do appreciate the Sanchez
efforts and aside in working
with us we stand opposition from
many of the reasons just stated
by the association of health
insurance plans and we look
forward to continuing the
discussions we are very
committed to mental health
parity and trying to build our
provider network we understand
what has happened over the last
eight years we live it every day
and for those reasons we will
continue to work on this bill
with the sponsor and with us I
think you thank you.
If anybody online and opposition
of.
All right thank you now we go to
the committee other questions
from the committee.
Senator Kernan.
Madam chair so thinking about
and I was sitting on the in the
FIR page three all the.
Please Senator Stewart retired
healthcare school.
And and so forth.
Just trying to figure out what
for the additional costs will
be.
For.
Terry healthcare for instance
and and I just.
So that now of course they are
did.
They have.
That are already covered.
Is school public schools are.
Yes of Senator Kernan and madam
chair they ask them for an FIR
discovers everyone who has any
kind of commercial insurance so
it's not just state employees
it's anyone who has commercial
insurance and federal law covers
self insured as well as fully
insured plans and then the the
the different I. back groups are
covered that and this is in the
a section of the bill because
there of a special kind out
through the ACA but everyone is
covered actually Medicaid is
covered by the federal bill and
only chair stands out uncovered
but there is legislation coming
forward to bring Medicare into
compliance.
This doesn't chair and that
Senator Kernan madam chair this
does not apply to Medicare there
is one other critically
important point and I'd be happy
to go into the actuarial
analysis but the punch line is
this and this is from element
who is the nation's leading
actuary they did a study where
they demonstrated that if you
are able to lessen or remove the
stress of mental health or
substance abuse the associated
costs with there are absent the
cost for that is associated
chronic diseases drop by a
factor of two to three in fact
in fact if the health plans did
this they would actually and I
know this because we did it that
health plans that I started here
in the state back in two
thousand and twelve
this this became a business
strategy because we had so much
less use by removing the the
barriers financial barriers to
access to behavioral health and
and we of course just didn't
have an open door to it are
emerging to emergency room
admissions were were answered
less than our competitors are
admission to the hospitals were
quarter last actually it will
lower the overall cost of care.
Public schools are.
Government employees.
Correct and all that.
I'm gonna defer to my experts
at.
Madam chair Senator so those
plans are what are called non
federal governmental plans and
we can still regulate them as
the state and this these plants
can opt into mental health
parity law
this clarifies that they have to
often to mental health parity
law and meaning that they can't
apply standards for access to
behavioral health services are
more stringent than medical
surgical services.
K. E. R..
I'd.
Madam chair Senator I do not
know that any of them actually
do the analysis on whether or
not their plants are compliant
with mental health parity law.
If you so choose if I'm part of.
Behavioral health this morning.
Madam chair Senator it is it
probably is part of your planner
is I haven't seen your
particular plan but it is part
of the plan as a puppet mental
health care is a part of the
state employee plans the
analysis is not necessarily
being done as to whether or not
the that those benefits are
being equitably yeah are equal
to.
Quality is.
Three.
It's.
Circle that Reebok in India as
a.
Bryant or purchaser of that plan
I have no choice but to set the
total plan or not.
Madam chair Senator these plans.
But for for purchase in the
market place or as a small
business or large group should
theoretically already be
instituting the is parity
requirements this brings this
these requirements of state law
and gives us more authority to
shore and audit that these plans
are actually doing so.
Implies those already compliant
I'll do we know
madam chairman center Keren I
think that the answer is
important for the most part they
probably aren't complying most
of they're not required to offer
mental health care most of them
do offer mental health care in
the in most cases is probably
not the equivalent of the
medical and surgical care that
they offer so they offer sort of
not nearly as good mental health
care as medical surgical care
and we I'm and I'm one of those
in one of those retiree plans
now to well we can either take
it or leave it there's nothing
no and no way we can otherwise
get coverage for that that part
of mental health care and
substance abuse care that isn't
covered under the standard that
would apply in this statute
under this if this bill were
passed then in fact they'd have
to provide the same standard on
the mental health side and the
medical and surgical side and
the package it would be
presented to us would be a
complete package not one that
was missing some parts of mental
health.
Thank you thank you for your so
that's where that the response
that's.
Also.
Person is purchasing the plan
and to provide.
So that's yes that's kind of
where I'm coming in and I don't
disagree I think you've got and
we preventive health coverage
and not everybody does some good
purchasing something that we may
never utilize that that's the
case with medical was well if
that plan is in health.
Yes but you never know and and
so it's that because that I
think I'm a little bit concerned
about you know I always liked
the idea of the cafeteria plan
so I'm concerned that down the
road and may have some issues
I'm gonna be sure about it.
And then I'll have it.
Sometimes we don't have that you
know a lot of the you know we
include substance abuse to.
That at that point I've.
People have to go through that
is it that made those choices as
the choices they may put them in
that position and and it is a
medical condition that I
disagree that you know I'm gonna
be paying for that is a
purchaser.
It's not going to have to cover
everything in the same building
consent to stay in I'm sure
there's a great need for but we
need to be realistic about what
we do here because what we're
doing right as the cost of
insurance in this circle back to
the network is out of date I may
have a great plan that that in
order to pay for something I'm
never be able to access it yeah.
And so I think the network is an
important piece
For the course because we're
gonna have all these great plans
and we're not gonna have to find
is that.
To spend the money.
Listen to the debate and I think
we've got to look at cost I mean
they're they're actually.
Organizations and and insurance
companies are actually gonna
have this this and this is that
what we're doing here that
that that that will have this
critically important.
Disagree with that that this is
the thank you thank you senator
thank you madam chair and
senator just a couple of
observations if you read the
bottom of page four and the top
of page five
and this is what they were
talking about reimbursement
rates in other words it requires
a health plan to go through a
strategy to demonstrate that
they have done everything they
can including raising
reimbursement rates to get
providers to that area we are
going to work we don't train
enough providers to fill the
huge gaps here in New Mexico New
Mexico we have to attracting
from other states this bill will
allow us to raise the rates so
that we will attractive from
other states so that in fact you
do have a service provided for
you win this fully takes effect
which will be two to three years
there's no question about that
again in California Senate bill
eight fifty five was passed and
and and has many of these
components to it and they are
seeing may be a one percent
increase in premiums due to.
It's a bill to require.
Because we provided.
Try to practice just.
So we've got the best piece of.
Make sure that everybody.
Thank.
Thank you senator any other
questions from the committee.
What is the will of the
committee.
We have a two thousand Senator
Lopez a second second from Tom
and how to meal.
Representative Davis is it out.
and then if you will take a vote
senator Graham.
Senator great.
Excused
okay here just about.
Senator Hotmail.
Yes Senator Kernan yes Senator
Lopez yes senator Sanchez.
Yes.
Senator Tallman yes Senator
Wirth.
Yes thank you.
Yes.
One of the things.
Seven yes so seven one years
passes congratulations thank you
very much chair and committee.
All right next we have Senator
to see Pino the geothermal
energy generation tax credit
this is a bill we're going to
just hear will get public public
comment and Community and
Canadian participation but we
will not vote on this bill.
This will be move forward as
part of an omnibus Tax pet.
Okay that's.
Sorry.
Senator.
From home.
I don't.
Good afternoon madam chairman
and members of the committee of
this bill is a companion to the
geo thermal.
The resources development bills
which
I think it is.
Representative pending in
finance and pandemic was trying
to search for the right word
pending in five minutes of.
And and it is of the tax credit
portion of of what we initially
thought of as a single bill we
ultimately decided it made more
sense to separate this bill out
and it's an attempted
incentivizing through the tax
credit system the the
development of.
What.
In all likelihood will be the
final piece of New Mexico's
renewable energy portfolio.
The send me that always show in
the wind may not always blow but
the earth is always going to be
very warm.
And using that heat.
To generate electricity he's
been demonstrated doubted to on
the most food with the lightning
dock facility that's been in
operation for about ten years
new technology makes it even
more of likely that this will
happen if the other bill passes
we would have within energy
minerals and natural resources
he expanded capacity within
state government to foster the
development of this source.
And and then we would have the
center of excellence in New
Mexico tech to foster the
further research and an
expansion of of of these
techniques.
this bill then would would be a
compliment to that it would
provide tax incentives for
companies that develop our geo
thermal capacity.
And with that we stand for
questions that might my expert
witness is Tom Solomon who's
available to answer questions on
geothermal development I'm not
sure the tax issues one that
either of us are particularly
keen on we're just trying to
find ways subsidized even
further incentivize even further
the development we do put a cap
on on the credits and we put a
subset of given the chance to
work if it doesn't work we take
it off and.
I was seventy want to make a
brief statement at all
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee chair and I'd like
to briefly outline of what we
think our vision is for this
particular resource
and as you know New Mexico has
abundant sun and we and and with
the combination of those two
plus firm and dispatchable
twenty four by seven geothermal
energy we could really have a
complete renewable energy
portfolio that would make the
New Mexico the renewable power
house of the nation quite
potentially and that is the
advantage of this particular
resource is that it can back up
the more intermittent natures of
solar and wind with energy that
is online twenty four by seven
and we saw a demonstration of
the capability of developing in
New Mexico just this last
quarter in the last part of it
twenty twenty two with one of
the advanced you thermal
companies called ever and they
were able to drill an eighteen
thousand foot deep yes well
just adjacent to the lightning
dock facility south of Lordsburg
and the Animas valley and they
reach temperatures of two
hundred and fifty degrees
Celsius which is I think in
excess of four hundred and
seventy degrees Fahrenheit very
very hot rock with their
technology and they met their
milestones and then they
proceeded to get a contract with
Nevada energy and the energy to
build a twenty might megawatt
generating plant in the vada we
believe that having incentives
like we are proposing in this
bill some tax incentives would
attract those new businesses to
set up shop do the R. and D. and
then the further development of
electricity generating stations
here in our state providing that
sustainably.
I'm a development jobs for New
Mexicans renewable energy and
quite frankly a transition path
for workers in the oil industry
as we transition away from oil
and gas drilling use that same
workforce that same drilling
equipment to drill but just real
freaky for oil thank you.
Madam sent out to the audience
is there anybody in the audience
that is in favor of this bill.
Right one to three if I can go
ahead have you line up if you
will we are trying to keep our
common short so I will time you
at two minutes.
And then we'll go to online.
How madam chair.
and committee members my name is
Jr mackenzie I am the co
coordinator of an environmental
group called three fifty New
Mexico and I speaker today for
seven thousand member members in
largely but not exclusively and
central New Mexico we stand in
favor of this bill today.
For the reasons outlined
By
Mr us Solomon and just I want to
explain it in a slightly
different way.
We all know that we're moving
aggressively in New Mexico
towards renewable energy.
for a number of reasons.
When we don't want to lose focus
on the fact that cost is one of
those reasons renewable energy
is the cheapest available energy
now of one component of that.
Our stand by batteries.
And batteries are expensive.
Geothermal.
Provides the same kind of energy
in other words twenty four seven
energy that batteries
supply so this is and it turned
alternative and maybe a better
solution of the.
This technology is fairly new
it's being developed rapidly and
the legislation from you today
is an important part on moving
it forward thank you.
Thank.
good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee Lewis
gonna with the Sierra Club
you're gonna chapter wanted to
much of your time in respect of
the desire of the chair just to
say that we support this bill
and thank the sponsor and expert
for bringing in four and asks
addition of owning and it but
just want to let you guys know
that we support it thank you.
Yes thousand thank you madam
chair members of the committee
of Charles good marker speaking
on behalf of natural resources
defense council also known as an
RTC just want to highlight you
know big part of the story of
how wind and solar became very
viable in the state was.
A tax credit very much like this
one
and that was called the
renewable energy production tax
credit it help to those
industries develop its sunset it
did its job
basically this proposal is the
same for deer thermal energy
let's let it do its job and this
will help move this forward
thank you.
That anybody online in favor of
this bill.
All righty so is there anybody
in the audience as opposed to
this bill.
Okay said nobody online post all
right at this point let's go to
the committee are there any
questions from the committee.
Senator Kernan.
Yeah.
Right now Sir right you get the
you get the best for most active
today I think I think this is
this is really exciting and I
think I read an article about
madam chair that what's going on
down there the deal areas for
and that in you know I think
this fascinating and I acted
that are completely that from
expanding that.
Through really well whatever you
can the family it require for us
to be able to get this fracking
part of that process.
Thank you madam chair Senator.
In the example that I sided with
the yes well that was drilled
and drilled
he'll there was no fracking
involved the
the technology that ever uses is
to just drill a very deep
borehole just like would be done
with the oil and gas drilling
and then to drill a series of
branches off of that one
penetration and then the connect
those branches at their tips and
a drill another production well
so the basically to penetrations
one for injection one for a
return and then you just
circulated fluid through there
so there's no need for fracking
you just absorb the heat at the
depth from the portholes and
that circulates that very hot
fluid heated by the earth back
up to the surface and it
provides that he to a geo
thermal generating electricity
plant at the service that looks
very much like a gas fired
generation plant it's just using
the earth's heat as a source of
providing that see many so in
that example there is no
fracking required to be
perfectly transparent there is
another flavor another variation
of advance the thermal energy
that's called enhanced
geothermal energy
that is operated by another
company excuse me.
by another company that we are
in contact hold for of all
energy and the due to use of
fracking at shallower depths
in that that can be done we
really like the the the ever
style of advanced you thermal
technology because there is no
fracking involved very much
practice okay.
The lead up just wanted to madam
you know the cost when you think
about the cost of renewables and
and I have a problem that the
different that no closer cheaper
because the natural gas that
we'll have that conversation
other times in any of the act I
do think it's really exciting to
have this additional opportunity
and of course the credits always
tells me that's how you get the
new technology up and going then
at some point and I think with
is getting close but not there
the state of.
You go go down
it that the one thing I'm
concerned about in Lee County we
are called the energy plants
that means all of the that we do
with so there we have nuclear
and we have a gas but we don't
have any deals there so now
we're going to we're going to do
because we
don't think we have seals are
down Matt where chairman of
century you actually the ticket
technology that I don't know the
geology of the case that maybe
you don't but it doesn't require
hot water down below there it
just requires hot rock which
you're everywhere if you're
willing to go deep enough so I
don't know the the depth of of
of how deeply they would have to
drill those boreholes to get to
the hard as rocks at south of
NMSA got down to eighteen
thousand feet using a new type
of drill bit.
But using the same rigs that are
used for petroleum exploration.
Madam chair you can you can that
have electric drilling rigs now
and the laser and laser drilling
thousand southeast New Mexico
not many that believing that
direction and they pay for those
of the credit second body of
reducing our the person so you
know but also built around but
thank you I think it's really
great okay.
Thank you senator Senator Brandt
and Sierra.
Thank you so.
But I know that like Cleveland
high school in Rio Rancho is all
heated and cooled.
I was done.
I was years ago when war was on
the school board was approved
and then when I was on the
school board actually got opened
up so please well what fifteen
sixteen years ago and and
apparently madam chairman and
senator there several other
schools around as well Google in
Albuquerque but also in is it
over group hello regard I think
there's one as well that also
use what's called ground source
heat pumps they don't have to go
anywhere near eighteen thousand
feet they they go down a couple
hundred feet I think for some of
their you think for one director
like six hundred feet or
something like that yeah so it's
it's it's an interesting deal
terms we use for a long time
there's new technologies to make
it better just like with oil and
gas
I'm with the kind of the all the
above person
I I do agree that to get things
started in the that technology
moving it's fine to do some
subsidies I may disagree with a
little bit I think went
it state they've gotten to the
point they don't really or
subsidies in person the maturity
of solar's they really shouldn't
need our subsidies years time
stand on your own
I think that you know I've been
asking for at least ten years if
not longer for an analysis of
cradle to grave on all types of
energy to the state no one has
given to me.
and I think honest this after
ten years just because no one
wants to people in the.
otherwise would be easy to do
and then you could actually
convince me if you could show me
cradle to grave
the affects on the environment
with no one wants to show me
that which makes me very
skeptical of almost all types of
energies point there's no will
still be creative reflect any
type of.
So but I I would like to ask a
few questions on this is we also
have how much energy do the do
these produce you mentioned one
is this two twenty kilowatt make
one megawatt sorry
And what what.
What we use as a state.
madam chair senator if I
understand your question you're
asking about the approximate
order total size of the
generating facility of the
service the he of the total
conception the total consult our
state what we all hope what is
the New Mexicos Energy load I
boy it's so you the utilities
design
energy generation for the
summertime peak load and a the
would have to speculate I think
it's something on the order of
I don't know I gigawatts ten
gigawatts peak something like
that in the summertime and I
don't have that number at the
top of my head but the PNM you
know el Paso electric and SPS
energy and all of the rural co
ops together find that
electricity we believe that in
the future when we have
converted to a hundred percent
renewable energy and are using
renewable energy for not only
the current electricity load but
the electricity load that will
be you know needed for powering
electric vehicles and the power
the heat pumps to heat our homes
and hot water.
That geothermal electricity has
the potential to generate
something like two to three
gigawatts in the state
of geothermal capacity which
would be something like ten
percent roughly of the total
electricity generation point.
It's implicitly built out the
capacity to deal fall would be
about ten percent.
That is our vision of madam
chair Senator yes the geothermal
would be approximately in a in a
good case about ten percent of
the total portfolio the best
case scenario.
Is that what a reasonable basis
you know time will tell.
That I totally understand and
and remember the seventies were
supposed to run out of oil.
The.
That's what they were predicting
that we would run out of oil
sometime in the eighties and and
now we have three hundred years
with oil according to most
analysis but so I'm just saying
it could be way more than that
with new technology
so Madam center and if we were
to become a major source of
exporting energy which we
currently do and should do more
of it could be more than that.
We could we could literally
power the United States with
renewable energy if we if we had
to if we had the transmission
lines and build a lot.
Okay can we come back down to
earth.
Thank.
So and
So our use you so the production
about gonna be about ten percent
what's the cost.
When it comes to.
Yeah I mean I I know some of the
cost of the other types of
energy what's what's the cost
production with the in initial
investment the operating cost
what's the what's the cost of
the end users to the wholesale
market not the chair Senator
So let me answer that in a
couple of ways one is by quoting
the current cost of generating
geothermal electricity with
current technology so there is a
lot of geothermal electricity
generating capacity in the
United States today about three
point six approximately
gigawatts I believe most of it
in northern California and
Nevada and states in the
northwest where a lot of that
existing hydro thermal
geothermal generation is which
relies on finding an existing
hot Oct four for underground in
contact with hard rock like like
a geyser right and just you
extracted bringing to the
surface the cost of that
geothermal electricity is
roughly competitive with the gas
combined cycle power plant and
for the agencies that quote the
levelized cost of electricity
gas combined cycle I think the
court is about sixty dollars per
megawatt hour geothermal is
about seventy five dollars per
megawatt hour so it's a little
bit higher but that was run the
price of natural gas was a bit
lower than what it is today so
it's roughly competitive with
the cost of the need of of of
natural gas combined cycle now
the technology that we're
looking at developing in the
state is still in the are in the
face and we are looking at
generate at developing that over
the course of the next decade.
I don't know what lightning dock
costs probably in that order may
be a little bit higher because
it's a pretty small facility
only fifteen megawatts.
and so we believe that the costs
of geothermal electricity for
this advanced type those costs
will probably start high as they
do with most new technologies
and when you get experience in
the bill more more but the costs
will come down.
I appreciate that thank you
madam chair and senator so you
said there's a fluid that's
being pumped through the earth.
and so so you're drilling.
Down in the lateral lines to to
do the connections that you were
talking about and then there's a
fluid that runs through all
that.
What's the fluid it could be
water it could be a number of
things that could be produced
water there are a number of
options it just needs to have
good properties of thermal
conductivity and low corrosion
so that it doesn't damage the
equipment that is circulating
through Madam chairman and
senator we recently saw a video
and another company doing the
similar thing and they use
molten salt.
In order for whatever reason
they figure that molten salt has
properties that lit lend itself
to this it's a closed circuit
circuit it it's it's a closed
loop so there's no loss of of
the water or whatever fuel
you're using into the into the
underground it just it just
continuously recycles.
Mr Chairman
with that Mr Chairman yeah madam
chair feel sorry for all right.
That's good.
Madam.
Senator it gets confusing when
general actor.
Looking the gal was still with.
Well the the never mind I'm
gonna stop on the.
That sounds awful of late in the
oil and gas.
That's a close look.
So so you're saying it's not
only because it's it's not gonna
get into the groundwater all
those things because it's a
close look.
So just like the guests at I I
guess and I like to think your
formal to better answer than the
other renewable energy's we have
what I will say are you familiar
with the the Gavin Newsom and.
chair Senator I'd probably not
Geno Revenue Service thank you
okay awesome I thought sure
everyone in the room those of
governments in this so couple
years ago a couple years ago
because
California have opted such high
energy standards Gavin Newsom
with amendment on energy bills
that made natural gas be
considered green energy in
California.
And because he realized there's
no way that you could produce
what is needed with just
renewables and so I I think
maybe it's something to adopt
that same thing here because
we're gonna run the state
problems they're having where
they're having brownouts and
blackouts because that too
quickly moved to rely upon what
what you guys are calling clean
energy I will not call clean
energy until someone gives me
the cradle to grave.
So that I can actually compare
whether to clean energy or not
That is not gonna take the word
of someone that I.
I have no idea what their
background is or whether on the
reserves so thank you I I do
like geothermal I think there's
actually almost no argument that
that's the way of using what the
earth is naturally producing
and I guess the only side effect
of that would be what we're
lining in the ground the
concrete.
Is I'm guessing what the lining
is made out of.
So all right managers etcetera
it's very similar to the
drilling technology and linings
and casings in the oil industry
I if I'm happy with that for oil
and gas are are we happy with a
virtual for all and so I am and
I do like your formal I do think
it's probably the best solution
we have other than what we
currently have thank Madam thank
you Senator Brandt Sierra.
Thank you madam chair in the
just one quick question.
So.
Thank.
This.
Of these the.
How.
All over.
Our.
Madam chairman and senator Tom
and if if you're willing to go
deep enough you can drill
anywhere and get to to the area
where you're tapping rocked the
sudden up to generate
electricity to service the
problem is one of the problem
the beauty of New Mexico is that
our geology is such that there
are many more of those locations
closer to the surface and other
places and the Dr sherry Kelly
who has been working with our
working group on this from New
Mexico tech has maps that show
where in New Mexico you only
have to drill down to about
eighteen thousand feet but if
you're willing to go to fifty
thousand feet you could probably
do it anywhere it's just that
would be very expensive the new
drilling techniques in those new
bits that have been developed
actually a lot of the work was
done at Sandia and some of those
bits of this is something that
our national labs in our
universities are on top of and
they're working really hard and
that's why we would like to see
this become a real statewide
effort with energy minerals of
board the university's sedation
of labs and the private
companies.
This is the.
Mexico to the one and only about
that's right we have a beautiful
the land of enchantment wherever
you're located in New and I'm
true on that one if you're going
to come up with those
incentives.
This is
got that out of this state or
any other questions from so you
have all right.
Would not question you have a
question all right thank you
madam chair and and thank you
senator
sorry I walk in the units the
two kids with the stuff but Mike
is no okay.
Purpose.
Is there anything who maybe for
you expert witness what is the
minimum temperature that will
require that generates
electricity.
That could be use.
Mr chair will
You for that question.
I think a key question is what
is the minimum temperature that
it can economically develop all
electricity and it gets I think
you need to be at least a
hundred fifty degrees Celsius to
to barely do it two hundred and
you really got a good solid
economic K. two hundred and
fifty degrees Celsius yes you're
in the money so and I
eight the Fahrenheit so it's C.
two fifty is about four seventy
F. I think I would need to do
some math to get to the correct
answers but yet but one one
fifty Celsius with the above the
boiling point fair night which
is to twelve so it's probably
about two fifty very nice yes.
a few of to let me do some math
here I get to those answers but.
Is that is that enough for you
you of.
That that that's fine for now
and so.
I know in this
we're talking about also do a
thermal source heat pumps.
Yes so so so on one hand we're
talking about connected
generation to talk about the
project boards for that's
creating legislation may I move
on to whatever.
And then the
he pumps can you talk a little
bit about the
The pumps forty point lead to Mr
chairman and Tommy fill fill it
on this but my understanding is
that our bill only deals
electric generation Senator
souls as a separate bill for
ground source heat pumps that
would have taken credits for
that you encouraging the use of
the event commercial and and and
and home construction I think
that's it thank you okay on that
note if there are no other
questions from the committee
that is where we stand at this
point because this will be moved
into a I'm the best tax package
will consider an ordinance
Center
and so at that point thank you
for the clarification so at this
point we did have a question
Senator to see if you know you
do have another bill that's
going to be coming up but we do
want to try and stick into the
order of the agenda the feel
hunger okay thank you very much
so we do have Senate bill one
ninety four but I do want archer
Senator Shendo to clarify
because or some questions from
the committee on the status of
that will and where we need to
go but we do plan on trying to
finish the agenda today.
Well thank you thank you madam
chair thank you that I fear
thank you for bringing us this
far
just to.
One ninety four.
There was a question from
Senator Kernan requesting
additional information I think
we clarified okay chair I think
it is we did all this for for
that reason well for the.
Revocation on our.
So we have no we have an
amendment
To to the committee so we can.
Sierra wanted to the.
Go ahead and the present the
building in order to meminta the
bill.
The.
And I want to make sure that
Senator current header
questions.
And services.
Thank you Mr chair we have an
amendment to.
To the Senate bill one ninety
four.
Which
In search on page one line
eighteen inserts
To follow the words so requiring
cooperation from state agencies
to share relevant data.
And then and
Page nine.
Between one six and seven insert
the following a new subsection
D. that was standing any other
provision of the law stage of
cooperate as requested state
treasurer for the advancement of
New Mexico work in state via our
IRA program including the
sharing of relevant.
That our information is a party
show usually agree at reasonably
this reason necessary the state
treasurer of requests that to.
We present this amendment in
order to ensure.
The the state treasurer's office
receive the information they
need in order to implement and
execute the work it's safe
program.
This.
Working in a motion the to move
the amendment for discussion
purposes.
Senator meals motion senator
Graham second.
Is to pick.
Any questions on the on the
amendment Senator Kernan you at
the requested additional
information facing for
clarification.
Well.
I probably have a question is
so.
Mr chair appears
Page fifty.
That.
As long as the parties the
parties are.
The individual to participate.
has been very to allow.
The you know I.
In.
Parties the.
Senator the state agencies.
The state agencies.
They've agreed to this yes.
Mr chair and senator so it says
that all state agencies shall
cooperate as requested by the
state treasurer the advancement
Wirth said program including the
sharing of relevant.
Data.
The.
My understanding Senator is that
the only agency to so we
requesting information from is a
workforce solutions.
But it doesn't say that was just
says all.
So that would include all that
would include tax Iran.
Who is with right now with my
understanding is the most
information they'll be
requesting to the photo work for
solutions I will have somebody
and zoom.
From the former the former
assistant Attorney General who
is currently the general counsel
for treasures office they can
assure you that we're not
violating any confidentiality if
you want to two one eight zoom
zoom anyone here from him.
Mr chairman that's okay.
Thank you.
I guess.
Let me of Senator my
understanding is that the
information we.
Will be.
Listing of businesses.
Business contact information
with five more employees is that
your understanding Senator.
Okay.
With the needs of information in
order to implement.
The.
The again information at the
seeking without be violating any
confidentiality.
Mr.
Okay.
Limit is voluntary I think we
had this discussion limit is
voluntary when we passed the.
And now we're making it
mandatory because.
It's not working the way we had
intended on a voter bases an
hour forcing folks.
On the to do this reporter
actually right this if we don't
pass.
This legislation then this
program is that.
Because we can't find any
financial services provider was
willing to build the necessary
infrastructure.
Is that for economic reasons.
The reason is because we don't
it will get enough participation
you know economies of scale that
they put.
As I said before the preeminent.
Center for studies of.
Retirement savings plans which
is located in Boston College in
court and they did a study in
cooperation with folks from the
UNM.
Thank you would only get one
percent participation so it if
you're gonna get one percent
fifty one percent participation
no financial services providers
willing to build the necessary
infrastructure.
And with that fifteen states
have passed Mr chair of fifteen
states have enacted similar
legislation and all of them that
made it mandatory.
So the study also then suggested
that we make it mandatory to
make it work absolutely Mr
chair.
Now again you know the.
Raise the for the fact that
the a lot of work well as I said
before the employees never
responsible for plan
administration and that
responsible for plan reporting.
That response so they don't give
out any and and the submitted
by.
And answering any questions
related to the operation of this
plan they would have to contact
the plan administrator.
With that kind of the employer
would that be responsible for
that.
And
So in the end well down to the
fact all the the state employee
the only responsibility.
For the employers just add
another deduction on the kind of
they will.
So.
We still yeah we're yeah I was
just sort of the data sharing
and and just you know and I just
kind of asking you know this
office for about three or four
days and okay yeah.
This is been hiding from us.
Yeah I know so
this is the amendment and I
think there's some questions
about what they're relevant data
is and I think comes to I know
that.
Data among between agencies
always a very delicate thing and
and
I just on on the asus thank you.
Make you feel more comfortable I
have somebody and soon they can
assure you that there will be no
violation confidentiality.
And who is that his name is the
hope I don't think mispronounces
jun.
Prying camps K. R. I. E. and Hey
A. M. P. he's a general counsel.
The treasurer's office and the.
Just a few months ago he was a
former assistant Attorney
General.
All right let's hear from MC
what's gonna say.
As.
Good afternoon.
Mr chairman members of the
committee can you hear that.
Yeah go ahead.
Okay hi good afternoon everyone
my name is John director by the
general counsel the state
treasurer's office
I would clarify I think at the
outset that the language in the
amendment is really just about
the sharing is not obligated to
the
The change in terms of the opt
out this.
Issue it really is amended to
the share of the purpose of the
language in that New Mexico
subsection he is to facilitate
our office receiving the
information that we need to
functionally Network state
program started so essentially
what we're looking for is that
a couple years and then if
necessary contact information so
phone numbers email addresses
physical addresses that kind of
thing it's not really
confidential data I would note
that this type of data sharing
provision you know insurance
provisions are
there are a number of them in
the statutory code already so
this is similar to those I'm
happy to get a couple of
examples that help but I would
just clarify that the purpose of
that section G. is really just
to get the names and contact
information of on the cover of
this lawyers and so it's not
directly related to opt out she.
The.
First of.
So all state agency shall
cooperate.
And I think I think that's the
question so.
In this.
whizzes for the offense meant.
Is your is a request.
From agencies to cooperate.
Because we're forcing for from
from what I understand is we're
forcing all private sector
employers and have five or more
to be automatically roll we're
not and doing anything with the
state agencies so this
particular.
Section.
Hello the treasure to.
Contact agencies to cooperate to
provide for the state to
participate or for the
secretary's office to get
private sector.
Information.
To do what I don't know what
events meant means.
This.
to read to for to the.
German and soon but it is also
important to point out that.
Everyone is automatically in the
role but they have the option.
Opting out to get up out the
next taken the role one day
after out the next day.
Of Madam okay up to now.
Of.
So is that but that's not the
case first for state.
Agencies we're gonna
automatically in order well we
had a program for them.
This has nothing to do with
state employees.
Because the private sector.
I.
Only that that.
Well I
been made before what my policy
this is the thing that I'm also
part and I see the challenge of
okay we're mandating this
private employers or if but for
me I I don't see the difference
in like we're mandating that
people have to opt out because
if we want people to opt in they
still have to make an effort to
up in.
My right from reason to reason.
The top having any with everyone
automatically enrolled this
because.
Study after study showed you
fifteen times more.
More I have to to participate.
This people are reluctant to
take take the initiative so the
top ten.
This legislative initiative the
opt out but if if nobody's and
that is that everybody's.
Government the rules that you're
not going to get the
participation because human
nature is such that.
Third that is likely to
participate in a program where
they have to opt in.
But they have the option opting
out right so Mister chair and
senator I think I I guess what
I'm saying is that.
I understand the discomfort of
the work mandate because it's
like we're forcing this on
businesses I get that.
I'm also but to me I I don't see
the difference of okay if you're
automatically enrolled that you
just have to opt out so that's
okay have to check that box if
you're if you have the
opportunity to join this program
but it's not mandated then you
have to check a box to opt in.
So to me I don't
I I I don't see that either is a
challenge because there's still
one effort one step that
employee has to make to either
opt in or opt out.
So my is really just more of a
kind of a clarification of I I
get it but I don't see that one
is worse than the other in this
case and so the mandating.
I understand that's a discomfort
for some but I I don't see that
one is the other the the the
employees to participate we're
just mandating that the employer
that gives them.
Gives the Boise option it gives
it that makes a program
available.
And just a quick follow up Mr
chair if I may so you know part
of it is like educating.
Lawyers on this
because then they would have
that information it would be a
tool in their toolbox to either
offer to their employees or not.
But are there
programs in place materials
available that would educate
employers about what this
program can do what they need to
do is if they decide to opt out
then they don't have to worry
about their five plus employees
either having to make that
decision or not through the the
plan administrator working in
conjunction with the working
safe people and educate the
employers employees about this
program that's that the
responsibility of the employer.
Okay that's all I have Mister
chair thank you sent.
Senator Sanchez.
Thank you Mr chair.
I'm following along here and I
hope this is a question for
still on the amendment but so
Senator.
This will not will this be
implemented in state agencies as
well or not at all.
So we're only going to the boys
are have a pension plan.
It was only have attention okay
so then this is only for private
business so Mr chair Senator
when you spoke the other day he
said well it's just adding
another box to the payroll thing
will small businesses only have
five employees I think you made
a comment so they'll do that
they'll have an employee
payroll company they use.
Someone if you have a fireplace
you know using a payroll company
are you don't have the money to
four one one and they don't have
the infrastructure for H. R.
using the owner of the company
is H. R. estimator
superintendent of payroll.
You know because you're one of
the five employees.
So it's not just that in a box
and the you know it's it's a lot
more to it sometimes when you
don't have your own business
resulting in so you think what's
out of the box payroll take care
of it but Mr chair Senator like
Center Hamlin said the smaller
businesses.
Like I just mentioned all one
person does almost all these
jobs and then you have four
employees are actually boots on
the ground and the so.
It's just hard for me to.
To
That sort of thing to to to
support this bill because the
smaller price to put it on to
private businesses and then the
smaller companies to make a
mandatory.
It just doesn't make sense to me
but Mr chair Senator.
The other thing is
I lost my train of.
Actually things like so even on
the on the on the to make it
mandatory we haven't had any
businesses opt into it yet Mr
chair Senator and there must be
a reason why they haven't opted
into it.
The program has gotten off the
ground now with Mr chair Senator
how long has the program been.
On the ground our.
Our out
figured here was passed but we
it's it's not something you can.
Implemented and get organized
off overnight it's been.
So Mr chair Senator where we
just did this is taking more
time than we at the I would like
but.
It's we yes your question is
it's it's taken this long to get
to this point so we have to have
that offer it yet we can't offer
until we get a financial
services provider and we were
able to get one because they're
not going to.
Thank you all for a
Of the the negative reply to our
our
The but the request for.
Proposals.
Knowing that it's not mandatory.
Okay because like I said all
fifty states separatist they
have this program is mandatory
right which if you market Mr
chair.
And senator would you feel more
comfortable if we raise that to
ten employees.
I mean well.
I don't mean to get personal but
Mr chairman and please do you
have going to have to we're
we're only if we're still on the
amendment so that's why I was
asking Mister chair if my
question was.
This is one of the bill okay all
right okay so
Okay so we have.
A motion on the floor to amend
the bill we have a second I have
a question on the okay okay all
right go it will go to Senator
Brandt on the question on the
amendment so let's focus on the
amendment thank you and and you
know sometimes it happens and
sometimes imminent changes the
bill enough that you just kind
of roll until but so what I'm
looking at and then I'm I'm
still stuck on that same place
with the so what it says is
notwithstanding any other
provision of law.
In other words no matter what
any other laws in the state New
Mexico state.
All state agency shop offering I
have a referral.
So we're ignoring every other
law in the state of New Mexico
dealing with everything.
All state agency shall cooperate
as requested by the state
treasury.
That is very very broad.
Very very open to interpretation
and your intention is not the
that the misuse that that
doesn't mean it won't be but
that does that make sense you
and so again I I hate to keep
reiterating this and I've
reiterated and Education
Committee yesterday or not
writing implied we're writing
all this is going law books and
this is what people are gonna
operate under and everyone tries
to figure out how to get around
the law.
And so we have to be very clear
very cessation notwithstanding
any other provision of law is a
scary.
One two three four five six
works.
So my cat F. I cannot support
this amendment with the that I
think it makes this bill
completely unattainable not that
I'm planning to support the bill
anyway this amendment that
sections of this horrendous
George gentleman thank you.
Okay so any other questions an
amendment.
If not is our opposition to the
amendment.
Okay Clark call the roll on the
amendment.
Senator Brandt the.
Senator great not here Senator
how to meal.
Senator Kernan no Senator Lopez
yes.
Senator sentence.
Senator Tallman.
Yes.
Senator Wirth you there.
Yes and I vote yes okay thank
you.
Senator Hamblen yes.
And Senator Shendo then.
Well no.
For now.
I can to.
This support for.
I for.
Five four five four you have no
so we're back on the bill
Senator Kernan thank you very
much Mr chairman
I'll tell you the thing that
concerns me is the fact that we
are name getting employers maybe
not be able to work with them
but we are to the employers and
it's not necessarily the simple
thing to for an employer to set
up a qualified plan percent to
the Internal Revenue Code
including a plan while I under
all of the sections of the
Internal Revenue.
And show registered because
just.
Employees and this is a program
then obviously.
Your own Moores has has not been
popular for work to people or
not following dearly going into
this plan so our answer to that
is whatever make them and I I
just think we as a committee may
I you know I I hate expensed
Senator Thomas but but I'll tell
you this is not this is not good
policy when when something isn't
working and we come back and
then we make people participate
Committee that justice just
doesn't work and I guess we can
send it on.
To work on this
The you know we're we're trying
and committees to to pass good
legislation and I'm sorry that
that I think that we need to
really consider if this is the
kind of legislation that we want
to send on and so with all due
respect and I have tremendous
respect that in his own words
people are not participating
with so thank you go ahead I'll
be happy to his dad know if the
ground because we don't we can't
engage a program administrator
so hasn't been offered.
Thanks a lot thank you for the
two of.
But
the other question yeah okay but
the first so I share and
Senator.
do you have a company that's
right jump in and do this if we
make it mandatory no because
they went out to bid and nobody
would be.
Nobody would to respond to our
request for proposals correct
and so you're making it long has
it may have reached their
letters from them saying.
That they won't participate
because it's not mandatory is
that going to be successful.
You can show you those letters.
Okay thank you Mister chairman
Senator of.
What we have.
We're going to make something
mandatory
to owners the business owners.
Make it mandatory to offer Mr
chair Senator well no you're
make it mandatory that all the
rules not to offer it that's
what it was before.
The mandatory that the.
Members employers.
Expert witness is more familiar
with it then I he was he said
three other bills the city might
be able to make any might not be
able to make it.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator I.
What my concern is you're making
something along mandatory.
For employers we don't have
someone put the program together
we don't have someone to
administer.
Senator is there something in
the bill.
That says if it's not off the
ground if it's not available
that employers don't have to
offer.
Thank you for your questions
thank you Mr.
Okay us to remember the
Nobody else was before.
No.
I guess go back to the bill so
Senator remind me again what do
we pass this bill as a
voluntary.
The two thousand.
Twenty one.
So so that time period we did
nothing to educate employers.
Twenty.
About this voluntary program
that we passed.
Sir I'm.
In the.
So we have we've made no effort.
To educate employers that we
have passed this law for them to
you know for the simple
dissipate.
That you're not going to get
voluntary compliance is get
enough people voluntary comply
to make it work because no
program provider.
Responded to our request for
proposals.
Because they know that is that
going to work unless it's
mandatory.
So are why why do we think.
Fifteen other states have passed
it with mandatory so why are we
different why do you think is
going to work here if we don't
make it mandatory.
I don't know I have trouble with
us not educating or doing
anything and now a year and a
half later we're forcing because
I don't I just don't.
I just don't see it I don't
know.
No.
If we if we don't pass this
bill.
We're doing nothing.
To improve.
Our state which has the highest
percentage of people over fifty
five with less than five
thousand dollars save toward
their retirement.
So continues to be the worst
state as far as having the
highest percentage of people
without the savings plan.
I understand that do you know
what the average age of the
Indian male is.
The Indian mill no the average
age of foot of the life
expectancy of the average Indian
male you know what that is all
and the Mr chair forty eight.
Forty eight.
nationally so.
I I see your point.
None of us never get to be old
enough to enjoy retirement and
just that age goes up to sixty
to sixty five sixty whatever it
is.
Well Mister you have.
I'm I'm I'm I'm not exposed the
past.
Maybe.
One of the few.
So you know we keep up in social
service social security we keep
up in all this and I look at my
folks across the country none of
it would have some security
probably never live long enough
to enjoy that.
I can see where you're coming
from.
Other questions so what's a
pleasure the committee.
Mr chairman we do pass well
motion for the pass.
But the road to get so second.
The second okay with the seconds
Senator Corman.
Senator Brandt no Senator have a
meal no.
Senator Kernan they'll Senator
Lopez yes Senator sent.
Senator Clemente yes Senator
Wirth.
Yes.
Senator Hamblen.
Yes.
Senator Shendo I know I know for
four with two people absent.
Yes.
No.
The director of the motion
direct.
Hi a motion to move up to the
next meeting the rest.
Well I'd like to we'll try to
have a motion for a no right
Senator Lopez second.
Senator hello and comments that
senator of Senator Brandt no.
Senator had a meal yes Senator
Kernan now Senator Lopez yes.
Senator Tallman yes.
Senator Wirth.
Yes.
Yes Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Shendo yes.
One three four five six yes No
and to Representative.
okay there were no
Representative the
firm is the pass thank you for
your thank you Mr thank you.
And so.
The Senate bill two twenty.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Hello Mr chairman see you again
you very long you may.
And I think we have an amendment
I hope it's been yes and we
have.
Yeah.
I don't think.
The council service and they
said that the.
They're doing that this year for
some reason that are sending it
to the Sanchez and having just
bring in.
We can explain the amendment if
you want.
We don't have it would be for
the next.
There is no next committee is
there.
Funding was provided.
That will look to put the
amendment amendment was gonna at
domestic violence is a
possibility for the besides
alcohol and drug treatment it
will also go for domestic
violence trying to pick up on
one of the Senator Tomlinson
earlier verifiability that
didn't I guess it didn't pass or
whatever it's yeah we're going
to add it into to make it into
the use of the money.
Yes this is the first up in the
Senate finance from here okay
good goes to finance and so
maybe we'll put it under finance
act.
The switches things you can.
Thank you Mr president of thank
you Mr that are built Senator
Senate bill two twenty is a bill
that that attempts to deal with
The situation that the we've
we've been facing since we first
started taxing alcohol and that
is we don't use all of it well
the tax gains for treating it
goes half to the data the I fund
roughly have to D. W. I have to
the general fund there's a chart
on the
The FIR indigenous shows you
exactly how the money would be
distributed under this under
this bill.
The currently it the the tax
generates above.
It is generating about fifty
million is issues run numbers
fifty million a year have it's
going into the W. I. fund goes
up to the individual counties
for their programs a little bit
extra those departments and
special situation and then a
little bit goes to drug court
five percent goes to drug courts
around the state the rest goes
into the general fund roughly
forty eight million a year goes
to the general fund nothing goes
to Gallup.
Know they have their own space
they have another they McKinley
gets their share in Gallup has
their own share of the local
option liquor excise tax special
taxation special tax thank you
for this is bill would take this
year that goes into the general
fund which.
Most about forty eight million a
year we don't really need that
much of the General Fund anymore
since we're carrying a three
billion dollar reserve and so
the idea is let's use that and
when we use it would be too much
of it with Medicaid.
Get a three to one match of a
portion of it and that would
generate if we took half of it
and used it for Medicaid for the
half of the money that goes in
the general fund twenty four of
twenty B. twelve and a half
million coming to mention
Medicaid three one produces
about a fifty million dollar
Medicaid the addition to the
Medicaid program for drug and
alcohol and then we would add in
domestic violence programming in
the local communities.
The other portion would continue
to get distributed to the
counties the other half of the
part is going to the general
fund twelve and a half million.
And that could be used for non
Medicaid because everybody's
eligible for Medicaid that every
every services in Medicaid
service and that every provider
is in Medicaid certified
providers so this would be a way
to actually take without raising
the alcohol tax that I'm not
here to debate whether we should
or shouldn't raise a tax I
happen to be of the opinion that
we have a very low tax and it
raising it might discourage it
but that's what this bill does
it just happens of that whatever
whatever the taxes this to be
the distribution formula that's
what this bill does yield and we
could without any additional
taxing.
At approximately thirty seven
million dollars to what's
available from Mexico and drug
treatment around state and with
me is dead weeks Representative
this idea up and running to be.
Two years ago not a very good
lobbyist.
Thank you Mr chair this is a
great way to put that actually
double of the alcohol excise to.
Not just because we're going to
get a twenty five million
dollars back from the general
fund which was taken out many
years ago when the state was
basically broke.
but matching it with Medicaid is
this is what we're really give
us the leverage and give us are
basically twice as much of
double of fifty million dollars
to about ninety two so I think
is a really good idea no
there's.
call is really a big problem in
the state and that that this is
a good way to go about
addressing that problem at the
local level at the county level
were the county commissioners
really have a better feel for
what's needed in their
particular counties and they can
then contract with providers
nonprofit entities of hospitals
or any number of
Folks that provide this type of
service.
That Mr Chairman will stand for
questions okay full medical
questions of we will go up to
the audience anybody here
support of Senate bill to
twenty.
Of the store here yes in the
quickly make statement maybe a
minute or less.
And the my vice chair so started
to stop what so.
She's rough so sure okay.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee David how to me
registered lobbyist for the City
of Albuquerque and we stand in
support of the bill we did speak
with the sponsor and Mr weeks
before the committee about the
amendment which we would support
to include an allocation for
domestic violence programs and I
understand that to that
amendment has been drafted we're
we're hopeful get on it's the
Senate finance the committee or
member of Senator Tallman had a
bill that was along those lines
I was concerned that it would
raise taxes this is a very good
solution to that because it
would address the core issue
that he was concerned about that
the city in the communities are
domestic violence the
relationship with alcohol as
well known to everyone so we
look forward to seeing this bill
advance and we look forward to
the domestic violence programs
being included in the funding
thank you.
The second there.
The district.
It's all the little changed
Mr chairman members of the
committee John Thompson a
registered lobbyist federal
beverage national distributing
company we fully support the
concept thank Senator Ortiz Pino
and my my friend Mr weeks here I
believe the stated ninety two
million ninety million some like
that would be generated right
now we're sending twenty five
million that's a four fold
increase in substance abuse
treatment numbers we could be
dealing with in the state that
some meaningful increase Mr
chairman and I believe that
that's going to do some good in
the state appreciate the
opportunity to speak again
appreciate the sponsor Mr weeks.
Fixed.
Thank you.
Mr chair.
Committee members of our.
Thank you Mr chairman committee
members my name is Eddie
Edmundson I'm the executive
director for the New Mexico
brewers guild and we stand in
support of this bill thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is kind of
our the co owner of tractor
brewing company in troubled
minds to selling and I'm on the
board of the New Mexico
distillers guild and we also
support this legislation thank
you.
Mr chair members of the
committee Jason Weaks register
of this program we have County
and the New Mexico Austal
Association substance abuse is
the issue throughout the state
crimes also an issue and one of
the core causes of crime is
substance abuse and all the
other economic disparities that
come along with it this is a
really good way to use our
current funding structures to
generate additional revenue so
that we can facilitate the
expansion of local programs to
address substance abuse on a
local level it's not just
alcohol it's all substances so
this is really a great bill
really want to think Senator
Ortiz for Pino for bringing it
and fortunately you know my dad
my dad here is running for two
years and has had no no traction
but this really is a good bill
we have the money to do it this
year this is something we should
absolutely do if not pay for
anything other than ten weeks.
Fix up your mother
All right thank you go ahead.
Okay good afternoon Mister chair
members of the committee
American group registered
lobbyists for The New Mexico
restaurant association and we
stand in support of this
thoughtful approach to spending
one hundred percent of liquor
excise taxes for the purposes
intended this bill multiplies
our state dollars but providing
match for federal dollars and
the focus tax distribution to
counties will help our rural
areas design programs that
address their unique challenges
thank you.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Roy Moore
from registered lobbyists for
Anna's bush and the state has
available dollars as you well
know those those available
revenue dollars liquor excise
tax can be leveraged with
Medicaid we think this is a
great way for the state to use
available dollars and address
the needs that are in the
communities thank you you.
Support.
Okay anybody opposition of us in
a bill to twenty.
What is it all right we'll
committee Senator Brandt will
depress motion for the past
Mexican by Senator a motion by
Representative Senator okay Mr
chair.
Mr chair Senator were.
I'm sorry.
Out of sight out of mind.
Thank you know I appreciate that
thank you Mr chairman thank you
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino for again
bringing this bill I guess first
question for Mr weeks I want to
understand the did I hear you in
a different community you're
more.
Of of this liquor excise in the
general fund is that a Max call
effort at one point to raise
money when what was the history
of that.
It's not just.
Mr chair and Mr leader yes and I
was is analyst at the time.
Mr chair you're probably came up
with the idea.
I see my ways now.
Well no I appreciate that and I
think this is one of those
things that really cast cost a
lot of issues and are currently
because the these dollars need
to be going for treatment I
think it is as I said the last
time you brought this up really
a way to get the dollars I would
just point out you know I
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino you when I
came the same year two thousand
five and I think first year two
thousand five and try to that
tax that was an effort to
leverage medicated did not work
so well that was very
problematic but over the years
you know in twenty nineteen we
did a provider tax and Mr weeks
I think you probably were very
involved with the hospitals and
the bigger creative ways to let
leverage the Medicaid with with
with our mask in this state this
is a phenomenal opportunity the
I think we need to really and
I'm just making the statements
because I think we delay it a
foundation for the arguments the
need to happen in the Senate
finance because I think they'll
realize that the the the the
dollars that they've got to make
up and let me just ask you that
question obscenities if you know
how much money in general fund
or they're gonna have to make up
to make this work forty eight
million W. twenty four minutes
twenty four.
So Mister chair that's important
about mine might yes is that
we're probably party standing
for more than twenty four
million in different for
programmatic areas this is going
to supplant so we just need to
look at this the big picture and
I just really encouraged you
know this is I'm glad this
committee wants to move this
forward quickly but as we have a
discussion about how tax this
bill is absolutely step number
one where you go start talking
about an additional tax I've
always said that we need to get
these dollars all going to the
treatment and so I just think
I'm hoping that we can go visit
with the Mr chair Senator
financing get this one scheduled
and really move along that's all
I have Mister chair thank you
all right thank you Senator so
we do have a due pass motion by
Senator Brandt second by Senator
Kernan.
book points are Senator Lopez.
Thank you Mr chair just want to
say thank you for this forward
it's much needed and data on
what senator Wirth said.
And we're coming this chair you
know what's interesting this is
a site COVID.
To see the next generation of
the.
Persons who are lobbying the
roundhouse.
It is very.
think Christians to see here we
have to gentleman sitting here
the back who's your fathers have
been involved in this round
house there's Jeremy you know
who's running around the house
Rutherford who's also out and
and about it's just for those of
us who've been around seen some
of our our very good friends
it's just nice to see the next
generation bring it up so I just
want to mention that Mr chair
thank you all.
It is it was the movie.
Already okay thank you Senator
Lopez it yes it is a I've been
on her own up but you know I get
to interact with both
generations and so forth so with
that we do have a due pass
motion any opposition to the
motion.
I see none never do pass.
All righty.
We are here to.
Mr chair.
Senator Stewart.
Was senator go ahead just yes Mr
chair for the public in those
following you just announced the
vote counts okay.
Just about the thank you there
was a.
If you want to five seventy.
Eight eighty four and two eighty
zero and two excuse.
Thank you thank you senator for
reminding us of Senator three
fifty eight health to find
actions financing act Senator
Hamblen and Senator.
Here to support Senator Kernan
and so Mr chair committee this
bill this is the second time
that this bill is coming up we
did bring it up in twenty twenty
one with Senator Kernan support
on that bill as well and it made
it all the way through the house
installed on the floor it is had
overwhelming support for this
and I'll explain just a little
bit and then I will introduce my
expert witness too many families
in New Mexico lack access to
healthy food and strong local
job opportunities in New Mexico
exports ninety seven percent of
our agricultural products and
spends a six point five billion
dollars a year on buying food
from out of state.
Racial ethnic and gender
prejudice exists within
government grant lending
programs and private sector
lending programs this prejudice
prevents members of socially
disadvantaged groups from
building wealth increase
barriers to access to healthy
food we've used we've heard the
term of food desert but many of
us love the desert there's
actually a new term things too
and incredible black activist
and and the person who's
involved in agriculture called
food apartheid where these it
communities up the majority of
our state is experiencing food
apartheid I think it's what
ninety ninety percent ninety
five percent and so we have the
opportunity to provide funding
to our small farmers who rarely
get access to capital to help
them continue to grow the food
that our local school districts
can use that our local
communities can use and that our
children are in desperate need
of that we know of in this bill
will help level the playing
field to help those minority
owned businesses who are found
to pay higher interest late
rates on loans they're also more
likely to be denied credit and
they're less likely to apply for
loans because they fear their
application will be denied and
so this really is an opportunity
to adequately invest in our
small farmers throughout the
state.
And with this with the healthy
food financing act it would
bring new federal money into the
states and healthy food
financing initiatives are
eligible for up to two million
dollars annually from the US
treasury's CDFI fund that's
community development financial
institution to sedition thank
you.
In the HFA will create a healthy
food financing initiative with
the frontier of low interest
loans forgivable loans and
grants to invest in local
farmers food hubs and healthy
food outlets across the strait
state and this is really all
about giving New Mexicans the
freedom to choose what we eat to
eat what nurses us whether to we
do so by buying those foods at a
local grocery store or by
growing them ourselves and what
we're finding with the the food
department hunger group that
that I have the honor of being
part of a lot of our small
farmers especially our farmers
of minority communities they
have the resources that they
have the drive and they can grow
that food they don't have cold
storage they don't have access
to funding to go ahead by the
tractor equipment they don't
have opportunities for
warehouses to build those
warehouses and they can do that
if they had access to this
funding so that's why it's such
an honor for me to be able to
bring this bill again once again
hoping that we get into the
house this time and with me is
Erin or to goes and who is the
food and hunger agricultural
specialists from the New Mexico
economic development department
and you're welcome to say a few
words if you'd like.
Thank you good afternoon Mister
chair committee members The New
Mexico healthy food financing
program and fund enacted through
the healthy food financing act
supports the interaction of
economic development in New
Mexico's food agricultural
industry with increased food
security for New Mexicans
prioritizing those projects
which demonstrate they'll be
serving low income and moderate
income communities the healthy
food financing fund would be a
community capital fund that is
intended to provide patient and
flexible capital to a range of
food and agricultural
enterprises across all sectors
to meet the mission criteria
established provide equitable
food oriented development group
and the economic development
department the fund would
stimulate investments in lower
income communities and in food
retailing businesses that are
owned by New or serve
individuals who are from
historically marginalized
communities including
communities of color tribal
communities underserved areas of
low and moderate income
populations rural communities
and women and minority owned
businesses it would also remove
financing obstacles in operating
barriers for grocery stores and
other healthy food retail in
lower income communities The New
Mexico healthy food financing
fund is a very important part of
the governor's food initiative
as it will strengthen the local
food system community food
infrastructure and increase
market opportunities for the
supply chain for New Mexico
farmers and agricultural
producers and manufacturers.
The healthy food financing fund
is complementary to the
wholesale and institutional
local food procurement programs
operating throughout the state
through the governor's food
initiative as well as state and
federally funded nutrition
incentive programs that are
addressing access to healthy
food for vulnerable populations
these programs programs include
the New Mexico grown program for
schools senior centers early
child care facilities food banks
as well as the supplemental
nutrition assistance program and
double up food Bucks.
This fund would directly support
the capacity of the small and
mid scale food and agricultural
enterprises in our state to in
the supply chain to grow raise
process aggregate and distribute
local culturally appropriate
food to meet the current and
increasing demand eligible
projects that would be
considered by this fund would
include new grocery store in
food retail construction
existing store renovation
expansion and infrastructure
upgrades and establishment of
farmers markets farm stands food
cooperatives and food markets
land based food production as
well as agricultural operations
and controlled environment food
production operations value
added operations and food
aggregation processing and
distribution projects including
how distribution projects
proposed to benefit food
producers and to improve improve
local food retailer access to
fresh produce and healthy foods.
Yes.
But if I may interrupt I'm just
because I know that there
opportunity for questions and
two things to note that you know
for the past two years I've
dedicated junior money to the
Economic Development Department
to help get this program where
it is today right now I think we
have the R. F. P. is already out
I'm sorry I'm looking to conduct
this also who has been working
really doing an incredible job
herding cats and throughout the
entire state of all the folks
who are participating in this
but there are opportunities in
our request for proposal already
out ready to go for the third
party that will be overseen who
gets the funding because that
that is something that we
shouldn't be doing but also just
the fact that it's where it is
now it is ready to go what we
need is this to be in statute
because the economic development
department has done this as an
honor and an agreement because
we will I've committed money to
them but we really want this to
be a statute because this will
allow us to have access of up to
two million dollars federally to
help all of our small farmers
and we can't do without this
program and so I I do appreciate
that at this point we can can
open it up for public comment
and then the committee Mr chair
thank you for go out to the
public comment until you have a
co sponsor Senator Kernan any
remark before golf Senator
Kernan.
Yes thank you very much no Mr
chair very pleased to be able to
co sponsor with you and we had
this conversation when you carry
field last year and
make more comments after we get
to hear from everyone that
the courage to that this will go
through thank thank you so
clarification Senator Diamond is
also on the other line okay are
appreciate that thank you okay
we'll go out to the audience
anybody here in support of
Senate bill three fifty eight.
Very.
Good afternoon Mister chair
members of the committee
American group registered
lobbyists for the New Mexico
association of food banks we
stand in very strong support of
this bill hunger is an ever
present need in New Mexico and
this bill will help place more
dollars in meaningful places to
provide more food and associated
services to our fellow New
Mexicans in need we thank the
sponsors for this valuable
legislation to help and hunger
in our fair state thank you
thank you more we have a couple
thousand we have one more here
I'm sorry okay I think all
right.
Thank you
Mr chair members of the
committee my name's Kendall
Chavez and the food and hunger
adviser in the governor's office
just here to strand and saw
strong support of this bill we
see this as a very elegant
solution to a number of problems
including hunger but also the
deep investment that we need in
our farms or ranches in our food
businesses all across the state
agriculture is one of our main
economic drivers and so we need
to invest it as so and so thank
you Senator Kernan and Senator
Hamblen for your support.
Thank you.
Yes right.
All right goes if.
If.
Mr chair and members of the
committee this is current
regular director of leaders
advocacy ministry to Mexico with
her Nancy Mr also speaks this
evening on behalf of New Mexico
trudges and press three of Santa
Fe I'm here to stay R. Sanchez
work as the fifty three fifty
eight Senator Hamblen is really
made all the necessary arguments
is the importance of in the
critical needs for us three
fifty three fifty eight it's on
the interest of time also please
stated we urge your support for
SD three fifty eight as well
thanks for this opportunity to
speak thank you Sir you do
select are Senate Majority
Leader.
Well that would not be the.
Do it.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Secora
Nefish and I'm a registered
lobbyist for covenant pathways
experimental farm in the Navajo
Nation we stand in strong
support of Senate bill three
fifty eight the healthy food
financing act will help develop
New Mexico's food infrastructure
it will make healthy food more
accessible to more New Mexicans
this will indirectly help reduce
health care costs it's good for
families and it's good for
farmers and our economies our
economy to support SB three
fifty eight thank you.
Thank you of that it has a okay
anybody in opposition of Senate
bill three fifty eight.
Anybody alone.
and okay all right now we go to
the committee senator Hermio.
Thank you Mr chairman and I
don't have a question but I want
to thank you Senator for
bringing this bill forward but I
think about one in four children
in New Mexico living in hunger
mmhm and when you think about
supporting ranchers and farmers
this bill makes so much sense
because everybody throughout the
state of New Mexico should be
able to access healthy food I
want to thank you so much on
behalf of my district for
bringing this bill forward thank
you Mr chairman thank you
Senator Kernan and Senator Lopez
thank you Mr chair you know the
thing that caught my attention
when he first brought this bill
off of them very small
communities in my area that
don't have a grocery store they
simply have maybe a family
dollars something like that in
the recent the store closed in
my area they needed a freezer to
put meeting because nobody could
mean that still go someplace
else to divide the groceries
because I could not have a full
service they had building they
need that so this is one of the
the uses of that money which can
make a huge difference for
community with regard to G. R.
T. having a healthy food all
together makes such a difference
of thank you thank you thank you
Senator Kernan Senator Lopez.
Thank you Mr chair candidate for
Senator Kernan Senator how to me
thank you for bringing this
forward again your second time
folks are reserve would.
That that the measure but this
does how it and like a number I
did not point five on our
analysis it does talk about the
processing and distribution
points here in my area we have
small farmers are doing so but
we don't have enough of a large
enough facilities to accommodate
as all the processing that you
have to do when you are USDA
approves you there's all these
other necessary steps we have to
do and I think this is just
perfect
because we are one of the desert
no matter where we are in our
state we just don't have that
access point thank you Mr chair
Senator Erin actually can
respond to that in their their
food hubs that are really part
of this network that are really
working hard.
Go ahead go ahead Mr chair
Senator Lopez says that's
incredibly important point and
part of the goal of this the
healthy food financing fund is
to really amplify a lot of the
aggregation capacity that exists
in our rural areas and really
really tap into the power of our
statewide supply chain so that
we have step by step of food
safe pathway from production
through aggregation through to
distribution to people's table
in an equitable fashion and so
that's one of the big priorities
that we see coming out of this
fund.
No thank you if I could say but
do not yet work is one of the
ill health that that that goes
from north south down into your
area goes through money and up
north so thank you Mr chair and
Senators I'd like to also give
an exciting update that we just
sort of the PO to the state fund
manager as of during while I was
sitting here in this meeting so
we have an active state funds
manager who will be working with
us starting tomorrow.
Those quick.
Look at school.
Right Mr chair and committee I
mean that that's the thing is is
it you know I I get frustrated
that it takes a while for good
bills to pass and I understand
that there needs to be those
conversations but I think the
investment that I've been very
fortunate to make in the last
two years and just a commitment
from the Economic Development
Department really seem like okay
we need to get that foundation
you know Aaron has done an
incredible job Kendall and her
office have done an incredible
job we think of all the
different participating farmers
that have been part of this
element with but do it a is
amazing you know there's almost
done with the entity youth farm
there's chili Yazzie I got to
meet him for the first time
like the three week was three
four weeks ago three four weeks
ago and I felt like I was
amongst greatness because he's
such a legend and what he does
in his community that you know
there's so many different groups
and yet they're all working
together to try and address
these issues and the HFI the HSA
would be able to really help
them and kind of remove some of
those obstacles that they have
to continue providing food that
everybody deserves to have.
Senator Corman.
It is the thank you Mr just
wanted to applaud to.
Senator Kernan.
For two hundred fifty.
One of the.
Okay
Thank you I am so this thirty.
Okay the real mission.
This is.
Close.
thank you yes.
Thank you Mr chairman committee
and and Roadrunner food bank has
been part of the conversations
we've been having for for the
last couple of years there's so
many different groups less them
include etcetera all of these
different groups who are so
committed to doing this and
recognize how important it is
and how important it is to make
sure that that one out of every
four kids actually gets a meal
and you know we're we're
comforted by the governor
support to make sure that every
child has has healthy food and I
was in the hallway the other day
with Senator Diamond and
She showed us the meals these
kids were getting that school
lunches and it's absolutely
horrible.
Like a corn dogs and French
fries that specific districts we
will not name the specific just
I look to Kendall because
Kendall really has been of corn
dogs.
Yeah you're you're you're a
grown man we're talking about a
little parades the need to grow
but you know the thing is is
that I think what it is is that
we have this opportunity these
groups involved in part of this
can find that healthy food that
we can work with the school
districts and we have people in
the school districts were really
dedicated to doing this and we
can do that with this passing
I'll stop now because it looks
of on this word is Bologna's and
thirty with rivalries troubling
we're is that rank is not there.
Right I lay's potato chips.
Really there you go all right.
I don't have any with us on this
but I do Senator main function
for it to pass okay just before
we take the motion of the talk
about a CDFI provided are you
all ready working with it
because it knows you're going to
be a contract and who is that
signify Mr chair yes we've so we
awarded the contract to the
demand for capital who is
emerging as an emerging CDFI in
the state of New Mexico and so
that's where we've just
contacted the PO number today
okay all right and then also
Senator Hamblen I think you
talked about that this will
provide additional funding from
USDA for a committee kind of
leverage that US treasury so I
fund Mr chair that two million
we have access to that two
million dollars annually from
the U. S. treasury's CDFI fund
but if if parent has any other.
Comments to add to that that be
great.
Mr chair and I centers I don't
have and more clarification for
that particular aspect but we
also envision this funding of a
diversified pool of funding
where we could work with private
investment as well as potential
federal funding and so that we
will be looking to expand into
diversified funding streams
including those federal funds
that are available through the
national healthy food financing
initiative
Concurrent with that working
with the CDFI to do so.
I appreciate that that's kind of
where I was going but I you know
I love the nonprofit we started
to they were to see if I years
ago and you know with the First
Nations development institute is
our foundation Colorado that the
we we started a CDFI called
police to of corporation and I
respond that often it's on to do
some great things but also bring
a lot of the money that's
available for any country so
that's kind of where I was
headed with that question to
make sure that no there's all
this financing available.
And so this one time money.
Close to two million will give
you three million in year one
and so what's the on going
because if
you know money the needs all of
either over the next several
years so what what does that
look like.
In outgoing years in terms of.
Mr chair currently we've we're
working with our the funds that
were allocated for fiscal year
twenty three that'll be the
first phase of our of our work
through June thirtieth that's
what we're getting working with
our currency if I on starting
next fiscal year and subsequent
fiscal years will be looking to
bring in vestments from as I
mentioned the the option options
for trying out federal funds as
well as really doing some very
strong targeted outreach to
various philanthropic
organizations that want to
support local food system
development in New Mexico and
equitable fashion that this fund
will really be notable to be the
name of where you can't just to
support New Mexico local food
system and so that will be
working with the outreach to
also to bring in potential
yet to have the federal funding
and private investment as well
if I can add to the Mr chairman
of that Mr this is for let me
know because she's really the
one who's been elbow deep both
she and Aaron is that you know
there may be in a possibility
that I'll come back and ask
because some of these are
recurring funds but it will be
to this the disk this degree
yeah no I just had a question
because on page seven it says a
you know the.
Million dollars appropriation
the general fund to the health
food financing for for
expenditure in fiscal year
twenty twenty four and
subsequent fiscal years to carry
out so what is the what's the
and day or what's the what does
that mean Mr chair as you
mentioned and committee I mean
this is going to be on going so
I think it's so so that we meet
the needs okay all right I mean
that's kind of the goal of every
single nonprofit is to be put
out of business.
You know so that they don't have
to continue addressing the needs
that are needed okay appreciate
that thank you for that Mr chair
if I can add it might be helpful
and we can work with you on
grow in this area since last
year you had a hard time
figuring out no it's a it was
nice very good lawyers Oprah it
was that's right.
Ten minutes that that's the
number that you're growing
across.
Already we do have a defense
motion by Senator mail.
Second Senator Griggs second.
Any opposition to the do pass
motion.
Senator Wirth.
I see none.
Four five six seven four.
In a word.
You're good.
Yes
yes.
Okay.
Seven in the affirmative zero
negative and we have three to
see more eight oh eight I'm
sorry.
We have we have a Senator
Hamblen excuse to.
Thank you.
What.
Thank
you yes she's a wants to both on
the debate that's what we're
gonna go with open and we'll
we'll get our and soon as she
cast her vote to be here okay we
got another.
Senator Representative you're a
Senate Bill up to ninety nine
thank you Mr chair.
Ready for you know who's going
to help me.
And also on soon we have Joe
Dougherty general counsel for
the self service store
association if we can give them
access as well okay thank you Mr
chair Senate bill two ninety
nine this is actually a
committee substitute I believe
we have in here folks
what we are trying to do here is
to amend the self storage rental
agreement.
then the difference between what
we.
initially introduced and what's
in the committee substitute
we deleted some language
the newspaper's circulation.
And then we had a new language
that gives.
Our rental rental agreements
I'm sorry the the owner may.
I'm sorry.
We're basically giving the
renter an option to designate an
alternate contact
for their storage this doesn't
mean that they have automatic
access they would still need to
you know give permission for
that to happen just think just
so that they actually have an
additional contact before their
items are removed or are sold
off okay already can I have a
the committee member of make a
motion for
of note sent to committee
substitute in fact did not pass
on Senate bill two ninety nine
can I just on Senate tax bases
and transportation discussion
the substitute for that.
I have a second second second
lawyer Senator lotus.
Thank you.
So.
Thank you Mr chair
so as I was saying before what
we're trying to do here is we
want to add an alternate contact
on the rental contract.
And then we also want to make
some adjustments on the
advertising historically on
state leave laws advertisements
had to be put in the newspaper
for an operator could proceed to
assail
you know things are changing now
there's not as many people are
going to the news plate
newspaper there's declining
readership and we have a growth
in online sales so we want to
allow storage operators to
advertise on websites such as
storage auctions dot net storage
auctions dot com Facebook
marketplace Craigslist to get
that information out to notify
them and also advertise the
sales.
We also want to make some
adjustments on the value
limitation
in the rental agreement the
limitation of the value of the
property that the tenant may
store in the unit value
limitations are very necessary
tool for operators because they
have no reasonable means to know
the type for the value of a
property that customers of
storing on a self service basis
this is something that's already
being done in thirty nine other
states.
Also one of the two late fees
for safe harbor many states have
a late fees safe harbor of up to
twenty dollars or twenty percent
of the monthly rent whichever is
greater these amounts right at
appropriate balance to
compensate the operator for
delinquent payment one not being
overly burdensome the tenet
currently thirty six states are
recognize this type of late fees
statute and in the earlier
mentioned the change on the
newspaper advertising going more
to digital this is currently
being done in thirty one other
states right now with that I
would like to pass it over to Mr
trainer if you would like to
come thank you senator thank you
Mr chairman and members of the
committee using this bill before
and we've had this discussion
before and really the the the
media the discussion I think
we're going to have to day is on
the issue of the notice and what
I want to be very clear with is
that there's two notices in the
law today.
There's a notice that it gets
sent to the occupant when they
are related to payment and
there's a whole procedure to do
that and after the procedure is
completed with somebody has
fulfilled the requirements of
the statute that's the end of
it.
The next stage is the sales.
And what we're talking about
today is the sale not the notice
provisions but the the notice
for the sale we want to get
people to bid on these things
that somebody left behind.
But Senator Wirth particularly
has noticed in the past noticed
in the past that you know that
last notice is really kind of
important just on the off chance
that you know somebody would
read the legal add up for the
sale and you know might be this
is that one last chance
what we've done to to to.
Move our chances of connecting
with the occupant is what
Senator said earlier back in the
notice provisions of somebody
being laid on their.
Payment that we're gonna be
forced to leave we we would find
now in the law what we're
suggesting is a provision that
when you sign up for that rental
space you have the option of
adding somebody else on that
notification list so we've
doubled up the not the notice
that you're getting so if I just
kind of falling off the map so
to speak but us one of my
friends I put on that list that
person might know how to get a
hold of me and let me know that
you know the the I bet six and
lose this property is stored in
the unit and so that's how we're
trying to offset the issue we're
not taking away the ability to
advertised the sale in the
newspaper we're just adding the
option quite frankly it's just
the way things are done nowadays
it's more a modernization issue
than anything and so I think
I'll stop right there and if you
got specific questions about
anything else of the Joe it will
be available to three those okay
thank you already so at this
time we will go out to the
audience anybody here support of
Senate bill two ninety nine.
All right.
Williams.
No okay so anybody here in
opposition to Senate bill two
ninety nine.
Okay.
Thanks.
Mr chairman members of the
committee Larry around
registered lobbyists for the New
Mexico press association in the
Albuquerque publishing company
although I would agree with what
Senator said that times are
changing but the way they're
changing as people reading their
newspapers in multiple ways
including online additions and
also in print and send me Lopez
from the press association can
talk about a survey that we
conducted that showed to seventy
five percent of New Mexicans
still read newspapers and they
also prefer to see notices in
the newspapers yes the digital
option is good so what we would
do what when where I'm looking
in the bill and I think I have
the committee so but my
affirmative little wanted
tickets page seven when we're
looking at line fourteen.
Mr trainer is correct when it
when we are going to have a sale
where somebody's property is now
going to be sold or no longer
available to them you have an
option of either publishing the
newspaper for as it says on a
publicly accessible online
website that customarily
conducts or advertises online
auctions as far as I know
there's not one Senator pope
talked about several different
options so you so if a person or
a family member of a person who
just property that's about to be
sold and will no longer be
available to them they don't
know where to look so if you
want to put it online that's
great but we think you should
still have the requirement to
publish it in a newspaper Mr
parameters correct there's
several ways you try to get
notices to people people move
they may forget to update their
address somebody could be second
in a hospital and a family
member may not know course I'm
dealing with with the state of
my brother who passed away who
does have a storage unit which I
knew about if you have somebody
that passes away the state may
not know about that storage unit
intelligence flight in an online
notice and law firms who help
you with the state issues and
other issues that are services
wannatter
of publications in newspapers
and I'll just touch on one more
point because I think you're
hearing a lot about this in this
committee if it's online access
we are in New Mexico where you
all keep hearing about all these
instances where we don't have
access to the internet in the
state of New Mexico we don't
have it for health care we don't
have it for students and we also
don't have it for people who may
be having the property sold on
it the sale for failing to pay
in a storage unit so we ask you
to propose legislation or I
would ask for in simple
amendment and that would be on
page seven point fourteen strike
the word for and insert the word
end because built in suspenders
whenever you're talking about
taking people's property or
selling their property is a good
thing thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee thank
you.
Not.
Get on Mike so the public can
hear as well those are.
He
it on okay Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is
Brian fennel I'm with
Albuquerque publishing in
Albuquerque journal I think our
steam lobbyist said everything
that needed to be said we've
debated this bill for I'm trying
to think how many sessions for I
probably
the story hasn't changed and are
concerned yes there's a
potential for your community
newspapers to lose revenue that
may match people think that's
why we're against everything but
the real reason is the public
needs to know especially when
they're materials getting sold
and as Larry said we part to New
Mexico don't have good why I
don't go on the internet and I
personally looked on the
internet yesterday because I
went to my storage locker
operator and asked what website
they might advertise on and they
looked at me with a blank stare
and said we don't and we don't
know of any so I went online
last night and Senator put
mentioned several I found like
ten or fifteen and how does a
person know which one to go to
unless it is distortion has to
advertise on multiple thank you.
All right anybody on on zoom
with all.
Okay all righty so we.
I will go to the committee the
body of Senator Tallman the
because.
Thirty one.
Have the option to of allow a
online so.
I'm sorry I can't hear you the
question is how many of those
that you mentioned have both
options and.
I don't know the answer to that.
Maybe maybe our expert would
know that I'm sorry
Representative Joe Dougherty
generally yes story.
Yes Mr chairman.
do you know the answer to the
question.
I'm sorry I I didn't hear the
full question Mr chairman.
So it's probably one state your
question again thirty one cities
in the.
That don't require this paper.
How many.
The the.
The option of that requirement.
The.
Yes Sir.
For.
Hello this is.
Do have a.
All let's.
a
Our alternative newspaper.
That would be the online the
alternative is the online.
I'm here to help more
What out of the thirty one how
Mr chair Senator.
They allow alternatives to favor
or do not require I only about
alternatives how many that
require.
Of the thirty one.
Maybe joking answer that
question thank yes Mister
chairman Senator I can answer
that question the there are six
states that don't require any
form of advertising including
Arizona and Washington the other
twenty five states and that
thirty one allow for
alternatives to advertising
including online websites that
would be provided for additional
there are I I should also
mention the Senator in Mr
chairman that the there are only
ten states that still require to
newspaper ads the way New Mexico
does currently the other states
only require one newspaper at
among the states that still
still have newspaper
advertising.
Thank you to the.
I
is all thank you us tour a
Kernan you have a.
Thank you very much and.
Some little torn on this bill
because for thirty seven years I
owned and operated self storage
facility and at certainly for
with your expert in and over the
years and I just sold it last
year so just thinking about how
I operated that we always
included newspaper with regard
to the sales and I called my
former.
Office manager he's still
working for the company that
bought mind my storage and and
talk to a little bit about it
and she said well actually
curfew and then we would have a
fashion that she said
advertising in the newspaper the
sales actually increased
interest from those that really
are not part of the
Part of the the process in other
words the lane you know the
people that own the property
they kind of keep it on that too
as well as just people that are
interested in coming for this
they do use the platform now
though and I've never I what I
didn't do that I wasn't as of
today this is the new owners are
many the new owners to pay
everything online and so you
know I think.
I worry every time we had to
take over unit
And you have to notify try to
get them to pay because we know
in many cases what they have in
there they really don't care
about in some cases they do and
it's it's a struggle and it's
hard because you know you're
going to sell the property you
don't make a lot of money
basically the reason you try to
to to do that is to free up the
units you rented again because
when we keep them their time you
don't make any money.
But I do have a question.
so by naming an alternative
person R. when you do that is
there any requirement archy
responsibility for that person
notify me you can name somebody.
That may say okay thank you and.
That man never contact the
person that made to so so I I
don't know how helpful that is
and it's hard to track people
whether they're the actual
retort are the person that they
name people.
Their email addresses change
maybe that's the biggest problem
you could try to contact the
letters come back you can reach
of so how do.
Is it doesn't hurt that I'm not
sure that
The people can can actually be
contacted so I don't know what
what motivated that well we were
trying to address the concern
that people have about.
If you know this is being
treated as an additional notice
to that person who hasn't paid
that because we're talking about
the sales the law is very clear
at some point in time all over
advertising is for somebody to
come to the sale that's it and
but it was being treated as
though it should be another form
of of notice and so our solution
to that and it's been used in
other states is to just allow
that person if it's if there's
doing something this important
to them you would think they
might just select that option
and select somebody who would be
responsible to call them and say
Hey you got a they're trying to
reach you.
And so that was our that was our
solution to this concern but
it's very clear we're
advertising for the sale
everything about trying to reach
some and notify them that's
already been done.
So Mr chair we talk about that
that you can't seem to find it
again for the patients that are.
The.
The fire.
I think the back page number
nine
the last.
The last affording onto.
So Mr chair what.
If the if the.
Owner of the facility however
they need to put a limit public
that when they're not insuring
it does it make a difference
what thank you that means was if
if you Mr chairman of the center
for the low my expert here to.
He can on that point.
This regarding your.
Yes Mister chairman Senator I
can respond to that question is
the the purpose of the of the
value limitation is is to set up
front that self storage is for
property available a limited
value you're not storing high in
property in the storage unit
you're storing property
typically the value limitation
be up to say five thousand
dollars it's similar to what you
see in the innkeeper statute in
New Mexico that has a limit on
on the liability of the hotel
owner if something is is removed
or stolen from a hotel room and
if somebody's if an attendant
comes in or potential tenant
comes in and says I want to
store something maybe a classic
car something of of significant
value to that's going to lead to
a conversation of things like do
you have insurance for that
property Kerr you typically what
and and insurance would would
cover any value above the value
limitation in the contract if
it's if it's one saying I want
to store jewelry I want to
stores are something like that
it's just really that's not
what's self storage is important
and it probably have to be at a
different in a different
solution for that person that's
that's the purpose behind the.
The value limitation to put some
parameters around what is stored
in that unit and then it limits
the ability of the tenant is
later say well this the property
is actually worth something more
than that when they had the
ability to the front and the
say
that the property was worth more
than the value of it and have it
adjusted at the beginning so Mr
chair and senator
The claims being made against
the tenants insurance company
would have nothing to do with
the owner and frankly a five
thousand dollar limit that that
doesn't work because we know
people store things that are far
more valuable than that we have
businesses that put equipment
and products and things like
that that that piece I don't
think it's necessary because if
your branding you're responsible
for the insurance on that that
content not the owner of the
property and I suppose anyone
could write a contract if you
don't want said in there that
could do it I don't think it
needs to be in statute with any
kind of particular limitation
in and certainly contract that
the number could do it without
this that I think that's a
misconception that people don't
put value things in there that
they may not have insurance at
the insured in the levels of
them and if there's a break in
and somebody takes everything
you're at a lot most of time in
so I think that's curious I'm
not sure about that the other
issue I have is with the late
fee and now I'm not the owner
and the tenant and so I not able
to pay my bill for a couple
months to tack on that late fee
so when you so much property
because I'm not able to pay you
can attack on
Whatever you make from the sale
of the property you keep what's
of correct and if there's
anything left over to return to
the attendant which generally
that's not what happened so why
why is that late fee tacked on
to the to the late Joe could you
answer that.
yes I can Mr Mr chair Senator
the the purpose for that late
fee is to provide provide some
parameters on on both sides of
the equation right now there are
there are late fees being
imposed by stored towners in New
Mexico.
This would limit the I'm not
saying that people are charging
more than what this bill is
requiring or allowing but it
would it would stop any higher
late fees and have regulations
and statutes for those late fees
it also provides protection for
the owner that they know if they
charged a late fee that within
that twenty dollar twenty
percent Ramin that it is allowed
by law so it it's that you do
protection for both sides of the
contract.
You know hi I'm not going to
really have a question so just
you know just trying to figure
out it's hard bill for me
because I'm down both sides of
in the honor is now and it is
expensive I will tell you when
you run in the newspaper all the
items that you cut twenty two
got twenty units that you need
to you know to put for sale and
and it is expensive but but on
the other hand I think you know
I do worry about the idea that
people don't have access to the
apply for me now we have no idea
I know that the new owner does
she's
online they even sell everything
on.
Come to the.
Put pictures that and then the
the one line is a bit of that
unit that unit in the past forty
eight hours to get everything
cleaned that it's changing and I
have I don't deny that but I
also think that
We need to be cautious about
people's goods because sometimes
it's it's pretty tough when.
In in the example.
The Trust Company not having any
idea there was storage unit in
the name of that person and then
the we they ended up having to
pay quite a bit of money because
I discovered it in the have been
paying because I was there I
don't know I just to move
forward but I'm gonna listen and
say thank you.
Thank you Sir have a look thank
you Mr minds just actually kind
of the the spring or because
recognizing.
That yeah we don't have access
we don't have the best internet
throughout the state I mean even
the internet here in the capital
is crap and so sometimes you can
see things and someone it is it
is it a bad suggestion to make
that amendment that Mr Perrin.
Brought up.
To just say and instead of or.
Is it really just kind of expand
opportunities it's not limiting
you to one but it's it's not
saying you can't do this but
that it gives people the option
to do this traditional way the
people seen Senator I'm just
wondering if that's Mr chair
Senator again I I the the way
the law is structured this is
all about advertising from the
sale.
And so we just want the option
to do it either through an ad in
the paper or do it online really
works going.
And so the reason I think you're
struggling with this is because
you think it ought to be that
one last chance the somebody
would see that something in the
paper
so they could go recover their
property and again our solution
to that was.
Two others trying to let you is
the owner of the occupant
designate your friend your
cousin relative whatever to be
that person that would be
notified in case they can't get
in touch with me the that makes
far more sense than the off
chance to somebody's going to
read the legal at and so.
Again the sale would like the
either or for the sale and we've
added another provision for
notice.
That I think it most people RSVP
here our serious about what they
put in there if they put
something in their value you
would think they would designate
somebody the bank is reliable
the bank account on a case there
was a problem I am we were we
just have to assume that but I
think it's a fair assumption and
I think it's a solution is
pretty reasonable solution to
this quandary we find ourselves
in here.
I hope that answers your
question it doesn't actually
because I'm here I'm thinking
because I'm thinking of people
in my community in southern New
Mexico that during the pandemic
had to go and park outside a
community center to get access
to internet so that their kids
could go to school you know we
have of mainly a Spanish
speaking audience and so one of
the of the bills on bringing
forward as of about a Spanish
speaking paper to be considered
a legitimate paper
and so I I don't I don't
understand I mean if it's just
for the sale.
What what harm is it going to do
to just put in.
It's not tying your hands right.
Mr chair of center it's it's the
just to be the cost is at some
point.
The option I mean if it cost you
to go online to advertise the
sale to be you you go online you
pay a fee etcetera in its can or
you go online or you go to the
newspaper and and take an ad out
of once a week for two weeks so
it's you know it's it's a the
balances spenders if you do a
and and I don't think it's you
know we can just put either then
Mr chair I mean it's really
we're talking about semantics
right now is just really what
we're is appropriate that allows
the the storage unit owners to
have that flexibility but also
think about the populations that
they are putting those
advertisements out for cause on
social media we can target where
those go and if for example we
have a storage unit in southern
New Mexico that might be in the
situation where they're going to
be selling the materials of the
the contents of a of a unit and
they only have the option to go
online in southern New Mexico
that's not going to reach a lot
of people words if they have the
opportunity to advertise in the
Spanish speaking paper or in the
weekly paper then they would
probably be reaching more people
so I'm just I'm just saying I
think you know we we do have to
think about the rural parts of
the community in the
demographics of which were
targeting.
And so maybe it's just either so
that that gives that won't work
either go ahead ma'am I I yield
to Senator.
So Mister chair and in it would
be because they would choose to
do the platform given the choice
that's what the only species
because of cost right and then I
guess when it's in the
newspapers I understanding that
not just the contents are listed
with the name I think the line
Ceneri associated Mr chair
Senator the name of the person
who do this whose property their
listings then you've got that
name and then somebody's ring
the patrons all I know that
person better call is and then
listed in the senator Senator
believe so because in this case
it's the sale and career.
Yes go ahead of Larry do you
have the you madam chair.
Better apartment Mr chairman of
the committee page six starting
online twenty.
The advertisement.
I'm sorry starting on line
eighteen an advertisement made
pursuant to subsection the of
this chipset section shall
include.
Reef and general description of
the personal property recently
adequate to permit its
identification as provided in
paragraph two of subsection B.
of the section the address of
the self storage facility where
the personal property is located
and the name and last known
address of the occupant so it
does provide an additional
notice to the actual owner or
their successors.
Thank you that's
thank you I I I guess my my
point is is that I would hi I'm
thinking of the demographics and
I'm thinking of people who
either might benefit from
knowing okay there's a unit that
belongs to somebody's cousin
but also that because of the
state of broadband in our state.
I am concerned about limiting to
this yes this one platform when
I think we have to recognize
that not everybody has access to
this that people still in our
and the city of Los crucis we
have a daily paper which is
unfortunately dwindling but we
have a weekly paper that is
really thriving.
And we've got an older
population that looks at the
that paper every single week
religiously.
And so I I I just worry that
we're excluding.
We're excluding a group of
people because they they won't
have access to internet.
Then that's on.
Thank you.
The Senator David is questions.
Senator X..
Thank you Mr chairman and action
and Randy
I mean it looks like there's
gonna be some some challenging
challenge them for around the
war for us we may need to be and
which would then take care of of
no relationship R. the late fee
member
Twenty dollars or.
Twenty percent.
You know I don't I don't know
that that may be a big number
that may be a little override
no.
And I don't know Mr chair and
ready we're we're actually go.
Center were to go with the kids
I I don't feel comfortable
trying to you know to make an
amendment on the fly that would.
Fix all of that so I think what
would be best measures you.
In the center you can get with
Larry and and and see what
changes might work.
And actually finds.
Close to twenty years of twenty
divide I don't I don't know but.
I can't I can't feel comfortable
support for the get the I'm sure
the shift change.
I see that you guys are trying
to make.
You know make sure that our
I'm willing to support that
vision.
Representative worked on page
factors which but.
Thank you thank you senator of
groups of you know the next stop
for this bill is a Senate
Judiciary so.
Okay I don't have any videos
Question.
Anybody online isn't questions
see it.
What is the pleasure of the
committee of Peter Mr.
Mr chair go ahead.
Senator Wirth
So I I just.
I'm a little bit I can't hear
what I'm I'm personally just say
I appreciate very much
what Mr trainer did in putting
in a the option for the second
person I think that is important
and it's something that's going
to help
You know I guess my question is
at this stage.
You know and maybe we just take
a vote here because because I'm
I'm John John I'm gonna going
back and forth because I hear
Senator Griggs I hear what
you're saying yeah we can pull
this up.
Fund these are kind of policy
decisions I think.
More than trying to re write
this I mean it's a policy
decision of where we are on this
and I do think that it.
Because of that they maybe that
is just as to move it.
To see if it's gonna move
forward take of.
And then it'll be into this
hearing probably in all state
policy.
Decisions again I don't think
there's so much legal in my mind
at this point as they are.
You know policy decisions so I
just want to say that because
I'm I.
I hear what you're saying Senate
race in a navy pause for a
minute but then I also.
Kind of realize that we've got
three weeks left in the session
for this bill have a chance.
It just it needs to move it it's
gonna vote so just that's all I
have here thank you thank you of
Senator Wirth.
So what is the pleasure of the
committee Representative passed
motion for do passed by Senator
Hamblen seconded by Senator to
me.
Any opposition to the new pass
motion.
Okay already so we'll go ahead
and have the clerk called the
roll Senator Griggs metal
Senator how to meal yes.
Senator Kernan no Senator.
Madam.
What is.
Yes.
That thank you Senator Wirth.
Yes.
Senator Hamblen this Senator
Shendo yes.
One two three four five yes two
nil and three excuse.
Okay you have a do pass motion I
yes to those and.
All right senator Nancy
Rodriguez we go thank you.
last bill for this evening.
Has an amendment really Senator
Senator reviews as finest dinner
after this.
Research on.
All.
The minutes are and it seems to
be I know it's late and I got a
smile toward.
Chief economist for the
legislative finance committee
here in case you have any
questions I'm gonna be brief and
I'm gonna try to be as clear as
possible on this bill and I do
have an amendment it's very
simple amendment but very
powerful let me explain the bill
meet but let me go to the
amendment the amendment merely
holds the public schools are
harmless on any potential
impacts from the bill which
would I'm gonna talk about here
in New.
as you may recall we have
discussed putting funds into or
away into savings basically for
the future now that we have an
influx of revenue coming in we
had discussed putting in a
billion dollars into the
severance tax permanent fund to
generate long term returns as it
turns out right now because of
of was working on the budget
it's going to be approximately
eight hundred and fifty million
but because we're not funding
this year much and we're using
general fund this bill here that
I have is merely going to very
needed bill because it provides
the vehicle and the means by
which we can store the funds
that were saving from debt
service in other words we're not
going to incur debt service so
we're gonna save ninety two
million a year and we're gonna
be putting ninety two million
into the severance tax permanent
fund for ten years and guess
what in those ten years my gosh
we can we are in a lot we're
looking at earning approximately
one hundred and eighty and
eighty five point seven million
dollars in additional you know
revenues for the general fund.
Or just yeah general fund engine
yeah but after ten years we're
still looking at generated forty
one million intent on going and
growing and so Mr Chairman this
is really to establish the means
by which we can put the savings
into a permanent fund to
generate more that's really what
it is if we don't do this we
wouldn't know where to put the
savings and there's no mechanism
to do it so that's what it
doesn't just miles here in case
you have questions okay already
Mr chair I move the amendment
thank you yes this will be just
a second.
Motion by
members Secondus and current any
opposition to the motion for
discussion purposes.
I see none.
Any other questions on the
amendment.
Well okay so any opposition to
okay I guess.
We need a motion.
The amendment no public comment.
Not yet.
Okay all right any opposition to
the motion.
See none okay you have amended
bill.
Chairman yes.
We go through the billion what I
just mentioned is that build a
sickly that is no I I think it's
pretty pretty clear so what will
go out to the audience anybody
here support of Senate bill
three seventy eight point but.
State police isn't.
Thank you okay all right zoom.
Thank you Mr chairman this is JD
bowling.
Greater Albuquerque chamber of
commerce the table supports all
of the legislative efforts to
strengthen and grow the
severance tax permanent fund
including this bill it's a wise
move to avoid using severance
tax bonds for capital outlay
projects given in our storage
surplus which allows us to keep
more money in the permanent fund
and experience larger general
fund distributions over the long
haul this is a good Crystal
policy we applaud the father for
bringing four thank you Senator
Rodriguez and we are creating
all to point this legislation.
Thank you.
Nobody else out of that and okay
anybody in opposition Senate
bill three seventy eight.
And by as soon okay well
committee that the most of a new
password.
Any opposition to the do passed
motions.
I see none.
We have seven yes is.
And three three excuse so you
have a do pass.
Thank you.
We are in your.
