We've had 221 Senate bills
referred to this committee.
Um, and I have to say that I
feel that this committee, the
analysts, the staff have done a
really good job of moving
through how many over 100?
But yes. And so at least 100.
So, um, uh, so when you see that
there are times where if we
don't take public commentary
that is a conversations that
we've had as a committee, um,
and there are times where they
are going to be bills that we
are going to take public
commentary on. So, what we're
doing today, and I'm going to
explain to you where you've
noticed that we've got a, uh
ambitiously long agenda today,
and the consent calendar. So
just to give you a little
background on the consent
calendar, uh, many of these are
bills that came out, they're all
house.
Obviously we we don't do consent
on Senate bills here. Uh, but
the House bills, these are bills
that we have compiled that we
look at either have either
unanimous or near unanimous vote
on the floor in the house.
But also, we'll look at how the
responses were in committee, and
so what we have is we share
with, with the minority, with
the ranking member on those
bills, and then we as a group
come to a consensus on the bills
that we would like to hear and
consent. Consent is really kind
of what some of you might be
familiar with like a rocket
docket. This is something where
we will go through quickly to do
the process of passing the bill.
Um, but if any of the members on
this committee have any
opposition to the bills on the
consent calendar, what will
happen is that bill will get
pulled. It will get moved to the
next days, next committee days
agenda. And the reason why we
don't hear it at the same time,
so for example, if House Bill
154 got pulled, we would not
hear it because uh hear it
today, we would hear it Saturday
in this case, because that gives
the bill sponsor time to get
experts there and public
testimony.
If we need it. So that is why we
don't, if we pull a bill from
consent, we will not hear it the
same day in committee.
And that is more out of fairness
for the sponsor.
And so
What we will do is, um,
We have determined which bills
will have no opposition and
going through the consent
calendar, what I will do is I
will mention the bill, the
title. I will ask if there is
any opposition from the
committee if there's no
opposition from the committee
that our committee secretary
will show on the record those
bills that all in attendance are
in support.
Um, I do want to remind the
committee that if you do have
any opposition about any of the
bills, you can voice that, as
I've mentioned, that bill will
be pulled off of the consent
agenda and put on the next
meetings and regular agenda.
And so, uh, that has been in
working with ranking member
Sanchez and the committee. uh,
we have these bills from the
house. So, um,
Any other questions, any
questions from the committee
before we start?
Buckle up, buttercups, we're
gonna move pretty fast. Here we
go.
All right.
So we are going on the consent,
oh but we need to do need to
take roll first, and I always
forget that cause I'm like
they're all here, but they're
not all here. So go ahead,
Rebecca.
Senator Figueroa.
Here
Send it to me.
Senator O'Malley.
Senator, Senator Paul, Senator
Ramos
San Sanchez
Senator Sheer is excused Senator
Wirth is excused Senator
Bergman's.
Senator Hamlin.
we had attended so far. All
right.
OK, committee, here we go.
All right. Now, we have, we have
House Bill 56 as amended
Medicaid reimbursements for
birth centers, the sponsors are,
uh, representative Herndon and
Representative Martinez. Is
there any opposition to this
bill?
see none 7 House Bill 56A,
Medicaid reimbursements for
birth centers, uh, receives a
due pass and now goes to Senate
Finance Committee, the Du pass
is on an 8 to 0 vote.
Next, we move on to the
committee substitute for House
Bill 93A Advanced grid
technology plans? No, my
apologies. Yes, that Bill.
Uh, that is from Ortiz and
Padilla. Is there any opposition
to this bill?
See none.
House Bill 93A, advanced grid
technology plans from Ortiz and
Padilla, um, is received a due
pass with 8 to 0, and now heads
to the floor.
Moving on, House Bill 99 as
amended non-repairable vehicle
certifications from Onionornu
and Bere Berego.
Is there any opposition to House
Bill 99A as amended.
see none.
House Bill 99A, if you will,
please record, uh, receives a
due pass of 8 to 0.
He now heads to Senate
Judiciary.
Moving on, House Bill 160 stop,
look and listen for railroad
equipment equipment from
Representative Lindstrom and
Representative Johnson.
Is there any opposition to House
Bill 160?
See that. House Bill 160, stop
looking, listen for railroad
equipment from Lundstrom and
Johnson received a due pass with
a vote of 8 to 0, and now heads
to Senate Judiciary.
is
Moving on to House Bill 281 as
amended hair braiding licensure
from Maa Nonu and Herndon. Is
there any opposition to Senate
bill to House Bill 281 as
amended.
See that House Bill 281 as
amended hair braiding licensure
from Undi Nornu and Heit
receives a due pass with a vote
of 8 to 0, and now heads to
Senate Judiciary.
So.
Moving on to House Bill 145 as
amended additional highway
project bonding.
Uh, Representative Huckton B.
Hill and Lindstrom.
Is there any opposition on that
bill?
see done?
As the what 45A additional
highway project bonding from
Hochman Hill and Lundstrom.
Receives a Du pass vote of 8 to
0, and now moves.
to Senate Finance.
Bless you.
That movie not the house Bill
154 bingo and raffle act
exemptions from representative
Zamora. Any oppositions to that
bill?
See no
House Bill 154 bingo and raffle
uh Act exemptions from
representative Zamora receives a
due pass with a vote of 8 to 0.
And now heads to Senate Finance.
Moving on to House Bill 171 as
amended pharmacy custodial care
facilities from Representative
Jones and Thompson. Any
opposition to that bill?
See none?
That means House Bill 171 as
amended, pharmacy custodial care
facilities from Jones and
Thompson, uh, received the DuPaz
vote of 8 to 0, and now heads to
the floor.
House Bill 174 pharmacy
reimbursement for certain plans
for representatives Armstrong
and and Senator Woods.
Is there any opposition to House
Bill 174?
See none has Bill 174, pharmacy
reimbursement for certain plans
from Armstrong and Woods
receives a Du pass vote of each
to 0. It now heads to Senate
Finance.
Moving on to House Bill 220,
ignition resistant construction
from representative Lujan and
Sanchez, any opposition to House
Bill 220.
See that? House Bill 220
ignition resistant construction
from representatives Lujan and
Sanchez receives a due pass with
a vote of 8 to 0, and now heads
to Senate Judiciary.
House Bill 228, local
restrictions on certain fences
from Serrado and Martinez, there
any opposition to that bill?
See no opposition. House Bill
228, local restrictions on
certain fences from Serato and
Martinez, receives a DuP pass
vote of 8 to 0, and Dow heads to
7 judiciary.
House Bill 233 as amended
diabetic foot ulcer equipment
coverage from representatives
Hernandez and Thompson.
the opposition to that bill?
See that. House Bill 233 as
amended diabetic foot ulcer
equipment coverage from
representatives Hernandez and
Thompson, now heads to the
floor.
Leslie, House Bill 357, Vivia
waiver program provider gross
receipts, representatives Luhan
and Kates.
Is there any opposition to that
bill?
See none House Bill 357, the via
waiver Program provider gross
receipts from Luhan and Kates
now goes to the floor.
With an 8 to 0 vote.
That's our consent calendar.
OK, that's a good job. Thank
you. Right on. Way to go,
everybody.
Let's wait for the room to clear
up.
Madam chair this committee is so
Yes, we do.
So
All right, now we're on to
regular business. We have 8
bills to here, um.
Is it really only 3:10?
OK. 3:30.
Some of those will be really
happy if you say that. All
right, so we're going to go to
Senate Bill 372
telecommunication surcharges
from Senator Siia Lopez and
Representative Dixon, um,
Senator Savia Lopez, uh, does
your interpreter need us to
speak slowly for your, your
expert witness.
Oh, OK.
All right, Senator Sidia Lopez,
you're welcome to go ahead.
Thank you, Madam Chair. The
Nabisco Commission for Deaf and
Hard of Hearing Person's faces
financial challenges due to a
declining telecommunications
realize service relay service
charge TRS is what they call it,
um, the proposed bill aims to
stabilize the funding by
changing the TRS language from
3300% to a flat rate of 51
cents, potentially generating
between 9 million and $11
million.
in revenue. Without this
legislation, the commission will
likely exhaust its fund balance,
leading to program cuts and
potential failure to fulfill
federal federal obligations
without significant general fund
requests, which the agency has
been requesting since fiscal
year 21 and what's difficult
about this is they have been uh
getting special appropriations.
They're not in recurring place,
so it's been special
appropriations over and over
again, which has been extremely
frustrating for an agency that
normally get or
Used to uh get a stream of of
funding.
So, um, with that, I would like
to turn it over to my expert,
Norman Gom is the director of
the Commission for Deaf and Hard
of Hearing persons, and I would
like to turn it over to him to
explain, it's really
complicated, but the fix is
simple, I think.
Good afternoon.
Um, thank you for your time,
Chair, members of the committee.
Um, this is a pretty simple fix,
but it's a complicated
situation, so I'm just gonna lay
out the simple part of this
before we get into anything
else. Um, my revenue since FY 11
has been falling, and since that
time we've had to cut back on a
number of services on a number
of programs, which includes
transfers to divisional
vocational rehab, which at one
point was about 466,000.
that we transferred is now
reduced to about 91,500 and
their federal matching funds
are, um, the language right now
is a thirty-third
100% of the um overall bill that
you receive as a um uh your
T-Mobile, your Verizon, your
Xfinity Bill, etc. and because
since about 2010, we've seen a
40% decrease in the amount of
money that people have to pay
for their services. We've also
seen the percentage.
which, when you compare it to
that, it goes down as well. So
if you pay less for your phone
bill, you pay less for the relay
surcharge. Um, also, at the same
time, we see relay services
costs going up. Uh, we have an
aging population who gets
support service provider program
services through this program,
which are largely general fund
funded, um, and we also see
telecommunications equipment
distribution being limited
because of increasing cost
inflation costs.
And that is why we requested the
specs, um.
And all my time, uh, being in
the agency, um, probably you can
all see this.
That's what it looks like for my
rein.
Um.
That's what we're trying to fix.
It's that simple, and we're
trying to make sure that we have
enough funds to support our
deaf, deaf line that seniors
death with additional
disabilities.
Um, anything else.
Well, this is actually attained
greater urgency because I was
under the impression that they
got what they requested with the
specials in the budget, and I
was just told that they did not
get they they got flat funding
from last year and they, the
price of the equipment goes up
and the service needed has been
going up. So it will require
cutting services, so this is
really crucial. OK, so what
we're gonna do is we're going to
go to uh a little bit of public
testimony, if you'd like, you
have 5 minutes to respond to
that.
public testimony, and then we
will go to the committee. OK, so
by a show of hands,
how many in this in this room
are in support of this
legislation.
Or
But
OK. How many in this room are in
opposition of this legislation.
A none recorded. We do have one
that person is, is definitely in
opposition.
OK, so we have one person, one
person online who is in
opposition. One person who is in
support.
So what we're gonna do is, why
don't we do um 4 people who are
in support to come and line up.
Behind the Senate sponsor,
please, if you will be quick.
And if we only get 3, that's
fine. We will go to the 2
online.
There is Mike, yes.
And so, um, you will have one
minute.
You will see the thirty-second
warning, um, and those online as
well will have the 32nd warning.
So if you will, once you see the
32nd warning, you'll want to
start wrapping it up.
Go ahead.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Madam Chair, members of the
committee. Ellen Pine's
representing the disability
coalition. This bill corrects a
long-standing problem in the
funding for the commission for
the Deaf and Hard of Hearing.
Um, right now there
percentage fee added to phone
bills to fund the relay service.
This is unlike how we fund our
911 emergency service, which is
a flat fee. The bill would
change it to a flat fee for
relay, making it the same kind
of system and would address the
problem that not only have
prices gone down for telephone
services, but it's a lot harder
to tell what the phone service
is because we have bundled
services, we no longer have
landlines. So this would be a
simple um fee.
Charged the same way as the 9/11
funding, and it would result in
um reliable funding for the
commission for the deaf
services. So we urge your
support. Thank you.
Hello, Madam Chair and members
chairs and members committee. My
name is John Cooper. I'm the
chairman of the commission for
that party hearing. Uh, I have
been hard of hearing all my
life, and I know I grew up in
the dea and hardy hearing
environment all my life, and I
have seen these, uh, the people
that are getting older and
they're needing some assistance,
and the special service provider
is a great beneficial for this
program, but the rising costs
really hurts to budget, so, uh,
we really think this, uh.
tax increasing, increase, uh,
will help the community and
Will impact though.
Uh, the life of definitely hard
of hearing the community. Thank
you very much.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Jim Jackson here for
disability rights in New Mexico.
There's an important service to
support, uh, but I just want to
make it clear, particularly for
some of you who are fairly new
to this process, the, the
legislative finance committee is
always presuming that this
commission is going to earn much
more money than it ends up
actually collecting and some of
that is because of this
technical glitch about trying to
compute this percentage and it
makes a whole lot more sense to.
make it predictable for the
commission to simply set this
small fee, uh, so that they get
that on a monthly basis, it'll
be much more reliable, uh, and
it will support the good work
that the uh that the commission
does. Thank you.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh, Jay Santiannis,
registered lobbyist for the New
Mexico exchange carrier Group.
Uh, we thank you for allowing
testimony on this bill. Uh, we
are, uh, very supportive of this
endeavor and uh we feel that's,
that is very needed to, to
justify and to set the limits on
the amount and not have a, a
calculation to determine. Thank
you, man.
Thank you so much. All right,
we're now going online. We have
uh Jake Lesto, who has, uh,
expressed opposition and, and
Nat Dean, who says they are in
support, so we are going to hear
from both. We'll go for Jake
first. Jake, you have one
minute, you will see in your
chat, your thirty-second
warning. If you do go over one
minute, we will cut your mic. So
if you will, please pay
attention to that 30 seconds.
You have 1 minute now. Go ahead,
Jake.
Thank you, Chair and members of
the committee. My name is Jake
Lestock. I'm here today on
behalf of CTIA. We're the trade
association representing the
wireless communications
industry, and I'm here today in
uh in opposition to SB 372. Uh,
the wireless industry fully
supports telecommunications
relay services and has been at
the forefront of innovating and
enabling communication between
people with and without hearing
or speech disabilities. While we
support the goals, uh,
legislation's goal of supporting
TRS, we need to share our
concerns on behalf of the
wireless consumers who are going
to bear the brunt of this
taxing.
increase. Currently, state and
local taxes and fees imposed in
New Mexico customers with
typically sorry with a typical
wireless plan exceed $4 per
month, over 12% of the average
monthly bill. The estate, uh,
recently changed their state's
USF surfcharge to a flat rate
fee of 51 cents per line per
month. This would be a this is a
significant increase, uh, and
this is in addition to two other
bills that are currently being
considered being considered by
your body, uh, that would
raised the 911 surcharge as well
as this USF surcharge this year.
Um,
Most states impose TRS
surcharges between a cent and 5
cents per line per month. This
increase would be 3 times more
than the highest current TRS
surcharge in the country. You
guys would be 3 times higher
than that, uh, for the typical
wireless customer, that would be
an 800% increase in the TRS
surcharge. Uh, as I mentioned
earlier, flat rate.
Thank you. That was 1 minute and
14 seconds. Um, we are a little
strict on the time. Uh, thank
you, Jake. Uh, we now go to Nat.
Uh, if you will, please stick to
the one minute.
And uh you will get a 30-second
warning in your chat box. Go
ahead, chair, committee members
and sponsors. My name is Natine
and I have an auditory
processing disorder, which means
that I may or may not rely on
needing captioning or
interpreter services and
supports. I stand in support of
Senate Bill 372. Thank you.
Thank you so much, Net.
Um, so Senator Sidil Lopez, you
have 5 minutes if you want to
respond to that, or you can go
ahead and just go to the
committee. I think uh
I think we'll start down for
questions at this point unless,
unless my expert has something
to say.
All right, so, uh, let's go
ahead and go to the committee.
Madam Chair, do pass. We have a
do pass from Senator Ramos. Do
we have a second? Second from
Senator Bergmans.
Is there anybody in opposition
of the Du Pas motion?
All right, we'll, we'll, so
Senator Figueroa, you know this
committee is gonna be like you
gotta just
sorry madam the button over
there for you. I need some
caffeine. We're gonna do a, put
a button over there for you
since the rest of these folks
are like, but I should always
have to look to you first. So
before we go to the Du Past
motion, Senator Figueroa. Yeah,
I, I just wondered how you came
to the number of 51. It was it,
you said it matches the 911
call, but is that the only
reason given that compared to
other states, it's
apparently I.
Madam Chair, I believe we
started with the need.
First
But we could, there's complex
calculations, but it's basically
beginning with what the need is.
Mad terror and sponsor then this
number will meet the need now.
It doesn't account in 2 years,
we'll probably have to look at
it again. Our hope is not
because of uh we anticipate that
the number of phones will grow.
And, and with the growing
phones, um,
The, the need will keep up the,
the tax will keep up with the
need.
That is an expectation and hope.
Thanks, Madam Chair. That's all.
All right, thank you. Before we
get really excited and go to the
Du Pas motion. Are there any
other questions? I appreciate
that lesson, Senator Figueroa.
No other questions, so if there
uh with that, is there anybody
in opposition to the DuPass
motion, not Senator Sanchez is
running in and out.
You're good.
You're gonna stay in that
position. All right, so if you
will, please take the role.
Senator Figueroa.
Yes, Senator had a meal.
Yes. Senator O'Malley,
Senator Paul.
Senator Ramos.
Senator Sanchez.
And to share is excuse, Senator
worth excuse Senator Bergmans.
And Senator Hamblin.
So we have a 7 to 1.
So
With a 7 to 1, you have a due
pass, so to the lous. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you, members
of the committee. You head on to
Senate Finance next. Senator
Jaramilo, you've got a 2 fur.
You ready to do that.
Y'all ready for this
you still have that
committee soundtrack.
I, I challenge the committee
during the interim to come up
with a Spotify playlist,
Madam Chair,
privilege. I don't think we have
to let this go on until he
promises us all a shirt
but a chair and senators, I've
ordered 100 so I can make sure
each of you get one, you know,
it's gonna
to be mailed to your home. They
won't be in on time, but I've
I've placed the order and you
will be getting an official
espanol lowrider capital of the
world,
including you Stephan. Very
exciting. I think you're gonna
have a list of people like
Representative Ortiz behind you
is very excited about that as
well. We got to show our
lowrider pride throughout the
entire state and support our
ourtown of Espanola, so thank
you very much. All right,
Senator Adamillo, you're going
on Senate Bill 96 1st, and then
we'll
move on to Senate Bill 419.
Madam Chair, Senate Bill 96 is,
um, proposes to change the
definite definitions contained
in the off-highway Vehicle Act,
these proposed changes will
update the definitions and will
facilitate the sale of more
modern vehicles and electric
vehicles and off-highway vehicle
market in New Mexico. And here's
how this works in my district.
Los Alamos National Laboratory
is working on reducing our
carbon footprint and working on
getting electric vehicles. The
weight of an electrical off.
Highway vehicles, so a side by
side needs to be changed in the
state of New Mexico. They're
currently being sold, but this
changes the weight restriction
so that we can get them licensed
in the state of New Mexico. And
with me to answer questions is
Brent Moore, if we need him.
All right. Thank you so much.
Uh, just by a show of hands is
there and we're going to
audience, uh, remember Senator
How do you have 5 minutes to
respond to public testimony if
you'd like. Is there anybody in
the audience in support of this
bill?
We have 2. All right. Is there
anybody in the audience in
opposition of this bill?
See none. Is there anybody
online? Nobody online. Senator,
are you OK if I just go ahead
and move to the committee unless
you wanted to go ahead and work
kidney stone in, Scotty. OK.
He had a kidney stone the other
day.
Did it for you. You're welcome.
All right, let's go ahead and go
to the committee. Are there any
questions or comments or
concerns from the committee.
Looking to Senator Figueroa
first.
If there are none, what is the
will of the committee?
We would do that. We have a do
pass from Senator Figueroa. Do
we have a second?
Did you all want to ask
questions first?
All right, we'll give you a
moment, Senator Sanchez.
So how many of you by show of
hands heard the lowrider uh
debate, low rider capital of the
world today on the floor.
Right, let's props to Senator
Jaramio for.
Jam it out to Moors lowrider at
the being able to keep secrets,
the license plate design. You
did a good job even though you
were pressured extremely hard
from that, not sure, but did I
really show the official design.
No, you did not.
Oh, you are good, OK. Ramos, you
have a question? OK, go ahead,
Senator Robert Madam Chair,
Senator, thank you for bringing
this bill. So,
Why such the big tires? I mean,
why?
Why, why is the need? I know
it's heavier. How much heavier
are we talking?
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, so the, the change in
the vehicle weight, um, is
moving, uh, from 1750 pounds up
to 3500 pounds. That is
consistent with where most other
states are going for these types
of vehicles and by comparison,
if you, if you had a half ton
truck, uh, that 0.5 ton truck is
going to be 200 to 3000 pounds
more than that 3500 pound limit.
So that you're still much below
uh what commercial vehicles are
at.
Madam Cha center, so is it's
because the batteries aren't
that much heavier, doctor.
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator Ramos,
uh, when you start talking about
improving these vehicles and
making them more modern, you can
add various things to the
vehicles, including cabs and
other features, but if you are
going to electric vehicles,
those batteries and I would call
them drive trains, not the
expert here, but that, that
equipment is much heavier and so
to accommodate those types of
improvements, you, you need that
increased uh weight limit.
That's all we got.
All right, thank you very much.
Any other questions from the
committee?
All right, what is the will of
the committee?
We have a due pass from Senator
Sanchez.
Second from Senator Bergmans.
I believe that Figueroas gave
the first due pass
right.
You're right, we did. No, it's
OK.
Rebecca, if you will, mark the
original Du Passen Figueroa, and
then we'll do the 2nd from
Senator Sanchez will be equal
opportunity here.
Right, is there anybody in
opposition of the Du Pas motion,
seeing that, if you will, please
record a 9 to 0 do pass on that.
Thank you, Senator Jaramillo.
Uh, but now we move on to Senate
Bill 419. Thank you Madam Senate
Bill 419 amend several sections
of the current protecting
vulnerable adults from financial
exploitation Act, and this is
the NMSA 1978. Now what this
bill does is it would allow the
delay of the extent for up to 55
business days.
provided certain conditions are
met, and so current law doesn't
provide sufficient time for a
state or other public agency to
conduct any inkfall examination
of the underlying circumstances
to determine what, if any,
action may be taken by the
agency while the disbursement or
transaction is delayed. Now
Senate Bill 419 has safeguards
in place that requires certain
findings of uh be made by the
broker dealers investments
advisors in order to ex
an additional delay. Now this
bill also increases the persons
or agencies that may extend or
terminate or delay or a
disbursement or transaction to
include a state regulator or
agency of compliant
jurisdiction. Now I have with me
my expert witness if you'd like
to say a few words.
I'm sure I have nothing to add,
but I will stand for questions
at this time.
All right, thank you so much.
Um, now we go to the audience by
show of hands, how many in the
audience are in support of this
legislation, but 123. Thank you.
Anybody in the audience in
opposition of this legislation.
then why don't we go ahead and
get 2 of you, uh, to come up and
speak if you will quickly.
I'll let you arm wrestle over
it.
We should actually have a table
in the back for that.
Uh, we'll give you one minute of
peace. Is there anybody online?
Nobody online, OK.
Gaf Newman chairs Committee. My
name is Craig Hay, Assistant
general counsel from the Asian
Long Term Services Department,
and uh we stand in support of
Senate bill for 19, um, as it
will provide additional
safeguards for, uh, older
adults, uh, you may be uh facing
financial exploitation. Also, it
will provide an opportunity for
adult protective services to
receive a status report from the
financial institutions, so they
can complete their
investigation.
Protect older adults. Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Jim Jackson for
disability rights in New Mexico.
Um, we're here not really, uh,
related to this timeline
specifically, but to make sure
that the state agency that's
designated to provide protective
services for people, the adult
protective services unit within
the adult, within the aging and
long-term services department.
This bill makes it clear that
they also have some authority to
get involved in these processes
and help protect seniors who
might have seniors and people
with disabilities who might be
at risk of this.
kind of uh financial
exploitation, uh, we think this
just adds another opportunity
for them to get involved and to
fulfill the function that you
all have given them, uh, uh,
through earlier legislation, so
we hope you'll support this
bill. Thank you.
Thank you so much, Senator
Jaramillo, you have 5 minutes to
respond to public testimony or
we can go ahead and go to the
committee.
All right. Do we have any
questions or comments from the
committee?
Um, before I go to Will of the
community, um, Senator Jarami,
I've shared this with you that
my mother was a victim of, of uh
online scams, we have to be very
careful, uh, for seniors,
especially, um, who are
vulnerable, uh, and also not
really aware of the different
approaches that people will take
from outside this country to get
money out of our elderly. And
so, um, I'm very appreciative of
this, uh, because, uh, my mom is
out 4 grand because she fell for
this.
Uh, while I was here at this
session last year. And so, um,
so I really appreciate this. I
wish she lived in New Mexico
cause she lives in Texas, um,
and they don't have as strict
laws on this, uh, to be able to
protect our elderly. So, um, I'm
very grateful for this. Uh, so
thank you. Um, any other
comments from the committee,
Senator Roberts, Madam Chair,
uh, Senator, thanks for bringing
this forward. I think this is a,
a very important bill, but, uh,
quick question.
Um, how does a person have to be
to qualify for this type of
services.
Metal senator, not much older
than us, 65 years old. OK. Well,
I still got a ways to go, but
yes. OK. Um, and, and the reason
I was asking, Madam Chair, is, I
know a gentleman that paid for a
UTV online and uh
You know, last 2900 bucks, which
was ridiculous that he thought
he's gonna get one for that
amount, but I mean, how do we
help these individuals? I know
it's not part of your bill, but
uh, you know, why, why just the
vulnerable.
Um, elderly folks.
I'm sure.
Madam Chair, Senator Ramos, um,
that's, that's really important
question. Uh, we're all impacted
right now by fraud. Uh, however,
According some statistics that I
have and according to the
complaints that we received in
the securities division, uh,
elderly individuals are impacted
at a much, at a much greater
level.
Uh, and, and unfortunately, the
existing bill.
That, uh, SB 14 would amend only
impacts vulnerable adults and by
definition, those are persons uh
65 years or older and uh uh
other sorts of disabilities that
may impact cognitive abilities.
That's the bill we were kind of
working from in the future, the
securities division might
explore uh some further
protections for individuals that
are younger than 65, because
these crimes are impacting all
of New Mexico.
everybody, but again, elderly,
elderly victims definitely seem
to be the majority, you know,
the people impacted at this time
for fraud, fraud online
especially.
Madam Chair Sander, I definitely
would like to work with you on
the interim on something like
that, I'm sure. Thank you so
much, ma'am.
Thank you, Senator Paul. Thanks,
Madam Chair. Thank you, Senator,
for bringing this. I had a
grandparent that's had the same
thing and thankfully, the bank
was able to stop 30,000 from
going out to some random person,
um, my, my question is, is for
how did, what's the mechanisms
that allow this, you know, hold
to be put in place. How do you,
how do they quantify or qualify
that, hey, yeah, this needs to,
you know, the broker dealer, the
investment advisor, whoever it
is, how do they know that this
is something we need to put a
hold on until we verify that it
is or is.
Not some type of scam.
There's a training that broker
dealers have to go through, uh,
and investment advisors, it's
actually part of the uh
protecting vulnerable adults
from financial exploitations
Act, uh, that they're required
to go through to be, to be
reporters, and then of course it
enables them to uh a place that,
that hold on the suspected, you
know, fraud, uh, that's
occurring in a in a
disperursement or transaction
and and again, we're looking
to extend that for a few more
days out. Uh, but they do a
training that enables them to
spot sort of red flags. Also, a
lot of these folks in the
industry, the securities
industry broker dealer firms,
uh, investment advisors and the
folks that work for them. I
mean, they've been, they've been
in the industry a long time and,
and, and especially in smaller
communities, or somebody you
work with all the time, they
know the types of transactions
that client is gonna be uh that
that they typically uh uh uh
engage in, and if they see
something out of
the ordinary and expense for a
large amount of money overseas
or, or paying for something that
you like, like a, uh, um, I
mean, I could go on and on
numerous examples, but certainly
a transaction that looks like
it's out of the ordinary, a
large amount of money, uh,
somebody from the family might
uh contact uh uh broker dealer
or an investment advisor and,
and say that they have concerns
about a relative that's met
somebody online making some
expenses, so there there's a,
there's a litany of red flags.
If you will, uh, that, that keys
them in and enables them to move
forward.
Perfect. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. I was just wanting to
make sure there was some
framework and training or
something that these people were
able to obviously have access
and too, so thank you, that's
all the only question I had.
Thank you, Senator Paul. Other
questions from the committee.
Senator Berman, did you have a
question or no? All right, we
have a a due pass from Senator
O'Malley. Do we have a second?
Senator Ramos.
Anybody in opposition of the
DuPass motion?
see none of you will go ahead
and record all in attendance, 9
to 0 due pass to Senator.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
All righty, now we go uh to
Senator Sapans.
Thanks.
Uh, good afternoon. Um, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
This spill is to increase the
definitions of burial and
specifically under the
cremation. I have brought this
bill in the past as well as
Senator Purle.
But this is a serious uh bill.
We have had a large group of
people all over the state attend
a workshop, slightly before the
new year.
Uh, examining many things about
death. It was not an end of life
in terms of when you are ill or
preparing to uh pass on, but
really to look at all the
options that are available to
you once you die or in planning
for your death. So this bill and
um I would like to let you know.
that one of the drafters who's
an attorney upstairs indicated
that this should be under the
definitions, uh, and in the
burial statute and should not be
a whole new statute. So that's
why you're finding the expansion
of the definition of cremation.
This bill would add the
non-traditional options of
cremation by water, which is
alkaline hydro hydrolysis
hydrolysis.
or cremation by biologic
processes, which is considered
national natural organic
reduction. It also provides the
following benefits.
It benefits citizens by
expanding post-life options. It
benefits the funeral services
industry, and it benefits the
environment. Alkaline
hydrolysis, which is water
cremation is legal in 28 states.
natural organic reduction, nor,
which is biological processing
cremation is legal in 12 states,
with legislation pending in
several other states.
Now, you might ask if this is
something that would cost much
more. Traditional full-service
burials might start around $7000
and go up.
Uh, I just had an experience
with this, with the uh past
family member, and it in
choosing the lowest level, it
was close to about 12,000. Full
service cremation is about 5500.
Direct burial and direct
cremation can be um
A direct cremation might be
around 2000, a little less,
maybe, and or direct burial for
1700 or about 5000 natural
organic reduction in the state
of Washington, it's about 7000
and water cremation could go
from $1400 in California while
in Fort Collins, Colorado, it's
about $3200. So with me today, I
have Donna Griffin.
who is a member in I believe
there's other individuals either
online or in the room, who were
interested in this. Would you
like to say a few words?
Thank you. Um, Chairman, member
of the committee. I just wanted
to point out that uh this bill
actually merges the two bills
that were presented in 2023 by
Senator Purle and Senator
Stephanics, and that um also it
it of the 28 states that allow
alkaline hydrolysis, uh, at
least 9 of them have done
exactly this. In fact, he did
almost a more simpler drafting
and that they, in their
definition of cremation all.
added was and other processes.
So expanding the definition of
cremation is not um problematic,
um, unfortunately, I believe the
board of Funeral Services did
comment that it might be, but
other states do it exactly the
same way. Thank you.
All right, thank you so much.
Anything else that would stand
for support opposition
questions.
By show of hands, how many in
the audience are in support of
this legislation? We have 2.
Anybody in the audience in
opposition of this legislation.
See then Senators to panics we
do have a magnolia online, OK,
if that's who you're thinking
of. So let's go ahead and get
the two of you. If you will come
on up.
If you want to go ahead and
express your support for this.
We are gonna give you one
minute. Uh, you'll get a 32nd
warning, uh, and we will do the
same thing, uh, online. To go
ahead.
Thanks, Madam members of the
committee, Camilla with the
Sierra Club Cremation is
actually very energy intensive
and so having less energy
intensive alternatives is
something we support.
Thank you.
My name is Rob Hirsch. I'm here
on behalf of the New Mexico
Healthy soil Working Group,
which is over 1500 members.
But uh cattle ranchers and
farmers and producers and
consumers in urban and rural
residents all in support.
Uh, of this important bill which
gives us an alternative.
to cremation.
And it's something that
Washington State initiated an
earlier on Arizona and Colorado
do it in our region.
And it's something that is done
with livestock already
composting for livestock, it's
very similar process, but um
we're very strongly in support
of this, and we appreciate
bipartisan support. Thank you
very much.
Thank you so much. And just uh,
uh, uh, our, our staff has been
instructed cause, uh, to move
the mic down if you're speaking
just because it gets distorted
online. And so we want to make
sure that people online can
hear. So if you see that, please
don't be alarmed by that. All
right, Magnolia, we're gonna go
ahead and go to you. Magnolia,
if you will, um, unmute
yourself, you'll see a 32nd
warning in your chat. If you do
go over one minute, we will cut
your mic. Uh, if you have one
minute, go ahead and share your
support for uh this bill.
You will Magnolia mute yourself.
There you go.
Greetings, senators and
committee. I just wanted to give
uh an enthusiastic public
comment of support for this
bill. I am eager for the future
of this as a potential option
for death care in New Mexico.
All right, thank you very much,
uh, Senator Stephanics, you can
respond to public testimony or
we can go ahead and go to the
committee.
Um, we can go to committee.
Thank you. All right, uh,
Senator O'Malley, I know you
have to leave, so if you want to
go ahead and go first. Thank
you, Madam Chair. So I guess um,
The concern I have is the, the
change to to to finding
cremation, right? You're
expanding the the definition of
creation. I guess what I was
wondering is why didn't you just
make a whole new definition for
what it is that you're trying to
accomplish because this is not
cremation, this is another way
of processing a dead body.
Well, um, thank you for the
question, Madam Chair and
Senator. First of all, the
legislative drafter who is an
attorney drafted a different
bill.
And then they came back and they
said no, when you dissolve a
body.
That is a form of cremation.
Cremation is not just by fire or
heat.
And so now you have a
dissolution and that that could
fit under the definition of
cremation. What would happen is
that regulation and licensing
would have authority, of course,
for establishing rules, the
licensing, etc. but I am um
I came with this bill based upon
the advice of one of our
attorneys.
Well, I guess the attorney said
it.
Um, yeah, I mean, that's my
understanding of cremation. I
assumed that it was by, you
know, that you would uh earn a
body. So this is basically a uh
a um dissolving of a of of a
body, um, in the tube, uh, I
guess a sealed tube, but I think
it's what it says with
chemicals.
Man chair and uh Senator, I will
have my um advocate here, talk
about it.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Senator, um, the, the alkaline
hydrolysis is almost if you
remember, um, uh, your lung
tanks. It's in a tank. It's uh
with alkaline water and some
pressure and some heat. It
results in a uh sterile solution
of a pH of 11 that can be
discharged and then there is an
ash which is like uh fire
cremation that you have a
residue. Uh, it is such a small
footprint that a funeral home
could actually put it in in
facility. Um, so it would be an
extra, um, process that they
could offer.
Uh, OK, just out of curiosity,
so there's ash if something's
burned.
No, I'm sorry. When the chemical
reaction occurs, the bones are
just are um turned into like an
S.
So there is residue, right,
yeah, OK,
And so then this thing is put
into
Whatever.
OK.
Um, all right. Well, thank you.
I appreciate your answers.
Thank you. Go to Senator Sanchez
next and then Senator Ramos.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
senator for bringing this. I'm
trying to follow along here. I
got a couple of questions. So
the cost of this would be the
same or a little bit.
mentioned a couple of costs for
cremation, 3200 and
2200.
What would the cost of this uh
procedure. Yes, the water
cremation, um, I have California
to Colorado. It's uh uh in
California it's about $1400 in
Colorado. It's about 3200. Now,
I did talk to Representative
Luis Terrasas about this in the
um about this since I was
introducing it, and he thought
it was
Hm
He had very strong feelings
against it. He said it would be
too expensive. The um natural
organic reduction uh in the
state of Washington, it's about
$7000. So it might be comparable
to a direct, a basic burial.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair and
Senator, and
After this process is taken, we
know when you get cremated, you
have an urn of ashes. What's
What's left or what's uh in this
process. What, what do we, what
would you get your family member
back in or whatever. So, um, Ma
chair Senator, I'm gonna pass
this back to my.
Madam chair and senator, uh,
again, the Elkin hydrolysis, the
chemical process that occurs
when the water and the liquids
drained off, there is a residue
that's similar to an ash. It's,
it's the bones that are
dissolved and so this is calcium
and things like that, so the
family would get a uh container
with
with that residue back on the
north, uh, your body is
dissolved into compost and it's
a cubic yard of compost.
Thank you, Madam Chancellor. So,
and the, and the, the residue
that's drained off.
Where's that go, just in the,
the water is um sterile. It's
your, what it has lipids and
things from the um dissolving of
the body and the chemical
reactions and uh
And my understanding from my
research is that it can be
drained to the sewer and our
sewer systems Adam Chan Center,
OK. Um,
Those are the only questions I
have right now. Thank you. All
right. Thank you, Senator Ramos.
Madam, um, Senator.
So, how long does it take for
the body to decompose.
After this process starts. I'm
gonna defer again to my advocate
Ma,
Madamian senator, uh, uh,
alkaline hydrolysis takes about
3 hours, body composting takes
about 3 months.
OK. So, Madam Chair, Senator,
Um
Wouldn't there be like a
Kind of a rental charge of
keeping the body within the
funeral home for 3 months.
Um
Mandarian senator, the um the
research that I've done about
the facility called recompost in
Washington. They have a
warehouse facility after they,
because they are a funeral
service themselves so they can
do the, the family, um, the
traditions and, and services,
but then when the body is laid
in to and that's into a
composting um vessel. It's like
in there with compost material.
It's put into the facility that
they run where they actually
a soil scientist that checks
temperature and air quality in,
in, and, and the and the vessels
are turned, and that's what
takes 3 months and that's why it
costs a little more because they
have possession of the body.
Be chair center, isn't this kind
of like what they did in
Breaking Bad.
You know, um, madam chair and
senator, I have to admit I never
watched Breaking. Oh my gosh,
you missed a
drug abuse in my family and
around me to like get into that,
but I do want to point out that
chair, Senator, we have green
burials, and there are different
uh regulations for green
barrels, burials, county by
county. Sometimes the entire
body with all the fluids can be
buried.
Sometimes the body without the
fluids can be buried. So we have
expanded the definition of
burials.
And so expanding um it's not
unheard of. We've done it, it's
just, are we ready to go to that
next step here.
So Madam Chair, um,
Uh, center, it's, I mean, I've
worked at a funeral home. We did
cremation.
We did regular burials. I'm, I'm
just trying to figure out.
But family member would want
their.
Family members body go down with
the wore.
I just, I just can't fathom
that, Madam chair Senator, I,
uh, and not only that, but I was
told that sometimes they just
put the water.
Into some field or a dream or
what have you.
And uh
I just, I just can't found that.
I can't wrap my head around it.
But thank you very much, Madam
Chair and Senator.
Thank you so much, Senator
Ramos. Any other questions from
the committee?
Madam Chair, I have got one,
nothing in this bill as far as I
can tell. Please confirm
requires any um funeral business
to offer these services.
It's not required of anyone. Is
that correct? Um, Madam Chair,
Senator, that is correct. This
is, these would be new offerings
that a funeral business could
offer to their customers if they
chose to do so. They are not
required to do any of this.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, sponsor, and because
you put it in our, uh, funeral
act, burial act, I'm not sure
the title of this piece, but
because it's in here, it falls
under all of the regulations and
inspections that our funeral
operations have to go through
anyway, correct?
Yes, and Madam Chair, Senator,
um, this, uh, would and um
authorized this body, the
regulation and licensing
department's body to actually
develop the rules and
regulations. Interesting use of
the word body in this
conversation. It's sponsored,
but, um, Madam Chair for, for a
bill that just
Uh, opens up opportunities to
people who've been emailing me
who, who are interested in this,
um, I think it's a good bill.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator Figuero. Any other
questions or comments from the
committee.
We have a Du pass from Senator
Haamil.
Do we have a 22nd from uh
Senator Bergman's, I have a
feeling we'll need to take a
vote on this.
If you will, Rebecca. Senator
Figueroa.
Yes.
Signature had a meal.
Senator O'Malley is excused
Senator Paul.
Senator Ramos.
No.
San Sanchez.
Senator Bergman, or Senator Sch
is excused Senator Worth is
excused Senator Burin.
Senator Hamplin. Yes.
Senator Paul.
Senator Sanchez.
Out of 4 to 3, you have a DuP
pass Senator Stephanics. Thank
you very much. I'm sure
judiciary will never get to it.
Thank you very much. I'll be
right back.
Please let that be the quote of
the week.
God, there's somebody in here
from the press, please make sure
that happens.
Yes,
very
interesting.
All right, so now we have
We have Senate Bill 127 movie
exemption from Barbara and
Cosmetic Act from Senator
Trujillo, and then we will go to
House Bill 26. I saw
Representative Cates here as
well.
OK.
Good morning, Madam Chair. Good
morning, good afternoon. I don't
know what I'm doing.
Um, and committee members, uh,
I'm excited today to present the
Senate Bill 127, um, especially
since this is the film industry
day at the Roundhouse. I have
with mepresentative Brego and um
my expert witness is Steve
Graham from the film, um, Film
Division Mexico Film Office.
Thank you. So, New Mexico film
industry has experienced
significant growth, contributing
to to the.
the state's economy and job
growth.
Senate Bill 127 amends the
Barbers and Cosmetology Act to
add an exemption for makeup
artist and hair stylists.
Placing unnecessary restrictions
that go beyond that of other
states has a negative impact on
current and future film
productions. Senate Bill 127
seeks to clarify that the film
industry makeup artists and
hairstylists are not subject to
the licensing requirements of
the Barbers and cosmetology
board.
Similar exemptions exist in
other states with robust film
industries such as California
and Georgia. In fact, no other
jurisdiction requires this type
of licensing.
This bill seeks to align New
Mexico's regulations with
industry standards.
The scope of work for a makeup
artist and hairstylist in the
film or television industry does
not include what an
anesthetician or cosmetologist
provides. These indu industry
professionals apply makeup and
style hair to create characters.
They, they may apply makeup to
enhance an actor's own features
or to create wounds, bruising,
injuries, or special effects to
create characters such as
monsters, aliens, and witches. I
really wanted to be wicked
today, but there just wasn't
time.
And they style hair for those
charactersenville 127 seeks to
modernize New Mexico's
regulatory framework to better
accommodate the unique needs of
the film industry. Regulations
of an industry must balance
economic development with
protection and public safety.
All right, thank you, Senator
Trio. You have an amendment on
this. Would you like to go
ahead? We need to move the
amendment for discussion.
So move, right? So if you will,
go ahead and discuss the
amendment. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Um, so we realized in the
last committee that we were
potentially leaving out a few
individuals, i.e. the opera, um,
Pope Joy, uh, local, uh, theater
production, uh, small, large, so
we've amended it to include um
uh theatrical and cinematic
instead of calling it motion
pictures, so
In the title, we've struck in
motion picture and replace that
with 4 theatrical and cinematic.
Down on line 24, um, this is
actually an amendment on behalf
of Senator Block, who is not in
here, but um nonetheless for
him. And we add United States
Army.
Navy, and here, so we add comma
and take out the or.
Marine, and then we add in 4 Air
Force. He was incensed that we
had left out the Air Force.
Have no reason why no
understanding why you would be
upset about the Air Force being
yeah, shocking. And then on the
back, um, uh, page 2, line 5
after um the word hairstylist,
we again replace for theatrical
or cinematic, um, and then, uh,
we end up with productions. So
really we're just expanding it
to include any type of theater,
um, and adding the Air Force.
Madam Chair, um, I'd like to
give my expert witness just an
opportunity to speak and then um
uh representative too.
Adam chair, senators, uh, I'm
Steve Graham, I'm the director
of the uh New Mexico Film
Office, and um,
I'll just speak to the, the, uh,
fiscal impact report that uh
that I helped write on this. Um,
traditionally, the, uh, this
licener has not been enforced
for our industry, um, we've
been, uh, making, uh, film and
TV in in New Mexico for dozens
of years and uh have have not
had an issue with it. Um, the,
uh, as the senator mentioned, if
this were, uh, if we did not
have this exemption, well, I
should say,
this exemption, uh, provides
clarity, uh, for what sort of
the practice we've already had,
uh, and not requiring licener,
um, if
If we don't have this exemption
and we do enforce uh the
licener, it would have a
dramatic impact, could have a
dramatic impact on our industry.
Um, the 1st, 1st impact would be
the largest productions because
uh many large uh productions use
the biggest stars and the
biggest stars uh sometimes bring
their own uh, hair and makeup,
and if they aren't from New
Mexico, they wouldn't be
licensed in New Mexico, and that
would mean they wouldn't come.
And if the stars don't come,
then the shows don't come. Um,
but it would also affect, uh,
all of our, uh our homegrown,
uh, New Mexico uh artists as
well, um, by and large, uh,
makeup artists are not licensed
in the state, uh, and it would
create a burden there and would
mean that we wouldn't have folks
that we could hire, so, um, the,
you know, we did $740 million
worth of work, uh, over a
billion dollars of impact in the
State and fiscal 24, uh, and I
would say uh.
A rough estimate would be 80,
90% of that would be affected,
so it would be a a a dramatic uh
uh impact on uh revenue and on
uh we'd lose jobs in the state.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and,
and, uh, senators and uh I think
there's some representatives,
the senators, um, senators, um,
so when I served as council
president in Albuquerque, I
helped bring in Netflix, helped
bring in the NBC, um, and when I
retired from the city, I became
an extra in the movies, believe
it or not, and if you guys
haven't done it, you should try
it cause it's a blast. Um, and I
learned a lot about cost.
To me, um, in that and a couple
of
Productions that I was an extra
incident the way back, but it
was fun and it really taught me
a lot about the movie industry,
um, and how, you know, the
economy in New Mexico is really
benefiting from all of this, so
thank you for that. All right,
thank you. Is there any other
discussion on the amendment?
Is there any opposition to the
amendment?
Right, showing no opposition,
the amendment has been moved.
You can go ahead and continue
discussing the bill, or we can
go ahead and go to public
testimony. Yeah, go ahead and go
to public testimony. All right,
so by show of hands, how many of
the audience are in support of
this legislation?
3 over there.
Recalculture.
Anybody in the audience in
opposition to this legislation.
Is there anybody online? Nobody
on live.
All right, um, if you're all
right with just for expediency
purposes, if you're OK, we can
go ahead and go to the committee
if that's all right.
Are there any questions or
comments from the committee,
Senator Sanchez.
Thank you, Madam Cur.
Uh, one quick question, Senator.
When these hair and makeup
artists, who's employing for the
employed by.
That's a really good question,
Madam Chair, Senator, um, so
they're employed by the, the,
the production, right? And um
this question was actually asked
in the last committee, like
where's the liability? How do we
make sure that the public is
protected. Um, they will only be
doing the, the, the work that
they do with makeup and hair
styling with the individuals
that are in the production and
so it would be the, the
production company that has the
liability if someone were to get
harmed.
So Madam Chair and senator with
that production that hires and
we're calling him the
production, but they already
have a business license, let's
say they're doing something here
in the city of Santa Fe.
So, other, other businesses, you
have to have a, you have to buy
a business license to work in
Santa Fe. You pay your 30 bucks,
and then if you're working in
Santa Fe County, you have to buy
another business license, Madam
Chair, Senator, to work in the
county.
So with that production,
kinda already have the business
license to cover these people or
do these people need to pull
their own business license, not,
not necessarily they have to go
to school and be certified like
the cosmetologists and all that,
Madam Chein, but, uh, a simple
business license
Senator Sanchez, um, when I did
this, and it was for just a
brief time, we had to sign a
sort of a contractual agreement
with the production company, and
it covered any liability or any
accidents, um, so that was
really, that's why I said I
learned a little bit about it
when I was doing this. I did it
for about 2 years. Um, it was,
it was a very enlightening and
so you worked basically my
paycheck came from the
production company.
Madam Chair, Senator, I, I, we
are not certain whether or not
the protection company actually
has to get a business license,
um, but we'll certainly look
into that, but my suspect, my
suspicion is that they have to
get a local business license,
but everybody that the employer
contract with doesn't
necessarily have to, but we'll
get an answer for that.
And Madam Church Senator, that's
where I was gonna go next. Are
these like
Is their company A that you hire
to do makeup and hair and
Company B or do they all work,
or you, or there's already, you,
you hire onto the production and
you're in that area and that's
all you do.
The, the production company
hires typically hires
individuals to do that, and
they're um sometimes there's a,
uh, a payroll company that's the
employer of record, but their
employees of the production
company. Uh, thank you, Madam
Chancellor. I'm just seeing how
we track, you know, if these
people, individual people just
we track them or, you know, like
maybe they just go buy their own
business license for the $25 and
we know that they're, that's
their certification to be hair
and makeup and
And go throughout the state.
Mr. Mr.
Madam Chair.
And
Senator
Um, those individuals don't like
the business license doesn't
certify that you're a licensed
professional. It's the
regulation and licensing
department that actually
licenses the professions, and so
that's why we're looking to get
an exemption under the barbers
and Cosmetology Act, which is
managed through the regulation
and licensing department is
because they really don't do the
things that a regular
cosmetologist and, and
anesthetician, I'm gonna say
that wrong, um, would do. And so
we're trying to get an exemption
for that. There are other
exemptions in the statute, and I
won't read them because somebody
might be left out and I have to
do another amendment, but it has
to do with like funeral parlor,
you know, funeral workers, um,
nurses, doctors, those that we
just don't need to be covered by
this. And and thank you, Madam
Chair, Senator. I'm just seeing,
I mean, somebody should carry
the business license cause
Whether you're a contractor and
you have your GB 98, it doesn't
matter if you have that license
and your license to the whole
state, every county and every
municipality you show up, you
have to buy another business
license to work in their, in
their municipality or their
county. So I'm just wondering if
We needed to add or
If the production carries a
business license, I think those
people would be.
Covered with it. I'm, I'm not
sure, Madam Schiff senator,
Madam Chair, Senator, so this
bill doesn't address that kind
of business license. However, I,
I will say that I, I'm actually
in favor of us having one
statewide business license
rather than individual, but we
can talk about that later.
Adam Chair Center, that's the
only question.
Thank you. Other questions from
the committee, Senator Roberts,
Madam Chair Senator
Representative, thank you for
bringing this bill in front of
us today. Um,
I, I'm sorry, I missed your the
beginning of your presentation.
So how does it currently work? I
mean, do they come in and have
to hire somebody from, from New
Mexico to do this type of work.
Madame Chair, Senator, it really
depends, um, as, uh, Mr. Graham
said, there are some times when
a production will come into
town.
And, um, in fact, one was
announced today, um, and they'll
hire local individuals who do
hair and makeup or a variety of
other things. I have a lady that
works, lives in my neighborhood
that does hair and makeup and so
they hire locals, but there are
times when uh a star.
Um, someone who's probably at
the top of the credits, um, has
someone that they have used for
many years, and that person will
follow them around. Uh, when my,
my, my son was a
Still photographer for the
Hallmark channel.
And he would travel around um on
set, and there were and I get to
visit sometimes and there were
some people that were just that.
Person's hair and makeup, and
they had done it for 1015, 20
years. So those will be brought
in, but for the bulk of it,
they're hiring local people.
And Madam Chair and the senator
that, that's kind of where I was
getting to it just seems to me
like that's one of the big
benefits we have of them coming
into New Mexico is utilizing our
locals to do this type of work
and, and I just feel like we're
taking away from our, from our
people in New Mexico, from not
only one doing their job and
doing it well, but the
excitement of them being able to
work with some of these people,
and I think that's part of the
uh trade-off of the tax breaks
they're already getting, um,
madam.
Senator, so I see where you're
coming from. I, I, I.
I'd hate to lose uh uh.
some big movie with a great
movie star out there, the state
of Mexico because of this, but
at the same time, I do not want
us to lose our uh.
lose this type of work to our
locals. Madam Chair, um,
Senator, I will say if we don't
get this exemption, we're going
to lose locals.
Because they, they are not going
to go back to school for 1500
hours to become a licensed
cosmetologist so that they can
continue to work on the sets.
So, so this, this exemption is
not being moved forward in order
to protect those people that
would come from out of state,
this exemption is being put in
place to protect the people who
live here and have been working
on sets at the opera at Pope
Joy, at movie sets that have
come in at small and large
theaters.
For years.
And all of a sudden, the barbers
and cosmetology board decided
that they wanted to start saying
they have to go to Barbers and
cosmetology school and get all
of these credentials.
That's pretty expensive. That
can take more than a year, and
so we're actually here today
with this bill to try to protect
local artists.
Thank you very much, manager.
Thank you, Senator. Thank you,
Senator Roberts. Other questions
from the committee.
Go ahead, Senor Sanchez. Uh,
thank you, Madam. What you just
said now, so it's
Well exempt out of state people
that come, or they have to get
some kind of licenses or it's
for everybody across the board.
New Mexicans and people that
come here. This is an exemption
exemption for everyone, and, and
just further to, um, sorry, uh,
Madam Chair, Senators, sorry, I
forgot protocol. Um, to the
senator's point, uh, this not
only affects, uh, it affects
everyone, so it would, um, and
it
Not to be too alarmist, but it's
existential. It affects every
job on the, on the film set,
because if we, if we don't have
hair and makeup folks that can
work here locally or from, from
out of state, then uh
productions are going to go
somewhere else. So we lose grip
jobs, we lose uh transportation
jobs we lose, you know, across
the board, so it's uh it's
really uh uh to help.
Maintain the industry that we
have.
Thank you, Madamur Center.
That's all I have. Thank you,
Senator. Any other questions or
comments from the committee.
Come over. You have a pass for
Senator Berkins. Do you have a
second?
But
Echo wait a second over there.
You can pick whoever you want.
Either how to video or Figueroa.
Is there anybody in opposition?
To the Duins motion.
Village.
Right.
last
See no opposition, then you have
an 8 to 0 due pass. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you, members
of the committee. Thank you very
much. All right, now we have
House Bill 26.
Ticket resale at state nonprofit
events from Representative
Cates.
So Representative Cates, this is
your first time in this
committee, so just and also for
your colleagues in the house,
uh, what we do is we'll give you
10 minutes to go ahead and
present your bill. Uh, that
includes your expert, and then
what we will do is we will go to
public comment. Uh, you have 5
minutes after that to respond to
public comment if you'd like, or
we can go ahead and just go to
the committee, so that will be
asked to you after we do public
comment. But, uh, we will give
you this time, uh, to go ahead
and present your bill.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, senators. Um, we'd
like to start with our senator
who will be presenting this bill
as well, and then I'll take over
from there. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
colleagues. Uh, this bill seeks
to expand the crime of ticket
scalping, uh, from just college
sports events to uh state or
political subdivisions of the
state, and especially not for
profit corporations, and with
that I will turn it over back
over to uh Representative Casson
we have an expert, Tony Zakanel
with us to help out. Thank you.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, senators. So
the senator of state, that's
what this bill is before you,
um, currently our performing
arts programs are all our arts
program events within the state
of New Mexico, um, are, uh,
especially vulnerable as
technology has expanded, um, I
understand that there are
fraudulent websites out there,
redirecting you instead of the
Santa Fe Opera to a bogus
website, um, this is, um, what
we are trying
to prevent here with the
scalping as well as um it is
also hindering their
relationship with their audience
as well, um, if you want to
attend the opera and you think,
oh, that's a $40 ticket and then
you are redirected to one of
these uh fraudulent websites and
find out, oh, it's a $200
ticket. It may discourage you
from um participating in the
event, um, the bill before you
is uh taking a law that already
exists.
Since 1989 to protect our
university sports events. We're
asking you to expand it to our
arts programs now, specifically
our arts programs that are
presented by non for profit
corporations or a state or
political subdivisions. So these
are arts programs that have
already had some kind of state
funding subsidy, whether as
being tax exempt or a lower rate
at the Hispanic.
or the natural, uh, national
Hispanic Cultural Center or our
capital outlay. So we are
already trying to preserve and
make these programs accessible
for New Mexicans. We don't want
to take an asset, which is their
ticket price that has been
subsidized with our tax dollars
and allows a private company or
a for profit company to be able
to make profit off of it. I, I
will stand for questions, but I
would like to have my
um, an expert witness, uh,
provide a comment as well. Thank
you, Madam Chair. You just turn
it on a bit, but there you go.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, uh, Representative Cates,
um, Representative Cates has got
it down, uh, perfect. I couldn't
say it, uh, much better. This
is, uh, I'll just emphasize that
this has become, uh, a much more
pressing problem over about the
last, uh, 2 years or so, uh,
and, and as uh the
representative mentioned, it's
really the fact um that the
Uh, the most arch patrons, and I
mean 90% plus access their
tickets, uh, through the
internet and online search, uh,
that they get led astray, uh, to
these deceptive ticket resellers
and
Uh, either come away with a
vastly overpriced ticket or a
misperception of how uh
affordable the event may even
be.
I think
Thank you, Madam Chair. So in
closing, if um Colgate wants to
present Taylor Swift at the
Isleta Bacon scalpel they want,
but this is protecting our arts
events that are already
subsidized by our state dollars
and we rest for questions. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Great. Thank
you, Representative. All right,
so we're gonna go to the
audience, uh, by a show of
hands, how many in the audience
are in support?
2345. OK.
5, correct? Uh, how many in the
audience are in opposition.
We have 123.
And then we have 3 online, so we
will do, uh, a total of 5 in
support.
Here in the room and then we've
got
Uh, the two of you in
opposition, so let's go ahead
and get the 5 in support, if you
will line up behind.
Uh, the representative and
senator, we're going to give you
one minute a piece, uh, if you
will watch for that 30 seconds.
Uh, go ahead, make sure you
state your name for the record.
Good afternoon. Thank you,
senators and chair. My name is
Joel Alberts. I'm the executive
director of the Lensic
Performing Arts Center here in
Santa Fe. Uh, this is a
significant problem for us. We
lose hundreds of thousands of
dollars to secondary market
sales. Um, what happens is it's
basically these uh sites and
resellers absorbing a commodity
that we are trying to present to
our patrons in doing this, as
they have mentioned, ticket
prices are often sold at
significant.
fly higher levels, which does
impede participation for them.
What we experience as an
organization is people who think
they have legitimate tickets
purchased for an event to arrive
at the Lansing and find out that
they do not actually have a
ticket for that show or the the
zone one, excellent seat that
they thought they purchased is
actually way in the back of the
theater that their ticket has
been sold to multiple people,
uh, and we don't actually have a
record of who that patron uh is
and
that ticket was purchased, so we
have a lot of uh discouraged
patrons who arrive at our
events. It creates a significant
problem for us in communicating
with them and ensuring that
they're getting a proper arts
experience. Thank you for your
time.
Uh, good, uh, good afternoon,
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, Scott Scanlon
registered lobbyist for the
Santa Fe Opera, and for us it's
all about our customer
experience at the opera, for
example, we have an, an
apprentice.
Uh, presentation where uh the
whole idea is, is inexpensive
seats so that members, uh, local
people can come and maybe for
the first time experience the
opera 25 to $15 tickets, we had
one experience, um, this year
where tickets in the back were
being sold for 2 $280. And so
for that customer that buys that
ticket has that sort of
experience.
Very frankly makes them feel
like they just have a kidney
stone.
So for that reason we, we
support the bill.
Madam Chair, uh, my name is Jim
Jackson. This is not really a
disability bill, but as it turns
out in my personal life,
actually sing with the symphonic
chorus that's now a part of the
opera Southwest. And I want to
just use myself as an example of
how many of us participate in
the cultural life of uh New
Mexico, whether it's the Santa
Fe Opera or local organizations
and so on, um, whether we're
participants or folks in the
audience, all these
organizations really depend.
on the income that comes from
these uh uh ticket sales, and
when they, when they lose out
because somebody thinks, oh,
it's gonna cost $100 to go that
instead of actually $20 or
whatever it is, these
organizations really suffer as a
result, so the support um uh all
of us who are involved in these
cultural activities, we
encourage you to support this
bill. Thank you. Great, thank
you. Did I see anybody else in
the audience who is in support?
But we're gonna keep it fair, so
we've got the gentleman there in
the back who wants to speak in
opposition. Go ahead and come on
up.
This
Is there anybody else in the
audience in opposition?
Right, then we'll go to 2 people
online will do Brian and Tyler,
if you'll let them know. Go
ahead and speak. You have one
minute. Cha Hamblin, members of
the committee. My name is Sean
Ayas, and I'm here on behalf of
StubHub, the world's leading
ticket resale platform.
To testify in respectful
opposition to House Bill 26. By
criminalizing ticket resale
above the original purchase
price, HB 26 will not make
tickets more affordable or
accessible for New Mexicans.
When resale prices are
restricted, consumers are often
driven off secure platforms and
onto unregulated channels like
social media or street corners,
where scams are common and
consumer protections are
non-existent.
Bars and sellers should be able
to transact on safe and trusted
marketplaces like StubHub,
without fear of criminality.
A 2018 report by the US
Government Accountability Office
said, and I quote, price caps
are not effective, due largely
to the difficulty with
enforcement.
Recognizing this, 48 states have
moved away from antiquated laws
that place major restrictions on
the resale of tickets. Most
states, including most recently
Arkansas, Louisiana,
Massachusetts, and Michigan have
modernized their laws to reflect
how the market works today.
Supporting secure online
marketplaces and giving
consumers choice, flexibility,
and protection when buying
tickets.
By criminalizing ticket resale
above the original purchase
price, HB 26, sorry, I.
Thank you for the opportunity to
speak for your time.
Thank you so much.
All right, we're going to Brian,
and then Tyler, who have both
expressed opposition to Brian,
you have one minute. You will
see a 32nd warning in your chat
box if you do go over one
minute, we will cut your mic. Go
ahead, Brian. Thank you, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
uh, my name is Brian Hess,
executive director of Sports
Fans Coalition, uh, found in
2009 represent fans of public
policy impacts the games we
love. Thank you for the
opportunity to testify today in
opposition to HB 26, uh, across
the country, states are rolling
back anti-consumer.
laws, uh, that would penalize or
even criminalize ticket resale.
Um, however, it seemed that New
Mexico remains criminalized in a
way of disproportionately harmed
students, uh, and and the
protections for consumers don't
go far enough to ban the bad
actors online. We hear about
deceptive websites, bots, and
all of these other things, but
there are other states such as
Colorado that have passed laws
that effectively address those
harms without hindering a market
that um ends up criminalizing
fans and putting them at risk of
even jail time. Uh, many states
this year, including Hawaii,
Montana, have rejected
criminalization efforts like
this, and uh Massachusetts last
year repealed its
criminalization statute. Once a
fan purchased a ticket, uh, they
should be able to resell it, and
we also call for the prohibition
on college sports, uh, on this
to be removed as well. I'm happy
to answer any questions, but
really this is about uh
preventing a gray market or even
a black market and protecting
consumers in a transparent way.
Thank you.
Thank you so much, Brian. And
then we'll go to Tyler Robert,
we will register your
opposition, uh, but we're just
going to go ahead and go to one
more in opposition. So Tyler,
you're welcome to speak.
You have one minute, please pay
attention to the 32nd warning.
Good afternoon, Chair Hamblin,
Vice Bergmans, and members of
the committee for the record, my
name is Tyler Saint Clair and I
serve on the policy team at
Vivid Seats. We are an online
ticket resale marketplace which
aims to connect fans with memory
making live events, and I'm here
today to provide testimony in
opposition to House Bill 26, and
thank you for the opportunity to
testify today. Uh, you know,
pivot seats offers award-winning
customer service, and we've been
routinely featured on Newsweek's
list of best companies for
customer service and ticketing.
Every ticket sold on Vivid seats
is backed by a 100% buyer
guarantee, and we support this
guarantee with a 300 person call
center in Texas.
We understand the sponsor's
concerns with fraudulent
activity that negatively impacts
consumers and venues in New
Mexico. Um, in prior hearings,
we've heard concerns about
concerns about scam websites
that dupe consumers and about
bots that buy up tickets before
real fans can get their hands on
them. And we agree that these
problems should be addressed.
However, we are concerned that
House Bill 26 takes a blunt
approach to consumer protection
which would limit New Mexico
residents' ability to resell
their ticket, and it's not
reflective of the technological
challenges that consumers face
today.
We would propose that New Mexico
looks to neighboring states such
as Colorado, Utah, and Nevada,
which have each passed bans on
the use of bots and ticket
purchasing, as well as bands and
deceptive URLs, banning the use
of bots and deceptive URLs or
common sense, pro-consumer
solutions to the issues that
have been spoken to in prior
committee hearings.
Thank you for your time to speak
today and happy to answer any
questions.
Thank you so much. So
Representative and senator, you
have 5 minutes if you'd like to
respond to any of the public
testimony.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, senators. Um, I just
would like to address some of
the comments, so there are about
20 states uh uh currently that
have similar laws, um, I, so I
want to bring that to your
attention. I want to bring to
your attention that with our
advanced technology, it is not a
I'm a, I'm a business person
too, and these businesses are
not taking the risk of
purchasing the tickets and then
reselling them. They are
fraudulently redirecting you and
buying them, selling them.
On speculation, which is a
difference. I respectfully ask
this committee to please protect
our local arts programs the same
way we protect our university
sports programs. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. Now
we go to the committee. Are
there any uh any questions or
concerns or comments from the
committee.
Senator Bergen.
Did you have your hand up or you
just
Just
a quick question, Madam Chair.
Representatives here, um, I'm
sure you've gotten this question
somewhere along the way, given
the public testimony that um we
heard.
OK
It's a simple statue change.
This is like a two-page bill.
Is it somehow going to like
prevent the resale is a similar
price to get on a third party
website that's not fraudulent.
So thank you, Madam Cherry.
Thank you uh thank you, Senator.
Um, it is, um, that's a great
question, and yes, we do get
this question, so I will um say
that the 20 states in our
research who have similar laws,
have what happens is, um, search
engines such as Google, they go
out and look for these laws, and
then they geo fence the ability
to be able to create these, um,
it's not in the bill because
it's just something that
happens, it doesn't need to be
part of all, um, and I would say
by uh the large corporations
that have testified here today
shows you that it is a
possibility. Thank you.
Thank you, that's all. Senator
Rus, Madam Chair, Senator, uh.
I just want to say, doesn't this
just penalize the good actors,
people that are doing things
right.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Senator.
So
Senator, I'm not sure what is
right. I mean, so our attacks
So
Senator, I'm not sure what is
right. I mean, so our tax are
our our state money are going to
subsidize these local nonprofit
state funded arts programs to
either um uh to either support
our culture such as the Flamingo
Dance Company or by making sure
that our citizens have
Access to our arts, and we are
trying to prevent uh
For-profit entity making profit
off of an asset we created with
our state funds. I, I'm not sure
if that is, but.
Madam Cha answer that. Thank
you.
No problem, Madam Chair,
senator.
Um, there's already fraudulent
websites seems to, they seem to
get around the uh
The
law when it comes or when it
relates to university sports.
Why do we think that this could
be any different. Thank you,
Madam Chair, and thank you,
senators. May I ask my expert
witness to answer. Thank you.
Um, so in, in point of fact,
actually, uh, we find that um
The same problem that afflicts
uh right now, the non for profit
arts, uh, does not afflict
university sports here, so and
and I'll just give sort of an
example right now if you go
ahead and search, um, you know,
Spencer Theater tickets or San
Juan Symphony tickets, for
example, right now, you're gonna
get bombarded with probably 8 to
10.
Uh, these, uh, websites that are
third party ticket resellers
purporting to be sort of an
official outlet and then micro
fine print, it will say this is,
you know, a reseller, OK, but
there, the, the websites are
designed to deceive the consumer
into thinking you're on an
official website, and then
they're gonna take tickets that,
um, you know, the Spencer
Theater and Sanan Symphony or
off the Southwest are selling
for perhaps $30 to $50 and claim
that they're available for $200
or more. Um.
This, um,
is not just the problem if
you're the consumer who
inadvertently purchases a $200
ticket and overpays by $160. Um,
it's a, a colossal problem
where, again, people get the
impression that
They can't afford this event,
and they don't attend the arts
event at all. And so, um, and
the fact that these uh bad
actors in the marketplace are
out there creating that
perception, um.
Causes a huge amount of damage
to the
Arts organizations, uh, in terms
of foregone sales and then also
to the consumer in terms of
overcharging, uh, the market
that we're discussing here is,
is not one,
Where their previously was some
kind of like black market or
gray market in opera tickets. I
wish there was. Um, there
basically enabled to uh try and
The scheme of profit off of
these publicly subsidized
events, um,
While taking on no risk
themselves and doing enormous
harm in the process.
And I hope that clarified your
question. I may have gone a bit
afield. I apologize and I
apologize for not addressing the
chair. I'll get better with
this.
Mad chair, Senator, penalties
don't deter criminal behavior.
That's what we hear all the
time. Why would we think this is
gonna be different?
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Senator. Can you
repeat that question one more
time. Penalties don't deter
criminal activity.
Why do we think this could be
any different?
So thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Senator. Um, well, we
see that it is working with our
university sports, but I will
like to bring to your attention
on page one. It does say ticket
scalping and I'm sorry, it's a
1989 word, um, consists of
selling offering for sale or
attempting to sell any ticket
privileged license, mission or
pass. And you know not read the
whole other paragraph, but if
you go
Now to page 2, it does say
whoever commits scouting is
guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction shall be punished by
a fine of $500. So that could be
um for uh that $500 if I was a
prosecutor and I am not, um,
might, uh, make the charge for
every time there is an attempt
to sell that ticket, which means
every view, every click on that
website.
chair and senators.
Medicare Center, that's all I've
got.
All right. Any other questions
from the committee?
I was really trying to find a a
a way of
Look, uh, moving in that I'm the
worst at buying tickets that I'm
no longer allowed to in our
friend group, because the
tickets I bought to Pink were up
in the nosebleed section, and I
also tried to figure out how it
could work in Harry Styles for
Representative Rubio
and also that I'm not an opera
gay, but I certainly appreciate
it and appreciate that, um, but
I, I have nothing, so, um, but I
really just wanted to kind of
work those in, uh, as we're
getting to the end of the
session. I hope you appreciate
the slap happiness. Um, do, is
there a motion from the, from
the committee I move.
We have a due pass from Senator
Harramila. Do we have a second?
Second from Senator Bermans, if
you will please take the role.
Take the vote.
Senator Figuero.
Yes.
Senator had a meal. Yes.
Senator O'Malley is excused
Senator Cole. No, ma'am.
Senator Ramos? No, ma'am.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator share is excused Senator
Wirth.
Senator Bergman.
Senator Hanlin. Yes.
By 5 to 3, you have a due pass.
Thank you.
All right, so next we have House
Bill 91 as amended from
Representative Ortiz and Royal
Caballero.
Then we'll finish off with
Representative Rubio. If you
want to think of your favorite
hairstyle song to walk up to.
I'm sure it is. That's why I
said it for you.
Representative Ortiz, thank you,
uh, I think you heard the, um,
kind of just the progress, the,
the process on how we hear
bills. Here you've got 10
minutes, that includes your
expert witness. Uh, then what we
will do is go to public
testimony. After that, you have
5 minutes to respond to public
testimony. If you choose not to,
then we'll go right to the
committee. Uh, you're welcome to
go. Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
this bill will allow for a low
income rate of concert tickets
at Pope Joe Health
but I,
I, I
shouldn't make light of this,
um, this bill, uh, addresses,
uh, an issue in the state, which
is the high utility cost that
low-income New Mexicans
have in, in the state, um, on
average, New Mexico, New
Mexicans living below the
poverty line spend 20% of their
income on energy bills alone,
they're faced with a terrible
choice whether to pay their
light bill or buy food, pay for
medicines. What this bill does
is that it allows the public
regulation.
Commission to consider proposals
for low-income rates and
programs that are brought by
investor-owned utilities, um,
for the whole purpose of
reducing the energy burden on
our most vulnerable populations,
about 20 states have a low
income rate or program,
including our, our neighbors,
Arizona and Colorado, so with
that maam chair and uh centers I
stand for questions. I do have a
um an expert with, uh, with me,
Doctor Anna Lindon Muller from
Western Resources Advocates.
We stand for questions. Alright,
at this point, um, we're gonna
go ahead and go to the audience
first by a show of hands, how
many are in support of this
bill?
Oh, look at that.
OK, keep your hands up.
What, 23456789, 1011.
Well, shyly.
All right, 12, thank you. All
right, thank you very much.
Anybody in the audience in
opposition of this film.
So Senator Jaramiya was speaking
for me because he's hearing this
in his sleep. He's hearing my,
my dulcet tones in his sleep
with me saying, see man. All
right, so we have none
registered in the audience. Do
we have anybody online?
You're gathering that right now.
All right, so why don't we do 5,
of folks who are in support.
Uh, you have a minute.
Go ahead and line up behind the
sponsor.
You can rock paper scissors, I
don't care whatever. Rico, why
don't you go first?
Yeah, one minute, you will go
ahead and you'll see the 30
seconds here.
Hi, Madam Chair and members of
the committee. My name is Rico
Gonzalez and I represent El Paso
Electric.
Uh, this bill has been uh uh uh
coming for, for a couple of
years. I wanna thank the sponsor
of the bill for for continuing
to work with us inside of El
Paso Electric our, our territory
is split 20% in New Mexico, 80%
in Texas, and our low income
customers in Texas have a low
income rate right now as, as we
speak, uh, we don't have one
here because of a mountain
states, which was a case that uh
doesn't allow us to
have them until this law,
hopefully knock on wood, excuse
me, uh, goes through. So, um, I
just, again, want to reiterate
that, that, uh, the sponsor has
been great to work on this bill
with us and um it is something
that's important for our, for
our customers. Uh, thank you.
Thank you so much.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee share
grown horse with P&M. PNM stands
in support of HB 91. We thank
the sponsor for introducing this
important bill.
PNM is deeply committed to
serving our community and
ensuring that everyone has
access to the resources they
need. In fact, the uh P&M Good
Neighbor Fund assisted, uh, 3700
families with 469,000 in bill
payment support in 2024.
In 2023, we assisted 6800
families with over a million in
bill payment support. I share
these figures just to illustrate
the need of a struggling
families. Many of our customers
are low income households,
offering a low income rate will
help customers ensure they can
manage and afford their bill
while maintaining continuation
of service, with passage of HB
91, it will allow an electric
utility like PNM or El Paso to
design a rate program
specifically for
low income customers. Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Mike D'Antonio with
Xcel Energy. We serve
electricity to the eastern part
of the state, but we think the
sponsor for bringing this bill.
It's an important bill, and what
we like to some of the things we
like about it is it gives us a
lot of flexibility. Uh, you can
tailor it to your own service
territory. We all have utilities
have different service
territories, that's important to
us. You can also put together
either rates or programs, it
doesn't have to be either or. So
there's a lot of flexibility and
we think it's a just a good
approach to providing help to
the
income folks. Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Victoria Lacon Macias,
and I'm here today with the
Samia Project and Samia Action.
I stand before you today in
strong support of House Bill 91.
This legislation will create a
pathway to make energy more
affordable for families
struggling with high utility
bills. Many low income and rural
households in New Mexico are
paying a disproportionate share
of their income just to keep the
lights on. House Bill 91
empowers of public regulation
commission to ensure fair
utility rates, reduces.
the weight on those who need
relief the most. More than 20
other states, including our
neighbors in Arizona and
Colorado have already adopted
similar programs that help
families while strengthening
local economies, New Mexico
should not be left behind. By
voting in favor of HB 91, you
will be taking a critical step
towards ensuring that all
families have access to
affordable essential services
without having to make
impossible choices between
paying their utility bills and
putting food on their table.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the
Committee for your time and
consideration.
Madam Chair, committee members,
my name is Carlos Matutes. I am
the New Mexico community
advocate for green Latinos.
We're National Environmental
Justice Organization dedicated
to environmental justice for
Latina communities and other
communities of color. You may be
wondering why if I work for an
environmental justice
organization. I'm here talking
about low income, affordable
utilities. Well, the fact of the
matter is climate change is
making our utilities more
important. And the people who
are affected at the highest rate
from climate change.
are the exact same folks who are
having a hard time making their
bills every month.
And if we have folks who are
perhaps medically vulnerable and
cannot afford to either run
their air conditioner in the
middle of summer, or pay for
their groceries.
I want to make sure that they
survived that summer. Thank you
very much. We do hope that you
support, uh, House Bill 91.
Thank you.
Thank you so much. And now,
just is there again, anybody in
the audience in opposition?
All right, we're gonna go online
to those that are in opposition.
We have 3 that have listed that
they are in opposition, Carlos
Santag, Nikki, and then somebody
with the name of Smith. So,
Carla, you have one minute, if
you will.
Uh, go ahead and unmute
yourself. Please pay attention
to the 32nd warning in your chat
box if you do go over one
minute, we will cut your mic. Go
ahead.
You, Madam Chairman and
committee members, it's Larry
Sontag here on behalf of the New
Mexico Business Coalition, as
you've heard from the supporters
New Mexico has an abundance of
uh people living in poverty, and
There is an existing program
right now, which some of the
utility, uh, people talked
about, it's called light, low
income home energy assistance
program, we would encourage you
to focus on that funding and not
shift the burden of lower
utility rates for some on to
others. By doing so, you create
additional hardships. It doesn't
matter where you draw the line
for poverty in the state,
subsidizing costs for others
will push many of those who are
barely making ends meet and.
to poverty. You can hurt more
people of those that you're, uh,
the, the sponsors are wanting to
help. Consider those on fixed
income budget who can scarcely
afford their utilities right
now. We encourage you to vote no
on this bill. Thank you. All
right, thank you so much. Now we
go to Nikki and then somebody
with this name, Smith, Nicky,
uh, you're welcome to go and you
will have one minute. Please pay
attention to the 32nd warning in
your chat box. Go ahead.
Thank you. Good afternoon, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
My name is Nicky McCarty, and
I'm a resident of Taos County, a
community where many families
already struggle to make ends
meet. House Bill 91 would have
devastating and lasting
consequences for our county,
placing an unfair financial
burden on hardworking lower
middle class families who don't
qualify for government
assistance. Many in County are
already living paycheck to
paycheck, forcing them to
the costs of these mandates
would push them further into
financial distress, making it
even harder for them to provide
for their families. Well, I
fully support helping those in
need. This bill unfairly targets
the very people who are working
tirelessly to stay afloat. I
strongly urge you to vote no on
House Bill 91 and stand up for
New Mexico's working families.
They deserve policies that
support their livelihoods, not
ones that threaten their
financial stability. Thank you.
Thank you so much, and the last
person that we have is Smith,
but I want to let make sure
that, uh, and Lynn and Enrique,
we have your, uh, support of
this bill registered, but we're
gonna go ahead and just have
Smith is the last person to give
testimony, and then we will go
back to the sponsors. So, Smith,
you have one minute, please pay
attention to the, it looks like
Angie Smith, you will, please
pay attention to the 32nd
warning in your chat box. Go
ahead.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
committee members. My name is
Angie Smith and I'm an active
and concerned citizen from
Portalis. Here in Roosevelt
County, we have a ministerial
alliance made up of several
churches and community focused
organizations. Every Christmas
season, we do the red kettle
campaign to raise money
specifically to help our
neighbors struggling with their
utility bills. The Alliance not
only vets those seeking help,
but even helps them come up with
budgets in hopes that they won't
need help in the future. Its
neighbors helping neighbors. It
works well and it's a joy to do.
Americans are the
most compassionate, benevolent
people in the world, and given
the opportunity, we'll take care
of our own, wanting to help
people is a good and right
thing, but the government coming
to take away from some of its
citizens, many of whom may be
struggling themselves just to
give to a favorite group is not
right. It harms one part and
doesn't truly help the other
part in the long run. Wouldn't
it be better to find a way to
empower and assist organizations
like our ministerial alliance
and LIHIP, which are already
doing this important work and
doing a great job at that.
Please vote no on HB 91. Thank
you for your
time and service to our state.
Thank you so much. And so now we
go back to the sponsor. You have
5 minutes if you'd like to
respond to any of the public
comment or we can go straight to
the committee. Thank you, Madam
Chair, Senators. I would like to
respond, uh, one, I'd like to
address, uh, like he, um, Ly he
is a fantastic program and all
the 20 states that um that offer
a low income rate or program
through their utilities also
have uh light heat and those
programs work together. He is
one time only funds for.
heating or cooling or a crisis,
um, they
Um, range from somewhere between
70 or $490 for a one-time use.
So it's um it's additive and
it's a great program, but Lye
doesn't cover um the, the issue
that most of our low income New
Mexicans are facing with regard
to utility bills. Uh, secondly,
um, I represent Taos County. I
really care about my, uh, my
constituents, uh, and I would
never, uh, have a bill that
would harm them in, in any way,
especially financially, uh, this
program is not about mandates.
You know, voluntary program for
utilities that they could design
a program in any way they want
that supports their
constituents, and I, I want to
note that um Taos County is
represented by Kit Carson, uh,
which is a a rural electrical co
op and they're they're not part
of this, um, this bill. So
that's it madam Chair. Thank
you. Thank you so much. Now I go
to the committee, Senator Ramos,
Madam Chair, Representative,
thank you for bringing this bill
in front of us today. And that
was my question, why, why aren't
co-ops involved because most of
My, well, a good portion of my
district has co-ops. Why can't
these people benefit from it
because I do have some of the
lowest income in the whole
state.
I'll start, Madam Chair, as
Senator Ramos, thank you for
that question. Uh, this bill is
really only for investor-owned
utilities, um, who need this
bill in order to offer anything
for uh for their uh service
members at co ops tan, uh, also,
uh for a low income rate, um,
they're, they're not covered by
this, but, but they're, but
they're allowed to, and I'll let
my expert expand.
So, um, Madam Chairander Ramos.
Co-ops are regulated differently
than investor and utilities and
what this bill specifically does
is remove a restriction that is
currently on investor-owned
utilities. Um, so it doesn't
really affect co-ops.
Co-ops could bring a low income
rate right now if their member
owners agreed.
Same way they do with their
regular rates.
Thank you.
I think you said Ramos, uh,
other question, Senator Paul,
thanks, Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative. So to kind of to
one of the points that you just
mentioned in in response to
Senator Ramos's question is that
you said this is geared in
public regulated utility
companies.
What's preventing them from
offering these types of
programs, not.
had to be enacted in the
legislation. Uh, thank you,
Madam Chair, uh, Senator Paul,
we've never met before. Hello.
Um, the reason why is because of
mountain states, uh, which is,
uh, which was a lawsuit, um, a
legal opinion that basically
said that uh the PRC can't offer
the low income rate that it
needs to um be a legislative and
I'm probably getting a little
bit of this wrong Madam Chair,
and, uh, and senator, but
essentially that the legislature
t ate s what kinds of kinds of
rates can be offered through
utility, and so that's why we
need this.
Legislation, so we, we're
telling the PRC you can provide,
you can allow the utilities to
offer different rates like a
economic development rate or an
industrial rate. Those are rates
that exist right now. So really
it's because of mountain states.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representatives. So would
it be fair for for me to say
then that by doing this, it, it
allows them to set up a fee
structure that's going to charge
somebody less than other
customers and that it's gonna be
based on the amount of income in
the, the bill here it just says
low-income customers, and so
what, what's considered a low
income customer, Madam Chair
Senator, uh, another great
question. I think that depends
on the service area.
what a low income customer that
is. So we're not mandating uh
anything here. Uh, we're not
saying, you know, you only have
to, you can only include uh
customers that make between 100
and 150% of poverty. Um, it is
whatever makes sense for that
service area, so the utility PNM
can say only those who get li
heap are eligible for this
program, and then they can
develop a program that, um, you
know, that manages those um
those.
customers' needs, so it's very,
uh, it's very flexible, it's
very tailored to what the
utility needs. Um, we already
have different rate structures
for different customers, you
know, economic development
customers, uh, industrial rate
customers. They get, they get a
different rate, and those rates
are, you know, are paid for by
all the ratepayers.
The PRC must look at what is
just and reasonable. That's
their mandate. That's their
obligation to, to ratepayers. So
the utility brings uh a
ratepayer case that has, that
includes programs or a rate for
a certain class of customers,
they have to justify that and
the PRC will look at that and,
you know, we'll look at that
justification and we'll
determine if that is just and
reasonable for the rest of the
ratepayers.
Thank you Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative for those
answers. You know, I just, I
have a fundamental disagreement.
I think that there's, there's
enough other options out there.
There's already programs that
these utility companies are
offering for, for low income
folks and there's uh other means
to do that. I don't know that
the, the, the PRC and, and, and
Folks that are going to be on
the cusp of that definition of
low income, should have to pick
up the burden just so that
somebody else can get, get a
lesser rate. So I appreciate
your responses and thanks for
the time, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator, Senator Sanchez.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative for bringing this
bill. I kind of with my two
colleagues here I'll just, it's
the feels kind of really broad
on how much the utility are
gonna reduce the rate. We don't.
Madam Chair represented to you,
is it gonna be 1% for the low
income people, 5%. I mean, I
know you're gonna build a
structure, but what do you see
this bill doing? What would you
like this to do for the low
income people, Madam Cha's
representative. Madam Chair, uh,
Senator Sanchez, um,
The bill is written in that way
so that the invest your own
utility can make a determination
based on what their ratepayers
need, based on what their
constituents need and, and it
doesn't have to be a low income
rate. Uh, it could be a low
income program, uh, so that
could be, you know, rebates or,
you know, um, it could be, you
know, equipment or um
You know, refrigerator or things
like that, that could help
reduce the energy burden for
that household. We left it open
so that the utilities can
determine what is needed for
their customers.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative. Um,
That's all I have. I had another
question I forgot.
OK. Thank you, Senator Sanchez.
Any other questions or comments
from the committee.
What is the will of the
committee?
And we would do we do pass from
Senator had a meal. Can we have
a second?
second from Senator Berkins, if
you will please take the vote.
Senator Figaro.
Yes.
had a meal? Yes.
Senator O'Malley is excused
Senator Paul.
Senator Ramos, ma'am.
And said Sanchez.
Senator, uh, Sheriff is excused
and it to work. Yes.
Senator Bergman
Senator Hammer.
5
You have a due pass 5 to 3.
Thank you.
Right, our last bill of the
night
is House Bill 339 with an
amendment, housing
discrimination and the Human
Rights Act from Representative
Rubio and Representative Romero.
Welcome, homie.
Right, you've heard the deal, so
you, you know, I don't have to
repeat it again. Otherwise,
Senator Jaramillo might lip sync
with me cause he hears my
dulcent tones in his sleep
efficiency. I've been
traumatized by CPAC, so thank
you for moving so quickly.
Um,
thank you all. Um, uh, House
Bill 339, um, amends the Human
Rights Act, and we do have an
amendment um that you will have
uh it's really just clean up
language, um, one of the, uh,
during the floor debate in the
House, some of the folks on, on
our, um, on, on the Republican
side, were a bit confused around
whether or not this would impact
the Human Rights Act with
previous cases already ruled on,
so we
it. So we try to fix it and um
and so that's what the amendment
is, is for.
OK, so, um, committee's not used
to seeing it on yellow paper,
but this is 231-790.1?
Um
Be.
That has 6 points on it.
OK, can we uh move the amendment
for discussion. We have to move
the amendment for discussion. Go
ahead. Thank you. um, Madam
Chair, thank you, senators. Um,
so House Bill 339 amends the
Human Rights Act to address
housing discrimination, um, but
it isn't, it's a necessary step
to protect tenants, uh, for the
last 6 months, we in the in um
we have a cohort in for housing
um on the house side who have
been working on a number of
pieces of legislation. This is
one of those.
pieces where we feel that it's
low hanging fruit. It's
something that we can really
help tenants, especially folks
who receive veteran vouchers,
um, Social Security disability,
people who have very diverse,
um, um, income sources that they
will be, they will be, they will
have access to housing and won't
be discriminated against because
of that source of income. I do
have my um experts here. I have
Rachel Biggs and then I have
Elizabeth Elia, who I'm happy to
let.
them introduce themselves as
well.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Rachel
Biggs. I'm the chief strategy
officer at Albuquerque Health
Care for the Homeless.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Elizabeth
Elia. I'm the co-founder and
secretary of the New Mexico
Center for Housing Law. Thank
you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. We'll
we'll stand for questions.
All right, at this point, um,
any, uh, opposition or any
discussion on the amendment?
the opposition to the amendment.
I see that you will record that
the amendment was supported
unanimously. All right, at this
point, what we're gonna do is
going to go to public comments.
So just by a show of hands, I've
been in the audience are in
support of this legislation.
123456.
OK. How many in the audience are
in opposition to this
legislation.
Prince used to that.
Uh online we have
3 people in support and 1 person
in opposition. So what we're
going to do is we're gonna hear
um from 4 people here in the
room, if you will find up.
In uh support.
4 people in support. Don't
worry, Brett. We'll get to you
and then we'll hear, uh, one
person online who is in
opposition. So, uh, if you will,
you will have one minute.
And uh we'll give you a
thirty-second warning. So you're
welcome to start.
So my, my name is Ellen Ackerman
and I am a section 8 voucher
holder. I lived in one rental
for 30 years until my landlord
wanted to sell and that put me
into the uh rental market, uh,
last year, and I have to say
almost every landlord that I
spoke with would not take
Section 8 voucher and they had
no opportunity to find out that
I had excellent references.
I was very lucky and found um a
landlady who was willing to rent
to me and uh she knew nothing
about Section 8, so I helped her
get um if it in place and it was
very easy. All she had to do was
prove that she owned the rental
building and um the housing
inspection was very simple. So I
wanted to say that
discrimination is real.
Thank you so much.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Daniel
Williams. I'm a policy advocate
at the American Civil Liberties
Union of New Mexico, and we
stand in strong support of HB
339, Mexico has a strong history
of prohibiting discrimination
and the human Rights Act is a
critical legal tool to create an
accountability for
discrimination, and we are
excited for this effort to
strengthen and expand the Act.
No one should be denied housing
simply because they rely on
lawful income sources such as
Social Security, veterans
benefits, or
Housing vouchers. This bill
ensures fair access to housing
and prevents discriminatory
screening practices that
disproportionately harm
low-income families, seniors and
people with disabilities.
Housing is a public safety
investment, and HB 339 is a
crucial step for equity and
inclusion in our communities.
Thank you.
Thank you so much.
Mm
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Maria Grego. I'm an
attorney and the director of
economic equity with the New
Mexico Center on Law and Poverty
in the New Mexico Center stands
on in strong support of this
bill.
Housing vouchers are a key
resource to ensuring families
can access stable and affordable
housing in New Mexico, 1/3 of
voucher holders can't find
housing before their voucher
expires because landlords refuse
to rent many landlords, excuse
me, refuses to rent to voucher
holders.
Simply put, source of income
discrimination creates inequity.
When landlords deny housing to
uh to families. They're excluded
from certain neighborhoods and
are concentrated in areas with
fewer resources.
In other jurisdictions were
source of income discrimination
is illegal, voucher holders are
12% more likely to succeed in
finding housing. The result is
that more families are housed
and landlords can count on
timely rent payments. It's a
win-win situation. Thank you.
Madam Chair, committee members,
my name is Carlos Matutes with
Green Latinos. Again, we're a
national organization dedicated
to environmental justice for
Latina communities and other
communities of color. What we
find is that environmental
injustice happens in a de facto
red line.
By including these housing
vouchers.
Opening up
housing opportunities for our
families. We start to open up
areas where people can have
homes where they're not dealing
with as much environmental
injustice. Thank you very much.
We hope that you vote do pass on
House Bill 339.
All right. Thank you so much.
Uh, Brett we'll go to you in the
room and then we'll go online.
So if you'll let the people on
Zoom know to get ready?
Go ahead, Bret, uh, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, my
name is Brent Moore. I'm a
registered lobbyist for the
Mexico Association Realtors, we
stand in opposition to this
bill. We standing up this
opposition to this bill for
several reasons. The first is
that the inclusion of uh this,
these provisions in the Human
Rights Act, what that does is
that exposes landlords to
lawsuits, and that's actual
damages, attorneys' fees, and I
noted in some of the research
that I was looking at that when
you talk about actual damages,
it's kind of unsettled.
in the Mexico law, whether or
not that includes intentional
infliction of emotional
distress, so you have uh a
difficult situation for
landlords facing lawsuits and
some of these landlords can be
mom and pops. This isn't all
corporate ownership. This can be
smaller, smaller folks who would
be exposed to those types of
lawsuits, and I would also note,
and it's in your FIR that
Albuquerque, Donana County,
Burnleyo County, and Santa Fe
have all passed local ordinances
to address this, this would be
state law. This would be
applicable throughout.
The, the state of New Mexico, we
would much prefer that you, you
allow local jurisdictions to
address this. Thank you very
much.
Thank you so much.
All right, we're gonna go
online. We have um
For people who are in support
and one person who is against,
so we're gonna go ahead and have
uh the 4 of you that are in
support, you get one minute.
Let's go to Isaiah Torres first,
and then we'll go to Cat and
then Jane and then Nicole, uh,
after that. So Isaiah, you do
have one minute, if you will,
unmute yourself, please pay
attention to the 32nd marker
there.
Go ahead.
Thank you, chair. Um, good
afternoon, um, members of the
committee. um thank you for the
opportunity for letting me
speak. My name is Isaiah Torres.
I'm the statewide policy manager
at the Center for Civic Policy,
and we strongly support House
Bill 339. This bill ensures that
all New Mexicans have fair
access to housing by prohibiting
discrimination based on law
lawful sources of income such as
Social Security, disability
benefits, and housing vouchers,
source of income discrimination
disproportionately affects
vulnerable groups, and it's also
worth noting that 72% of Section
8 vouch.
holders are either seniors,
children, or people with
disability. I urge the committee
to pass House Bill 339 to
promote fairness, housing
security, and equitable access
to stable housing for all. Thank
you for all the work that you do
for the state of New Mexico.
Thank you.
Thank you so much. Uh, we're
gonna go to Cat, Jane, and then
Nicole, and then Carla will have
you, uh, finish off the Zoom
testimony. So Kat, uh, you have
one minute, please pay attention
to the 30-second morning in your
chat box.
Thank you, Chair and members of
committee. Katsanche with bold
Futures, a statewide
organization by and for black
indigenous women and people of
color. We are in support of HB
339. I want to thank the
sponsors for being responsive to
individuals' concerns and
bringing this bill forward. This
issue has come up before by a
community leader in Las Cruces
with regards to Hapua, which
stands for housing opportunities
for people with AIDS. The
specific issue was in
discrimination of individuals
using hopwa vouchers for stable
and safe housing.
in the city, unfortunately, this
hap this kind of discrimination
happens more often than we
realize and keeps New Mexicans
across the state from having
options in housing and instead
limits the kind of housing
available for people and
families to be able to thrive.
We urge it to pass.
Thank you so much. Uh, now we go
to Jane.
Jane, if you will, unmute
yourself, and you have one
minute.
Yes. Thank you, Madam Chair and
committee members. My name is
Jenny McGuigan. I'm a registered
lobbyist with the League of
Women Voters of New Mexico, the
league strongly supports HB 339
as amended because it ensures
access to housing and that
applicants will not be
discriminated against due to
their form of income source such
as Social Security, pension
annuity, child support.
Um, etc. Uh, in summary, the
league strongly supports HB 339
and appreciate a representative
Rubio and Romero for bringing
this bill forward. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you so much.
And lastly in support, Nicole
Mar Martinez.
Thank you, Senator Hamster. Uh,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. This is Nicole
Martinez with Masa Valley
Community of Hope in Las Cruces,
and I would really like you to
pass this bill. I work every day
with people surviving outside
and in too many cases they get
turned away from an apartment
that works for them because they
are using a housing voucher. We
often hear they don't have
enough income to qualify even if
we are paying 100% of their rent
permanently. Sometimes their
voucher expires before they find
a landlord willing to utilize a
voucher, and that means people
are staying on the streets for
longer periods of time.
Did you know that more than 80%
of the people we serve are
successful in terms of housing
stability. That's so much
successful rent paid for by
vouchers. Please help us
eradicate unlawful
discrimination practices as they
relate to housing people
experiencing poverty and
homelessness. Please vote yes
today on HB 339. Thank you so
much.
Thank you. And now we go to
Carlos Sontag, uh, who has
registered in opposition. So
Carla, you have one minute, if
you will go ahead and unmute
yourself, you know the deal. Um,
go ahead, Carla.
Good afternoon, Madam Chairman,
Larry Sontag here, and yes, I do
know the deal, so I'm speaking
on behalf of the New Mexico
Business Coalition, and I won't
repeat the uh concerns that were
mentioned by the gentleman in
the room there on litigation,
but we have heard in the New
Mexico Business Coalition from
small mom and pop rental owners
who are very concerned about
this bill being passed, because
the section 8 vouchers that are
mentioned, they do require an
inspection and these inspections
may sound like it's no big deal,
but if you have a property
that's older than 10 years,
there's things that have to be,
uh,
In place in order for the, the,
the home or the rental unit to
be acceptable to the
Inspecting authority, things
like the height of a window,
things like where electrical
outlets are placed. I would uh
encourage you, if you have a
home that's older than 10 years,
it's very possible, if not
likely, that your home would not
qualify for Section 8 housing.
That is a major concern for
people who may not have the
resources to bring a property up
to code. We encourage you to
vote against House Bill 339.
Thank you.
Thank you so much. And so now,
Representative, you do have 5
minutes to respond to any of the
public testimony, and then we,
or if you would rather not, we
can also go to the committee.
It's entirely up to you. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Um, uh, we'll,
we'll just take a few minutes to
just be brief.
And I'll hand it to my experts.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, very
briefly to clarify what this
bill would not do. This bill
would not require
prioritization, so you would not
have to choose a voucher holder
or someone paying with Social
Security or disability income
over another tenant, you just
couldn't use that as a reason
for denying them, um, housing.
It would not control rent or
dictate how much a landlord can
charge for their rent, so if
someone's rent is that fair
market rate or higher, that
person would not be able to use
a, a voucher at that unit
anyways, um.
In terms of the concerns around
inspections, we clarified that
language during the House debate
to be sure, um, to address
concerns around if your unit
does not meet those housing
quality inspection standards
that it would be OK for you to
not take the voucher at that
point and you would not be
penalized. So we're not
requiring landlords to update
their units to meet the um
decent, safe and sanitary
inspection quality guidelines of
the housing quality inspection,
um, and lastly, it does not
change anything around it.
laws. So, um, the same eviction
laws still apply to someone
that's on a voucher. Um, and to
be clear, what we're seeing at
um Albuquerque Health Care for
the homeless and and the, the
system around the state is that
denying vouchers is prolonging
homelessness. It is a waste of
our state funds. We have state
funding that goes to permanent
support housing vouchers and
it's a um a waste and
inefficiency of our federal
dollars.
Uh, Mountainar members of the
committee, I'll just add a
couple more things, um.
To reiterate what the what the
bill does not do, um.
It, uh, you know, it does like
Rachel said, it does not require
any landlord to make
improvements based on any type
of housing code or requirements
for housing quality inspection,
um,
And we, it never did and we
added clarifying language into
it during the house of order to
make that very clear, um,
additionally, um,
What the bill does is it ensures
that a landlord, um, will, it,
it requires landlords to screen
tenants the way they ordinarily
do. Nothing in the bill offends
a landlord from screening a
tenant for criminal background
or creditworthiness, etc. The
one thing it does is it says the
landlord can't out of hand deny
um an applicant for housing
based on how they plan to pay
their rent, um, if that, if that
payment source is lawful.
Um, and, and reliable.
Um
One of the other things that the
bill does, um, is it gives the
Attorney General's office to
enforce the public accommodation
and housing accommodation
provisions in the Human Rights
Act. And it does that because um
the existing structure had
complaints go through, uh, the
Department of Workforce
Solutions as they indicated in
their comments, they received
very few, um, public
accommodations request as it is
now, um, probably because most
people
don't think we're for solutions
when they're having a public
accommodations or housing
problem. So the Attorney
General's office is on board
with this change, and so is.
Solutions, we can talk more
about that if you'd like. Um,
and then finally, the
reorganization, um, that's the,
the subject of the amendment is
really clean up like
Representative Rubio said, and I
can help walk you through that
if you have questions about it.
Thank you.
Thank you so much. All right,
now we go to the committee. Are
there questions from the
committee.
Senator Paul.
Thanks, Madam Chair. Thanks,
Representative. Couple just
questions to try and
clarify, so I own a couple.
Uh, rental units, not a ton by
any means.
But when I'm reading here
through, you know, the source of
income. Help me understand what
I'm, it is a owner of a
property, a property owner able
to and not able to do to ensure
that the person that I'm renting
this unit to can actually afford
to do that.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator. Um, I'll hand it
over to Liam.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Senator Paul. Um, so
just like you do now, you can
ask an applicant how they are
going to pay you. You can say,
tell me your sources of income
and, and you can ask for that to
be documented so that you can
ensure that they're real, um,
what all this bill does is it
does not allow you to say, oh, I
see you're going to be paying
part of your rent with Social
Security income. I don't want to
accept that. I'm not going to
rent to you because of that. Oh,
I see you're
to pay part of your rent with um
with an annuity. I'm not going
to rent to you because that's
your source of income. Oh, I see
you're going to be renting,
using part of your income,
income is based on a voucher,
and I, and I don't want to
accept vouchers, so I'm not
gonna rent you for that reason.
That's, that's the only thing it
requires.
Thanks, thanks for the answer.
So,
To me, then that means it's a
property owner, now I have to
get even more detailed in my
application process of figuring
out how a potential applicants
actually going to pay me, you
know, most of the time when I,
when I'm renting a unit, I don't
know how everybody else does it,
you know, we require that you
make, you know, um, 3 times what
the, you know, uh, monthly
amount of rent is, and so if I'm
not asking those questions of
what are all your sources of
income, you know, most of the
time I'm just verifying.
From, from their job of, hey,
you know, the, I live in a
military community, most of my
renters have been active
military and so it's pretty easy
to verify that, so I, I see this
as just being another burden to
property owners, a hoop to have
to jump through for them to to
to rent a unit, and if they
don't, then they're penalized
because now they've based on
this would be discriminating
against somebody. Um, can you
help, help me understand to this
screening process and the
definition of that. What do you
guys talking about there?
Me and Senator, and, and, and
this goes to what you just
previously just talked about.
We're, we're not as this, this
legislation isn't in asking that
landlords go into detail about
how they're going to pay for
their, um, for the rent, it's,
it's just merely saying that if
somebody does happen to mention
that they're using a voucher to
pay for the rent that you're not
gonna straight out deny them the
opportunity to apply so.
In the case of the, the tool,
um, everybody that is a landlord
goes through the process of um
reviewing applicants. This just
means that you're not going to
treat somebody differently, um,
in this process of, of this
intake of, of how you're, you're
asking for or the, the way that
you're doing the application
process, it'll still remain the
same. You're just not doing any
type of exceptions or anything
like that.
Thanks man. I'm sure thank
representative for the answer.
So, uh, I guess just as a
hypothetical, if I list a unit
for rent, and I get one
applicant and the person is a
housing voucher applicants.
And I know that I'm gonna get
potentially more applicants in a
week.
But if I do not rent it to that
applicant that it applied, and
they had a voucher, can I give
other reasons as to why that
they, you know, I'm waiting to
see what other applicants come
or now I subject to violating if
this goes into law and subject
to whatever lawsuits may come as
a result of that.
Madam Chair and Senator, that's
a good question. So in this, it
just like any other fair
housing, we're just adding
another status, so, um, in the
case of if it was a woman that
was renting and you couldn't
deny them based on the fact that
they were a woman renting. Same
thing for source of income, um,
you just all things considered
equal, you can't make that the
the reason for your decision to
deny them housing, um, so if you
had other applicants, you would
screen them all, everyone
exactly the same, and then your
decision will be based on your
screening criteria, which we're
still
um saying that screening
criteria is allowed. This is,
um, just one other form of
discrimination that we're saying
that you can't base your
decision on.
Thanks, Chair. Thank you for
that answer. So I guess I just
have a fundamental difference on
low income housing as a whole. I
think that there's a lot of
other ways to incentivize
development and to help folks
that need low income housing.
There's a, a lot of, you know,
companies out there that
specialize in low income
housing, yet we're not seeking
to to help do them. That's, you
know, help them do these
developments. That's their
expertise. They're efficient at
it were instead turning it on.
The mom and pop landlords across
the state because this has
already been enacted at the
local municipal level in, in all
the areas where it really, you
know, is probably an issue and I
of Bor, New Mexico. I don't see
this being a huge issue, but
I'll tell you that it definitely
makes and raises concerns for me
because of folks like myself,
the mom and pop people, and
that's the majority of anybody
that owns rental properties in
Almogordo outside of the larger
and the few, uh, multi-family
housing complexes that we have
and so I just.
Um, uh, at the core, I think
that we don't need to have the
government telling property
owners how to rent their
properties. Let's encourage
folks that specialize in this to
come into these communities and
build these types of projects
and have them run efficiently
and we get, you know, around
this whole issue, that's all
I've got, Madam Chair. Thank
you. Thank you, Senator Robert.
I'm sorry, Senator Paul.
Any other questions from the
committee that I share.
That means I'm sure in the
restroom very quick you very
quick, very quick, really? OK,
so we bills have come through
here that just appear to be set
up for somebody to sue me. Who's
gonna sue me?
And why? It would be a reason
why, but what is, what is gonna
be the reason why?
Yeah
Um, uh, Madam Chair, and, uh,
Senator Sher.
Just, just as you're liable if
you violate the human Rights Act
in general, you would be liable
if, if you violated the Human
Rights Act in this case. So you
would be, you could potentially
be sued um by either the state
or by an individual if you
violate the Human Rights Act.
So, Madam Chair, I have no
problem not violating the Human
Rights Act today.
But there's something in here
that somebody's trying to get.
Somebody's doing something in
this bill.
Because I can't imagine anybody
saying, I don't want your money.
They might say, I don't want
your drug problems.
But they're not gonna say I
don't want your money and that
wherever your money comes from,
that nobody's gonna say.
Thank you, Senator Sher. Any
other questions or comments from
the committee.
Man we would do past. We have a
Du pass. Do we have a second?
2 from Senator Adam, if you
will, please take the vote.
Senator Figueroa.
Yes, Senator had a meal.
Senator O'Malley is excused
Senator Paul. No, ma'am.
Senator Ramos. No, ma'am.
Senator Sanchez.
And to share.
Senator to work.
Senator Bergman.
Senator Hamlin. Yes.
We have 54. So you have you pass
on a 5 to 4 vote. Thank you very
much.
Thank you all.
All right, so, committee, um,
kudos to you. We flew through
quite a few bills today, um, and
it's always a pleasure to work
with you on this, uh, to give a
heads up, we will be meeting
Saturday morning at 9 o'clock in
this room. Again, we have a
ranking member has a list of
potential consent calendar
items, so we'll confirm that up
tonight. um, and then, uh, if
you will please plan for a
shorter meeting on Sunday,
hopefully, fingers crossed to
discuss the tax.
package. So that was kind of the
heads out and that will be at
1:30 or 30 minutes after the 4.
And so on that note, um, thank
you all very much. We are
adjourned.
of
