Here.
Hamblen here Senator Shendo here
we have six present in court
right okay so we'll go ahead and
the.
We started with Senate bill one
of seventeen Senator probably
within the bill.
Thank you percent.
The scripts and.
Just.
Was.
Thank you Mr chair and
Members of the committee of the
form yes we have to assume it's
right.
Thank you.
This would be the best billion
here today.
Looking forward to so in one
sentence or less this bill
Senate bill seventeen allows
minimum standards should be set
for dental plan so why do we
need this bill for a dental
insurance is considered excepted
benefits under federal law and
state law.
As a result many of the rules
apply to health insurance do not
apply to dental plans leaving
them loosely regulated Senate
bill seventeen create some
standards transparency and
accountability from dental plans
that will allow.
Patients to better understand
their coverage and receive the
care they need so this bill
addresses the following seven
issues number one prior
authorization to help patients
understand their coverage number
two assignment of benefits which
allows patients to designate
their Dennis to submit claims
and receive payment number
three.
That we're leasing that would
require companies to give notice
when renting or selling their
provider networks number for
retroactive denial which would
create a time limit for
companies to reclaim mistaken
payments number five virtual
credit cards.
That would require companies to
provide fee free payment methods
number six medical loss ratio
that requires companies to use
sixty five eighty five percent
of premiums to pay for care.
A similar bill recently passed
in Massachusetts the the three
percent loss ratio.
Number seven right limits to
limit the rate increases to
inject CPI.
So I think it's important to
point out Mr chair that most
dental plans already meet some
or all of these standards
however Senate bill seventeen
insurers that they're all.
All plans are meeting some
minimum requirements.
In summary Mr chair.
I'm getting close to the end.
Senate bill seventeen as new
sections of the health care
purchasing Act and the other
short term health plan and
accepted benefits to establish
dental plan standards for prior
authorization.
Collection of overpayments.
The pharmacy benefit assignment
of benefits acceptable methods
of payment assignment of
budget acceptable methods of
payment.
And network leasing.
In addition the staff which is a
minimum loss racial standards
for dental plans so that survey
of my presentation Mister chair
I have with me expert witness
script Parma.
Who is executive director of the
New Mexico dental association we
stand for questions thank you.
Thank you.
You want to make a comment for
this that's a specific.
Senator comments done wonderful
job of summarizing I'd be happy
to answer questions okay all
right the this time we'll go to
the audience anybody's Mr chair
four of yes.
That is Senator Wirth here is a
co sponsor I just wanted to say
a couple of things if I could
okay going Senator I'm sorry.
No that's fine thank you Mr
chairman I appreciated Center
Kalman's top seven list I just
need three more and have a top
ten but seriously I think he did
an excellent job of kind of
laying out of what this bill
does is why it's needed I just
want the committee to know that
the dental association has been
an active conversations with a
variety of the dental plans and
again there's a commitment on
the part of the Sanchez and on
the data associated to continue
those discussions kind of as
this bill moves forward I mean
these are complicated areas and
we want to right but the hope
today if you be able to move it
forward out of this committee so
we can head to Senate Judiciary
with the bill are all on board
with but I just want to add that
thank you Mr chair thank you all
right with that we'll go out to
the audience anybody here in
support of Senate bill of
seventy.
If you can the your parents
talking to Mike.
Sure so for the record.
Madam chair members of the
committee and the Senate but the
hello to all the but continue.
Thank you very much Michael
moxie New Mexico dental
association I do government work
as well as communications stand
in favor of this bill thank you
Sir.
Somebody else sector.
Hello and Scott general Dennis
Albuquerque I'm also present
elective The New Mexico dental
association and I support this
bill.
We also
the organisers share.
All right this time we'll go to
audience anybody in opposition
Senate bill one seventeen.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Roy Moore I
am registered lobbyist for
America's health insurance plans
which is the national trade
association of health plans I'm
also registered lobbyist for the
American council of life
insurers those are two of the
trade associations along with
the national association of
dental plans that have engaged
with us senator Wirth and Mr
scripts all with the dental
association we have been in
active conversations since we
got the bill we had a very long
meeting to start things off
we've exchanged various
potential amendments and so we
are working with the sponsor and
working with Mr scripts my so
we.
Definitely have concerns about
the bill as it stands and I
would know for you some of those
concerns one is hi the bill
requires their provides
statutory authority for a loss
ratio and provides for a loss
ratio.
What is it has come to light
need to our discussions is the
dental association wasn't aware
that there already is existing
statutory authority for that and
that the office of
superintendent of insurance has
already adopted a loss ratio
that loss ratio is that it's
sixty five percent currently
that loss ratio came into effect
the beginning of the year and so
we would very much like to let
that process play out there are
a number of other requirements
that apply to dental plans that
were a part of the rulemaking
that former superintendent till
put into place we believe this
bill needs to let those rules
and that loss ratio play out we
have many other concerns with
the bills that we exchange
information with the dental
association with and we will
continue those discussions but
has the bill stands now we are
in opposition thank you.
What else in the audience we.
Good afternoon my name's Luke
Falk the president CEO of delta
dental also this about delta
dental we are a local company
even though we have a national
brand we are domiciled in New
Mexico we have our own A. M.
best rating we are here we're in
the community.
as it relates to the bill are
stand in opposition to the bill.
As you know last fall result
there is a number of rules that
were put in place an alternately
approved many of those in fact
pretty much in lockstep with the
seven we just listed but to to
kind of rise to the level for me
particularly of the number one
is the minimum loss ratio when
you look at the minimum loss
ratio at sixty five percent some
might say well how come the
world could you have a problem
with that and the way the way it
really is when you get down into
the details of it.
It's not taking a whole business
insurance insurance company and
saying your loss ratio has to be
less than sixty five percent
it's at the plan level and
within delta dental of New
Mexico we have
we have I can plans for
individuals ten can plans for
really small policies some of
the rest we have three hundred
policies that would be at the
plan level so we would be
looking at that loss ratio had
more than three hundred
different levels in trying to
move the loss ratio there when
you look at that can you look at
the the results of the end of
our insurance company and a lot
of people think insurance
companies make make big margins
all tell you the margins are
very slim in this this rule even
at the sixty five percent would
would you have most of our
operating income.
When you look at that when it's
implemented and what it does
when you move those to what this
rule says sixty five for
individual eighty for small and
eighty five for large we that's
untenable again when you look at
delta dental in New Mexico again
we're the largest player hundred
forty five million dollars a
year and in business so we're
managing it's it's very
detrimental the other part is
pre authorizations.
Delta dental is a lot different
than medical pre authorizations
we do pre authorizations
everyday day in and day out last
year we had over eight hundred
thousand claims about three
hundred ninety five thousand of
those and pre authorization
delta dental in New Mexico today
we honor those pre
authorizations unless there's a
change for example somebody
waited nine months and then a
change in their health care
change so maybe that we were
denied for medical necessity
there for
and four thirty if the the.
If the if the patient had
consumed the maximum allowable
budget for the year that sort of
thing with with subsequent
procedures prior to getting that
done but we day in and day out
do pre authorizations we honor
them we we don't believe there's
a need for necessity to throw a
bunch of bureaucracy on
something that we believe is
working very well I asked my
staff after last Friday's
meeting will tell me how many
Paul how many claims what
percentage of our claims did we
do we deny last year two
thousand twenty one is two point
one seven percent of all claims
two thousand twenty two is two
point two four percent yes in
our view of a hundred thousand
claims that's pretty low
So you don't tell that was some
of the other aspects of the bill
again I don't want to continue
time were working behind the
scenes the we stand in
opposition to the bill thank
you.
What else.
That.
What
are.
A
Okay all righty so no it go to
questions of the committee.
Senator Kernan.
For that.
Was reading through the analysis
had just had a few questions
just trying to get my arms
around it because number one we
need our dentist and appreciate
It that very much but we also
need our insurers we don't have
insurance the dentists are going
to get paid for the most part so
you know I think it's really
important to make sure that if
you can reach some sort of
compromise between now and
Judiciary that would be really
good at a good thing to do so
when you think about
I think that the loss ratio is
one thing I don't understand
very well and I guess the
OSI Russell told and and the
superintendent of insurance put
in place as I heard today rules
just last year.
And the status of the sixty five
percent is that correct of the
Los iterations and so I'm
curious why is to chair and
senator.
The state urgent need right now
to to make changes to some of
the definitely and I certainly
appreciate Russell till the new
superintendent is that a lot of
confidence in the in so help me
understand why there's a need
for this huge change after
things were already put in place
and then you have like the in
the incident.
That's what.
Mr chairman and senator and
medical rust loss ratio just to
quickly explain it is the the
ratio of the number of dollars
that are spent toward care
versus administration over the
overall premiums as you said
that was set by rural during
this last year at sixty five
percent.
We feel like the sixty five
percent more is a pretty low bar
just to give an example it's
like having a credit card with a
fifty percent interest interest
rate you know for every two
dollars spent on care for one
dollars going towards the you
know to the credit card company
in this case of the insurance
company in this case and and
somewhat so
you know I mean I I think most
of us would say that's not a
very good that's not a very good
ratio that maybe the ratio
that's called for you under the
rule but it's not a very high
bar to to achieve and one has to
ask is that really good coverage
when there's you know when to
within one half of the half as
much is being spent on
administration is what's
actually being spent on care our
ideas to try to find you know
wait try to move that bar up a
little higher than what it is
the affordable Care Act for for
health insurance sets those
rates eighty five percent for
large plants and eighty percent
for smaller group plans
just like what we've proposed
here and as senator lamented
said recently there was a an
initiative in Massachusetts that
seventy two percent so yeah I
mean this is certainly something
that we're talking about with
them trying to find some some
kind of middle ground I think we
just feel like the sixty five
percent level is a pretty low
bar to achieve
and yeah I mean for patients
they want yeah and those who are
buying plans which is also
employers they want to know that
the dollars that they're
spending are actually going
towards care and that people are
getting the care that they
deserve.
I think that I guess my concern
is when I hear from the
insurance company specifically
delta dental New Mexico to
covers me and I'm very pleased
average that I receive and I
pay one hundred percent of the
premium.
So paid whether I get into what
I will say that I wanted higher
level of coverage that that's
gonna cost me more and so I get
to choose kind of the standard
that I and I retired health care
so I guess one question I have
if this does eighty percent in
the.
Delta dental says that's and
technical and then the longer
offered dental insurance and
obviously some of the other
insurance companies that have
submitted letters they're not
gonna offer insurance then we
have a situation in New Mexico
where basically there's very
little coverage that can be
purchased so that's a concern
that I haven't should be
concerned the community when
people don't have insurance and
they certainly can't take five
percent out of their pocket may
I that that maybe people can't
afford to go to the dentist at
all and so sixty five percent of
something I hope that you will
continue to work on and and see
if that in just remember that
people purchase what they number
one can afford and what that
they accept this coverage so I'm
trying to get pharmacists around
and you know institutions I'm
sure should braid state to live
in I think probably many people
wanted their losing a lot of
dentists and I would be
interested in the in the
percentage of dentists to that
per capita
their force in yeah so New
Mexico is no usual state just
staff left the press conference
related to to our doctors and
how they're leaving the state
and I just want to be careful
that yeah the public
participate that also think
we've got to have insurance in
order to get the coverage we in
order to go to the Dennis board
about the loss ratio
I think I'm not sure who this
weekend we had if I'm part of
retiree health care.
So I know that's the you know
the government to the government
and I'm sure you are being a
problem some sort of coverage as
well and so this is involved.
Coverage that can be outside of
those entities in other words
if I decide to drop health care
will do.
I can't get the bills.
I would go to another.
To the other insurance company.
In light of often that just
means that we have to follow the
same rules.
Projected dental.
Mr chairman and Senator Kernan
obviously this is not our
purpose to close anybody down
and that's exactly the reason
why we're engaged in discussions
to try to find where that middle
ground yes
you know mean.
I think that
this will.
I guess we can debate about
whether it really closes anybody
down or not there's a number of
states that have higher in
Millar's and they I figured out
ways for the companies to
continue and I'm assume that you
know whatever decision is made
by the legislature with regard
to what this should be we're
going to find ways to continue
to do that connect again that's
exactly why we're engaged in the
discussions is to try to find
you know find what the right
number is
They say too high we say too low
it's a matter of finding exactly
what is the right level to for
for patients you know we believe
that the amount that you pay
should be reflected in the
amount that that of care that
you're receiving the amount that
you're able to get from that and
so a higher M. L. R. means that
more more of the dollars that
you pay are actually going
toward your care and we think
that's advocating on behalf of
patients and also advocating on
behalf some transparency so that
you actually know where the
dollars you're spending on
premiums are going so at that I
I don't know if that answers all
the questions obviously we're
not trying to to close anybody
down we want to find ways to to
work together so that they are
able to existing provide the
insurance that they need to and
patients are able to have the
the most insurance for what
they're paying.
Mr chair what I'm trying to
figure out this
individual current tech health
care services chance if I decide
that that's not gonna work
because maybe the premiums are
now so much higher that I'm not
going to want to be able to pay
that so if I go to another
insurance company that isn't
connected to the RP or retire
Health Care state government are
those insurance are those plants
also the impact of what we're
doing today.
Mister chairman Senator the
This does cover both types of
plans however the the M. L. R.
that in the the medical loss
ratio part portion of this is
It's in that part of the plans
that the office of the
superintendent
has authority over and and not
in the same section is what the
other does what we're hoping
though is that as the tide rises
it hits helps everyone
regardless of what their
coverage might be here in New
Mexico.
Chair LESC
Sir I.
New Mexico down southeast corner
really limited in the number of
dentists that we have been
getting the community actually
go to let the in dental care and
all health care basically and so
I'm just curious you know I
wonder if those dentists that
are currently contracting with
non providers will continue to
do so you know maybe it'll be
better for them maybe not at the
I I don't know how this affects
impacts that that certainly one
listen to the rest of the debate
I support that we have a dentist
in New Mexico serving on we want
to keep you here but I also
understand that you know with
insurance companies Senator the
if it's not able to survive the
the email are is this will rise
to some concern maybe the X. in
the state go to messages thank
you very much.
Thank you senator.
We also on the committee for
questions.
Deceptive a.
Questions Senator of you say
that based on the rates of
analysis the superintendent had
rulemaking.
So who will engage in a
rulemaking process thank you for
the question
For extra buttons thank you.
Mr chairman.
I think the players have the
state and that you only know
what they went through the
regular rulemaking process
process and they were able to
offer some testimony.
Because it had not been clear
prior to this that dental was a
regulated entity we did not
particularly participate in that
during that rulemaking process
and only discovered that rules
had been adopted during the
process of drafting this result
legislation
that's not to say that we think
it was adequately done but but
we you know we were not engaged
in that process just because we
were not aware that was going
on.
The I know there's mention of a
of a Massachusetts is is this
ratio based on the rulemaking
based on New Mexico experience I
mean we I know that.
That's a good question Senator
of the different
Thanks for.
thank you Senator Tallman Mr
Chairman
eight there this is a process
that goes up on that actually
rates the company's them selves
I mean it it's it's rating based
on on their past experiences and
others and you know what what
they've been spending and and
other kinds of things
at the same time they're out are
outside standards like what the
four wheel Care Act has for
health insurance that set
standards that allows them to
you know set the benchmark for
that they need to meet so again
the idea is not to to strain
them to the point that they're
not going to be able to continue
to go on but it is to point
place benchmarks that actually
allow them to improve on that
ratio because the higher that
ratio is the better patients are
going to be in terms of having
care coverage.
Okay of thank you I appreciate
that of.
And I think you know we've heard
from a both the the the sponsors
that there's a lot of of we're
going on and so forth and so I
don't spend too much time of
this committee said believe you
know there's a lot of work going
on and hopefully there can be an
agreement before it gets too if
we move this thing off and so
forth so with that I have
Senator Hamblen Mr chair to
committee of I move in New
a new rack as it moves on to
Judiciary.
Do we have a second we have a no
Representative motion by Senator
Hamblen second by Senator
Tallman.
Go ahead take a roll call this.
Senator Browne yes.
Senator Griggs.
Hash.
Senator huh.
Yes.
Senator Kernan yes.
Senator Lopez yes.
Senator Sweetser yes.
Senator John yes Senator Wirth.
Yes.
Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Shendo yes.
The center for.
Yes.
Senator bricks yes.
Senator Kernan I'm gonna vote no
in explained off of.
We have nine yeses for a without
REC.
Okay good center thank you and I
really encourage you to to work
this out we need both of you
with our dentist and insurance
companies they can stay in
business to find what we need as
customers so really do need for
tribal yes.
Loss ratio and seeking come in
the middle of a little bit and
we'll see what happens when it
comes for thank you.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee thank
you.
Well of move on to the Senate
bill sixty one all.
The.
Of.
The proposed amendment.
It should be in there.
All right Senator.
If someone passes so.
Thanks.
Okay you ready
for
the amendment
to the amendment in the I I.
Point one.
So what the.
Does Mr chair is
It splits the.
The originally the for the forty
nine point five percent of the.
Six six is going to the mystic
violence victims fund.
And now we're we splitting that
equally between.
The domestic violence victims
fund and the substance abuse
education fund.
Which of both existing Fund
recreation the funds the second
thing it does doesn't make any
no no changes to the wholesalers
in the spirits beer wine and
fortified wine the slight
increase.
And the
Thanks for a.
The craft brewers starting in
the middle of the page I passed
out this page three line twenty.
Increases the rules originally
wanted.
The three cents per serving goes
to two three and four cents
respectively.
And then the.
The small on growers.
Goes from two cents per five
ounce to three cents per five
ounce serving in and
On page four line ten.
What that for them to go through
three cents to four cents for I
stand for I don't serving and
page four line fourteen.
It was originally a thirty cents
per litre.
And and and if it goes from five
cents to seven cents more on the
reverse side.
Is four cents for twelve on
serving of cider.
And then you can
You can read for yourself the
rest so the point is so minimal
charge basically most of
residence is going from one
sense to to cents as you know
there's another bill heard the
house yesterday this twenty five
cents so my bills and minimal
and I I the hard pressed right
to try to convince the going for
one says a Senator is going to
put a body out of business so
that's my and then that.
Mr chair.
Thank you for the eleventh.
The members.
Mr chair I move the
Amendment.
Two Senate bills sixty one.
Second second by Senator Lopez.
The opposition to the amendment.
Session purposes.
Representative.
This is.
All right so
Want roll on the amendment.
Senator rent to the.
Senator Griggs.
Senator had a meal.
Yes Senator Carmen use.
Senator.
Yes.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator Thoman.
Yes.
Senator Wirth.
Yes.
Senator Hamblen is.
Senator Shendo yes we have eight
yess for.
Moving the amendment forward
okay so you have an amended
bill.
So now we're.
Of.
No.
Will you explain the bills.
I was going to go for you think
the amendment for the amendment
of bill Kristol.
The original bill.
Mr chair is.
Originally.
Fifty percent of the tax is
going to.
The domestic violence.
Victims.
Fund.
and now we're I was going to us.
And now and we it and then the
other half is going to general
fund so that have to have to is
going to general fund we are we
going to the substance
Going to a.
This is violence victims fund.
And then the other half would go
to a of substance abuse Fund so
then the amendment splits.
A fifty fifty the half that was
going to the
of domestic violence victims
fund.
There are no changes in the
In the.
Tax.
And
So they were slight increases in
the and and the.
The tax and then there was a.
the regional bill Lewis
The counties.
We're.
The counties were able to impose
a a local liquor excise tax.
But in the original draft.
We have that option and then in
the draft amendment I just
introduce we limited that option
I forgot to mention that it was
the sheet that I gave to you.
Great so as you can see the
expert witness on kind of.
We and.
Pretty good so far.
All right is that it on the
bill.
It's not because I couldn't get
an expert witness.
This is a war available because
this is kind of a last minute
thing.
Mexico a population of of you
know two million are to.
So I hope that explains so the.
That's the end of a presentation
on the on the bill thank you
Sanford questions all right
thank you so we'll go to the
audience anybody here support of
Senate bill sixty one.
Start here.
Yes Mr chair members of the
committee David how to me I'm a
registered lobbyist for the City
of Albuquerque in the City of
Albuquerque thank senator Tom
and for bringing this bill which
is as he acknowledged a very
very modest proposal in terms of
the impact to the purchaser of
all call it's a minuscule amount
but in the aggregate would have
a substantial impact in
addressing two very important
social problems and issues in
our community so we would urge
that you take this modest step
to provide resources to both of
these are thank you.
You.
Go ahead.
In the Senator can handle the
Mike please.
Thank you thank you.
Chairman committee members my
name is Kathy Elliott and today
I'm here representing the
domestic violence resource
center of Albuquerque of which I
am a board member I've actually
been a board member of domestic
violence appropriations since
the early nineties when I myself
found myself in a domestic
violence situation so I took
that knowledge.
Of what happened to me and my
children at that point and
turned it into an opportunity to
serve on boards today we
as the DVR C. we say between two
hundred and two hundred and
fifty people every month.
Those people range from age of
eighteen to seventy five.
They are not only women there
then as well.
And we highly support this bill
not only will it give us the
opportunity for some even if
it's pennies.
Some additional funding
for the operations of domestic
violence and we also know how
domestic violence and.
Substance abuse work.
Badly together so we applaud the
efforts and hope for this bill
to pass because that may allow
us then to get back into the
counseling services that we so
richly want to do thank you for
your time today you.
What else in support of this
bill.
It will be on soon that's.
All right buddy in opposition of
this bill okay so we'll start
here locally.
Then.
Thank thank you Mr chairman
members my name is Dan weeks in
a representative Bernalillo
county of the county is not
supportive of this they're
actually support of an
alternative bill that Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino has
and I will go into detail about
that bill other than the fact it
does not increase taxes it
increases the distribution of
this
alcohol excise tax because it
takes the money there was always
intended to be in this fund back
from the general fund
Representative call maybe that
diversion back when the state
didn't have any money and needed
to divert that money into the
general fund this time to take
it back
Under that bill we we do a
greater distribution of the
counties we leave the local D.
W. I. fund alone
the other small distributions
would leave intact of the beauty
of that bill is frankly that we
take of the twenty five million
we divided by two and we use
half of that then to match
Medicaid and sent out to a fund
to the Department of Health for
substance abuse or alcohol abuse
and treatment so it enhances the
the fund without increasing
taxes and it also send some
money directly to the counties
so that they can enhance their
programs for treatment and and
and and abuse so that's a better
alternative in our estimation
and early County supports that
particular approach we we
appreciate the issue on TV is a
big problem state but we think
it's a just not a way to go
about doing that with still
disinterested also thank you
thank you.
I know.
In order to.
Mr chairman members the
committee risque with premier
distributing I'm not gonna argue
the spirit of this bill because
you can is the the spares there
I just think the efficacy might
not hit and as it's written
right now it's moving in a
direction that is that possibly
could be the bill but at this
point permit distributing we
can't support it.
Thank you.
Mr chair members committee Jason
we treasure lobbyist for the
distillers guild of New Mexico
distillers guild also supports
alternative bill that senator
Ortiz Pino has Stiller's kids
these are local businesses this
is manufacturing it's not just
selling about because
manufacturing is something that
we ship out of the state we were
given a tax differential by this
body about in twenty nineteen it
has allowed the industry to
continue to grow these are jobs
that are local jobs they're not
just jobs in restaurants but
they're actually jobs in the
distillery where we're
distilling in where they were in
the manufacturing these
additional spirits and shipping
them out we very much appreciate
the intention of this we just
don't feel that this is the
right way to fund domestic
violence programs in we also
think that the currently correct
size tech should be used on
substance abuse treatment
alcohol cessation we actually
act pretty responsible in our
restaurants in terms of drink
limits and we think some of that
can be taken and other
restaurants and and and other
establishments to establish a
protocol where people can't be
over service so for that we
stand in opposition of this bill
but really do appreciate the
Sanchez intent.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Randi
Valverde and I am a registered
lobbyist for Anheuser Busch for
the reasons already outlined by
all of the others we also stand
in opposition to this bill thank
you.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
not your honor as I like to call
on occasion out park registered
lobbyist on the behalf of the
New Mexico brewers guild
as you've heard many of my
colleagues the state and the
brewers completely agree with
the intent of the legislation
domestic violence is a scourge
upon our society and I applaud
all the efforts to try to
eradicated
having said that.
On behalf of your brewers we
believe that there is other
legislation that is being
currently considered in this
body by Senator Ortiz Y. Pino to
fully maximize all of the fund I
think Mr weeks talked about
leveraging it with Medicaid so
that you can get federal funds
to match it at this point the
brewers guild which you can your
New Mexico brewers which been so
supported by your legislature
four years ago this legislature
major commitment to building a
nascent industry which is now
grown and is an award winning
industry our New Mexico
breweries compete head to head
with all the big boys all across
the country and we bring home
award after award and that is
because this legislature made a
commitment to diversifying our
economy to supporting small
businesses that provide high
wage jobs that provide benefits
in retirement at this time we
will continue and will be
willing to continue to work with
senator Tom and but we believe
that there are better vehicles
to achieving the noble goal of
the ratification of domestic
violence we respectfully stand
opposition Mr chairman.
You.
This.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Chelsea
Canada and I'm the director of
public policy at the New Mexico
chamber of commerce we
respectfully oppose SB sixty one
for the reasons previously
stated we agree that there's
other proposals going through
the legislature right now
especially in our times of
historic budget surpluses to
redistribute revenues from these
taxes we believe this
proposal currently will disrupt
intern Raval the work that has
been done over the last few
years on the court reform as you
heard from some of the other
speakers
we believe that this will affect
our growing and budding grapple
craft brewery scene and
distilleries the FIR reinforces
this concern by sharing this
change would result in New
Mexico being the state that
taxes are the highest in the
region for these reasons and
more we respectfully oppose but
we are very sympathetic and
agreed that a solution needs to
come forward thank you.
Mr chairman members of the
committee.
My god not my senator Senator
Tallman.
Appreciate the opportunity John
Thompson registered lobbyists
for admiral beverage National
distributing in southern wine
and spirits for the reasons
stated I think Mr park
elaborated at Lync Fund matter I
we oppose the bill I would ask
you to possibly encouraged due
to support Senate bill two
twenty which I believe is in
this committee which is is the
bill referenced up by Mr park
and others thank you very much
appreciate the time.
The bills.
Both of.
One more okay.
get afternoon Mister chair
members of the committee I merry
K. route registered this for The
New Mexico restaurant
association well we absolutely
honor the spirit in which this
is brought only a hundred
percent agree that all of the
liquor excise taxes should be
used for the purposes intended
instead of being diverted to the
general fund disagree with the
tax increase in your historic
state revenues thank you.
And what else the audience.
They see none of us did you want
to make this statement before go
to committee.
Yeah I have a closing statement.
After the questions I just want
to give you some more facts are
okay good.
Have you know we have the
highest.
Right alcohol calls this United
States affected to double second
the state with the second
highest rate.
This means that approximately
one in ten deaths in New Mexico
were due to alcohol related
causes.
Number three.
Increasing alcohol taxes
according to the centers for
disease control and prevention
and also the World Health
Organization.
State have stated that they are
proven methods to reduce
excessive alcohol consumption
are yesterday and a house
committee they were.
Legislature's it says they don't
believe that well that's
interesting so apparently they
know more than the World Health
Organization is centers for
disease control.
Number four hasn't this hasn't
as I find a mind boggling that
we have increased taxes here in
the state hello call taxes in
thirty years which means that
with inflation these taxes are
owning.
Are worth one third what they
were thirty years ago due to
inflation.
Number five there was a lot of
media attention two or three
weeks ago the doctors used to
say the health say that drinking
in moderation was okay another
the health organizations are
telling us.
No they don't recommend any
drinking of alcohol.
And so we made this we've
created all these jobs.
the courage.
Posed to drinker we have one of
the brewery's almost every major
intersection and Albuquerque is
not a.
It's not a growing fledging
industry anymore it's pretty
well established so I have find
it hard to believe that work
increase as I said before
increasing it by one cent is
going to put anybody out of
business I've had a hard time
wrapping my head around that and
finally Mr
Share my sweat this last point
is.
You know everybody says well
they appreciate they realize we
have the highest health heart
related deaths United States
they feel bad about that but
they don't want to do anything
about it the only thing they
suggest is we take some of our
additional.
Funding that we're getting from
the oil and gas industry which
is only temporary and use that
money to increase of funding for
substance abuse and to also for
domestic abuse domestic victims
abuse funding so I just want to
make.
That statement and that's that's
all I have and I realize that
this.
Is probably.
Going nowhere but I find it very
disappointing thank you.
Senator.
The Senator Hamblen.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Senator Tallman for bringing
this forward and first and
foremost as a young child I
witnessed domestic violence as a
result of alcoholism in my
family and so the intention of
this bill is is a relief to me
because I fully recognize the
correlation between alcohol
intake and domestic violence
the part of me that that has
institutions about this I'm I'm
relieved to hear that there's
there's another opportunity here
but the the the I have a couple
of questions because I do have
some hesitation about this is
where their conversations with
wine producers and craft brewers
part of this this bill
development.
I don't have it sorry I don't
have a very good.
Answer for that okay but
I don't know how anybody could
object to a penny increase.
So if I could if I can if I may
Mister Mister chair that if if
there wasn't I'll take the blame
thank you.
And that I have the utmost
respect for you senator Tom and
you know this I'm coming at it
from a small business
perspective and I'm thinking of
the LESC phones winery and
little toad creek brewery and
ice blocks for re that are
present in Los crucis and I'm
thinking and looking at the
sheet I'm wondering how are they
going to manage their point of
sale system.
Based on this information if
they have to forty five cents
per liter of wine and the bill
once point seven cents per five
ounce serving.
A couple of things that we have
to remember is that different
types of drinks have different
types of alcohol content.
So for example like a ten ounce
of a of a eight percent most of
to one person yields point eight
ounces of pure ethanol wall of
fear twenty four ounces of us
that out can come in with an
eleven percent alcohol content
or ethanol is three times more
and so there's incredible
discrepancies in terms of the
type of of alcohol that is being
sold or consumed and then
however be seen the the tax
increase and so I'm trying to
think of my friends in in Los
crucis in full disclosure you
know at least one of those is a
member of my chamber but I'm
thinking about small businesses
in general and just how they do
their business and this to me
looks like something that might
be an incredible nightmare and
setting up in their point of
sale system of if this drink has
this they have to they have to
qualify the difference between
gallons in liters
the alcohol content or ethanol
content you know one thing to
keep in mind twenty four ounces
of a stab years equivalent to
more than four shots of eighty
proof we whiskey which is why
you should never drink a stab
here in the first place this is
not a big fan I'm just I'm just
concerned about the trial that's
going to trickle down for small
businesses and how they're going
to navigate that if this were
going to play so if you have any
any response to that Sierra
monitor I appreciate that.
Thank you for the question was
afraid to get a question I can
have a very good answer for but
that the column on the left
that's existing.
So if you're saying you think it
would be a can be difficult to
convert to cents per serving I
think there's an inconsistency
Mr chair and senator consistency
of the the report Gallup leisure
because there's also
accomplished at the federal
level between units of
measurement of liquor and what
we're we're imposing on our
local breweries and wineries
here and so I that's why I asked
if there were conversations
because there maybe could have
been consistent units of
measurement that would have been
a little bit easier for those
industries to kind of get a hold
of.
And see where that would work
for them.
Well we and we had seven or
eight.
People opposing this bill not
own raise that issue.
As I I represent small
businesses and so like I are you
you obviously know more about it
than I do so I should head you
as the expert witness.
Thank thank you for the
compliment care center I'm just
I'm just thinking about those
things that is is a
consideration nothing is.
Thing is easy here and this
certainly is a good example of.
That's all I have Mister chair
thank you very much thank you
senator Byrd.
I move to table.
Well motion to table.
Not available so Thorpe the
please call the roll.
Senator Brandt yes Senator
Griggs.
Senator have a meal.
No.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Lopez.
Senator Sanchez.
Yes.
Senator Tallman.
No.
Senator Wirth.
No.
Senator Hamblen.
Senator Shendo then yes.
Okay we have I guess is and I
know.
The.
So it stays there.
The motion which Mr chair on
over the past.
Motion for the past.
Hello.
Senator Brandt no.
Senator Griggs no.
Senator had a meal yes Senator
Kernan.
No.
Senator Lopez yes senator
Sanchez no.
Senator toman.
Yes.
Senator Wirth.
Yes.
Senator Hamblen.
Yes.
Senator Shendo.
No.
We have five yeses and I notice
Mr chair of the no rack.
Senator right now Senator
Griggs.
Senator current Senator had a
meal I'm sorry.
That's okay yes.
Senator Kernan.
Senator Lopez.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator toman.
Yes Senator Wirth.
Yes Senator Hamblen yes.
Senator Shendo.
Yes.
We have six yeses and Fornals.
Four and No Representative.
Thank thank you Mr chairman
thank you
Committee for your.
No Representative.
Thanks.
All right thank you so just for
a committee members the sponsors
of a Senate bill three thirty
six as asked for that to be
rolled over Thursday as well as
one fifty five of them and if so
when I will go to Senator
Stewart.
One thirty two.
Yes.
Thank you so much Mr chairman
members of the committee we have
the this is a bill that deals
with the sexually transmitted
infections we have been working
with the insurance industry to
make changes and so we are
bringing you a substitute that
we delivered yesterday.
The.
So just one one.
Yes three two eight point one
one eight two eight point one.
So.
Mr Chairman do you want to do a.
We do not pass on Senate bill
one for the status.
The substitute for Senate bill
one to discuss as.
Motion the second.
The composer and with.
Opposition to the motion.
I see none right thank you so
much.
so Mr chairman.
The whole country has a problem
with the the increase in these
infections CDC reported in
January twenty one twenty six
million new sexually transmitted
infections diagnosed in twenty
eighteen are estimated to drive
sixteen billion in direct
lifetime medical costs half of
them among young people aged
fifteen to twenty four so this
fits the bill tries to deal with
that through treatment
treatment is prevention is the
sort of rule of this bill so
when people know that they can
access this kind of testing
treatment and prevention without
paying copays they're more
likely to get those screenings
that's what this bill does it
allows for screening and
treatment and prevention for
sexually transmitted diseases we
don't know why this was left out
of the you the ACA because ACA
put in all kinds of of a
treatment and prevention so
that's what this bill does
the it's the bacterial sexually
transmitted infections like
chlamydia and gonorrhea people
think they're not that bad
they're often a symptomatic
they're the top cases of
infertility the reason for
infertility in the US in
addition.
cephalus that's passed from a
mother to a baby creates huge
problems for that child and the
mother so this screening and
then the treatment and
prevention for those infections
is what we're trying to deal
with I have with me somebody who
can talk about this much better
than I her name is Kayla hearing
I and I would like her to make
some comments.
Thank you Mr chair and members
of the committee my name is
Kayla herring and I'm the
director of public affairs for
Planned Parenthood of the Rocky
Mountains in New Mexico.
We know that treatment as
prevention when related to
sexually transmitted infections
because when we address sexually
transmitted infections early to
reduce the likelihood that
someone may pass it on to
another through sexual contact
and we reduce the complications
that people experience through
I'm treated STI's and because
the most common symptom for
sexually transmitted infections
is actually no symptom at all
we're seeing later complications
because of these and treated
illnesses such as infertility
ectopic pregnancy and liver
transplant so we look forward to
this conversation thank you.
Thank you.
All right for go to committee go
to the audience anybody here
supported Senate bill of
substitute one thirty two.
Mr chairman members of the
committee we gonna Mike because.
Mr chairman members of the
committee Marla shows registered
lobbyists for Blue Cross blue
shield of New Mexico we want to
thank the sponsor and the
advocates for helping us with
the language and and the
provisions that we needed to
clarify thank you.
Mr chairman members committee
Larry heard and register
lobbyist for Presbyterian health
plan comes we appreciate the
fictional all point to to it
repeats itself throughout the
bill we had a technical issue
with high deductible plans so if
you go to page two subsection C.
online six that talks about high
deductible plans and says that
the no caution doesn't kick in
until they meet the deductible
the high deductible plans we
think that was just left out an
advert we were we appreciate the
making that fix we've run into
issues because of iris rulings
as it relates to those high
deductible plans so very
technical problem that that
needed to be fixed so we stand
in support of the committee
substitute we appreciate the
work of the the sponsoring the
advocates for clarifying that
issue for our health plan
members thank you Mr chairman.
I want to.
The other is going.
Mr chair members of the
committee on Marshall Martinez
in the executive director of the
quality New Mexico over the
statewide LGBTQ advocacy
organization we are so
incredibly grateful to the
sponsored an especially to this
amazing expert for leading the
charge on this LGBTQ folks grow
up in a world full of shame and
stigma mostly around the sex and
relationships in which we engage
that combined with what sounds
like a minimal but can be a very
prohibitive financial burden of
even a twenty or thirty dollar
copay eight especially young
queer and trans people to go a
significant amount of time
without testing or accessing
treatment for STI's because the
sponsoring the expert of said as
I know from my own personal work
as a peer educator in sexual
health advocate in this
community for twenty years going
without treating as TI's is just
spreading STIS to more people in
our community and so because
this a would reduce shame and
stigma for LGBTQ folks which is
our primary mission and be this
is a matter of health care
justice and liberation for
Korean translates we support
this legislation.
Chair members of the committee
my name is cat scientists and
the policy co director of oil
futures we are an organization
led by and for black indigenous
women and people of color many
of our leaders across the state
including rural and frontier
areas have expressed cost as a
reason that they don't always
get the health care including
STI testing that they may need
when New Mexicans make decisions
about the health of about their
health care based on
affordability the outcomes are
often fifth mental we fully
support as the one thirty two
for a healthier New Mexico thank
you.
Mr chair members of the
committee I'm Charles good
marker speaking on behalf of an
MVC action fund and we all know
how much come sorry the vast
majority of New Mexicos children
are from low and middle coming
income families.
Let it's not seeking adequate
health care because of cost
issues is just a horrible future
means a horrible future for New
Mexico's children so for New
Mexico's children this is a
great move by the state urge
your support thank you.
What else gets.
Hi I'm Janet Williams from of
the national organization for
women and we believe this bill
will help to improve of the and
lower the cost of health care
for all New Mexicans thank you
please vote in favor.
Okay.
The new committee my name is
Jude law school and I'm with the
New Mexico coalition of sexual
assault programs as an
organization serving survivors
of sexual violence across the
state it is deeply committed to
prevention and ending stigma we
strongly support Senate bill one
thirty two the ability to
identify and treat STIS without
unnecessary barriers is
empowering it helps decrease
stigma around STI's and it
fosters into people a positive
rather than shameful relation
with their bodies and
sexualities for survivors
especially decreasing obstacles
around STI treatment is another
way we can support them
regaining their sense of bodily
autonomy we support Senate bill
one thirty two and hope that you
will too thank you.
Therefore that in fact okay here
in opposition of Senate bill.
What thirty two.
What is known as well okay we'll
go to the center and I thank you
Mr chairman thank you senator
for a settlement for tempering
this
money is is really more of the
it should be a fairly basic
question because I I certainly
support the legislation
but back in the day it used to
be called S. T. D.'s seven
hundred change.
It really I mean we're all like
we just yes we had to look that
up.
So it's a simple sponsor could
referred to as T. D. and she
referred to it as TA that.
So is wondering if the change
when that when that happens Mr
chair and members of the
committee thank you for the
question and the opportunity to
clarify sexually transmitted
disease is a phrase that has
been used in the past for this
umbrella term of the lease
infections but the word
infection is actually more
encompassing because not all
sexually transmitted infections
or diseases but they are all
infections.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
appreciate that all know to
refer to a correctly from them I
learned something.
So what else committee members
Senator Kernan thank you Mr
chairman thank you initially I
was thinking about the come pay
and all of that all the
insurance companies are.
And so I want to move to.
Have a question regarding
Yes preventive care.
And
Example what what to say.
Mister chairman Senator Kernan
thank you for the question
preventive measures well there
are a lot of them so there are
physical measures like condoms
or other barrier methods like
dental dams which are Lee tax
are polyurethane cloths that you
can lay down for oral to anal or
vaginal oral sex there are
gloves finger costs and then of
medications like prep which is
pre exposure prophylaxis which
is a once daily pill you can
take just like birth control
that reduces the likelihood of
contracting HIV if you come in
contact and the a lot of other
medications thank you
I think that's what I was
wondering if that was part of
that deal with it over to to the
H. that case.
He said.
And it talks about the person
regardless of fatty has a
capacity to examinations.
To prevent here so I was curious
that person regardless of age
has the capacity.
One of every age happen as soon.
Mister chairman Senator Kernan.
Young people under the age of
eighteen have been able to
consent to testing and treatment
for sexually transmitted
infection since the nineteen
fifties we know that since the
nineteen fifties medicine has
advanced that is created these
preventative methods and we know
that if young people are able to
consent to their own testing and
treatment they should also be
able to access preventive
measures to prevent infection
and we believe that that should
be for all the young people
however we do know that under
the age of I believe it is
twelve if there is that sexually
transmitted infection than the
crime has likely occurred
because the age of consent is
thirteen.
Mr chair and.
Just exclude individual shows
young individuals that may have
a
Yes the capacity these decisions
for various reasons whether it's
a metal lack of capacity or.
I don't know I I guess.
Sable.
So Mister chairman Senator
Kernan the vast majority of
young people bring their parents
or their answer their uncles or
their guardians or whatever.
But there are some that don't
and so this this allows those
children under eighteen to get
preventive care if they ask for
themselves.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Sure.
What is abstract that's okay so
this included a
an individual young person
between the ages of twelve and
on to request the HPV vaccine
with the.
Mr chair and Senator Kernan.
Thank you.
They can now however there are a
the minor vaccinations are
regulated by the federal federal
government and so there are
federal processes that
wouldn't allow a young person
necessarily to hide that from
their parents but they could
consent to it and that's
currents.
That's currently the case so
that is not.
Right.
X. X. and without.
So Mister chairman Senator
Kernan you'll see on page eight
that between eighteen and twenty
two that's all current language
the only thing we've that it is
preventative care.
And I think we share that with
fallen to prevent so there would
be.
Yes I mean we we believe that's
what we're saying that the
sexually transmitted infections
treatment care screening is
prevention.
That's why we've added
preventative care.
Health problems.
Grex.
Okay.
Thank you thank you Mr chair
Senator.
You know these are all aged in
their tough issues from both the
top for me and on the top you
can change the the challenge I
guess the current laws reduction
agent questions regardless of
any age has compassion for the
have capacity we were you know
to get an examination or
treatment then we have the
shares preventive care so that
that person of any age group is
a line I suppose
Thank you very come and they
could.
As.
Preventive care which would then
give them screen testing
generation of canceling and
Administration dispensing.
For prescribing of preventive
drugs devices or what I think
we've mentioned what.
Some of that could be
Around the edges of the Mr chair
share this Graham dollars or the
older swimmers fifteen and.
The youngest one is about to be
team.
Charming I I have.
The struggle with that are being
I've.
Insisted its challenge of way.
I'd like to the see ours are and
I know that others all.
I don't I don't wear shorts and
Senator nine here are those that
are supported that I understand.
Sure thank.
Rigs local.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Excuse me senator for bringing
this bill forward like to move
it to pass.
Right.
We have a motion for the past by
Senator Lopez second by Senator
hand.
So Mister chairman can I make a
small statement.
So you know the part you're
concerned about this one small
paragraph that's already in law.
You know I just I think it's
important that we all trying not
to think personally about things
like this
I understand the concerns I do
it's something that I've been
working on and around the issue
my entire career
but so it just doesn't happen
that you have an eight year old
walking into Planned Parenthood
it just doesn't happen so we can
think about these things that we
think are going to happen that's
not the experience so you know
we've got that consent already
there I just I hope that you
think about this is what it's
really trying to do which is
stop this kind of pandemic that
we have among young people a
fifteen to twenty four that's
the ages that that's really
purpose of the bill thank you Mr
chairman.
Senator Representative.
Chair of the center for that I
guess Mike my question would be
is still the same area but and
then what I until about name so
I'm just going to focus on the
pain and then you can answer
page so.
Stewart says regardless of age
but you brought up the fact that
actually the age of consent is
the state for the agents
sexualizing.
so what I have that as
a regardless of age instead of
actually putting the age of
thirteen in their I'm I'm trying
to figure out why.
Because you're absolutely right
if if someone comes into
parenthood and twelve.
Are you required to report that.
Mr chair and senator yes Planned
Parenthood and all other sexual
and reproductive health
providers are mandatory
reporters our goal as a
healthcare providers to ensure
that all people have access to
all of their options regarding
sexually transmitted infection
testing treatment and
prevention.
An eight year olds don't walk
into Planned Parenthood asking
for this kind of care however we
know that young people in most
cases do involve their parents
when they're making these
decisions and it's really
critical that this language is
in this legislation because we
know that we can't legislate
relationships with our families
and so we want to ensure that
anyone who needs access to this
Care can do so whether they have
a supportive family or not our
goal is health care providers is
to ensure that our patients are
cared for.
Chairman okay great politicians
are you with will make a great
politician your plan to go there
because I I didn't quite hear
the answer but.
This line just.
I believe that.
The district.
That's okay I.
Available.
but I'm just trying to again if
the agent because of the state's
thirteen why do we want to do
that a twelve year old on a drug
that eight is right here is not
a law.
But the twelve year old comes
and that has to be reported in
that twelve year old should be
able conception bay.
Mr chair and senator consenting
to health care is different from
consenting to to sexual activity
we see young people all the time
who come into Planned Parenthood
to access birth control before
they engage in sexual activity
we know that education is a
critical part that is not
included in this of reducing the
spread of sexually transmitted
infections and we don't want to
limit our ability to provide
education care resources and
planning for young people who
may want to come in and talk
about options or any other
questions they may have or a
need for this kind of care
because you deserve this care no
matter who you are if you're
ready to have those
conversations whether you're
having sexual intercourse or
not.
Sure Mr I support this bill for
one for that but
Current language I I understand.
You're you're adding preventive
care the current page so you're
adding it to where twelve year
old can be given condom.
Because even though it's illegal
for the twelve rolling gauges
sectors of.
So what we're going to help them
engage in a way to.
So that's where the problem.
Thank you for.
Thank you so we do not have
anybody else on the list so we
do have a motion.
Second.
If you can for do pass so if you
can include can call the roll
Senator Brandt.
Senator Griggs.
Senator had a meal.
Yes.
Senator Kernan.
Senator Lopez yes.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator Thomas.
Senator Wirth.
Yes.
Senator Hamblen yes.
Senator Shendo yes.
We have six four do pass.
Just.
So Senator knows.
Senate bill one forty three.
Mr chairman Senate bill one
forty three just amended gaming
licenses allow for pots to go
from four thousand to ten
thousand dollars.
Gaming machines that are in the
nonprofit organizations that
will stand for questions.
Your expert witnesses time to
sit down.
They don't even.
Okay so
Allows for your from four
thousand to ten thousand a
and nonprofit organizations and
all right will stand for here in
support of
Senate so.
One forty three.
But.
You can know you might.
Thank you.
Hi I'm bill Jennings I'm not
vice commander of the American
Legion Department New Jersey New
Mexico excuse me.
And your speeds got mob ties.
No twenty years ago I was not
here I'm also president of the
B. F. and B. which is the
veteran and but don't know
nonprofit organizations in New
Mexico and for the nine thousand
members American Legion and the
seventy six of nonprofits we
support this thank you thank.
Somebody else.
And what else.
Okay all right and what is.
Right here in opposition of
Senate one of one forty three.
Committee of course.
Thousands.
Most
was
Sanchez.
Thank you Mr chair Senator.
I want twenty.
Mr chair Senator to pay out ten
and twenty thousand dollars a
time.
Dealing with difficult quarters.
No use quarter more Mr.
For.
The.
You have in the center of has.
Again what's the I know that
there was some discussions of
the machines and they are what
was the rationale for movie up.
You can explain.
Mr chair of the state.
The pumps Mr chair Cody joiner
president of New Mexico gaming
LLC we distribution of machines
to a nonprofit fraternal
organizations
the there's a few reasons in
behind trying to get this
increase one of which
the statue was passed in
nineteen ninety seven and the
four thousand dollar limit
we have not adjusted for
inflation whatsoever so the same
purchasing power of the four
thousand dollars is now about
seventy five hundred
in today's money
in the the other thing that we
are facing is a parts and supply
shortage manufactures we're such
a small niche manufacturers are
not tailoring their software
for.
Forty eight clubs in New Mexico
you know we are we feel somewhat
marginalized although we
understand there you know
economic reasoning for not
tailoring that
They do offer machines and
software that will.
Meet the criteria of ten
thousand dollars and you know
with the with that we're running
out of parts and supplies for of
twenty year old machines because
that's basically what we're
dealing with.
Already the.
But we will accept the amendment
for twenty thousand.
Senator Lopez.
Mr chair.
And I guess in line of your
question that you asked.
Sorry.
What was mentioned here in
reading through the FY are.
it does mention that a PO
supporters if you're gonna be
out like the four thousand you
have to have the cash on hand if
you're gonna up it to ten does
that mean also Mr chair that you
have to have that cash available
and how Mr chair will that
affect your smaller nonprofits
as compared to the larger ones I
mean not everybody's the same
size in different communities in
the state so just a question on
that Mr chair.
Senator thank you.
Mr chair Senator Richard K. with
Representative this with our C.
gaming
it.
They
They don't produce these
machines.
That that ten thousand dollars
anymore and and I I apologize Mr
Chairman can you repeat the
question to.
I apologize Center production
and cash on it this is the the
other the other part we like
about the bills is that it's a
may bill and not a shell bill
and so each organization can
determine if this is a good
business model or not a good
business model thank you Mr.
Senator so then have you taken a
poll months so that the
organizations to see what
their what their responses.
The New Jersey poster.
Yes I have a bit then be meeting
every two months and we all get
to meet the factor having one
right now in Albuquerque New.
Pat gear Jareth director gaming
and they all are in accord  they
can adjust their own banks each
individual unit will decide if
they want a four thousand dollar
machine which we currently have
five or six so each individual
nonprofit of make that decision
on their own.
Did that answer your question
member center Mr chair kind of
so who are the ones that are
going to go for the ten thousand
for the located I'm sorry which
are the nonprofits that would go
for the ten thousand if you want
to update would probably
probably the biggest posed to
have his post forty nine which
is located on the east side of
Central Avenue.
Post one eighteen in Rio Rancho
impose thirteen which is right
by the big guy I think would be
the only posted would meet that
right now I don't know but
there's a big Elks down and said
Los crucis so it builds motion
the motion and it would probably
meet the criteria.
Thank you Mr chair good as your
question that's better thank you
thank you.
Thank you.
A of.
I
a to school okay we have the
best motion of.
By.
And second by current.
So.
This is the best option.
Do not do that.
Senator Neville.
Want to roll over one fifty five
a.
Mr Chairman first off of senator
Wirth is my co sponsor and I
think you still online he can
also be my expert witness from
the legislative term.
Two four all right.
Mr chairman centers this is
Kind of a last piece of
restructuring the PRC we've
actually been doing this even
prior to the time that we were
up there we did a constitutional
amendment.
We have built a PRC that is
tailored to deal with utilities
and to deal with the
Mobley type organizations and
this some of these things just
didn't fit and over time we have
moved out the corporation
function we move that to the
secretary of state remove the
insurance out I think there's
another one or two but we've
gotten it down to where we are
dealing with utilities primarily
and
except for this one division and
this is the transportation
division and.
That is things like taxicabs
Mexico trucks and ambulances
that are not monopolies they're
totally different types of
things and they're more
concerned with safety and and
some regulation and so forth but
that's the gist of it as far as
an opening statement quit their
differs senator Wirth yes any
other comments and will I made a
couple of experts answer here
for online to look more into
your folder for fifty years
Senator out here thank you Mr
chair thank you senator Neville
And I certainly would echo the
statement made about this being
continued piece of the work to
really get the PRC focused on
utilities
we're allowed to make this
change under the constitution in
the legislature and we did have
this bill last year made it all
went through to the house floor
and just ran out of time at the
last minute.
So again I think I'll leave it
at that we may have some folks
here from the the new P. Garcia
and others and they want to
comment but certainly this is a
an important step in the right
direction and and happy to carry
this bill Senate bill you know
my point Mister chairman Senator
is that this is a standalone
Division in their own office
building it's not like we're
going to have to make people
approved and do a bunch of
gyrating as far as I know
everything is pretty well
centralized it would just change
boss from PRC guide.
DOT guy and that's all so
essentially it is not all it's
going to do it's much more
complicated that the bills very
dense but it's mostly changing
terminology from DOT to coming
from PRC video tape and it's in
the statute in a lot of places
so we have scratches forwards
replace those so I don't know if
you lose with Jefferies Jesse
mentor here here this with is
from the attorney legal division
and Jesse is director of
transportation division thirty
years later certainly might have
some comments.
Two individuals here it's not of
we'll go to the audience.
Anybody here is support of
Senate bill one sixty.
But we.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Trent do
little on the W. secretary for
the New Mexico department
transportation when we have been
working with the two
representatives on this bill we
do support the bill there are
some logistics that we need to
work out on on transitioning to
the Department.
transitioning to the Department
ensuring that the appropriate
funds are moved over with the
department but I can tell you in
the past the department has
picked up additional agencies
such as point of entry and we
stand fully prepared to accept
these responsibilities.
Right thank you thank you
secretary.
I believe the this with
Jefferies is on the one Senator
everybody is here she would have
a COVID that be great okay
Elisabeth.
Here I'm here for the PRC that
the PRC commissioners of
actually not taking a position
on this bill so I'm just here
to answer any questions that
might come up okay thank you.
Already so
One one final comment so much Mr
chairman is the the dollars are
provided for first off there's
two positions are in the bill
itself it says the money follows
the HSD her policy apartment and
house bill two it says in the
event the legislature does
something funny like this the
money goes with the with the
agencies and poses so we think
we've covered those bases of
course next year they'll have to
fight for their budget like
everybody else but that's taken
care of for the near future.
Okay.
All right so anybody of.
But in opposition.
This bill.
But I also.
That's not.
Okay I will go to committee.
The questions of the committee.
Senator Brandt.
Service for.
They was chairman Senator so the
new material you have in the
early part of bill
On section three has Kerrier
inspection fees is this a new
fee I don't believe there's any
new fees Mister chairman
Senator.
I may be wrong Senator Wirth
might have.
We give a classes and get rid of
like to the section say that
again section one section five
B. of eight five.
That is an image that is new
material
Senator Wirth you have any
comments on that I'm not sure
what this is all new material
from the standpoint of.
modernizing the statute of eight
but because our several sections
in imperial and so forth is the
Piercy have any comments on the.
It looks like the the O. T. may
have an answer on that.
This is a list of the Jefferies
I could answer if you'd like.
So there are no new fees however
they have switched in this bill
the way that the fees will be
determined they're set up to be
determined by the D. O. T..
So they will no longer be in
statute so it's basically cross
the line at all the fees that
are in center in statute now.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
and Liz with you maybe to answer
this one to that so they would
be able to raise the fee anytime
they want because they wouldn't
be in statute anymore.
I'm not necessarily they would
still have to go through the
rule promulgation process in
order to set the fees.
But there is also a limitation
in the bill that says that the
fi needs to reflect the actual
administrative costs of that
process.
So that's the cap on the fees.
Sure
Lows with thank you very much
for those answers very helpful
appreciate that thank you center
thank you.
Anybody else.
a motion for the password
Senator Hamblen.
So it was Senator Brandt.
Any opposition to the defense
motion.
The best sermons.
Senator Shendo yes Mr chair
just R. Senate staff is asking
that you just announce the the
actual vote counts on these just
people on the zoom and he's
following in keeping track of
the great if you could do that.
All right.
There was a no opposition to the
motion so that was ten two zero.
Thank you Mr chair.
Senator.
Senate bill one eighty four.
Thank you very much Mr chair
members of the committee I have
with me a check for ten who is
by expert witness and also
director of the municipally
Senate bill one eighty four
directs one hundred percent of
motor vehicle excise tax
revenues to reference to invest
strategically and ambitiously in
statewide road infrastructure
the bill directs sixty percent
of revenues to the state road
funding forty percent to the
transportation fund which
provides funding for municipal
county and tribal projects
generating over one hundred
forty million dollars annually
in additional revenues for the
two thousands currently fifty
nine percent of motor vehicle
excise tax revenues go to the
general fund twenty two percent
of the rent fund in nineteen
percent to the transportation
project that.
And as you all know New Mexico
roads are in critical need of
increased investment with over
half of the state's major roads
and highways in poor or mediocre
condition the state has over
five billion dollars in and
funded projects and if you
recall just several days ago we
had a presentation by the
department of transportation
listing many of the projects
that are very much needed but no
funding for those roads for road
quality cost drivers annually
about two thousand dollars in
costs to low income households
Representative nearly nine
percent of annual income so
basically we're just shifting
our excise vehicle excise tax
from the general fund one
hundred percent to at least two
funds that with that I stand for
questions great.
Of we'll go to the audience
anybody here support of Senate
bill one eighty four.
Start here quickly.
So
resurfacing.
Committee I sorry you need to
have you on the.
You can do that.
Because of.
Move over to the Middle East and
in line that we can.
The process moving the quicker
appreciate that thank you.
Thank you senator members of
this committee we're very
supportive of this piece of
legislation and we feel like
this is the responsible planning
that we need to do moving
forward in the event that
general fund on recurring
revenues don't materialize the
way they have over the last
several years when we've talked
in this committee about the
electrification of vehicles for
the state of New Mexico we've
also talked about the need for
us to develop more sustainable
ways to ensure that the revenues
coming for tax distributions can
support the work that we're
going to need to do to maintain
roads so we think that Lee we
think the sponsor for doing this
and we certainly as you all know
well put this money to good use
thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee members of Denso by
Representative AC and M. what's
of the highway contractors and
we support this bill because we
and we know that.
DOT requires predictable a level
and consistent funding the
projects take a long term to
plan design and build and also
the the contractors need to also
in advance to know how to invest
for their employees and they
quit meant that they're going to
need for these projects so we
fully support this bill thank
you Mr chairman and committee
members.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Joyce
person I'm the executive
director for New Mexico counties
we strongly support this we
consistently hear from our
county members that roads in
detention are two biggest issues
we have a lot of road miles in
New Mexico our executive
committee met with municipal
league in November the advice is
this was one of their priorities
and we absolutely supported
thank you.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Chelsea can
that and I'm the director of
public policy for the New Mexico
chamber of commerce the chamber
supports just be one eighty four
and thanks the sponsors for
bring it forward our membership
supports reallocating existing
state resources to the state
road fund to ensure adequate
transportation infrastructure to
support economic development
transportation investment create
short and long term economic
growth national reports show
that investment in
transportation creates forty two
thousand jobs for everyone
billion spent in addition to
immediate improvements in safety
and mobility improving our
transportation infrastructure
will support long term economic
growth and strengthen our our
ability to compete in a growing
national and international
market place thank you.
Good afternoon
Mr chair members of the
committee I am more Dawn Lopez
village of all frontal stab
kirke Senate bill one eighty
four is critical to communities
like mine because it offers
ninety percent of basically a
match for ninety percent of the
of the funding that we would
require we do have been in
contact with an M. D. O. T. and
they've given us really a high
level of support and the project
I want to tell you about is our
forestry revitalization project
which was completed in twenty
nineteen at a cost of nine
million dollars it's a perfect
example of how funds like this
can be used to improve the
safety the quality and at the
end of the day a project that
meets good engineering practice
thank you.
The only ones but in opposition.
Another committee members over
the last.
That's what senator press was at
work.
Opposition to the fast motion.
Very none.
You have a do pass tend to zero
thank you.
Thank you.
Senator one eighty nine Senator
Wirth chandlers Ford.
thank you Mr chair Senate bill
one eighty nine relates to the
corporate income tax.
A guy put down a the presenter
is on
the.
Senate bill one eighty nine is
related to the corporate tax
and it does two things it
basically eliminates the current
step up in our tax right now the
corporate tax for income for for
income and these are for C.
corporations are below five
hundred thousand dollars the
rate is four point eight percent
if it's over
five hundred thousand dollars
that is five point nine percent
it's a graduated tax that kicks
in this bill basically pre K.
one tax rates and the tax rate
is at six point nine percent of
the reason yes Representative
Chandler and I've chosen that
right and it's certainly
something we'll discusses the
omnibus bill moves forward that
is the right it's in the bill
over the house that's putting in
a I graduated set up of
different rates in the income
tax a couple of things Mr chair
I would note that Representative
Harper hand representative and
senator my S. this I have a bill
in the house that it's on house
bill three twenty two that
creates a similar plan for for
tax but they leave the rate at
five point nine percent which is
the current top rate and I would
note that the Albuquerque
journal into editorial
opined in favor of that stating
that it makes sense that New
Mexico small businesses that are
pass through entities and pay
tax under the personal income
tax most of them do which is the
top right there is five point
nine percent the same time
operation apply for corporations
so again if we have two concepts
here flat tax corporations this
bill increases.
Is the rate of six point nine
percent to have it track where
the house income tax bill is
obviously that'll be discussed
and certainly Mister chair I
understand that
you know this bill will not move
forward today it's one that's
just being put into the mix on
will discuss as part of a
package without stand for
questions.
Great thank you senator.
Of.
Anybody here in support of of
Senate bill one eighty nine.
Mr chair members of the
committee of Charles good marker
speaking to you on behalf of an
MVC action fund we're strong
support of this bill as you know
state revenue has become more
and more dependent on oil and
gas in the last few years.
The PFM report detailed how
there's a growing structural gap
in our state revenue even
without any increased revenue
and most of your heard that
presentation during the interim
committee about those that
increasing gap in the future
years and if the oil and gas
revenue projections don't live
up to their current expectations
that gap is going to be even
worse
so as you consider further
reductions to state revenue in
the session.
We know that there's going to be
some consideration of some
additional sources to mitigate
against those long term
reductions so that we don't have
a huge cliff in future years
when oil and gas revenues to
decline so this is just one
piece important piece to help
fill that gap thank you very
much.
We also support.
Nobody else.
But what.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is and I'm
a senior research and policy
analyst with New Mexico voices
for children we also send
instructs the port of Senate
bill one eighty nine we know
corporations received a big tax
break back in twenty thirteen on
the top rate of seven point six
percent less cuts now those cuts
did not lead to an increase in
economic activity but it did
reduce revenues we need for the
public investments like
education health and public
safety that do create jobs in
due to the strong economy and
that's because only added to the
pain of the last decade as well
we believe that our rate of six
point nine percent as additional
proposes is reasonable and will
help ensure that corporations
are paying their fair share
towards the use of our land and
water educating and training our
workforce in towards the
development of modern
infrastructure to the benefit of
New Mexicans and businesses
alike thank you.
Thank you one more.
Chairman members of the
committee on more information on
the number of half of a numeric
ages you know for the limit hi
we thank so I'm part of their
health and appreciate the work
with funded through it
want to thank father not needed
any other reason was very
important for the Mexico thank
you very much.
So thank you.
Go ahead Mr.
General and members of the
committee my name is Dave Mason
I'm a board member of the league
of women voters of New Mexico
thanks for the extensions
pro tempore to make just three
one eighty nine thanks to
sponsors for bringing forward.
Legalese Revenue state revenue
must be adequate to fund is just
the essentials of government yes
that in twenty thirteen we've
senior Rosen of revenues
generated from the corporate
income tax and that led to
drastic cuts in by the service.
Just be one eighty nine and
staff to mitigate that arose in
and raised needed services
needed revenues now to avoid
delay that cuts in essential
services late oil and gas
revenues will not always be
there so we stand in front of
Port SB one eighty nine energy
to give you give it to pass
thank you.
Thank you.
That that's all for okay all
right but in opposition of
Senate bill one the.
Of the.
Mr chair members of the
committee tells account on
behalf of the New Mexico chamber
of commerce the chamber
respectfully opposes SB one
eighty nine although our members
you prefer a single rate to
cover all corporations over our
current structure our members
support continued reduction to
the maximum corporate income tax
rate this proposal increases the
current rate by one percent
moving in the opposite direction
this rate would make us higher
than our surrounding states
Texas at zero Colorado and Utah
and we believe this creates a
disincentive for business
location or relocation we agree
with the remarks in the FIR by
the economic development
department that this change
would contribute to the
unpredictable unpredictability
of our current tax structure
sending a negative signal to
business and impacting our
ability to to diversify our
economy thank you.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
and members of the committee
chair grown our registered
registered lobbyists with PNM P.
member respectfully opposes SB
one eighty nine because we do
not believe that the such an
increase would be in our
customers or our state's best
interests the change in tax rate
from five point nine percent to
six point nine percent would
result in approximately one
million dollars in additional
annual tax expense for the
company plus roughly eighty two
million one time adjustment to
the company's deferred tax
balances all of which would
eventually be passed on to
customers and the company's next
rate case in addition we I did
share a handout with you
Senators I think that would give
you an idea of the lay of the
land across the country in
addition PNM believes SB eighty
nine would put New Mexico are at
a competitive disadvantage for
economic developments compared
to other states he six point
nine rate would put New Mexico
higher than any other western
state other than California and
Oregon we have passed out a map
and I see that you see you have
that and it gives you an idea of
what's next to us.
In our neighboring states for
these reasons we urge you to
vote no on SB one eighty nine
thank you.
Anybody.
Go ahead.
Thank.
R. Mr chair and members of the
committee Leri Sonntag here on
behalf of the New Mexico
business coalition.
The Apollo Senate bill one
eighty nine
for reasons previously stated
but we also want to note that
while some of the mention of one
percent corporate tax increase
the bill sponsored it rightfully
note that smaller corporations
will be going from a four point
nine to six point nine under
this bill.
We believe this would have
reinvestments that lead to new
jobs at a time when we most need
to this is a critical time in
our state when we need to be
working together to rebuild and
overcome the devastation caused
by extended lockdowns of our
economy it doesn't help to have
the legislature continuing to
look for ways to make more money
from those who risked everything
to create jobs and contribute to
the economy.
On behalf of hardworking New
Mexicans and especially small
corporations we ask you to
oppose Senate bill one ninety
nine thank you.
Okay all right.
All right of.
In the field but it also will go
to committee.
Any questions from the
committee.
One eighty nine.
No we're we're there's no action
on this thanks for the you know
to this package to look at that
I know there's no the bill that
Senator Wirth talk about so
there's no questions we're not
gonna take any action on this
would result.
Thank you senator.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members.
Okay Senate bill up to fifty
one.
Development Act changes Senator
Hamblen Orchis.
Mr chairman committee thank you
very much Senate bill two fifty
one of the men's of sections of
law related to the dedication of
revenue and issuance of bonds
for metropolitan redevelopment
basically this will enable
restrictions to collect up to
seventy five percent of the
incremental city county and
state property and gross revenue
taxes for an entire metropolitan
development area redevelopment
area for twenty years what this
will also do is allow
communities without MRAPs to
have control over how that money
is used for economic development
in their areas and I'm thinking
of Senator Kernan and hops you
don't have an MRI there Rio
Rancho also doesn't have an MRA
these are these are so I wanted
to pique your interest in this
as we we continue this
conversation these additions
will provide jurisdictions to
collect more than twenty times
the amount of revenue to develop
areas that are in need this is
an opportunity for areas that
have amerasian also
encouragement for communities
that don't to gather community
input create a plan and use
those monies to help areas that
are in desperate need of
improvement I'm thinking of in
Los crucis and I know that my
one of my experts will probably
talk about this is that we have
the LFC assail corridor which is
really a shop and go area it is
not a shop and stop area we
don't have the funds to be able
to develop that so just be two
fifty one will help main street
that will help small businesses
in town centres where
improvement is needed I do want
to go ahead and introduce my
experts they will make a brief
statement and then we'll go
ahead and open it up for public
comment to my left I have a
little bit teachers who is
director of the Los crucis
Economic Development Department
Elizabeth you want to go ahead
and and make a quick statement
have a good afternoon Mister
chair members of the committee I
want to thank you all for
letting me speak today on this
issue so as Senator Hamblen was
saying midtown redevelopment
areas are areas that are
designated as blighted we all
know communities and.
In New Mexico that that have
this blight that need this this
published at this this
assistance you know because
metropolitan redevelopment areas
provide infrastructure
improvements business assistance
and overall revitalization and
actually the process of setting
up a metropolitan redevelopment
area is pretty pretty simple it
just you have to make the
designation and then you have to
do the plan which is the public
input engagement process that
determines the needs and the
projects and then you implement
it the only issue with the way
that the state law is set up
right now is that there is no
funding mechanism that to help
implement that process so we
have over twenty five
communities in the state of New
Mexico that have plans that are
just sitting on the shelf
because there is no funding
available I like the senator was
saying the city Los crucis is
actually going to be designating
two new metropolitan
redevelopment areas hopefully in
the next few months and the next
will be starting the planning
process and so something like
this would really help to bring
that that funding and that up
with that we need to Los crucis
and and so I just wanted to say
real fast you know that by
designating this incremental
funds it'll give our resources
for communities that in areas
that need assistance and bring
back them back to life and I
know that's a lot of what these
communities need.
Thank you Mr chairman of the
committee Larry hearing which
lobbies for the city of Los
crucis and city of referential
Paul to support this
legislation.
Simply the simply put this
another lobbyist with the same
last name in nineteen seventy
eight passing amore Act medical
to rebuild Act and he did not
put in gross receipts tax
increment funding in the bill
had he done so we would have to
be here to fix it today so all
we're doing is adding gross
receipts tax incremental growth
so that we can make these
projects more viable so I can
corrected the mistake my father
made in nineteen seventy eight
with passage of this bill so for
that reason specifically up
madam chair center Lopez we did
not invite a for that because
yeah he'll be back but but will
stand for questions with this
bill also does is allow for
dedication of the gross receipts
tax increments for new gross
receipts growth within the
district to help fund the
improvements thank you.
Okay
good afternoon Mister chairman
my name is Terry Stewart
director of Albuquerque's
metropolitan redevelopment
agency
we're supportive of this
legislation because it really
allows us to do enhanced
redevelopment of blighted areas
that includes things like
affordable housing and other
private types of development
that aren't covered by normal
municipal activities and and I
want to stress as well that in
in a past life I was the state
director of USDA's rural
development agency and worked
with a lot of your small towns
on redevelopment efforts
downtown and one of the things
we saw over over and over was
mainstreet districts that had no
sustainable funding source this
type of tax increment financing
is common in other states but
it's unfortunately uncommon here
in New Mexico but it's what you
see when you travel to other
states and wonder how that main
street got re developed or how
they put up all that a probe
affordable housing because the
metropolitan redevelopment
agency has the ability to do
this enhanced types of
redevelopment that really
changes and transforms
communities.
Thank you Mr chair open it up
for public comments and
questions from the committee.
Thank you go to the audience
anybody here in support of
Senate bill two fifty one.
What yes Mr chair.
Mr chair members the committee
David autumn you know I'm
registered lobbyists for the
City of Albuquerque course Terry
brown or Emory directors here it
goes without saying how much we
support this bill but given that
the aforementioned in more steam
Karan was previously a City of
Albuquerque this I thought it
was incumbent upon me to say he
is not here to defend himself
but I will make sure that he is
told of the comments made by his
younger son.
Okay what else.
But.
Yes Mr chairman members of the
committee Charlie Marcus
registered lobbyists for the
city of Gallup city of Gallup is
got plenty of opportunity for
redevelopment and so they saw
this and said absolutely with
our sport the so if you would
please support this bill thank
you.
And if I may others in support
who weren't able to make it my
count my colleague with the
greater Las Cruces chamber
Debbie Moore also wanted to
register her support and Monica
yell who's director of economic
development for the city of
someone parked also is listening
and at the moment.
Of the yeah.
How many we have
the bank three okay if you can
give me a.
The minutes
or less.
I I just about.
As we Mr chairman and committee
members my name is walking Baca
and let the board director the
middle Rio Grande Conservancy
district largest consensus
districts and states protections
called Santa Fe counties more my
personal capacity to express
support for SP two fifty one
most individuals and vast
majority the funding that
supports emergency are at a
lower rates property taxes
primarily from cities located
within our districts this
includes Bernalillo seniors
grants to support on
Albuquerque.
To provide an example collided
telling downtown Albuquerque by
itself was the equivalent of
twenty percent of support
account lower rates.
An analysis done by introducing
emergency shows the economic
development that's can find
nearly the equivalent of a war
percent eleven right.
By passing the two fifty one our
communities throughout the state
level tools safety promote
economic development in our
monitor gated areas without
raising rates to provide
substantial support and I can
say with confidence that these
this one way we help our rural
communities by supporting our
main streets in the five
counties within the district
thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I'm secretary
senior vice president of the
greater Albuquerque chamber of
commerce we're in strong support
this legislation will benefit
communities across our state
building stronger main streets
economic districts that are
central to their growth and
vitality in Albuquerque this the
most critical to the successful
redevelopment and transformation
of our downtown thriving cities
have thriving downtowns there
places where people want to live
work shop you can get together
with others we need to create
the conditions and incentives
necessary for people to have
these opportunities independence
in our downtown unlike similar
cities across the country we
simply don't have adequate
revenue stream to incentivize
this kind of development this
bill will find that it would
give us a fighting chance using
our own local revenue to attract
and keep small businesses in the
downtown area and create new
opportunities for fun and
exciting experiences for
residents and visitors it's also
going to catalyze development
around will be an iconic real
trail project and strategically
develop housing that will keep a
larger population in the
downtown area full time we need
this in Albuquerque just like
it's needed in other cities and
towns across New Mexico please
support this legislation thank
you.
Yes but damn.
Thank you
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Danielle
Graham I am the
intergovernmental affairs chair
for Los Alamos County and we
stand in support of this bill
like many communities our main
street area at our housing or
very stressed and of funding of
this type would be very
beneficial for community and for
the people who visit our
community on a daily basis thank
you.
More.
Yes Representative I just.
If you want my car there.
One hundred other individuals
who would like to comment that
I.
But.
Mr chair members of the
committee I'm from rector of a
committee that would vet and
economic development with the
city of Santa Fe we're also in
full support of this bill SB two
five one it will help us create
the conditions for Emory no
master plan for midtown and a
find revenue source to help us
implement and accelerate
fine secretary and former
housing development in
opportunities up thank you thank
you
for that all right I will go to
committee.
Questions the committee Mr chair
if I may before we we go to the
committee did with someone else
with that if I may if I may make
a comment before we go to
committee when their first
conversations about this that
you know we we invite only is
this is not to to throw shade at
anybody in Albuquerque or Santa
Fe.
There are other places
throughout the state that exists
that can benefit from this and
that's really where I wanted to
start going is to show how our
rural communities actually
benefit in our small towns and
that really are seeing this that
could benefit a great deal from
this and so while means I'm not
I'm not throwing shade on on
anybody here and in Santa Fe but
that's really what drove in and
attached to my values as a
sponsor of this bill is how the
small communities and small mom
and pop businesses in those
communities would be able to
benefit.
Thank you Mr right.
The committee.
Senator Brett.
Thank you of.
Chairman thank you senator the
report to the sign on with you
I spent a lot of time on this
bill today the that with some of
your experts and I think I fully
understand it doesn't increase
taxes at all it just takes the
increase of revenue from the
redevelopment so it's up in
areas you have more people come
in at the sophomore that that
increases the revenue from that
area.
Use the value of the land so
that increase the revenue also
that money is what using up to
seventy five percent of I get
that right Mr chair committee
yes also I just want to make
sure I understand correctly and
the all the clerks offices on
the floor I appreciate that and
if there's anybody else so that
in the Representative finally
got something right.
Maybe losses and I did want to
tell you we've been trying forty
things a secret that it's not
all about Albuquerque Santa Fe
appears so let's.
Senator read.
Senator Kernan publicity pass
resolution for due process was
Senator second by Senator
Sanchez.
Mr chair of Senator Lopez you
have question Mr chair I did go
ahead for we take action.
Thank you there is in our
analysis there is a suggestion
about extending the date of
implementation from twenty three
to twenty four because there's
some intricate pieces that need
to be worked on.
So because just giving it for
the time it signed if it's dying
you know by the end of the
session it only gives a couple
of months Mr chair Senator for
the department to really work so
A consideration why are you
sticking a twenty three year can
we are not wedded to that date
and we completely understand the
request for the extension so we
would consider that a friendly
friendly amendment to this bill
if you would like to make that
case trying to read any of our
copier things to keep reading
right it is this is water but
it's just a I think just to kind
of give our tax department an
opportunity Mr chair to
To do that so
What I'd like to do that is to
offer an amendment and that
would be on page fifty thirty
thirty eight line fourteen to
change it from July one twenty
twenty three to July one twenty
twenty four.
Senator is it so from the moment
it is a friendly amendment chair
in the any of opposition to the
amendment.
I just Mr chair Senator.
Thank you senator work I just
want to make sure I know we've
got rich brown from the City of
Santa Fe was on at one point and
we've got I realize these are
the the bigger both bigger
cities I don't mean to minimize
all Senator Hamblen what you're
trying to do here I just want to
make sure the that there's not
anyone who's or a local
government ready to use this
during that time period so that
in some way it would slow down.
You know something in a way that
would actually the lace I just
want to clarify that for taking
the vote thank you secretary and
looks like from the.
Heads shaking though that it's
probably not going to affect.
Good that I'm fine okay so there
is no opposition to the motion
for the amendment for the
amendment to repeat that could
you repeat the amendment
procedures move in the state the
very last page the basic plenty
twenty three to thirty eight.
Page thirty eight line fourteen
changing the year from twenty
twenty three to twenty twenty
four thank you for.
So of there is no opposition to
the motion that is tend to zero
for the this that are keeping
score so you have an amended
bill and we're back on the bill.
There was a motion for two
passed by Senator Kernan believe
for a second by Senator senses.
Any opposition to the new path.
I
see none you have a two passed.
Sarah and committee members if
there's any of the rest of you
would like to sign on it we
welcome that.
All right.
Trying to.
Yeah.
All right so now we are on
Senate bill two seventy five
this is the motor vehicle
registration fees in lieu of
Senator Gonzales Senator Shendo
is going to go ahead and present
this bill so Senator Shendo you
it's all yours all right thank
you madam chair members of the
committee this is the Senate
bill two seventy five what this
does is increases registration
fees for passenger vehicles
trucks truck tractors and buses
of to write to me is the
secretary.
Of transportation and it's
pretty straightforward
increases a the buses but twenty
five percent
will range of the new vigorous
chase will range from twenty
seven dollars to seventy four
passed to be closed at forty
dollars to two hundred twelve a
two hundred fifty four trucks
tractors and buses depending on
the age and weight of the
vehicle.
The current registration feel
better vehicles and trucks have
been effective since March first
twenty four.
Since then producer price index
for construction material has
gone up by a hundred fifty
percent result in significant
increases in the NMDOT costs the
first part of the revenue
collected from registry fees has
steadily decreased because of
the growth in this revenue
source has not kept up with
inflation so we'll stop there in
the will stand for questions
right at this moment of.
Fifty three favorite for go
ahead very quickly before we ask
for your support of this bill we
just want to thank you for you
know proving that additional
work we'd be doing with the
Department problem P. Garcia
the and and your support for
that bill right now the revenue
sources for the state road for
this is one of for the largest
revenue sources for the state
road fund
in FY twenty two a generate
about eighty four million so the
additional seventy million will
be a twenty percent increase to
to this fund to the state road
fund so we really appreciate the
support again this is those
cities sustainable measures that
will help us maintain the work
we've got to do.
Thank you thank you Mr is there
anybody in the audience who is
in off the in support of this
bill this is Senate bill two
seventy five.
If you will go ahead and come up
to the microphone.
Thank you madam chair committee
members dance over with the
contractors a CNM of New Mexico
we stand in support of this bill
I know that I want to commend
Senator Gonzales for his many
years of of trying to find the
proper funding for
transportation and he's done a
lot and I we fully support this
bill and thank you for a good
name madam chair committee
members for your service thank
you.
Anybody else in support of
Senate bill two seventy five.
Anybody online and support okay
nobody online anybody in the
audience in opposition of Senate
bill two seventy five.
I see none anybody online no.
All right at this moment let's
go to the committee if there any
questions.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator so.
The increase here on page three
of the dollar on the side of the
people.
What would you give me a bill so
I have no idea what you're
referred to as the charter on
the side.
We in the future the right hand
side.
Yeah so the secretary fund
anything over forty eight
thousand would increase to about
fifteen dollars to whatever
originally is now seven
madam madam chair Senators the
rate would go up for anything
over forty thousand pounds from
one hundred and seventy two
dollars to two hundred and
fifteen dollars so that would be
the increase that would be the
new right.
Thank you.
Madam chair and senator.
Question.
Any other questions Senator.
Thank you madam chair and
senator
The registration fee is one
forty seven dollars right down
there goes up from there but in
five years that twenty seven
dollar goes to point one all.
The cage.
For
think for a less but for this.
Roff the
The charge down to twenty one
maintain a flash or of the.
Forty seven dollars the the the
delay is at the car show on the
road still doing
damage to grow the.
that would be having as a lot of
the inclement that is that is
really not is used in the oil
and.
That could be used on where we
would have to come in and say
okay.
Right.
Right
Mr Chairman I know it's not your
bills so I don't know how much
you will our to say about that
that that that's something that
I've.
To several years back I was
actually look at this.
We're maybe we should all set
it.
With some other
Tax decryption restrictions
right right right so I don't I
don't.
Forty five iterations do that
but if we knew we had shopping
options will.
You should be sure.
my mic completion
that the we've are we've already
done the big.
Motor vehicle excise tax thank
you.
Report a result right way
issues.
If we have any appreciation
either way but I just I don't
know whether we we could we do
that one said that the.
That would be crucial Revenue by
Representative Roybal what so
madam chair Senators want to
talk about that sure chair
Senators it's a great idea the
the only concern we have is it
would create a new balance an
increase to those individuals
who are registering vehicles
five years or older right so
right as you mentioned the
differences twenty one to twenty
seven dollars on the lowest end
of a vehicle and so if we take
the five year old vehicle and we
jumped at six dollars then
you're correct we could do an
analysis to see what that
increase in revenue would do to
standardize the feet but we kind
of a partially be impacting
those car owners who have an
older vehicle and so by doing
this we hit that twenty five
percent across the board so
you're correct this year someone
would would pay the twenty five
percent on the less than five
years but we're also increasing
by twenty five percent the rate
for the five vehicle five years
or older vehicle so everyone
gonna gets hit equitably as
opposed to adding that six
dollar percent increase to just
those with older vehicles.
Thank you madam chair.
Secretary.
Mmhm it.
Thank you senator Senator
Representative did you have
questions.
Mr chairman of this is in your
bill Senator but
Do we we don't have anything
separate for the for lecture to.
chair Senator no not at this
time.
It bills are able to.
Madam chair Senator it it's it's
a good opportunity are a couple
I know you've all had discussed
those already but you're correct
that it could be taken care of
here I'm not sure if it would be
a simple addition because it
would be establishing a new fee
for us this would be really
increasing establish fees within
statute
some of the proposed rates
you've seen rate range from
fifty dollars plus or minus you
know give or take which still
exceeds what it would be for a
standard gasoline vehicle at its
lowest way.
Okay Sir that to hear the for
thank.
Any other questions for the
committee.
madam chair yes Senator Wirth.
Thank you madam chair so.
Again it might correct and I did
I hear you I see the FIR these
fees have not been raised since
two thousand four correct
correct Madam chair Senator.
And so I guess my question is.
You know the reason so we're
doing this basically because the
road fund doesn't have enough
money that their statement madam
chair center correct the revenue
distribution for this and others
is in keeping up with the call
increased cost of construction.
And I think madam chair Senator
grants point about electric
vehicles one of the issues the
other one is that we haven't
looked at a gasoline tax since
nineteen ninety three am I
correct in that.
madam chair Senators it has been
sometime yes gasoline and
special fuel and we distance
would be some of the other large
forever of the three of the
other four areas.
So you know this state for my
colleagues I I do have
reservations about using fees.
As the way to address an issue
And so I mean again asked us not
sure what I'm gonna do on this
bill but I just I just worry
when when we're when we're.
Kind of doing it doing something
that's essential.
And we still got gaps in center
Brandt pointed out one of them
but I just think that there's a
number of other things we need
to do get our road fund backed
back solid I just worry about
the fee so just want to make
those comments thank you Madam.
Thank you senator Wirth and any
other questions from the
committee.
What is the will of the
committee.
motion to for the past five
second.
So Senator Lopez.
Then go ahead and take.
The roll Senator Brandt.
The.
Senator Griggs no Senator have a
meal.
Yes.
Senator Kernan yes.
Senator Lopez yes.
Senator Sanchez.
No.
Senator Tomlinson.
Yes.
Senator Wirth.
Note.
Senator Hamblen yes.
Senator Shendo.
Yes.
One of six yes or do packet six
to four you have to do that.
Thank you thank you.
Already Sierra who gets the
award for most bills presented
in a short period of time
sources next bill is Senate bill
one ninety four New Mexico work
and save act retirement changes
and then our last bill of the
evening it looks like we will
get to that given that the
chairman said we were gonna have
a hard stop at six so Senator
Pirtle you'll be up after
Sierra.
The.
This is
me.
Ready
set up to one orders and phone.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman.
This.
We have the amendment.
With that Mr.
Okay.
Okay square presented the bill.
Okay.
So again thank you for.
Thank you Mr chairman the.
What the Senate bill one ninety
for it it's three.
three changes.
One.
Course with five or more
employees and business for
twelve consecutive months and
don't offer.
Retirement plan let's register
all and all in rural their
employees in the are a program
number two borderless and sh
sure the total fees and expenses
are out of the irate program
remain reasonable board must
review at least annually or as
necessary to ensure reasonable
fees are maintained and number
three different the sum up
perfect cations the definitions.
So.
Mr chair if of.
If you don't the.
The one thing from this.
Presentation it is that it's
critically important for this
committee to understand that
without requiring employers with
the with the five or more
employees I am more workers to
participate in New Mexico will
be unable to launch.
This program.
Seven working on this.
For five years.
It's of largely and.
Personal involvement I think
it's extremely important bill.
We.
the
There is it right to a
retirement studies research
institute and the Boston
College.
And they together with the.
With some folks from UNM
The study.
So without this ammendment.
you would you would get one
percent participation.
If you only get one percentages
stations know the sense in the.
In the building this program.
So.
we also Mr chair.
The board to work in state board
trying to find a program
administrator to run the
program.
But no financial services
provider was willing to build
the necessary infrastructure
operate the program because
there would be no guarantee of a
sustainable number of accounts
and we have letters from those
companies to look into this that
would verify what I I just told
you.
I think it's important to
realize.
The New Mexico has the highest
percentage of folks with less
than five thousand dollars
chairman saving folks at fifty
five age or older we have the
highest percentage of folks
without with less than five
thousand dollars in retirement
savings in this program would go
a long ways in helping that also
another important factor like to
leave with you
thirty percent of retired folks
in New Mexico for living on
their only source of income and
social security the average
payment now is about fifteen
thousand dollars.
So this is a credit critically
needed and who
A program at it to see if the hi
A lot of people the line are in
this for the last the.
The five year.
So.
This is a couple more minutes
then I'll be done.
I just want to point out that
this program
the program features some of the
program features are in.
Our employees to save for their
own retirement employs more opt
out or opt in in the time
there's no contributions from
employers.
It's a simple employer
registration procedure.
And there's no employer
liability employed employee will
never be responsible for the
planning ministration there be
response for planned recording
never be responsible for
employee opt out.
And there is an employees are
not required to give any advise
any of vestment advice.
So
No one wants to important factor
like to leave the approximate
fifty percent of New Mexico's
private sector employees have no
access to a retirement savings
plan through their employers.
And workers are fifteen times
more likely to save when they
have a savings program.
Their job so if you're
automatically enrolled in this
study is a bear this out.
If you have to have to take the
initiative to opt in.
The cycle but if you are
automatically enrolled did you
fifteen times more likely to
participate in this program and
studies of their that out that's
all I have this time Mr.
Chair and
So you want to do the amendment
now or later what is your.
Your pleasure.
Of.
You want your extra witnesses
say anything
sure.
Why rural.
So.
Please like the face of sure Mr
chairman members of the
committee I have a lot of
introduce himself that's a care
and concern thank you thank you
thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is O. T.
on the me I am the advocacy
director for A. R. P. New Mexico
also vice chair of the work and
save board A. R. P. is been
working on this particular
legislation for a long time and
as you I remember we did pass it
as a voluntary program back in
the day we come back to you to
ask for to be a auto roll
program because of the studies
of that we've conducted on that
show that the program is as
Sierra mention will not be
viable or sustainable without
auto enrollment feature sixteen
of the other states that are
either operating or considering
launching one of these programs
all have auto enrolment programs
much like a five twenty nine
savings college plan it does
have an option for the employee
to opt out we just need the
imported be the gatekeeper
between the employee to be able
to offer this particular program
to their employees which rural
greatly benefit them to to save
in their their future make their
financial choices when they go
forward so we're we're asking
for a consideration of this and
and entertain all your questions
thank you.
Thank you
we'll go to the audience of.
And we're here to support of the
Senate bill one ninety four.
Go ahead if you can come up in
the US the Mike.
Thank you Mr chair but the thank
you Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Sharon
Arjun right.
And I'm nurse for forty five
years and ever since the
beginning of my career I have
always contributed to something
it's been offered I took it and
I match whatever the company
would put in please pass this
bill thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is kind of
our and I'm a small business
owner New Mexico Graham also
registered lobbyists with the
pew charitable trusts and we
support Senate bill one ninety
four our research shows that
employers want and need these
kinds of programs we surveyed
small and medium sized business
owners across the country asking
their opinion on such a program
overall eighty seven percent of
those without their own
retirement plan either somewhat
or strongly supported this kind
of initiative our research also
shows that the program works for
employees we recently conducted
a survey of workers in Illinois
and almost two thirds sixty two
percent without of up without a
fight with their program and
their experience we strongly
encourage you to pass this bill
thank you.
Thank you.
Of.
This.
Mr chair members of the
committee Jerry modest I am the
programs and outreach director
for the state treasurer's office
we support the bill as amended.
Thank you.
All right do you have anybody
else.
Representative look at anybody
in opposition of Senate bill one
ninety four.
All right.
Mr chairman members of the
committee this is an easy
position to Tate because I'm
more call I'm speaking on behalf
of a more ambulance providers.
The New Mexico private child
care providers good Sam home
health care providers.
and HME durable medical
equipment providers.
As employers we're being
inundated with mandates.
We don't oppose saving for
retirement in fact we encourage
it and anybody can have an IRA
and open an IRA.
In fact we work hard to help
senator Tom and pass the work
and save act when it was
originally passed.
At that time we had a commitment
that would always be voluntary.
Now that commitment has changed
it's being mandated.
And in fact all the employees in
these businesses will be auto
enrolled into it.
And the employee will have to
make an affirmative decision to
opt out if they don't want to.
Many of our employees are not
paid extravagant wages and so
this is a significant decision
for them to make and we think if
it was voluntary.
That would be more appropriate
than mandated it so one
fortunately for those reasons we
oppose the auto enrolment of
employees and the burden that
puts on the employers to then
take care of and manage that
those accounts for the employees
and their company thank you.
I
think chairman members of the
committee Jason Espinoza state
director for the national
federation of independent
business what we do is stand
opposed to the legislation with
the the mandate requirement
similar to to Mr hole you know.
If you know looking at the
statistics from the pew
charitable trust of businesses
want to do that let's give that
a try let's give marketing a try
talk to these employers one of
the other things you guys know I
wear many hats I also serve as
executive director of the New
Mexico society of association
executives which is the
association of all the
associations are you guys hear
from during the legislative
session you know I've heard from
mid those many assistance
they're willing to partner with
the state to do marketing
efforts on a voluntary basis to
working get out the message to
employers about this program so
that people can do it let's give
that a try before we mandate
businesses to do this and add
additional cost so I think you
have associations you have
others ready and willing to
market on a voluntary basis
let's give that a try before
mandating this thank you.
Mr chair members of the
committee on mery K. route
registered lobbyists for The New
Mexico restaurant association
and we very respectfully oppose
this legislation.
We stand very firmly behind the
New Mexico work in state backed
it's a great program we think
it's fabulous we just cannot get
behind mandatory participation
thank you.
Already.
Anybody else optician all right
now we'll go to committee
senator Hamblen.
Chair and thank you Senator
Tallman for bringing this
forward hi I have the wonderful
benefits of wearing multiple
hats as I said it appears
and understand are small
businesses so I think of the the
coffee shop of grounded that has
just celebrated its one year
anniversary right in downtown
Los crucis I think of the
one of my favorite tapas
restaurants and understand the
challenges that they have an
understand of the challenges
that many small businesses have
had as a continue to come out of
COVID I and for me what I I see
this is Dale is employee retain
ability and I'm wondering the
the concern is the mandate
requirement is the same to just
opt out as it is to voluntarily
opt in.
That's the question it's not
just I'm I'm just wondering is
that.
Can we do that can we just say
okay I want to be part of this
is that okay mandated or
required this is something that
the state is requiring my
business employer to do can I
just opt out.
You can.
You can opt out if you're
automatically involved yes okay
so that's why I don't see I
don't I don't see that that is
the challenge where if somebody
can opt out
other mandated thing if we
didn't have a mandated than they
would have to opt in.
We still have to taken effort in
some way or another.
But it is a set the fact is.
And this is been verified in
many studies it if you.
Fifteen times more likely to
participate if you're
automatically enrolled if you
have to take the initiative.
You're not as I have to do it
effective fifteen times less
have to do it.
Absolutely Mr chair and
committee and I think that I
think it's you know we've had
businesses that are struggling
and by all means my hi I
continue to talk about the
struggles of our small
businesses and I look at this
because we talk about the
affordable Care Act and how
that's not really friendly to
small businesses it's difficult
because this is to provide
health insurance it's difficult
for businesses to retire to find
a retirement plan any benefits
that would be something that
would bring in more employees I
I would hope would be something
that would be seen as a positive
and if the only concern about
this is is it's mandated and if
somebody can opt out just as
easily as they could often.
I would hope that this would be
something that would be like
okay I can't offer my employees
a whole lot but if I can offer
them an opportunity for
retirement I'm gonna do that if
I can offer them an opportunity
for flex time I'm going to do
that if I could offer them an
opportunity to work remotely
from home I'm going to do that
I'll finish up and I know that
you're gonna say something it's
just when we talk about
flexibility on behalf of small
businesses that is where we've
seen those succeed out of the
pandemic is looking at ways that
they can be for a flexible our
restaurant association is the
prime example of that and so I
would hope that we can look at
that as an opportunity is
employee retain ability not
something that is tying the
hands of businesses it's a
Sierra and I know you wanted to
say something and I just have
one more question after that.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for the comment and you.
I want to applaud you for for
bringing that up because I was
derelict in that matching that's
important it's important benefit
that'll help the in recruiting
now the set before it.
The only responsibility for the
lawyer.
Is to simply process the payroll
deductions a transfer and
transfer to the to work and say
there's no plan administration
is no reporting there's no
adjusting to give investment
advice so is simply.
Another payroll deduction so I
understand.
if they have a payroll
A company that does payroll it
was there's a name for that
action they just simply tell
their their contract to the
person doing the payroll just to
add another the deduction is
simply is the only obligation on
the part of the employer.
So thank you
For bringing that up.
And my last question Mr chair
and and senator Tom and
it also maybe our expert is that
can the supply for nonprofits
because nonprofits I know
several nonprofits that along
with not being able to offer
health insurance not being able
to offer you know some kind of
retirement this would be
something that would be really
beneficial to them as they
continue to struggle to keep
people on staff as well so I'm
wondering is this something that
is an option for nonprofits.
thank you for the question I'll
expert witness respond to that
thank you I think as long as
your of your yeah your employer
that the employees of five or
five or more employees it would
apply as long as you don't
already have a retirement
program
involved in that so I think
would apply to that as well.
Great thank you and I and I do
want to acknowledge that I don't
think everybody can afford and I
are a I think most of our small
businesses are struggling and
and most of the employees that's
not a priority there are other
priorities and so being able to
afford an R. I. F. I. R. A.'s is
is not necessarily open to
everybody so thank you Mr chair
I appreciate the opportunity
thank you for bringing this bill
to the Senator of current.
Thank you Mr chair and.
Concern I have is a promise made
in the promises made as the
previous bill is presented and
past and now we're coming back
for second by and that promises
not kept and that concerns me
because when we start doing this
legislators.
It it it really just.
Concerned about the process so.
That is sent
The finish just a minute so I
did considered a mandatory
process now of the employer
doesn't have a choice is that
correct Mr chairman Senator
for your past few participants
down correct.
Mr chair Senator that's correct.
And that so that concerns me and
I think the fact that
because the reasoning behind
moving to the opt in this
because program basically is not
able to be sustainable is
obviously not enough people are
participating which gives me a
little bit concerned to and
wondering why.
And so I think for those two
reasons just a little bit more
that that I am concerned about
how this was initially brought
before us it was passed and now
certain.
And we're gonna make.
Thank you.
Well Mister thank you for that
thank you Mr chair thank you for
that
I consider myself on is above
board person so I have no
trouble no problem.
Coming back with this
what we did we we didn't know at
the time limit that promises
that wasn't going to work
there's no sense.
And that is some of the people
offered well we can do some more
marketing while.
That sounds good it's maybe it's
a good excuse put that let's
face it it's just not going to
work the fact the matter is if
this bill fails.
This program is dead that's a
fact we're not going to continue
with it because.
The preeminent.
Center for retirement studies
tell us.
I can work plus the fact as I
said before the work in state
board tried to find a reprogram
administrator run the program
without requiring employers to
participate but no financial
services provider was willing to
to do that so.
It'll be dead if this is a few
kilometres tonight this program
is that.
Senator Griggs.
Thank you Mr chair and I you
know I appreciate your passion
for data
card getting a COVID.
Read about the bill here's what
I know I know our love thing the
general average ported
or may have supported each last
year which was actually
iterations when we respect our
but.
Our.
Mister chairman Senator can you
turn your micron.
Problem.
During my all.
That's on and there's not a lot
of ideas
but the
The.
The mandate changes the whole
picture of the staff.
we were willing I was willing to
supported if it was going to you
know work I.
Everybody get excited in mind
and you you see by some of the
the people who stood up in
opposition.
Probably they're not going to
want to get behind the.
Anyway and when you push it on.
They're not gonna really get too
fired up about that either
I think it's one of those deals
really.
It's a good thought.
But maybe she's not going to
work in the way that you've got
it set up but maybe there's
another way other than a
mandate.
And I don't know it and I want
to do to point out to to
Senator Hamblen on the on page
two why in nineteen.
So
sure sure I'm not gonna sh I'm
not going to support support
their shin you know hopefully if
it passes it some way you can be
found to to work with the groups
to determine whether or not
there's way better than the the
mandated approach of thank you
Mr thank you surviving on hello
we.
Really worked hard.
Well
I expert witness stated all
fifty states that are that much
implemented this program has a
mandatory program that.
That.
So what what you what has to be
the outlined.
I guess.
The work.
When I go to proceed with this
is that because we do
Wasting our time and effort the
local and we can't get anybody
to contract so.
Because I know that it'll work.
Right of.
Lois Mr chair I do have an
amendment.
Okay.
So I would move amendment number
one to Senate bill one for.
And what we are doing Mr Mr
chair members of the.
Zoom on page one.
Of line eighteen.
Adding after the semi calling
requiring cooperation from state
agencies to share relevant data
and information.
On page two striking proceeding
and insert in there of the
preceding Justice a technical
change on that one.
And then on page two like twenty
four we strike all of it switch
is not necessary language in the
bill.
and then I page six line I I
we're striking twenty twenty
three and sort of course there
are twenty twenty four again
giving a little bit more time.
In on page nine Mr chair members
of the committee we are
specifically asking that state
agencies to fully cooperate with
the state treasurer for the
advancement of the work in safe
program.
Out of it Mr chair then that was
explain me by the state
treasurer's office is that if we
don't express the state here for
the cooperation of for data
information
and other was a cooperative work
that needs to happen it wouldn't
it just doesn't take place so
which is kind of a simple
amendment just making sure that
there's some cooperation between
state agencies and the state
treasurer's office.
The current system thank you Mr
chairman so with regard to data
collection from state agencies
is that is that what you're
suggesting that that that would
have up in.
The relevant to this since it's
a private they're basically
private companies that are.
If I could Mr chair I do we do
have a a person here for the
state treasurer's office sent
to.
Expand a little bit more.
Mr chair and Senator Kernan so
the information that we would be
needing on the businesses in
order to do outreach could be
available through workforce
solutions or TRD so a lot of the
information may be confidential
and because the work in state
board is administratively
attached to the state
treasurer's office they use R.
I. T. and resources in order to
help them advance their program
and so that's why we added the
language so that other state
agencies will cooperate we need
the partnership with those
agencies in order for us to
obtain data in order to do
outreach to these businesses so
Mr chair and senator and expert
witness our treasures office the
data that you would get from TRD
is that confidential data that
should be on individual
taxpayers there may or may not I
don't know if it's all
confidential but we would be
keeping it confidential Mr chair
I don't think we're allowed to
do that should I mean I think I
think that that raises another
red flag for me.
Even the legislature of seeking
get confidential information DRT
so I haven't really concerned
that now is that with the
amendment did that.
The the allowing for the sharing
of information not all of we're
not asking for confidential
information.
We're asking for data that would
help advance the work and safety
program in order for us to get
information on the employers
that employ a five or more
employees Mr chair I I really am
concerned now because I do think
that's an over reach for the
treasures department to requests
that kind of personal
information I don't know that
that you're entitled to it I
think it this would involve a
much deeper conversation and
more specific this is a doctor
what you would be asking for
that this really concerns me
right it should be public.
What I'm not sure Mr chair it is
public or not there's a lot of
information it TRD that is very
confidential you can't
identify taxpayer information by
tax rate.
Anyone no one has authority to
do that except your gate it's my
understanding that we're being
specific to businesses not the
individual tax payer.
It's just really be cautious
about that
Justice for a verification
Senator Lopez is proposing these
as amendments we haven't gone to
the sponsor whether they're
friendly or not.
These are just of the minutes of
the proposed so Mister chair
maybe I'm concerned that the
amendment we did place on it
that allows for the treasurer's
office to.
That's not the second amendment
thank you to there's been no
amendment made to the bill okay
this came in I believe sometime
today and then the Senator Lopez
is just proposing these as
amendment okay to the service
have not have not the action of
the movements of thank you.
Because of the Sanchez sponsor
us Senator I don't know if you
consider these friendly
amendments or unfairly limits
well.
It be friendly if we could be
assured the.
And that they can
Choir who can we.
Representative hotel we get a
definitive answer.
Yeah.
The disclosure here because I I
think sharing relevant data and
information I have that noted on
it what does that mean what is I
don't I don't know what that
means it's.
So if it's the pleasure of the
committee would just hold it
here for the time being we get
that of information center the
fight with that will that the
president I was told this
afternoon that I I just hope
that you know.
Question.
Just some questions about it and
said well are you having trouble
getting this information I said
bill I just want to put in
statute so in case.
The
Thanks changes a new
Administration you Secretary
running workforce solutions is
that it's cooperative.
maybe not because we we need a
definitive answer alright but if
I get a definitive answer that
it's okay then it's a friendly
no.
Will this bill here for the
moment.
In answer it will come back the.
The next committees.
So with that Mr.
So.
Help.
It's just rolled over to the
next meeting okay.
Okay thank you senators so we'll
just hold it here okay roll over
to the next next next year.
Thank you thank you all right so
now we'll go to the Senate bill
I.
Senator Pirtle.
The last.
The first your last.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee today I have
before you send a bill to twenty
five we all know of the incident
that happened at Russ
film set in I think every single
one of us in this room had the
same reaction that you know we
couldn't believe that it
happened and and surely it could
have been prevented and so I I
understand that there's a lot of
things involving that process
report came out basically what
was brought to light is that
there was a lack of oversight
there's a lack of training there
was a lack of a lot of things
and to be honest the richest
negligence
and so just for full disclosure
I I have been in a few movies as
background I've been in a movie
as feature background where I
was in a shoot out actually got
shot and died in the movie and
in the most recent movie I was
in I didn't die but I was also
in a shoot out which was pretty
neat and and I can tell you
being a gun owner responsible
gun owner it was very strange
even though I saw the blanks
loaded into the gun I know the
difference between a live round
I know the difference I notably
looks like it was still very
strange for me to fire a fire
arm into a room where where
people were to maybe quite
uncomfortable but the
interesting thing is having
grown up grown up around
firearms knowing the difference
I knew that the fire on that I
was using was safe that was
loaded with blanks because I had
that knowledge I had that I had
that training and recently my
son went through hunter safety
and and so I was reintroduced to
what the training course is all
about and it's it's less about
hunting in more about this is
how you pulled a fire of this is
how you safely operate a fire
this is the difference between a
flintlock a lever action a pump
shotgun and a semi automatic
pistol all of those things so
that you know the difference you
know how they operate and you
can be safe around them so I
understand that this is not a
permanent fix.
What this is something we can do
right now that is a gonna put
people out let's say we have
some actors coming from
California they can either do
the New Mexico hunter safety
training or even better they can
do the California training in
California because there's a
reciprocity among states so that
we're not going to overload the
system we're not going to put an
undue burden on people to get a
training that we wouldn't be
able to provide but would at
least have some type of training
with a work safety type of
mindset is where I was coming
from and then not to mention
just work safety for the
individuals handling the guns
but the buddy system right that
let's say Senator Hamblen isn't
an actor but works in food
service but she knows how to
safely work around firearm she
witnesses Senator Kernan who's
the actor off acting negligently
she then knows that we
everybody's train that's
something that we do with
forklift operation tons of
things within the oil field
within farming that I think is
is definitely needed within
filmmaking and with that I will
stand for questions thank you
will to the audience and with
your support of Senate bill two
twenty five.
Nobody has.
Hi yes Care.
I need to talk.
And my.
Yes yes.
Yes thank you committee chairman
committee my name is mark
Comstock and I'm the president
of the New Mexico state house
road which is the you for actors
and functional performers
representing well over a
thousand members here in New
Mexico I am opposed to this bill
I understand the heart and the
intent of this bill
but it is not necessarily over
reach but it it's duplicitous
Stunt coordinators and all that
there is safety protocols and.
When you have something like
rust it is a tragedy that's
going to stick with this market
for years to come but really it
was people not following those
protocols I'm myself was a
character who was shut off on
the TV shows night shift and I
went through rigorous training
the day of and in fact all the
safety protocols are in place
followed and it took us longer
to go through the safety
protocols then to should the
optional seen right to privilege
to the.
And I do think that this extra
training phone productions will
be reluctant to pay for the
training of the time turnaround
is amazing
Hi last
and I do think that what we
really need is for those
protocols are in place simply to
be followed because when they
are you won't have the
strategies like rocks and I
would venture to say that
because we are also hyper aware
of the tragedy Ross that are set
on the safer than anywhere else
in the nation right now because
nobody wants tragedy happen ever
again especially here in New
Mexico so I really appreciate
our the still but I must stand
in opposition thank you for your
thank you.
All right so there's nobody for
support there is no okay I was
overwhelming support Mr chair.
Already so anybody help
assistance in the audience go
ahead.
You can speak to Michael.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is
Rochelle Bussy I am the senior
program manager at the New
Mexico film office within the
economic development department
The New Mexico Film Office
opposes Senate bill two to five
as there are significant issues
and conflicts first and foremost
hunter safety training is not
relevant to the film industry
requiring all individuals
employed by a film production
company to take a multi day
hunter safety class is not
applicable whatsoever to the
film industry nor to the set
weapons.
Filmmaking and hunting are
extremely different in their
very nature environment parties
involved standards practices
safety protocols hazardous
materials equipment and finally
there is also a major difference
between hunting firearms and set
weapons in most cases that
weapons are not the same as
actual fire arms additionally
the hunter training certificate
does not align with nor
compliment any existing safety
protocols in place for the film
industry which are extensive and
stringent specifically safety
bulletin number one is dedicated
to safety with fire arms and use
of blank ammunition safety
bulletin number two is dedicated
to special use of live
ammunition the language as broad
for example all individuals
employed by one production could
very easily be thousands of
people for just one production
who would be receiving training
that does not apply to their
trades more industry.
In addition to air relevant
training this bill adds
significant fiscal impact to
state specifically to the
department of game and fish the
film division and others.
Just for the department of game
and fish alone with
administering such training that
does not address any issues in
the film industry it's estimated
with current film order numbers
an additional six F. T. E.'s
would be needed.
To provide with game and fish
and an additional five hundred
volunteers would be necessary
kind of fiscal impact of upwards
of two million would be
encouraged to the state every
fiscal year fiscal impact on the
film division and TRD is also
inherent could be immense in
addition to major issues with
the air Representative the rebel
and see of Lujan training to
film sets and the complications
and bird into the state and the
administering your relevant
training there is vagueness with
regard to enforcement and
compliance of such training and
or licensing who would who would
administer the program would be
the film division game and fish
taxed revenue it's not clear.
The bill also holds adds a
significant and unnecessary
burden to production companies
and would indeed disincentive by
companies from working in New
Mexico as the bill proposes
linking the failure to complete
Lujan training for every film
employee to the holding and or
replication of the film tax
credits.
Which is unreasonable.
Lastly if this bill is enacted
in New Mexico would diminish the
film business fail to approve
any presumed safety deficiencies
and in fact this bill could
increase the chance of safety
violations because there's no
guarantee those in the film
industry who are trained in
hunter safety will have any
relevant knowledge regarding set
weight weapons whatsoever thank
you.
Right.
Else the the opposition if you
wanted to there is that person
already spoke.
Okay.
Go ahead.
There.
Yes.
Hello chairman members of the
committee and thank you for your
time on this my name is Rebecca
parks there and I am the
president of a hundred local for
eighty which is the film you
representing some most of the
film makers in New Mexico and I
stand in opposition to this bill
as you president and as you know
our primary one of the primary
functions of our units to
protect and preserve our members
and provide for their safety
unfortunately this bill the way
that it's written although we
supported you know safety in
spirit this bill will not have
that fact it'll burdensome
government regulation that still
design and will actually make
it safer for example on any set
the number of people who
actually handle weapons is tiny
maybe one or two people with the
handle of actors is the Senator
recounted and that's typically
less than one percent of the
crew requiring that everyone be
certified will add significant
business costs the lockdown
government and they actually
detract from safety efforts that
do work which I will mention are
many on going including fresh
partnerships with OSHA also
wonderful efforts from the state
film office and are up in arms
you haul some wonderful you and
safety training that is ongoing
so for gonna spend time and
money on increasing set safety
we are all in support of that
but I ask the members of the
committee to do it effectively
in partners with those of us on
staff to
live close to it and can can I
ask
and that concludes my comments I
will say also that we have on
the line John of our who is a
New Mexico the worker and harbor
and he is struggling to speak on
to them so if you cannot click
on mute on hand then I
respectfully ask to read a
statement from him.
Go ahead read the statement.
Thank you so John of our who's
been working in movies in armor
for forgive me John I got this
wrong but at least twenty to
thirty years
offers the following the state
hunter safety is for safe gun
handling all harvesting gained
and lost some of those safety
protocols crossover to our
industry we have other protocols
and safety issues concerned food
safety cameras set up and camera
crew safety at an actor Steve
you all interacting with each
other blank fire has different
safety levels and protocols that
are totally different than line
technician I.
I'm not opposed to improved
safety measures but they should
be developed and improved with
input from our industry The New
Mexico ocean report released
last year stated that it
consisting safety protocols we
have please have the following
the rest incident would not
happen.
And that concludes my comments
thank you chairman members of
the committee thank you already
for oil to the committee the
questions from the committee.
Mr chair Senator too much of
what was said I I found quite
interesting there's there is a
fee to do the training and if
you're over a certain age it's
online so I'm not sure how you
need more FTEs to run the
internet's
but I don't see that it as any
of the it's going to have a
return of money for the game and
fish department
There were issues brought up of
relevance I can guarantee you Mr
chair members of this committee
I'm the only person who has
fired a firearm on set and gone
through the training of anybody
that spoke so I find it
interesting that somehow they're
an expert in what the training
is about when I can guarantee
one hundred percent not a single
person that spoke in opposition
has taken the training but I
will tell you my tenure insult
ten year old son knows better
than to point a damn gun at
somebody and pull the trigger
any knows better that a live
round is a live round in a blink
is a blank and he's ten.
If the safety training that
these people are doing would
have worked Elena Hutcheon
wouldn't be dead and that's the
truth so if we want to be
serious about safety and film
safety we got to do something in
this sweeping it under the rug
of what you just heard from
these people opposition is not
good enough for New Mexico is
not good enough for the people
working on the sets in New
Mexico.
Shares of
taxes through.
This.
Speaker.
The
New Mexico.
I think.
This is.
All the tools.
Mr chair and senator as you
heard the they put up a bulletin
which means it's posted
somewhere.
And somehow that's supposed to
make people safe I will make I
will mention Mister chairman
Senator when the last person
started reading the letter of
somebody else I was actually
able to log on New Mexico game
and fish dot com.
Let my son's account.
Log in and pull up a copy of his
hundred eighty card.
Thirty seconds.
So I don't think Mr chair
members of the committee that
some have some undue burden on
somebody to prove that you've
taken some type of safety
training course that we would
have it wouldn't put an undue
burden on people as was stated
because I pulled up in thirty
seconds.
The.
Proper place for training
because of the animals.
So why.
The opposed to having a
regulation to industry is
required to do their own
training thank you Mr chair and
senator I I think move in the in
the future.
Whenever the film office and
others want to get serious about
doing something.
We can work on that this is
something we can do now you know
there's this misconception
hunter safety isn't about
teaching you how to sneak around
in the woods to find it here.
Under safety is about how do you
walk through the woods and not
shoot your buddy.
Which is what happened so I I
think there's a misconception
that somehow hunter safety is
about how to safely hunt no
hunter safety how to safely
handle a firearm around other
people and so there's a
misconception about that and and
this just in ignorance about
what hunter safety is about and
here's the thing if it already
exists and it's nationally
recognized you can take hunter
safety in Michigan in the hunter
safety is good for New Mexico so
that way people can move about
the country and take it at their
leisure and other states so that
we don't create the burden that
the Film Office talked about the
bird is going to be there you
know that you have a movie in
rural New Mexico in three months
yet three months to take hunter
safety training in your state at
your leisure online.
Thank you for that.
Through the.
The people working there
properly trained and.
Mr chair Senator proof in the
pudding.
So what kind of training do the.
Mr chair Senator that's the
thing.
These bulletins yes the the
issue having been on sets myself
okay I know it's it's wild to
think about but I do have a
unique perspective.
Having dental I shot blinks on a
film set in even with blanks you
don't point them at somebody.
That that's that's the
ridiculousness of all of this is
even with a blanket appointed
somebody because guess what
comes out of a blank burning
powder.
So with with Phil if Senator
Hamlin's in the scene with me
the position the camera right
about we're Senator Shendo that
and I pointed just to the side
of her when I pull the trigger
in with the camera angle it
looks like I've shot directly at
Senator Hamblen.
So all of this training would
have sought the hate no matter
what even with blanks you don't
point a firearm at somebody it
was mentioned that that firearms
on movie sets are different
that's the most ridiculous thing
I've ever heard Mr chair and
senator they are the exact same
there's no the term prop gun is
used it's a gun capable of
firing a live round and that's
evident in what happened so
again as we've the the testimony
against this said it's all half
truths or just blatant lies if
there'd been any type of minimal
training this would not have
happened so if we continue to do
nothing we're setting ourselves
up to for it to happen again.
Here.
Your.
for families actually.
Part of the.
You Mr Sir once was a black
powder and then the second time
was I believe it was like a
twenty three model revolver of
the the name of the movies death
alley it's quite cool I actually
had a line.
All.
Mr chair Senator.
Did receive training or approved
did you have to prove.
Mr chair Senator no and that's
why I brought this board even
though I do have training in a
vast knowledge of firearms I
didn't have to prove anything
even though I'm I consider
myself an expert or more than
qualified to handle firearms
there there's no formal training
required which I found
interesting to say the least Mr
chair Senator.
that that's kind of trouble you
know maybe they look at you and
they said you he looks like a
good good man.
Mr chair Senator actually rode
horses in the movie too and and
and a lot of that was just from
experience as well growing up on
horses riding in the mountains
carrying out L. can things but
it's just one of those things I
think within the movie industry
there such a dependence on a
will this person that's their
job and we don't interfere with
their job no where else in
business do we accept that that
we have the buddy system where
yes that's the forklift operator
but as a worker with in home
depot we know when to identify
when the forklift operators
operating recklessly and so
that's what this is really
about.
So I wanted to have one more
question.
Ruiloba this is shares started
to work did you talk to the
issue.
I think we got a problem here it
is willing to work and Mr chair
and senator I think the film
industry knows there's a problem
I think we're sitting at the
situation
not much different than the
Apollo missions when the first
rocket blew up the engineers
refused to accept that they made
a mistake they built the exact
same rocket and blew up another
group of astronauts.
So we can't double down right
now we can't afford to.
Well thank you Mr chair that's
all I have thank you Senator
Wirth.
I'm here I don't have any
questions okay all right the
okay so this all the like going
up to a maybe a question for
anybody else.
I would do private sector but
before we do that I I just have
a question you know
It was good that the use I know
that you know the only guns I
remember that of the two blanks
was doing during track races the
starters always had a gun but
there was never a hole in the
front.
The.
You know I I don't know why you
know like.
Do do that with those because
that would impede other.
Senator.
Mr Mr Mr chair you know that's
that's something that's been
asked with CG I now there's a
lot of the things that that can
be done in you know we can't the
I don't know if you were put
into statute you know banning
the use of a firearm sunsets but
that all this does is just
asking that people have just the
basic training so they know the
difference between a thirty
eight special in the thirty
eight blank.
That always talk to somebody
about you know it of you know I
think all of us that went to
high school related maybe rural
school all of those but I'm
working with which we all had
our our safety training and we
with the actually working at the
post office because somebody got
their car you know a day before
it was like right now post
office of the both of us to get
yours known so you know it's
just you know handling of gun
you know as a young child and
and so I think I don't think you
know it was a lot but the but
the leave it as it is.
Do you have a question we do
have a we have a motion from
Senator centers for to pass
thank you senator Sanchez and
pass motion of the second by
Senator Kernan of it says the
motion to table.
Yes so that's the intent.
Go to to motion to table so
Representative.
Just.
No debate the debate on that so
we'll have to take a vote on the
stateLee motion.
But.
Do we have on this motion to
table the bill.
Senator Brandt Senator bricks
no.
Senator had a meal.
No.
Senator Kernan does.
Senator Lopez yes.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator Tallman.
As.
Senator Wirth.
Yes.
Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Shendo
no.
So we have three yeses go back
to the center of our.
Well.
The table emotion filled yes.
It was we have a motion for the
past.
Mr chair.
Yes.
Senator Senator Wirth here I
don't know how you want to
handle this but given the fiscal
impact on this bill I'd like to
suggest that we consider an
additional referral to the
finance committee.
And I think we can do that part
of the recommendation out of
this committee so I don't know
how you want to handle that Mr
chair we do that regularly so
you just make the restate the
motion would do pass with an
additional recommendation to the
finance committee okay so we'll
go ahead and have the Senator
Sanchez restate his motion to
pass so I'm overdue pass with
the recommendation to the Senate
finance.
Additional Representative
additional recommendations to
central fire okay maybe.
Six senator current.
Again the clerk to call the
roll.
You can't require the film
industry is.
Then to underwrite the expense.
This too late for that for the
for the next year okay all right
okay Senator Brandt.
Excuse Senator Griggs yes.
Senator Hotmail yes.
Yes yes.
Senator Kernan yes Senator Lopez
no.
Senator Sanchez yes.
Senator Tallman yes Senator
Wirth.
Nope.
The Senator Hamblen.
Yes.
Senator Shendo yes.
We have seven yeses and.
To pass okay of do best with
voting affirmative and go to
school.
