I'd like to remind this
committee that we are doing the
work of 3 committees. So far 224
bills have been sent to this
committee.
Uh, of the 182 Senate bills that
have been sent here. This
committee has heard 141.
That is 77% of the house bills,
we have had 42 bills sent to
this committee and not including
today, we have heard 2424 of
those pills.
We have moved on 24 of those
pills. Um, that is the
commitment from this committee
and the collaboration and the
conversations, and so I'm very
proud of you all, and proud of
this committee and what we've
done. Um, so I do appreciate
that greatly. We are going to
start the consent agenda first
of this, for those of you in the
audience, if you're not familiar
with the consent agenda. These
are bills that have received
either unanimous or near
unanimous votes on the floor of
the house and in committee, we
have generated this list, shared
it with the, with the ranking
member and the minority.
and we have, uh, and also with
the, the, the majority, and we
have agreed that these bills are
just going to go on consent,
meaning we're going to see if
anybody has any opposition. If
any of the members of the
committee do have opposition on
any of the bills, then that bill
will be pulled and moved into
the agenda for the following
day. Yes, Senator Ramos, Madam
Chair, I do have a question on,
I was looking at the bills late
last night and
On each
3, that was a 61 to 0 vote. Why
wasn't that on the consent
agenda?
I'm sorry, say again. HB 323.
That was house Flo uh the House
floor vote was 61 was one that's
that um that I know Senator
Figueroa and Senator Bergmans
had questions on so that was
something that they, I, I have a
feeling it's gonna be a brief
discussion just to get some
answers on those, OK, yeah, mhm.
And so, um, what we will do is I
will go through with the, the
bill name, the number, the
sponsor, seeing if there's any
deposition if there's no
opposition, then Rebecca will uh
mark that all those in
attendance are in support and
the bill receives a due pass,
but again, just remind the
committee if there is any
opposition on any of that. Uh,
the reason why we pull it and
move it to the next committee is
because that gives the bill
sponsor and experts time to go
ahead and be here, um, and
prepare for that. So we want to
do that out of a courtesy. So,
um, at this point, um, we do
need to take roll first and then
we will go ahead and start with
the consent agenda and
then move on to new business. Go
ahead, Rebecca. Senator
Figueroa here,
Senator Haan is excused Senator
O'Malley.
Senator Paul, Senator Ramos.
Senator Sanchez.
share.
Senator work is excused Senator
Bergmans.
Senator Hamblin.
Yeah.
So we have
A present and 2 excused. OK, so
we do have a quote.
Uh, all right.
And also we will be doing the
committee shuffle. Senator
Scherer has a bill to present.
Senator Jaramilla was presenting
a bill, Senator Figueroa has a
couple of bills to prevent, so
we're going to do our best to
move these bills through, and
you have a bill as well.
Yes, I think.
So, here we go.
All righty. Um, we get on the
consent calendar. We are first
and foremost going to HB 439
Public Safety telecommunicators
CPR training from uh
Representative Lujan. Uh, is
there any opposition to uh HB
439.
See none, uh, HB 439, public
safety, telecommunicator, CPR
training from representative
Luhan receives a due pass with a
vote of 8 to 0.
And now heads to the floor.
We are on HB 155 gaming control
board director qualifications
from representative Zamora. Is
there any opposition?
See none, HB 155 gaming control
board director qualifications
from Representative Zamora
receives a due pass with a vote
of 8 to 0, and now heads to the
floor.
House Bill 192 with an
amendment, digital trunked radio
systems subscriber fees from
Representative Hernanda, uh
Hernandez, uh, and I believe
Senator Nava. Is there any
opposition to this bill?
say none HB 192 as amended,
digital trunked radio system
subscriber fees, uh, receives a
due pass with a vote of 8 to 0
and now heads to the floor.
Now moving on to House Bill 197,
expand Silver Alert definition.
From Representative Sanchez and
Senna Cortez.
Is there any opposition to House
Bill 197?
see none. House Bill 197 expands
over alert definition from
Sanchez and Senna Cortez
perceives the Dupes vote with an
8 to 0, and now heads to the
floor.
Moving on to House Bill 249.
Unemployment and emergencies
disasters from Representative
Sanchez and Berego.
Is there any opposition to this
bill?
See none. House Bill 249,
unemployment and emergency
disasters receives a due pass
with a vote of 8 to 0, and now
heads to the floor.
If I'm correct, we, we already
heard age 220, right?
This one that we crashed, OK.
Yeah, the.
All right.
Now moving on to House Bill 269
as amended. Healthcare authority
visit verification from
Representative Armstrong's and
Dow.
Is there any opposition to House
Bill 269 as amended.
See none. House Bill 269 is
amended. Healthcare authority
visit verification, receives a
due pass with a vote of 8 to 0,
and now heads to the floor.
Moving on to high wage jobs, tax
credit threshold job from
representatives Hernandez and
Dixon, is there any opposition
to this bill?
seen none. House Bill 368, high
wage jobs, tax credit threshold,
job from uh Hernandez and Dixon
now goes to the floor with an 8
to 0 due pass. 9 to 0 now that
Senator Worth is here.
Do, do you want me to give you a
minute to catch up on all the
work, OK. OK.
We now have the committee sub
for House Bill 402. Health
insurance provider info loading
from representative Hernandez.
Is there any opposition to this
bill?
See none, House Bill 402, the
committee substitute, health
insurance provider info loading
from Representative Fernandez
perceives a due pass vote of 9
to 0 and now heads to the floor.
House Bill 494 tax exemptions
for veterans from Representative
Martinez attorney opposition to
this bill?
See none. How's Bill? 494 tax
exemptions for veterans from
Representative Martinez receives
a DuPass vote of 9 to 0, and now
hence 2 the floor. Boy, we're
gonna have a lot of bills on the
floor, senator, where it's
Uh, lastly, we have House Bill
571, building, building housing
communities from representatives
Doo and Romero, turning
opposition to this bill, seeing
none, House Bill 571, building
housing communities from
Representative Da Romero
receives a due pass with a vote
of 9 to 0 and now heads to the
floor.
So that just added to our 42
house bills that have been sent
to this committee, Senator
Worth,
So that just added to our 42
house bills that have been sent
to this committee, Senator Wor
just went up a little bit.
Thank you very much. All right,
now we move on to new business.
We have Senate Bill 278. We do
have a committee sub, Senator
Hickey.
I thought I saw him here.
All right, we're gonna move on
and if he shows up, we'll, we'll
go ahead and do that. Um, we
have Senate Bill 439 from
Senator Sanchez.
Good.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair and
committee members. I have with
me today Jen.
Uh, some of my expert witnesses
on this bill.
Um,
Senate Bill 439 is a critical
measure to protect New Mexicans
local owned businesses and
ensure fair business practices
in the franchise sector. Um,
Franchise should be a pathway to
success, not a trap for
hardworking New Mexicans who
invest their savings, takes
risks, and create their own jobs
in their communities. So what
this what this bill is trying to
make a balance in on franchises
and just make a better fair
practices with franchises, so
I'll let Jen speak a little bit
on the bill, Madam Chair.
And then we will be ready for
questions or
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. Um,
I'm Jen Paul Schreier, former
cabinet secretary, and I'm here
in a personal capacity today.
Um, I really want to thank
Senator Sanchez for sponsoring
this bill, um, because it is a
personal nature for for me and
my family. Um,
The franchising sector.
It's a very interesting
relationship because we look at
different big brands that are
all over the state, McDonald's,
Hilton, Marriott, and we assume
they are corporate, um, but most
of the time they are locally
owned. There are New Mexicans
that take their own investment.
They contract with a national
company, typically out of state.
And they have a franchise or
franchisee relationship.
So this is local investment,
local owners, um, that are
really looking for that American
dream of entrepreneurship, and
they want that business in a
box.
And many times because of how
the laws are currently
structured. The um balance, the
power is with the franchisor.
This bill, in particular, really
looks at how do we equalize the
playing field so that way there
are fair business practices here
in New Mexico that align with
over 15 states that have
codified similar laws, um, and
also aligns with the Federal
Trade Commission and their rules
that they have recently
established to make sure that
there is fair business
practices.
Um, in particular,
There's a couple, um, points
that I just wanted to point out
in this bill, um,
For the Federal Trade Commission
initiatives, they, they really
looked at increased scrutiny of
unfair contract terms that
restrict franchisees
independence and financial
viability. Um, many times
there's, um, in the contract
that you signed for that brand
licensing agreement. It also
restricts of who you can use to
buy supplies. You have to buy
through the franchisor. Well,
the, the what's sold to you is
that those are gonna be buy uh
the franchisor is gonna buy in
volume and then
And you'll get a reduced price
at the local level, but really
what happens is that those
different supplies they're
buying the franchisor gets a
rebate or some sort of profit
margin, um, and it doesn't make
it more viable for the local
business owner. Um, there's
proposed bans to restrict
non-compete clauses. So right
now there's no rules around, um,
if you have a 10 year brand
licensing agreement with a
franchisor, they can put in
that.
agreement that when that
contract expires, you can't do
any related business once it
expires, um, for 57 years. So
this bill looks at, OK, what's
reasonable? What's it a
reasonable amount of years to
make sure that when I'm done
working with that big national
corporation, I still have a
means to support my family and
create a local business. And so
this bill restricts that
non-compete to 2 years.
Um,
A lot of times these um national
corporations, uh, it's the
middle class, it's the people
that have, um, retirements that
they look at how do I, how do I
leverage my retirement as an
investment into these franchise
agreements and start my own
business. Um, and because the
current laws are in favor and
allow the franchisesor to create
contract terms that are in their
favor and not necessarily fair.
It doesn't set.
Uh, the franchisee for success,
um, necessarily. And so this
bill is really about just
equalizing the playing field so
that way there's a win-win
between the franchises or the
franchisee, and they can have a
um a business partnership that's
that's balanced.
You want to have you,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh, Jason Espin is uh
here in my role as state
director for the National
Federation of Independent
Business, represents businesses
across the state. Uh, just, just
want to add, you know,
franchises are a vital part in
New Mexico's small business
community, uh, in this bill is
really about protecting small
businesses and strengthening New
Mexico's economy.
I'm happy to answer any
questions.
Uh, think you might have shared
with that we're ready for.
OK, so what we're gonna do is
we're going to go to the
audience. Is there anybody here
in the audience that's by a show
of hands in favor of this bill.
Seeing none. Anybody in the
audience in opposition of this
bill.
See none. Anything I don't mind?
Nothing on mine.
Um, can I go to the committee?
Senator Jaramillo.
Madam Chair, Senator, I'm
looking at the FYR and the, the
major flash that's coming to me
as it says that this bill
overrides contract terms and
thereby violates the US
Constitution Contract Clause,
uh, no state shall pass any law
impairing the obligation of
contracts, as well as the
Commerce Clause, and it looks
like there was um there was a
case on this. Um, did you look
at the FAR and see that?
Madam Chair, Senator, I will
defer to my expert witnesses.
Oh, I'm sorry, it's the
committee analysis that I'm
looking at. I'm sorry, Madam
Chair and senator.
Um,
continue reading what it says.
It what it does today is, um,
The state laws violate the
Commerce Clause if they mandate
different treatment of an
in-state and out of state
economic interest that benefits
the former and burdens the
latter. Now the New Mexico
Constitution Article 2 Section
19, also bars interference with
contracts stating no law
impairing the obligation of
contract shall be entered by the
legislator. Suppliers
potentially are located outside
of New Mexico, so the commerce
clause would be violated.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Senator, thank you
for that question. We've had
some preliminary um
conversations with the
Department of Justice, and they
have significant interest in
looking into this because there
are 15 other states that have
pursued and have codified very
similar laws, um, and I think
what's important to note that
this is not retroactive. So this
is for future contracts, so
there's parameters in which are
deemed uh fair business
practices. Thank you for that.
No further questions, ma'am.
Senator O'Malley.
I'm sure. So, could you give me
an example of, uh, for example,
a franchise where you had said
that um you're restricted from
from doing the same kind of
business once that contract
ends, uh, it, it, it for like 5
years. What, what, what, what
What business are we talking
about? For example, Sure. Um,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Senator, thank you
for that question. Um,
franchising really spans across
so many different industries,
um, childcare facilities.
That would be an example. So if
you belong, if you have a
franchise agreement with a
franchisor for a childcare
facility and you have a
non-compete clause, then you
would not be able to after that
contract is complete, you would
not be able to open up your own
childcare facility.
And typically it's within 5
years or that's the typical
contract is you could not.
Um, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, um, senator, it
depends on what is in the in the
contract, yes. So this
particular bill would limit it
to 2 years.
OK
Thank you, ma'am.
Thank you. Any other questions
from the committee, Senator
Ramos, Madam Chair, I, I had the
same question that uh Censor
Yohami had
and uh due to that uh valve due
to it violating the US
Constitution Contract Clause. I
moved the table. All right, uh,
a table in motion is
non-debatable. Uh, the motion on
is to table, uh, Rebecca, if you
will, a yes committee is the
most is to support the motion to
table a no is.
To deny that table motion. So if
you will, please.
Senator Figueroa.
Senator had a meal.
Senator O'Malley, no.
Senator Paul, yes.
Senator Ramos, yes. Senator
Sanchez.
Uh, send it to share.
Yes.
Senator work, no.
Senator Bergman, yes.
Senator Hamblin.
Yes.
So
Uh, Natalie has
Senator Figueroa? No.
64.
6 to 4, you do have.
The table in motion has been
passed at 6 to 4. I think there
are opportunities to have
conversations, uh, during the
interim, and I think, cause I
think there's a nugget there.
I think it's just figuring out
where that nugget is.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you,
Madam Chair and committee
members.
All right, we now go to, uh,
Senator Hickey. You've got 2
bills.
And we, we have committee
substitutes for those.
You
All right, so, um, Senator
Hickey, we have, um, as you can
see, we have an ambitious, uh,
agenda, so I'm gonna let you be
sweet and to the point.
OK.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, uh,
this is so hold on, yeah, let's
move on the committee sub.
Madam Chair.
Do not pass on the Senate Bill
278 and it do pass on the
committee substitute pursued 278
for discussion purposes. Thank
you so much. All right, Senator
Hickey, Madam Chair, this very
brief introduction applies to
this bill in the 2nd bill. Uh,
we are very fortunate in
Albuquerque to uh have at the
University of New Mexico, some
of the uh leading
physician researchers into
coronary artery disease, uh,
while we're all aware of the
coronary artery disease is due
to atherosclerotic plaque for so
many years we didn't understand
how it got laid down, uh, with
the research done here and the
research done across the
country, there is now a very
strong uh recognition that we
know exactly what is doing it.
Uh, it is the LDL low density
lipoprotein, a component of.
Cholesterol that is 980 to 90%
manufactured in your liver. It's
a.
Stra left over from the first
few months of life, but it is
the vast majority of this toxic,
um.
Uh, substance that once it gets
into the liver, then absorbed
into the body, uh, through the
intestine travels to the heart
and also to your other, uh,
vessels, uh, so stroke is
involved here and it burrows
into the arterial wall, and when
it does that, it sets up an
inflammatory reaction when the
inflammatory reaction occurs,
uh, the body heals with
inflammation, so it expands out
the arterial wall, that's what
leads to the narrowing.
Of the uh heart vessel uh of the
heart artery. And when the
healing process is finally
finished, it deposits calcium as
also occurs most everywhere else
in your body. That's part of the
process. So what we now know is
that a calcium scan of the
heart, a 5-minute procedure that
costs about $35 to actually do
by the radiologist, it just is,
you don't get any more radiation
than what you get in a day.
It's isolated to right here.
It's an in and out, uh,
historically, the health plans
have been treating this as a
high-end radiology, so there's
in almost every commercial
health plan at $250 deductible
just automatically whether you
get a CT of the head or the
heart, so it's very expensive.
Some of them will do it for $150
cash on the barrel head without
charging with the deductible.
In the event, if, if a person
has a kind of LDL that is
destructive and that's probably
5 or 75% of us.
Um, it, it lays down this plant,
and I have this handout here,
and you can see on the right,
I'm sorry, the left in the
handout, the plaque at the
bottom that builds up and up and
up.
And this is what then leads to
sudden death or heart attacks.
Um, so, but because it leaves
the calcium behind the calcium
scanning can detect if you are
having active disease, uh,
probably the higher the number,
the, uh, less good, um,
And then, unfortunately, when,
if you can look at that and
think of, and I'm sorry for this
example, like a pimple bursting
on the surface, that leads to
occlusion and sudden death.
600,000 people in America a year
die from this. It costs $600
billion to treat coronary artery
disease. That's almost 20% of
all health care costs, and
We now know that we can detect
it without a lot of other fancy
tests, catheterizations, nuclear
scans, all the stuff that costs
so much money simply by doing
the simple screening test, we
recommend for people over the
age of 50, if it's negative, you
come back in 5 years if it's
negative 5 years, and there is a
percent of the population in
which it remains negative. So
this test has immense impact on
the cost of heart disease, both
in terms of.
dollars, but also in terms of
tragedy for individuals and
their families. It translates
out to 1700 New Mexicans dying a
year of sudden death. And so,
but this is preventable and I'll
just dip a little bit into the
other bill. So what do we do
about hold on to the other bill
because we need to, you've got a
committee set for that as well.
We need to present those
separately, so we'll wrap up,
Senator Hickey. This is a very
cheap way health plans say, oh,
it's gonna cost so much money,
they can go
negotiate the cost of this test
down to $35 or less, uh, the
impact of the test is so
profound, uh, I'm looking across
the panel, not everyone here is
above 50, but I highly recommend
and, and so do now progressively
cardiologists and all doctors
that you get this test, um, as a
screening test for, to prevent
you from having this sudden
death, and in half the people
it's asymptomatic. There are
no symptoms. Uh, and risk
factors we used to look at,
doesn't matter anymore. Very,
very simple approach. So what
I'm proposing here is to for age
over 50 essentially, eliminate
the cost sharing so that we can
get more and more people in to
get this test, discover if they
have the disease and are subject
to sudden death.
And um profound impact on cost
and uh uh again, mortality. So,
uh, with that, I would rest for
questions.
All right, thank you, Senator
Hickey. Um, now we go to, uh,
public testimony. Is there
anybody in the audience that's
in support of this bill?
If one person, all right, is
there anybody in the audience in
opposition?
See anybody online?
All right, if you wanna go ahead
and come on up.
And you get the microphone.
We'll give you one minute.
Uh, you'll see a 32nd reminder
that you've, you wanna wrap it
up as you start seeing that 32nd
reminder. All right, thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Viera Akiva. I'm the
life and Health division
director with the Office of the
Superintendent of Insurance and
uh I'm here to stand in support
of Senate bill Commit substitute
of the comedian substitute for
75 to 78, um, we, uh, support
coverage of uh coronary uh
artery calcium screening based
on established clinical
guidelines, um, as a vital tool
in managing cardiovascular
health and preventing future
heart.
complications. Thank you very
much. Thank you so much. All
right. Um, now we go to the
committee. Are there questions
or comments from the committee,
Senator O'Malley.
Madam Chair, um, Senator Hickey,
um, so you're looking, uh,
you're
Wanting this copay, in other
words, to be more along the
lines of uh sort of like if you
see a specialist maybe, um,
Madam Chair and senator,
actually I want to eliminate the
copay because I need to remove
this barrier. It's such a
profound impact on the health in
the country. We don't want
anything standing away. I, I, I
think I didn't make that clear.
I'm sorry.
OK.
Um
And so who, who would recommend
this test?
Uh, madam chair and senator, uh,
in some instances, the heart
hospital you can walk in by
yourself and get the test. You
don't have to have it
recommended. Normally, every
physician should be recommending
it if they're doing any kind of
primary care or cardiologic
care, uh, to their patients and
the uh pharmacists and their
expanded scope of practice,
we'll be able, and there is a
pilot project going on in rural
areas where they can order the
test and, and the blood.
work and treat the disease.
Uh, so let him er is it
appropriate for someone who,
let's say, has had a heart
issues and maybe has stents. Is
it appropriate for them to get
the test?
Uh, Madam Chair and senator, if
they've had stents, they've
already had the atherosclerotic
disease, and so they should go
straight to treatment. OK.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Figueroa, and
then we'll go to Senator
Bergman's
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Figueroa, and
then we'll go to Senator
Bergmans,
Madam Chair, my, um, question is
about the committee so
Then the difference between the
sub and the original, and what I
found comparing them so far, and
I'd like.
The sponsor to confirm if I
missed anything on page 257, 10,
and 12. There is a reference
that this doesn't apply to the
catastrophic insurance plans,
which was the recommendation
from the Office of the
Superintendent of Insurance, but
did I miss anything and are
there any other changes between
the original bill and the
committee sub.
Uh, Madam Chair and Senator
Figuero, uh, this goes into the
technicality of all the
commercial plans, the
catastrophic is in the exchange
catastrophic, uh, basically has
almost unlimited uh uh
Deductibles, uh, but there are
health plans, high deductible
plans all across the country.
You cannot get a um
You, you cannot, uh, have
You, you have to go through the
whole deductible until it's paid
off for it to apply. And so this
goes into every section of the
different health plans. Correct,
Madam Chair, I understand the
need for it and I understand
what it means. I'm just asking,
were there any other changes in
the committee's, they were not.
All right, thank you, Senator
Figueroa. Senator Bergman's
question was answered. Senator
Sher, did you still have a
question?
Yes, madam Chatter.
I know you're trying to get rid
of the
The deductible on this.
But I also know that there's a
lot of things out there where
The, the insurance companies
want you to get screened because
it's a lot cheaper to deal with
it upfront and late.
And I don't think that most of
those have a law saying thou
shalt do this.
Why do we need a law? And if
it's, if it's inexpensive and
effective, why do we need to
order the insurance companies to
do it.
Uh, Senator Char, that's a great
question, uh, Madam Chair. Uh,
this area of medicine has moved
so fast that the US Preventive
Task Force hasn't caught up with
it, and it's only the US
preventive Task Force
recommendations where the
co-pays are waived.
So the health plans. I mean,
yes, they should. I mean,
imagine one heart attack
surviving.
Um, getting in the hospital,
you're paying at a minimum
50,000, more like 100,000 or
200,000. So this, and they're
gonna be so many of these, uh,
that potentially 3400 heart
attacks, now half will die,
unfortunately, and those they
don't have to pay for
afterwards, but for those other
ones, if they end up with
hospitalization, all this other
testing that goes on that's no
longer necessary. I just think
health plans having uh worked in
them for a number of years were
very slow.
to catch up with technology.
So
It just doesn't make sense to
me. I would think that any
health plan would want would
actively be looking for ways to
reduce costs.
And this sounds like a way to
reduce costs, cause you're
right, it's $100,000 somebody
has a heart attack, 1000 people
have heart attacks.
Uh, you know, you're a million
dollars pretty quick, but uh
That's why I just, I, I'm
And perplexed why we have to
have a law saying, hey,
insurance companies, go save
money.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Sher. Any
other questions or comments from
the committee?
What is the will of the
committee?
I'm chair move you test.
All right, so this is on the on
the substitute.
Uh, do you mind restating that,
Senator O'Malley? No.
The agendas right there by your
I'm chair move you test.
All right, so this is on the on
the substitute.
Uh, do you mind restating that,
Senator O'Malley? No.
The agenda is right there by
your mic. You can just say
I'm chair move you test.
All right, so this is on the on
the substitute.
Uh, do you mind restating that,
Senator O'Malley? No.
The agenda is right there by
your mic. You can just say
I'm chair move you test.
All right, so this is on the on
the substitute.
Uh, do you mind restating that,
Senator O'Malley? No.
The agenda is right there by
your mic. You can just say
committee sub for, yes, I moved
uh the
agenda is right there by your
mic. You can just say committee
sub for, yes, I moved uh the
do not do not pass on the
do not do not pass on the
original bill and, and a due
I'm chair move you test.
All right, so this is on the on
the substitute.
Uh, do you mind restating that,
Senator O'Malley? No.
The agenda is right there by
your mic. You can just say
committee sub for, yes, I moved
uh the
do not do not pass on the
original bill and, and a due
pass on the committee subboard
I'm chair move you test.
All right, so this is on the on
the substitute.
Uh, do you mind restating that,
Senator O'Malley? No.
The agenda is right there by
your mic. You can just say
committee sub for, yes, I moved
uh the
do not do not pass on the
original bill and, and a due
pass on the committee subboard
278. Thank you. Is there a
second?
Second from Senator Bergman's.
We will go ahead and take a
look, take the boat, please.
Senator Figueroa. Yes. Senator
had a meal. Senator O'Malley.
Senator Paul.
Senator Ramos.
No.
Senator Sanchez.
Send it to share.
Senator Birth
Yes.
Senator Bergmann's. Yes, Senator
Hamlet.
Senator Paul.
And just Sanchez.
We have a 6 to 4. Yeah, but you
pass those 6 to 4. Thank you
very much, Madam Chair. And so
quickly go into 443. That would
be great. We do have 2. That is
also a committee sub, so if I
can get a motion for the sub.
I'm a dude who not pass um sent
a bill 443, and they do pass for
discussion purposes of the
Senate tax Business and
Transportation Committee have
443. Thank you so much. All
right, Senator Hickey. Yes, so
once, Madam Chair and committee,
we discovered that there is
calcium and as prescritic
disease, it needs to be treated,
uh, for years, we've had
statins, statins go into the
liver, into this.
process that's left over from
the first few weeks of life to
build hormones, um, and it goes
in through the different statins
work in different ways,
mechanisms to block the
production in the liver. Um, the
LDL, we now know in the old days
it used to be 120, then it went
to 90, and now it's uh publicly
at 70, but the people who've
been doing this research say it
needs to be below 50. If it's
below 50, you have virtually
guaranteed not to die of a heart
attack or
an occlusive stroke. So, getting
the medication in, uh, we have a
generic medication,
rosuvastatin, Crestor, uh, and
another one, Zetia, that blocks
what uh comes in through your
eating from being taken up in
the intestines. It's an old, old
drug, together, they cost about
60 cents a day, um, and again,
we want to remove the barriers
to people being treated, the
people would say, oh, you know,
appeal for the rest of my life.
Well, um,
Um, yeah, if it's gonna stop you
from uh having a heart attack
that that could well be worth
it, but the technology is
advancing. There is now a
medication that's very commonly
prescribed. Some people do fail
statins. It either doesn't get
below 50 or it can cause a side
effect of, um, what's called a
myositis, uh, why not exactly
clear, but you can get some
aching in the muscles. If you
get those side effects, then you
move on to a second line drug,
uh, which would be a.
ACSK9 inhibitor, and there's,
that's given every 2 weeks in
the subcutaneous shot. It's just
a little pinprick, you put in,
um, it is more expensive, but it
used to be $1000 a month. It's
now down to $130 a month because
there are a number of
manufacturers, and there's
another one in Clyceron, the
very cleverly you have to go to
the office to get a shot every 6
months, and so the copay because
of the technicalities, it's a
medical, um, is only about
$200 there are, uh, drugs coming
out that will be once a year. So
this eventually will be like a
flu shot. You just get the flu
shot once a year to block the
excess production, and if you
don't make it, you don't, you
don't destroy your arterial
wall, but even better if you
look at this picture here, the
picture on the right shows 2
years post-treatment, it so
reduces the active inflammation
that the arteries open back up,
and a number of people who are
suffering
pensioner from coronary artery
disease get relief from that.
And so, again, we're discovering
that the biggest killer, the
most expensive, uh, disease, and
maybe as we meet how we meet the
needs of the future, uh, the
cardiologists aren't gonna be
happy about this or the
Cleveland Clinic, but um if we
could, we virtually can't
eliminate coronary artery
disease today, and that's really
in the last few years that we've
understood this, and uh now we
want.
move it forward. And so this
bill does away with the uh
co-pay for the generic, which is
practically nothing, $3 and we
just want to get the barrier.
The other drugs, uh, do have
copays with competition or
bringing them down and they'd
only be used if there are side
effects of the statins, and or
if you can't get the, uh
LDL below 50.
All right. Uh, thank you,
Senator Hickey. I think about my
wife who is one of the
healthiest people I know, but
has to be on a statin just
because of genetics, whereas
you've got this chunky monkey
who doesn't have to be on a
statin because of genetics.
Uh, if we will go ahead and go
to the audience. Is there
anybody in the audience that's
in support of this bill?
Right? Anybody in the audience
in opposition of this bill?
We have one and one, all right,
we have one person online who is
in opposition, so we're gonna go
ahead and hear from the sport
first if you want to get up.
Uh, you'll have one minute.
Uh, Marlon will give you one
minute as well, and then we'll
give Jonathan online one minute.
Uh, so if you will go ahead and
state your name, you'll see the
32nd reminder.
Thank you committee members. My
name is Alejandro Amparan. I'm
the pharmacist with the Office
of the Superintendent of
Insurance. I'm here to speak in
support of the bill as amended.
We've worked hard with the
senator to make sure that we are
decreasing uh barriers, the
coverage of this important
medications in these important
treatments. Um, I cannot stress
enough that heart disease is a
huge problem nationwide and in
New Mexico, number one killer.
It is extremely, and I cannot
overstate it, it's extremely
important to reduce the barriers
to coverage. Thank you.
Thank you so much. All right,
Marla, if you want to go ahead
and come on up in opposition.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee Marla Schulz
registered lobbyist for Blue
Cross Blue Shield New Mexico,
and we have been working with
the sponsor on some amendments.
I have not seen those
amendments, so I'm not sure um
if our concerns have been
addressed, but we do uh have
some concerns and requested that
the bill contain more detail
regarding which drugs are
considered cholesterol lowering,
uh, so I'm not sure if that's
been addressed, um,
Chair members of the committee,
but in, in addition, would like
to bring up this point and this
was with the other bill as well.
Um, additionally, the
legislature should consider a
comprehensive review of the many
bills that eliminate cost
sharing this session and
strategizing in the interim on
what cost sharing restrictions
to consider.
Eliminating cost sharing shifts
cost to premiums, which are paid
by individuals, families, and
employers. So there is an impact
when we eliminate all cost
sharing, um, it's gonna hit
somewhere and it's gonna be on
our small commercial market.
Thank you.
Thank you, Marla. Um, and
reminder of Senator Hickey I'll
have 5 minutes to respond. Let's
go ahead and go to Jonathan
online, uh, Jonathan, you've
registered in opposition of this
bill, if you will, uh, you can
go ahead and unmute yourself.
You'll get a thirty-second
warning in your chat box. Go
ahead, Jonathan.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, Jonathan
Buxton with pharmaceutical Care
Management Association, the
National Association
representing pharmacy benefit
managers. We are in opposition
to this bill. I think that one
of the primary reasons we need
to to look at this is that when
we remove things like cost
sharing, it will result in
higher premiums that cost of
those drugs doesn't go away. The
money that would have been spent
on those drugs through the
co-pay doesn't go away. It just
gets shifted to everyone else
and insurance is about sharing
responsibility.
The healthy people picking up
the, the cost for the sick
people, but responsibility needs
to go both ways, and making sure
that patients are incentivized
to use the cheapest, best, most
effective thing for them is why
one of the ways they can help
protect their other plane
sponsors that are paying for the
care. Thank you.
Thank you so much. All right,
Senator Hickey, you do have 5
minutes to respond to public
testimony.
Madam Chair and committee maybe
30 seconds. Uh, I would, uh,
encourage those opposed to
listen to Senators share.
We doing this and just imagine
if you take $600 billion out of
healthcare costs 20%, I think
we're making up for that little
bit of extra cost they loosen
the copay. All right, thank you,
Senator Hickey. Now we go to the
committee.
Senator O'Malley.
I think you have a chair, and I
agree that, you know, as much as
possible, we should remove
barriers to for access to this
to this uh these drugs. Um,
Uh
My husband had a
Heart attack, um, all those
things actually said too, and he
had 6 stints, and he has to take
statins, then he also uh is uh
Diabetics, so, you know, the and
so we're we're talking a lot of
money every month for for drugs
and in particular let's see if
we can do anything about drugs
like Trulicity, which costs a
lot of money every month.
Hopefully some, something will
happen there, so that we can
reduce the cost of that, but,
um,
I, I think this is good and
it's, it doesn't, it sometimes
it, it's um it's frustrating
because
I think a lot of times insurance
companies don't want to pay
those what they consider upfront
cost, and because the savings
over a period of years in terms
of, of, of disease that could
result as a as a not taking care
of the stuff, you know, problems
in the first place, but it
doesn't.
That's not the way they work.
So, um, so I think you would
think that that would make
sense, but uh that's, that's a
problem, so, thank you, ma'am.
Thank you, Senator O'Malley.
Other questions or comments.
Senator shared.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I know
you're excited.
Um
So this the
Again, it said and I agree, why
aren't they doing it already?
Uh, if it's gonna save them
money, why do we have to order
them to do it? But I also know
that
That, you know.
Nothing is free. Somebody's
gonna pay for everything.
And so when we give everybody
free everything, well, somebody
else is paying somewhere.
I don't know how much you said
$3. It's just uh $3 a day or $3
a month, or
$3 a month.
Um
Yeah, so again, I'm not sure why
we have to order anybody to do
it.
I am concerned, uh, as Marla
pointed out, and I hadn't
thought about this, we, we're
doing this a lot. We have a lot
of piecemeal.
Bills in here. It just pick a
little piece instead of picking
a program.
And it, and I know every time I
see one of those and look at it
on the floor and, you know, it's
40 pages long, not the jury
says, but it's really just
because we've changed a little
piece all over the little place.
Just doesn't sound like a good
way to make law. That has
nothing to do with your bill.
That's really my buddy over
there.
Help me out.
Makes a lot better.
But
But even if it's just $3 a
month, that's not even cost
prohibitive at all for anybody.
So I, there may be a handful of
people, but
But I just don't see, again, why
we need a law to force insurance
companies to do.
save money
And $3 a month does not be rise
to the level of cost
prohibitive.
$3 a day, maybe that's $100 a
month, $3 a month, I don't see
it.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Sheer. Any
other comments or questions from
the committee, Senator Figueroa.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, once
again, I'm trying to isolate the
difference between the committee
sub and the bill that was
before, to see what has changed.
Um, and it seems to be adding
the references to catastrophic
insurance again and what answers
one of my concerns, Madam Chair
and sponsor is the incentivizing
to use brand drugs instead of
generic. So language was added
to, say, you use brand drugs if
there's an adverse reaction to
generic, if there's a need.
Um, which is important if we're
talking about paying for these
or eliminating the copays for
these kinds of drugs. So those
are excellent additions.
Um, Madam Chairman, I repeat the
concerns that have been raised
about
The big picture because we're
looking at isolated co-pay
changes scattered across, and I
don't know if anybody is
tracking the big picture. How
many are we approving? What
effect is it having? And I would
like to see us work on that and,
and interim. My other concern,
Madam Chair, and it's not going
to keep me from voting for this
bill, but it is a concern and we
need to address it.
If we're talking about removing
obstacles to care, we need to
target our solutions to
low-income families.
There are lots of families who
can afford this if there are
families who cannot, our
solutions should be targeted to
those families and not broadly.
And that's all, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator Figuero. Any
other questions or comments from
the committee.
What is the will of the
committee?
Mm
I'm moving to pass. We have a
pass from Senator Wirth.
Is there a second?
Oh, for the, yes, thank you,
Madam Chair, I move a do not
pass on Bill 443 and I do pass
on the Senate.
tax business Transportation
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 443,
Madam Chair, don't we have to
say it do not pass on the
previous committee of.
I do not pass on Senate Health
and Public Affairs Committee
substitute.
Hannah about 443 and if you pass
on Senate tax business and
transportation committee
substitute for 443. OK.
So we'll take Figueroa first and
then Senator Worth as the
second. All right, if you will,
I'm feeling we need to take a
vote, so go ahead and if you
will, Rebecca.
Senator Figueroa.
Yes, Senator Jaramil.
Senator O'Malley, Senator Paul.
Senator Ramos. No. Senator
Sanchez.
Senator to share.
Senator Ward.
Senator Bergmanns? Yes, Senator
Hamley.
We have 6 yeses and 4 no. All
right, you have a do you pass on
a 6 to 4.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair, in this next summer, I
will fix healthcare and bring it
to you
I get you a shirt, Senator
Hickey, that says that.
Um, so we do have Senate Bill
156, the low-income utility
users.
That is from Senator Stephanix.
Um, but it doesn't seem she's
busy running the conservation
committee right now.
So we're just gonna move on to
the next one, and maybe hear
back from her or send a
representative Ortiz.
Chime in, please.
So let's just roll over it for a
minute. We'll roll over it for a
minute. Um, we'll get back to
that. So now,
My
We do, and we've got, uh, she's
gonna be taking care of a couple
of those bills that we've got on
the agenda today. Um, let's move
on to Senate Bill 466.
center Maestus is not here
either.
Right, we might have a fast day
today. I just jinx us.
House Bill 199 is amended.
Come on down.
All right. So, um, Senator
Lindstrom, this is your first
time here in committee.
Um
my, my, my apologies. It's, as
you see, we've been, we've been
busting through a lot of bills
here. So Representative Oson,
just to give you a little
synopsis about what we do. We
give you 10 minutes to do your
be presentation, uh, that
includes your expert. Then what
we will do is go to public
testimony, then you will have 5
minutes to respond to public
testimony if you so choose.
And then we will go to the
committee.
And so, uh, that is your option
and uh we will let you go ahead
and start here. Actually, I'm
here today on behalf of
Representative Lentang, um, I'm
here to talk about House Bill
199, and I understand there's an
amendment, man.
It is amendment 231804.3. All
right, we do have that
amendment.
Can I get a motion
to
move amendment 0.231804.3 for
discussion. Thank you. Is there
any opposition to that
amendment? I don't need to do
that. I'm still working on the
amendment language. Y'all have
been very patient. Thank you,
Representative. Go ahead and
start. All righty, thank you.
Um, you want me to talk about
the amendment or just the bill
in general? The bill, please,
and then we'll go to the
amendment. Thank you, Madam
Chair, what this bill is it
allows for the taxation of
revenue Department to share.
certain tax data with the
legislative Finance Committee.
Um, basically what's happened,
it would, it would uh allow for
much stronger recommendations
when it comes to fiscal impacts,
and with that we stand for
questions.
Now, if you will, um, please let
us know what the amendment,
um, yeah, uh my expert, and if
you would, if you would like,
introduce yourself.
Thank you, uh, Chair, senators.
My name is Mikaela Fisher. I'm a
deputy director at LFC. I
oversee the program evaluation
unit there. Um, the amendment
is uh just some cleanup language
where we worked with tax and
Rev. They wanted to make sure
that, you know, it's really
clear that any information that
they would share with us that,
um, you know, would be held to
the same confidentiality
standards that their own staff
are held to that we would go
through training, um, and that
we would be held to the same
penalties if that
Uh, information got disclosed
while it was shared with us.
OK, do you feel you need to go
through any of the, the points
here on the amendment at all? Do
you want to address any of
those?
Uh, so, chair, I can just say
like anywhere where it says um
authorized by the tax
Administration Act. Those are
actually uh recommendations from
council service before they were
listed out the individual little
items that said, you know, you
shouldn't share this, um, it
just says, now anything in the
tax administration Act.
That holds tax data
confidential, applies to the
LFC, um, and then the very, the
second page of the amendment,
uh, it says on 7176, it just,
um, that's the part where it
says there are penalties if uh
you share tax data outside of um
what it's being used for. In
this case, it would be program
evaluation and that we would be
held to the same penalties that,
uh, employees the tax and the
department are for revealing
that information.
Right. Are there any questions
on the amendment?
I have a motion on the
amendment.
Is there opposition to the
amendment? All right. Thank you.
So.
So we have adopted the
amendment.
I have Senator Bergman's
whispering in my ear.
still getting the amendment
language. All right, now we go
to public testimony. Uh, is
there anybody in the audience
who is in support of this bill?
See none?
Oh wait, did I say, did you, oh,
OK.
OK. Anybody in the audience in
opposition of this film?
See none. Anybody online? No?
All right, so now we go to the
committee.
I see Senator Scher moving,
moving forward to his microphone
ever so slowly and stealthily.
So we're gonna go ahead and have
Senator share. So,
Madam Chair.
We've been working on this for a
long, long, long, long, long,
long time, and employees from
LFC or staff from LFC, wow, end
up as cabinet secretaries for
TRD and yet there's still this
problem TRD doesn't want to
share the information.
I don't remember how many years
ago, we probably worked on it, I
don't remember.
Um, where we tried to get some
kind of dynamic scoring for tax
packages.
And we couldn't because we
didn't know what anything was,
and we were forbidden from
knowing what it was.
Uh, we, but certainly through
LFC.
And I've just never understood
the, the problem, but just a
real quick clarification
question, Madam Chair.
Is this aggregate information or
do you get information from
William Sheriff.
Uh, thank you, Senator and
chair. Uh, no, there's a
provision in the bill, I believe
it's on the last page, no, page
6, it would, we wouldn't get
anything aggregated to less than
3 taxpayers. And honestly, we
really don't need anything. We
need kind of large scale for
bill analysis and
and so and so Madam Chair, and I
think that's exactly the point.
Um,
If I fall into a category like
most of us, OK, then most of us,
uh, you know, it, it's.
Out there. But if I am a special
taxpayer, I'm the only one in
the state, then they won't get
that because then that is
clearly identifiable to me.
Uh, or my business.
And um
And, and I, I, I think that was
always the concern. Well, wait a
minute, somebody at LFC can
identify a particular taxpayer.
Uh
But
I've seen this for a long time.
It's time to pass it.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Sheriff. Any
other questions, Senator
O'Malley?
The command here. So when you
talk about at least 3 taxpayers
you're getting information.
From 3 taxpayers.
In order to get an idea, and
you're saying sort of like
general, but you're getting some
Private information at this
point.
So chair and senator, yeah,
that's right. So we wouldn't
get, we wouldn't get in the
information that didn't have at
least 3 taxpayers' data kind of
aggregated together. So we
couldn't, you know, pull out, as
the senator said, Senator share
his information and say that was
his because it would be grouped
in with at least 3 and, and
honestly probably whole
counties, whole state levels of
data.
OK, but
OK, so who has, who gets that
data? I mean, who would know
who, who they were getting it
from.
So Chair and senator, the Texan
Rev employees would be the, the
holders of it right now, um, and
they would be sharing with us
that data aggregated um for our
analysis as we were without
sharing any other information in
terms of names or anything like
that. That's correct, Senator.
There's also provisions in the
bill that require a data sharing
agreement upfront to make sure
that, you know, it's clear what
is being shared, who's
responsible, and also that it's
destroyed after um
we're done doing the analysis as
well.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator O'Malley.
Other questions from the
committee.
Madam chair and sponsor, thank
you for the amendment. I
appreciate the addition of
training on how to handle
confidential information. I
think our LFC is generally
really well trained, but this is
a whole different level of
confidential information. I'm
wondering, Madam Chair and
sponsor, if you saw in the FIR
the questions cause I had it too
when I was reading page 6, line
15. They're providing aggregated
data to 3 taxpayers. That sounds
like you're sending 3 taxpayers.
There's this information, which
I know is not the intent, uh,
but why did, why is it written
like that, and I'm asking Madam
Chair, because this bill goes to
Senate Finance, not Senate
Judiciary, so we need the
judiciary people to do their
magic here.
So I'm wondering who you're
targeting there on that.
Madam, I am looking at later
work, but, um, the question is
about that line 23 taxpayers,
why wouldn't it be of at least 3
taxpayers or something like
that.
So chair, senator, the amendment
did change it data of at least 3
taxpayers. That's why.
That's number 3 on the
amendment, so good catch there.
Thank you. That's, that's it for
me.
I know Senator Paul was like,
All right.
Uh, any other questions or
comments from the committee.
I'm sure.
Thank you, Senator Sher. I is
there a second?
Yes.
Like I have a feeling that, is
there anybody in the post, uh,
in opposition to the Du Pas
motion.
Senator O'Malley, so go ahead
and take the boat, please.
Senator Figueroa. Yes, Senator
Jarame
Senator O'Malley.
Senator Paul,
Senator Ramos, yes, Senator
Sanchez.
Senator Sheer.
Senator Wirth. Yes. Senator
Bergman, Senator Hamblin. Yes.
Yeah, 9 to 1. Yeah, but you pass
on a 9 to 1.
Thank you very much.
So now we are moving on to
Wait, we're gonna go ahead and
move on to your house 19. All
right, let's go ahead and do
that, Senator uh representative
Bunstro
maam chair, and I do have my
co-sponsor here
at La. Why don't you come on up.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
House Bill 19 is uh committee
sub.
It is an economic development
bill that is a proactive
response to global economics,
the proactive response focuses
on the use of existing
infrastructure assets, we often
discuss, uh, the need for
economic diversification, and
one of the best practices used
in economic development is to
use existing assets and in this
pill, those are state and local
infrastructure assets in Mexico
is seen as generally a bridge
state. It's a great.
to drive through?
That this bill positions New
Mexico for increase in trade,
increase in reshoring,
increase in onshoring, and most
importantly, could put New
Mexico in a place to help with
elimination of supply chain
disruption.
The economic development
development department is
administratively responsible for
this uh bill if it does pass, it
sets up the uh districts, it
sets up all the geographic area
for a district with the criteria
would be to have a trade court
district criteria for projects
and an advisory committee that
helps provide recommendations
for those projects. It also in
Section 3 allows for P3 uh
participation as an incentive.
Those include guidelines,
clawbacks, financial
obligations, feasibility, uh,
cost benefit analysis and what
would have to be inside of a P3
agreement should we get to that
point. Um, there are 3 areas
primarily, uh, that have been
working together, Madam Chair,
Berlio County, Donana County,
and McKinley County on the
spill, we started back in
September, uh, as we've looked
at.
What are those assets that we
could take advantage of, and I'd
like to ask my co-sponsor to say
a few words.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. This,
it uh
The way I see this is we're
building upon or or taking
what's the success we're having
in Donana County and Teresa and
the port that that that we have
down there and this is just
expanding the opportunities to
other parts of the state, which
I feel are just as important as
as representative Listrom had
mentioned, you know, we're
passed through, there's so much
potential in the state that we
could take advantage of this,
and I think this is an excellent
opportunity for us to grow our
state, in addition, um, and
looking for other ways to um for
economic development. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you so much. All right, so
now we go to the audience, um,
uh, by a show of hands, somebody
in the audience are in support
of this bill.
23456.
Everybody in the audience in
opposition of this bill.
So we have 6 in support.
And then we have uh another
person online and support. So
why don't we just go ahead,
we'll go to 3 folks uh who are
in support.
And then, um, Representative
Vlada, this is your first time
here. You'll have 5 minutes to
respond to public testimony, if
you so choose, otherwise we'll
go right to the committee.
Go ahead, you have one minute.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Peter Compos. I'm the
vice president of the
Gallup-McKinley County Chamber
of Commerce. I would like to
thank our the sponsors of this
bill, Representative Lungstrom
and the other sponsors, and we
stand in support of House Bill
19. Uh, House Bill 19 would help
our community by helping to
build strategies and
opportunities around our
existing economic assets.
Assessments of our primary
industrial assets have concluded
that transportation and
logistics define the heart of
our potential for economic
development in Gallup and
McKinley County. In recent
years, our region has been
devastated not only by the
COVID-19 restrictions and
impacts, but also the dramatic
changes in the energy industry,
resulting in the closure of a
refinery and a coal-fired power
plant. The loss of these major
industrial employers for
McKinley County not only means
that many good-paying jobs have
evaporated, but so too has the
tax base for the county.
House Bill 19 not only benefits
Gallup-McKinley County, that's
designed to provide funding
support for infrastructure
development and qualified trade
port sites all across New
Mexico, including Dona Ana and
Brown Leo. The chamber and our
300 businesses support House
Bill 19. Thank you. OK, thank
you so much.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Jason Espinoza
speaking on behalf of New Mexico
ADA, the statewide economic
development Professional
Association, as well as the
mechanical contractors
Association and the Sheet Metal
Contractors Association in New
Mexico, uh, stand in strong
support of this legislation. Uh,
this is really about
strategically using our existing
assets that we have here in the
state of New Mexico, uh,
targeting the infrastructure
which will then grow around that
and create economic activity, so
we stand in strong support.
Thank you. Thank you so much.
my
Uh, good morning, Madam Chair
and members of the committee. My
name is Marco Gonzalez and I'm
the registered lobbyist for
McKinley County. I think most of
you, uh, we appreciate the
sponsors of bringing this bill
forward. It's a really important
strategic piece. I don't know
that if I can say anything more
than what uh everybody else
before me has said, uh we do
support the bill. I'd also say
that it's going to advantage
other counties like Bernalillo
and, and of course Tanya, um,
San Juan potentially and also
Sandoval County. There's a
handout that you got that showed
uh uh all the
reasons why it would potentially
benefit those and so uh for all
the reasons stated, we, uh,
Kinney County supports Bill. I
appreciate you uh voting for it.
Thank you, Madam Chair Members
Committee.
Thank you so much. I also
received from the assistant
county manager of Donana County
Board of uh the board of
commissioners also supports.
We're gonna go ahead and go to
Carol Carolyn Tobias online.
Carolyn, you have uh one minute,
you'll see a 32nd warning in
your chat box. Uh, go ahead and,
uh, give your public testimony.
Good morning. Thank you, um,
Madam Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Carolyn
Tobias Berlio County Economic
Development and Central New
Mexico coalition partner with
Sandoval County in the village
of Los Lunas for the I-40 trade
port corridor. I do want to also
um stress our support and
recommendation of this bill, as
has already been said, we are at
a crucial time where New Mexico
can lead and show leadership to
the nation with regard
to our logistics and
transportation assets and uh
every couple of weeks, I'm on
the phone with USDOT and they
asked me, they say, is New
Mexico really gonna step up and
lead, like you're showing
leadership already with this
these trade port activities, and
they are watching this bill very
closely. So thank you so much,
chair, members of the committee,
and also the supporting
representatives for this bill
because this is a a really
impactful bell for our state.
Thank you.
Thank you so much, uh,
representatives, you have an
opportunity to respond or if
you'd like, we can go ahead and
just go to the committee.
All right, thank you very much.
Any questions or comments from
the committee, Senator Bergmans.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. Can you
just explain or elaborate a
little bit more why you have
this whole section that exempts
everything from the procurement
code.
Thank you, miss, uh, thank you,
Madam Chairman. Uh, thank you,
Representative. It's not unusual
when you think of about all
these this section that's
exempting from the procurement
code because you're gonna have a
P3 activity in here. So,
depending on how that agreement
is structured, remembering that
it's going to be public
infrastructure, they may need to
to have this.
OK, thank you. And are there
clawbacks in here for the
different types of, is it on?
Yes, madam. Can you just
elaborate on what they are?
Yeah, they are. There's a
section in there. I think it's
under section 8, when you think
about uh what has to go into
specifically the P3 concept.
There is a, there is a uh
section in there for clawbacks.
OK, thank you. That's all my
questions.
Thank you, Senator Bergens.
Other question, Senator
O'Malley,
you know that County is, is
participated in this, and, and I
was also gonna uh uh say that
I'm glad to see that uh it's
required that they provide
clawback, um, recapture
provisions in any, any
agreement, and also, you know,
um, what the benefit would be to
the public and all the things
that are important when, when,
uh, you know, agreeing to, uh,
uh,
to work together with a, with a
private partners, so I
appreciate that.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Wirth. I just
want to follow up some more on
the exemption from the
procurement code. We had another
proposed new district in
Albuquerque that had this
language and we took it out.
I, I just can.
It just concerns me that a
complete blanket exemption, I
don't want to send this bill to
the judiciary, but I'm concerned
that this will definitely flag
this whole I mean, we'll
probably have floor amendments,
you know, strip it, so I'm just
If, if we took that out, is that
gonna cause huge concern to you.
You know, um, Madam Chair,
Senator, I don't.
My, my personal feeling is, is
that it would not, but it seems
like it's pretty standard
activity here in the state of
New Mexico, when you think about
everything that is already
exempt from the procurement
code.
And I, it doesn't make it right,
but it does fall in line with
all the other kinds of things
that have been exempt.
So, I mean, we had the same
discussion with the pro tems
bill and took it out. So, I, I
just, again, I'm gonna make a
motion to just, I think we just,
is this all?
It's section, no section.
Starts on page 18, um, section
12, right? The only addition in
section 12 is that one
exemption, right? So if I just
struck it's on section 12.
OK. May I ask my other expert to
make a comment.
Go ahead.
Madam Cha Senor Rob Black,
secretary designee for Economic
Development Department. I think
one thing I did want to add as
to regarding the procurement
code component.
When you're doing a a P3, you're
typically doing a contract that
will be multiple years because
of it's a large capital
investment. We don't have within
the procurement code the ability
to do a 30-year contract or a
20-year contract.
Uh, without the renewal RFP
process. I think that's the real
challenge with doing large
infrastructure through 3 P's,
um, that we're trying to address
with that language.
So, Madam chair, does that mean
any public-private partnership
bill that comes through is going
to want to be exempted from the
procurement code. We've been
having this discussion for a
long time. And again, I'm, I'm,
this is a very targeted. It's
not a just a broad P3 we've been
through that before. No, yes,
yes, we have, but I just
It just concerns me that, that
we wouldn't have the oversight
that the procurement code
provides.
And, and all of a sudden we
start creating all these
vehicles that just get around.
You know, that oversight, that's
just that's my concern with
that, and there may be some, it
may make it a little bit harder,
but quite frankly, what
It's designed to kind of the
whole, it's just a chat to make
sure there's
So everything is being done
with.
A process that exists in the
procurement code. So I just,
this is, it causes me concern
and we did take it out in the
same argument was made about the
new district down and, and then
I got a whole bunch of feedback
after we took that out saying
you did exactly the right thing.
You should not have an exemption
from the procurement code. So
I'm just trying to
Get a feel for
for that.
Madam Chair, Senator, um,
you know, if there's a way to do
a more targeted approach that
allows for those longer term
contracts that don't, doesn't
have the broader exemption for
the procurement code, you know,
that might be a way to do that,
but I, I do it, you're right,
this has been an ongoing
conversation around these types
of projects, but if you can't,
if a company can't guarantee an
ROI on a multi-year or
multi-decade infrastructure
investment because they have to
go back.
For an RFP in 3 years, you won't
get that that partnership, and
that's the challenge.
So what I'm gonna suggest is I'm
gonna make the motion here, this
bill goes to Senate Finance and
if you guys can craft something
that's a way to deal with that
piece of it. So it's not just a,
a blanket exemption across the
board, then that's what I would
suggest putting that in there,
so think about it.
Yeah, that's right. That'll give
you a chance to, I mean, I don't
want to send the bill out with
this like this because we're
then we'll end up on the floor
having exactly the same, the
same argument. And again, I, I
will see where the rest of the
committee stands, and I mean if
anyone else wants to weigh in, I
don't know where, where maybe
Senator Sanchez has something to
say.
Sanchez, uh, Madam Chair, and
with what Senator Wor is saying,
that's my concern is, um,
Everybody wants an exemption on
this. So my question would be,
uh, Madam Chair Representative,
and Mr. Black, what is the
longest
Contract term that they can go
with the procurement code. Is it
3 years is what you're saying, 3
years is the max standing.
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator, that
is my understanding is you, you
can go do a 3 year and then you
need to go back out for an RFP
then I, I, there could be, I
could be incorrect, but that is
my understanding. OK, Madam
chair and, and representative. I
thought it was like 5 years they
could go, but I wasn't sure. But
these projects, Madam Chair and
Representative, you're talking
about 20 to 30 years, so you'd
want a contractor 23 years, so
you don't have to do the RPA
RFP, uh, process every 3 to 5
years, whatever it is.
Madam Chair, Senator, if if
you're thinking about, um, like
a water project, your ROI on
that sort of capital investment
is going to be 20 to 30 years.
And if you're a, a private
sector partner wanting to invest
and help build that water
project.
Um, and you have to go back out
to an RFP and you might not get
your return because you've got
to do it whether it's 3 or 5
years. It does, the risk level
is very, very high. And that's
where you run.
Man and representatives, so.
Yeah, cause I mean, you could
possibly get a better price than
the previous contractor or it
could go up, so I guess that's
all I have, Madam Chair,
representing, I think
maybe
what we could do in the bill is
we might be able to have an
amendment that basically says
because you have to put together
a business plan before you can
do the the P3. If it is uh an
infrastructure project beyond 20
years than it could be possibly
exempt from the procurement
code. Would you think that would
work?
Because you understand what our
situation is, we won't get
anybody to participate in a P3
process if they know they have
to keep going back.
And I guess that that's the
question. I mean, it feels like
they're
Can we narrow this narrow this
down, uh, that might be the way
to do it. So if it is, if the uh
life of the project is 20 years
higher than we would have to, we
would ask for that kind of
exemption. So I guess my, my,
at, at this point, my, my
preference would be to take it
out and then you work on exactly
that language and bring an
amendment to Senate Finance to
put the tweak in. I just don't
know enough sitting here right
now to be able to to fashion
that and get it.
Right, and yeah, my thinking is
that amount of terrorists that
we, if we take out the section
on procurement, go back to
Section 8 with that amendment in
there that says you would be
exempt from the procurement
code, not have all this other
stuff in there. We would that be
cleaner then?
So we can have an amendment here
today, Senator Wirth. Well, I
was just gonna, I was just gonna
propose the strike section 12.
Which I think the only thing in
section 12 is the blankets. It's
adding this into and then we
could go back to Senate Finance
with a revised Section 8 that's
because it's under the P3 piece
and that's all we're asking for.
And that's exactly that makes
more sense to me than just a
blanket exception, and then you
can craft that and get it, get
it right. I'd feel more
comfortable with depending if
the will of the committee's
there.
So after I move that we strike
section. well, which is the only
adding that one blanket
exemption with the understanding
that that's the, you're gonna
work on it.
To deal with it.
Senator.
Just to clarify, section.
Section 12 is page 18.
Through page 23.
All of that goes away. So Madam
chair, it's all existing
language. So once you take it
out, the only thing that's being
added is on page 23 at the
bottom line 23, the two
sentences, so it just, it
doesn't strike all, doesn't
eliminate all the language from
the law. We're not eliminating
the whole law. I think by taking
that out, it just means we're
not touching that
out, it just means we're not
touching that's actually
important. Thank you.
Uh, do you mind repeating that
again, section 12 on page 1717,
1819.
2021, 22, and 23 and 24.
24, so just the whole section,
strike it.
Right.
It seems to be an agreement from
the committee
to do that.
Yes, absolutely, because we do
have a section 13, so it would
be renumbered, that would become
the new section 12.
Get that to Rebecca.
All right, we do need to vote on
that amendment. So if you will,
when you're ready, Rebecca.
Make all those changes.
I can restate it if it's home.
She got, I think you got it. OK.
So if you will go ahead and, and
vote on the uh text, I mean the
tax committee amendment.
Senator Figueroa.
Oh.
Senator had a meal. Senator
O'Malley.
Senator Paul,
Senator Ramos. Yes. Senator
Sanchez.
Send it to share. Senator Ward,
yes. Senator Bergman, Senator
Hamlin. Yes. We have 9 yeses and
0. All right, the amendment
passes 9 to 0. Any other
conversations or questions, uh,
for, for the, the
representatives from the
committee.
What is the will of the
committee, Madam, I do pass
as amended.
All right, we have a due pass as
amended. Is there anybody in
opposition to that Du Pas
motion.
Seeing them while Senator
O'Malley is still somewhat in
the room.
All right, we have a 9 to 0 due
pass. Thank you, we'll get on
that.
Thank you so much.
All right. Now, I do see um
Madam Chair, I'm happy to do
156. All right, so Senator, we,
we are gonna go back, um, we are
trying to go a little bit in
order, but as you're seeing that
we kind of move quickly, so
we're gonna, uh, Senator Wirth
is going to go ahead and present
Senate Bill 156, on behalf of
Senator Stephanics, the
low-income utility users.
Good
Um, and Senate Bill 156, uh, by
senators Deanics and
Representative Cortez, uh, the
bill provides protection for
low-income rooftop solar
customers of public utilities
and it protects them from future
rate riders. What it does is it
contains a new definition of of
low income and basically exempts
those low income solar
customers.
from those riders, the
definition, uh, of low-income
customers is 80% of the area
median income.
Uh, and it directs the investor
own utilities to inform, uh,
customers how to qualify as low
income. Why is this important,
uh, as more folks are using
different federal and state
programs to access rooftop
solar, we want to make sure that
as I've always said is families
are sitting around the table,
kind of doing the pencils on
paper to see how this works. Uh,
they decide to move forward.
It pencils out and they move
forward, they don't get hit down
the road with a rider that
basically could take away all
the savings that came from the
rooftop solar. That's what the
bill does with me is Christian
Casilla, uh, as an expert
witness, and we're happy to
stand for questions. We'll just
Go go out to the audience first
and then address questions as
they come in. All right, that
sounds great. Thank you, Senator
Worth. Uh, by a show of hands,
how many in the audience are in
support of this bill?
Have 2. Thank you. How many in
the audience are in opposition
of this bill?
We have one. All right, is there
anybody online? You're getting
that ready. All right, so let's
go ahead and go to the 2 in
audience, um, and then the
opposition. So those of you who
are standing up in support. You
have one minute. You'll get a
32nd reminder.
Go ahead and start.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, I'm Ken Hughes
speaking on behalf of the Rio
Grande Chapter, the Sierra Club.
In Colorado this year Excel and
some real cops are offering a
repayment of, of uh installation
of solar on the utility bills.
that kind of program come to New
Mexico, this bill would ensure
Long come residents, uh, renters
and homeowners alike would be
able to keep the money.
And I appreciate your support of
the bill. Thank you. Thank you
so much.
Thank you.
Good.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is JD Bullington, and I'm
speaking to you today as a
registered lobbyist for the city
of Santa Fe, which strongly
supports this legislation and
the city of Santa Fe also
endorses the agenda of the
coalition of sustainable
communities in New Mexico. We
want to applaud that
organization and we also want to
thank the sponsors for bringing
this forward.
Thank you so much. All right, so
let's go ahead and go to
opposition in the audience, and
then we do have uh 2 yeses and 2
nos. We have and and Stephanie
in support, Hank and Beth in
opposition we'll go to you in
just a moment. You go ahead, you
have one minute.
Oh.
Good morning, um, Madam Chair
Hamblin, uh, members of the
committee, Carlos Lucero with
the public service company in
Mexico.
An SB 156 puts the burden on
utilities to determine
low-income eligibility without
specifying clear requirements
leading to private issues and
potential inconsistencies as
people move between counties.
PNM believes that HB 91
The other low income bill
achieves the what SB 156 intense
to without putting the burden on
low income customers and
protecting their personal
information.
I do, and it would allow the PRC
to prove low income rates and
programs. I do want to also
state that the exemption writer
that they're talking about
within this bill is to exempt
ancillary and standby services.
If you were to do this, this
would actually spread the cost
amongst the other renewable
interconnected customers within
the utilities. So for these
reasons, we oppose Senate Bill
156. Thank you. All right, thank
you so much. Now we're going to
online we have
Um, Anne and Stephanie in
support and then Hank and Beth
and um opposition. For those of
you online, uh, just to let you
know, you will receive a 32nd
warning in your chat, uh, if you
will, please pay attention to
that. If you do go over one
minute, we will cut you off. Uh,
so, and, go ahead and if you
will unmute yourself, uh, you
will have one minute to give
public testimony in support of
this bill. Go ahead, Ann.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
committee members. My name is
Alyn Hall, and I am the CEO of
Prosperity Works. I am here
today to ask for your support of
SB 156 low income utility users.
New Mexico has funding in place
already to support over 5000 low
income households to access
rooftop solar systems in the
next 4 years. This bill protects
the savings that these systems
would generate for households by
exempting low income households
from any uh rate writers for
standby charges or ancillary
fees. This bill is an important
step to protect the lifetime
savings of these systems, which
is estimated to be 10 to $20,000
over 25 years. As a state, we
need multiple solutions to lower
energy bills for low income
households. This is one piece of
the puzzle to doing just that. I
urge your support of this bill
and thank the sponsor for all
their work on this bill. Thank
you.
Thank you so much. All right,
Stephanie, you're up. Um, also
just a correction, Hank, uh,
Hughes, uh, said that he is in
support of this bill. So
Stephanie, go ahead. You have
one minute.
Good morning. I'm Stephanie Zer
from Albuquerque, an attorney
who appears regularly before the
New Mexico public regulation
commission. First, thank you to
the sponsors for this thoughtful
and timely bill. Thank you for
the opportunity to comment. SB
156 will help secure the
financial benefits that tens of
millions of dollars the federal
so for all grant will bring the
thousands of New Mexico
low-income utility customers. It
will allow low income customers
to enjoy renewable energy and
build savings, other customers
have long enjoyed.
the utility renewable energy
programs for large customers,
that secure those customer
savings. PNM, for example, has a
voluntary renewable energy
program for its large customers
called Solar Direct, that
permits large customers like
Walmart.
To get more of their energy from
renewables and save money on
their electric bills because
renewable energy is cheaper, but
the renewable energy program
PNM.
Uh, has for residential
customers, the Sky Blue program
is a premium program, meaning
customers pay extra for
renewable energy instead of
enjoying the savings. We could
serve the biggest corporations
with lower low cost renewable
energy. We can also do the same
for the poorest amongst us and
protect those savings. That's
all this still does.
Thank you. Sorry, Stephanie, we
did have to cut your mic. You
went to 1 minute and 7 seconds.
Uh, Hank, if you will, uh, go
ahead and unmute your mic. You
have one minute, you'll get a
32nd warning in your chat box.
Go ahead and hang.
OK, can you hear me? Yes. Um,
Santa Fe County is strongly
support of Senate Bill 156, we
think low income people need
access to solar, just like
everybody else. Thank you very
much. Please support this bill.
Thank you so much. And now we go
to opposition, Beth, uh, you
have expressed opposition to
this bill, if you will.
Go ahead. Oh, she's in support,
Beth, you're in support as well.
Yes, I am. OK, we'll go ahead
and we'll just mark that. um,
and thank you very much, Beth.
We appreciate that. We'll go now
to the sponsors if you'd like to
respond or we can uh go ahead
and go to the committee.
I'm sure let me yield to Mr.
Casillas, who's executive
director of the coalition of
Sustainable Communities just for
a couple of comments and then
we'll get right into it. All
right, so you do have 5 minutes.
OK, thank you, madam.
Madam
Yeah, Madam Chair, um, committee
members, uh, just to clarify a
few things, this bill does not
impact rural electric co ops. It
does not require IOUs to verify
or store sensitive info for
customers that want to qualify
as low income. It simply
requires the public utilities to
inform all customers, what is
the process for qualifying as
low income, um, regarding the
Concern about um uh undue costs
on other rate uh ratepayers, um,
the information we have in 2014,
um PNM submitted in their rape
case, um, a request for a rape
rider Francier and standby
services of $6 per kilowatt for
all solar customers, um, again,
we anticipate that uh there will
be something like 5000 low
income.
households, um, that will have
access to these coming programs.
There are 750,000 residential
customers in the 3 IOU service
territory, um, served by them
if, uh, if we take that $6 per
kilowatt, uh, multiply that by a
typical household system of 4
kilowatts, that would be a
monthly charge of $24 on these
households, $288 per year. If we
take that.
over 5000 households, that's 1.4
million. If you spread that over
all 750,000 households, that
would be an additional 15 cents
a month. Um, so there is really
due to the, the, the small
number of rooftop solar
households that are we're hoping
to protect, um, there's really
negligible risk of any uh undue
burden on any other ratepayers.
Um
We're ready for questions. All
right, let's go ahead and go to
the committee. Are there
questions or comments from the
committee.
Senator Sher, I'm watching your
body language.
Madam Charles was waiting for
anybody else to go first,
particularly Senator O'Malley,
but.
He's not she's, yeah,
I, I, I pretty much I look
between Senator Sheriff, Senator
Figueroa, and Senator O'Malley.
They know there's pressure, and
I appreciate you accepting that,
Senator share.
So,
Madam Chair, just, uh, first of
all,
I, I briefly heard about the
writer, but I don't understand
what kind, what writer are we
talking about or writers?
Madam Chair, Senator.
Um, the
Uh, New Mexico statue, the
public utility Act allows IOUs
to recover costs for standby and
ancillary services resulting
from solar customers connected
to the grid.
The primary physical grid impact
of solar um tends to have to do
with voltage regulation, and
this typically only occurs with
large systems close to megawatts
in size or very high penetration
of solar, um, solar systems with
smart inverters, uh, can
typically provide voltage
regulation themselves.
In the case of income, uh, low
income solar owners, the impact
of a relatively small, we're
talking about thousands of small
solar systems distributed across
the grid will have negligible
impact on utility power quality
and should therefore be exempt
from this particular rate rider.
Madam Cha.
I still don't know what an
ancillary writer is.
What do we mean? Can you
describe
System or the box or the
whatever it is.
Madam Chair, Senator, sure. So
stand by and ancillary services,
ancillary services is a broad
term, um, so the utility is
required to provide voltage
regulation, frequency
regulation, um, make sure that
there's, there's stable power
quality when uh there are
certain interruptions in this.
They, there are a number of
different technical ways they
can do things they can do to
modify that. It often has to do
with.
There, um, their natural gas
peaker plants, um, there are uh
um uh various capacitor banks
that can come online, smart
inverters from solar can modify,
um, uh, the voltage regulation
as, as well. And so these rate
riders are to to compensate the
utility for any costs that they
have to uh bring when they are
keeping power quality that
might.
Be modified by high penetration
of solar.
So, Madam Chair.
There was a comment about
Walmart and another big
corporation.
I'm trying, I'm trying to
understand here. So, when the
power goes out, Walmart has, you
know, how many megawatts of
power they have over their
parking lot or whatever that is.
They have their own battery
backup that kicks in.
But when
Power goes out.
When the solar goes out because
the sun's not shining.
The utility company, whether
it's P&M or anybody else still
has to provide power to that
home, he said.
Is that correct?
So I'm sure that's correct, if
the home does not have its own
battery system. OK, that
basically will function when.
When the power turns off and
An issue that's gonna become
more and more of an issue as we
get these, these, you know, we
just saw here in Santa Fe, with
the threat of a potential
complete shutdown. Yeah, so I
think more and more homes are
going to be looking at battery
systems to do that, so, but, but
you're right, if you don't have
the battery system, then the
default is into the, into the
grid.
OK, so Ancillary and Madam Chair
would be
The peaker plant that turned on
power relatively quickly and
still put power at the home. I'm
after, I think you're getting
confused on the rider here is
not an additional peaker plant
or anything like that. It's just
the cost that gets passed along.
Because they have under the
statute, the ability to
Go out and recover that when
there's a decrease based on the
home systems.
Madam Chair and Senator, I, I
think I misstated it. It's to
pay for.
OK. OK. All right. So it's to
pay for that. I got that.
Um
Hey, I want to thank you very
much for acknowledging that
natural gas is very important
part of
Clean energy cause without it,
you don't have any energy at
all.
Most of the time.
Oh, thank you. I'm gonna mention
that often now.
Um, low income is another
question I have for you. And so
here, um,
Uh, me, me and
income for a family of
$4,603,000 a year, at least
according to the FIR.
Um
But when you come to median,
well, that's half, so half of
the people qualify and half
don't, but then the 80%.
Uh
That still comes into
40% of all of the people in the
state could qualify as that.
You might
doing my math right there.
Uh, it, it, Madam Chair,
senator, yeah, thank you for
that question. That it, that's a
reasonable assumption, um, the,
the math doesn't really work out
that way. The median is, is the
average in New Mexico. It's
something like 340,000
households fall below 80% AMI,
um, it's, it's around 40% of the
population um fall under the the
low income, um, qualification.
And so, Madam Chair, Senator, so
that's what I did.
With a pencil, by the way, um,
so 300, 300, you said that 5000
homes were expected to
To qualify for this, but 40% of
all the homes in the states
300,000.
So that's a dramatic difference
because it's only the homes that
have Madam chair, only the homes
that have solar.
So
And only 5000 of those have
solar, so you take your pencil
number.
And then of that number.
5000.
are the ones that would
in, so it's not, you gotta have
solar panels on to, to go
through the exercise.
So, Madam Chair, 5000 today.
Ma, that's, that's correct.
Again, obviously,
It could grow. There's no
question.
So my experts clarifying 5000 in
the next 4 years, so we're not
quite at 5000 today, is what I'm
being told, but no question that
As you sit and anyone who looks
at doing one of these systems.
Sits around the table and trying
to make it work, and the idea
here is to make sure that we
don't have
A rider system that in effects
Makes the low income folks
unable to make the numbers work.
So, Madam Chair and senator, I
remember back, I can't remember
the name of the term now where
Electricity flows backwards onto
the grid from the from the home.
And and then the, the utility
had to buy that.
Um
What is the term for that net
metering, net metering, yes,
thank you. I knew you.
I could
Um
So when it first started, Madam
Cherry, there was just a handful
of homes that had that. Uh, I
think in Farmington there were
like 6 or 8 homes, um.
Doctor that lives
5 or 6 houses from me. It's like
the 2nd largest uh
Uh, power plants in the city.
Um
And it started to become a real
problem because
He was selling at a prime rate
and buying at a nothing rate.
And uh
So eventually, the net metering
everywhere.
changed.
Because all of a sudden it
became a massive issue.
Um
And so I look at things like
this, so it might make sense for
5000 homes.
Isn't going to make sense for
300,000 homes.
For 100,000 homes, which, which
could come along, uh, just like
the net metering encouraged
people to do things. So this
doctor sat down and penciled it
out and said, wow, I can become
more uh more prosperous if I
just sell electricity to the
city of Farmington than if I'm a
doctor.
And uh, and he does.
Um, although he also has bees,
and I take advantage of his bees
because I plant stuff.
So
So when we're, when we're
looking at this, I, I, I'm
looking at what is the
potential.
Because net metering did become
a real problem or statewide
eventually.
And, uh, so is this gonna be do
the same thing it's going to
become a a problem statewide,
because I think there could be
300,000 houses, but even if it
takes a few years to get there,
it took net metering a few years
to get there, and then it became
a problem.
So then all of a sudden, what
you have is you've got to have
these peaker plants, gas-powered
beaker plants, by the way, um,
natural gas.
I guess you could have diesel
ones, but natural gas is a
little cleaner.
Uh
So the, the, the utility is
going to have to buy more and
more of these, or bigger and
bigger, uh, and so there will be
a cost eventually, a growing
cost eventually to make sure
that power still flows to the
house.
When the sun's not shining.
Yeah, I mean, I think though
that
What we're talking about here
because we don't do net metering
anymore. So, this really is just
a way, it's shifting and
there's, you know, this low
income group is not gonna pay
that rider, which means that
others of us, I mean, I have
solar panels and I might pay a
little more, and others, and
actually it can get allocated
across the
Let me, let me check.
So Matt, Madam, the PRC is going
to determine how that gets
allocated. But again, it's not a
question of needing to increase.
Commercial solar with batteries,
which is another option from
natural gas, but or more
nuclear, another option is a
base, power load and we're
having all that discussion. I
think this is more though, just
reallocating the cost is what
this is gonna do.
All right, thank you, ma'am.
Thank you, Senator Sher. I think
just for giggles in our last
week as we're all doing our best
to get through this, I might put
a bingo card.
And of the natural gas
references that you make, um,
Uh, any other questions or
comments from the committee.
What is the will of the
committee? Move it to pass. We
have a due pass from Senator
Jaramilo. Do we have a second?
We have a second from Senator
O'Malley. He will go ahead and
take the vote, Rebecca.
Senator Figueroa.
Senator Figueroa.
Yes.
Senator had a meal. Senator
O'Malley, Senator Paul.
Senator Ramos
No.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator.
sent her to work.
Senator Bergman's.
Senator Hamlin. Yes. We have 6
yeses and 4 nos. You have a 6 to
4 due pass.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Wirth. All
right, now we're moving on to,
uh, we're trying to go back in
order. We have Senate Bill 466,
Senator Maestas, here look at
changes.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Honorable members. This is uh
Senate Bill 466 deals with
tweaks to the liquor Control
Act, uh, briefly, as you know,
we created a uh restaurant B
license, uh, with the famous
House Bill 255 a few years back,
and this just uh
This just kind of fixes the the
language so that instead of
having a beer and wine with a
with a with a a permit, you now
just have a restaurant, a
license.
Which is already in statute.
It's a beer and wine with
locally distilled spirits,
Restaurant B, beer, wine and
spirits, and then, uh, what,
what is called a beer and wine
license will be referred to as a
restaurant C and so when you
look on um when you look on the,
on the fee page, the fees don't
change just the names change and
the fees follow the names. But
what was interesting, uh, Madam
Chair, when I was
preparing this bill to just,
just to kind of um the the main
policy change, Madam Chair, is
that right now under current
law, you have to have a beer in
line for one year before you can
get the locally distilled
spirits license. It was a tweak
in the statute. You can get a
restaurant B today, you have to
wait a year to get the locally
dispelled, we wanna promote
locally distilled spirit market,
so that, that's the policy
change with regards to that. I
was then approached by uh by a
local city councilor very
forward thinking, uh, counselor
who
came to me with with section 3,
and this is what would I ask you
to consider. Section 3 is the
local entertainment zone, and
this is what they have in most
other cities where you can uh uh
local county or city can can uh
create a, a zone either outside
of a stadium and it's downtown
area and some of the smaller
towns maybe in their, uh their
old, uh, their old, uh, what's
it called, the old, um,
The old historic districts of
the downtown, all the beautiful
little towns that have their
downtown, you can create a
section and then you can change
the, the, the liquor laws within
that section for a particular
afternoon or evening, uh,
dealing with the purchase,
possession or consumption of
alcohol, maybe you have art
galleries, uh, maybe you have,
uh, theaters, bars, restaurants
where folks can go from, uh,
venue to venue and enjoy
themselves in that, in that
contained space, and, and
obviously the local.
Counties are municipalities will
make that decision and they'll
have the uh the public safety
aspect carried out, uh, if, if
in fact they choose to do that
and if the town doesn't want to
do that, then by all means they
never have to do that. So uh
with that, I'll stand for, uh,
with that, uh, if I could turn
to the zoom for the rest of my
presentation.
Uh, do you have somebody on
Zoom? Yeah, counselor wishes to
address the committee. All
right, Councilor Baca, if you
will.
Go ahead and unmute yourself.
Good morning, Madam Chair. Thank
you committee members. Uh, my
name is Joaquin Baca. I'm the
city councilor for District 2
for the city of Albuquerque.
District 2 encompasses the
center of the city, including
Old Town and downtown, the
largest business and tourist
destinations in Albuquerque.
Within the city, all liquor
licenses are permitted through
council services, staff and
myself are regularly called to
help new small businesses for
help to walk through what can be
a complex process. This bill
will streamline and clean up the
process, making it easier for
our restaurants and visitors.
Not only for Albuquerque, but
for every city in New Mexico.
Uh, in addition, the creation of
zones will allow us to support
restaurants and provide better
public safety. I urge your
support for this bill. Thank
you.
And with that we stand for
questions. Thank you so much.
Thank you, Senator. Uh, now just
going to the audience by a show
of hands, how many in the
audience are in support of this
bill?
See none? How many in the
audience are in opposition of
this bill?
We have one, so if you will go
ahead and come on up. Are there
people online, ma'am? There's
one? OK.
Right, you will have one minute,
you'll get a 32nd warning from
the vice chair.
Thank, thank you, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name's Philip Sanchez. I am the
director of the state's
alcoholic Beverage Control
Division of the regulation and
licensing department. At this
time, we oppose Senate Bill 466
as drafted, primarily section 3,
at best, it does create a
statutory framework.
That will result in um
Jurisdictional confusion for
licensed establishments and
unlicensed establishments
wishing to
Serve or allow consumption of
alcoholic beverages.
Um
At
That's at best, at worst, it
will make it impossible for the
alcoholic beverage Control
Division, as well as the special
investigations unit of the
Department of Public Safety to
enforce and regulate in
accordance with the liquor
Control Act, as well as um
ensure compliance with that act.
It will allow uh local
municipalities and counties to
create areas where they
determine the act not to apply,
uh, including hours of
operation.
will have no way to regulate
that they do stop service or
they comply with certain
requirements deemed appropriate
for their uh app.
License type.
Um, additionally, it will not
allow if you could please wrap
it up, you've gone over time. It
will allow for the service by
unlicensed staff without the
training to identify
intoxication.
Thank you so much. Uh, we're
going online to Joan Dickerson,
who is also registered uh in
opposition, Joan, uh, you've
been here before, you know that
you'll get a 32nd warning in
your chat box. Go ahead, Joan.
Uh, yes, ma'am, Chair, members
of the committee, uh, Joan
Dickerson with the Veterans and
Military Families Caucus. Um,
wanted to say that alcohol
misuse affects veterans.
More so than the general
population, uh, New Mexico leads
the nation in alcohol-related
deaths.
And the veterans and military
Families Caucus is supportive of
legislation that seeks to
alleviate alcohol harms in New
Mexico and is actively worked
with the sponsors of that
legislation and the alcohol
harms alleviation coalition in
light of that, we cannot support
legislation that would remove
restrictions on alcohol and
essentially promote its use. We
respectfully oppose Senate Bill
466. Thank you. Thank you so
much, Joan. So
Senator, you have 5 minutes if
you'd like to respond to public
comment, or we can go ahead and
go to the committee briefly,
Madam Chair, members, I think um
we appreciate RLD being here,
uh.
Couple of things. There's not
gonna be like month-long
entertainment zones. They're
gonna be for a couple hours
before a game or an afternoon or
maybe an evening uh with outdoor
concerts, and secondly, uh,
there's assumptions made that
cities will do stuff outside the
parameters of, of the liquid
Control Act, I can't imagine a
city ordinance being passed
where non-licensed servers would
serve. Uh, this is just, we, we
have to, uh, we have to allow
our historic districts, our
larger cities, to have these
entertainment zones to.
tourism and create cities and
towns where, where doctors want
to live in.
All right. Thank you so much.
Now we go to the committee.
Senator O'Malley
Thank you, Madam Chair, this
area, part of the area anyway
that that's being discussed, uh,
that was being discussed by um a
counselor of Joaquim Baca is uh
the that I also.
Um
And I know that there's there's
so many challenges downtown
Albuquerque. Um, and, uh, and I
think that, and I know that uh
counselor Baca is really trying
very hard to figure out how to
get more activity, more
viability down there, more eyes
on the street, all these things
so that, so that um we can have
um more, what are you gonna call
the vitality downtown, um.
And so, uh, I guess what I, if
you could maybe further explain,
uh, Senator.
What, what, what we're trying to
fix here. I mean, I sort of put
sort of a general umbrella over
it.
Thank you, Madam Senator
O'Malley. Well, one is we, we've
historically had the most
restrictive liquor Control Act
in, in, in the country. What
we've learned is that liquor by
the drink is actually a more
mature and healthy relationship
with alcohol and liquor by the
package or a liquor by the
package state. We 80 85% of the
liquor New Mexicans consume is
by the package.
Um, but when you drink in a
restaurant or in a bar, um,
it's, it's, it's different what
What I believe Councilor Buck
wants to do with section 3 is
allow Albuquerque to be as
vibrant and and as entertaining
as other cities. So, I don't
want to have the committee get
into a debate as to what the
policy would be and then argue
against that debate, but for
example, we could uh block off.
3 blocks of, uh, maybe 2
restaurants, a bar, and 4 art
galleries, and you could take a
nice glass of wine in a plastic
cup into the art gallery or
something like that, um, maybe
we wanna keep restaurants open
till midnight instead of 11
o'clock.
Or
You know, if and when, uh,
You know, our, our, our, uh,
the, the, the, the
The property surrounding our
football stadium in Albuquerque,
is, is, is university owned, so
they get a university liquor
license and you could drink a
beer at the tailgate, you know,
in the parking lot, if, if
property was extended to be
private and those tailgates
became bigger theoretically you
could block off.
Streets, uh, you know, 3 blocks
down from the stadium and folks
could could enjoy a tailgate
experience and walk to the
stadium, stuff like that.
Thank you, Senator. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator O'Malley,
Senator Bergmans, thank you,
Madam Chair and thank you,
Senator. I definitely love what
this bill is trying to get at,
having been in larger cities
like Kansas City or Dallas,
where they have those gigantic
entertainment centers right next
to their big stadiums, which is
definitely something Albuquerque
does not have. Um, I'm just
curious with the issues that
were brought up in the FIR.
It says on page 4.
Lines 4 through 7 that
Online 7.
Instead of beer and wine, it
would need to say alcoholic
beverages because of something
else that's changing.
Somewhere else.
Um, and then there's another
suggestion where it says that
The last two sections of the
bill are contradicting each
other.
But I don't know if I quite read
that the same, but do you want
to address these here? I know
you go to judiciary next.
Ri
Thank you, Madam Chair. Senator
Bergman. Yeah, there is some
glitches in the, in the
language.
Uh, I spotted one on uh.
Page 4, line 18, if, if, if this
committee would were to have a
general agreement with the
policy, we would clean that all
that stuff up in the next
committee.
Oh, thank you for that. I'm fine
with that. Um, I just wanted to
also ask if you could address
some of RLD's concerns. And if
In fact, on page 10 and 11, if
see and deer conflicting each
other, I mean, it says that an
establishment within the
entertainment zone must follow
the laws within the Liquor
Control Act.
So I don't entirely understand
how
Anyone could be assuming that it
would just uh an entertainment
zone would just completely
ignore all the other laws.
Thank, thank you, Madam Chair.
Senator Bergman, I, I agree with
you. I think um it's not in,
it's not in the, the bill, but I
would, I can't imagine an
ordinance deviating from the
liquor Control Act. I mean, they
obviously they can't sell to
under 21 persons, they need a
license to sell. This, I think
the tweaks contemplated would be
a person leaving an
establishment with, with an
alcoholic beverage.
Uh, going from, you know, uh,
you know, place to place, maybe
changing the hours or having
that parking lot or street
experience where um.
Or you can buy and consume
alcohol in that space. For
example, in the, in the historic
districts, maybe the historic
district is blocked off, uh,
there'll be a patio experiences,
uh, maybe a, you know, uh, some
actors do a shootout. I mean,
it, it's um, it just allows that
public space to be um to be a
consumable area as opposed to
just the confines of that one
establishment.
Thank you. And I mean, in
subsection D, as you read the
bill, it says,
Businesses still must follow all
the state laws. Just wanted like
yes or no.
Thank you, Senator Burke.
Senator Sheriff.
Oh, I'm sorry, did you have any
more? I'm so sorry, the answer
to that question is yes, right?
That uh Madam Chair Senator
Bergman's correct. Great, great
catch, um, yeah, it's not gonna
deviate from the act. OK, thank
you, that's all. Thank you, my
apologies. We'll do Senator Sher
and then Senator Figueroa. OK,
thank you, uh, Madam Chair.
So when you first started, uh,
I was a little concerned that
the, the art gallery would be
serving alcohol, but you're
saying that the restaurant or
the bar in that section.
Of town would be serving alcohol
you could just take it to the
art gallery.
Madam Chasen share, that's what
I would contemplate, if in fact
an ordinance, and I don't want
to argue about a policy that
doesn't exist, but if, if an
ordinance were to allow that art
gallery to sell high-end wine or
whatever.
They would have to have licensed
servers and and get a special
permit, I would imagine, but I
don't contemplate that. OK, all
right.
OK. So I, I just wanted to get
that uh straight in my head
because I can certainly see that
there are parts of
Old town everywhere, uh, where
this might make a lot of sense.
OK, we're gonna have this party.
I know in uh in Farmington, we
blocked off streets all the time
for various things. We've even
blocked the streets for low
riders, um.
So
Uh, so this doesn't make, uh,
doesn't bother me that we're
gonna do this at all. I do agree
in the FIR does talk, and I
think you've acknowledged that
there's some conflicts in here
that need to be, uh, cleaned up,
and I, I, and I'm certainly
willing to let him clean. Does
this go to the judiciary now?
Oh, OK, so it's gonna die there
anyway,
man, I'm sure I know a guy.
OK. But I'm, I'm more than
willing to let that, uh, uh,
move out of here without those
amendments, especially since
Senator Wirth isn't here to try
to fix them.
And, uh, but I do want to point
out that Fred Fredericksburg,
Texas.
Is the whole old town of
Fredericksburg, Texas is one of
these, but it's permanently one
of these, and they have signs
that say Fredericksburg is a
drinking town with a tourist
problem.
But it is great because you can
go, you, you can, uh, get a
good,
But it is great because you can
go, you, you can, uh, get a uh
good
good German, uh, meal, and then
you can carry your beer out and
take it into the next store
where you actually buy something
and then you go next door and
you get some wine and you take
that to the art gallery and look
at stuff and they do have police
officers all over the place, but
you can't see them.
But if something goes awry, that
it's right there pretty quick.
Well, thank you. I think it's a
great idea.
Thank you, Senator Sheriff. He
and I have a, a big uh affection
for schnitzel and Pomfrets and
Spitzle so.
Well, for that, Senator
Figueroa.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you sponsor. I really
appreciate the sponsor being
here to explain what's
contemplated and what might be
and how this could work out
because I think that vision is
really positive. I just don't
think it matches this bill at
all, and there's so many
conflicts and loopholes and gaps
in section 3 that I'm not
comfortable even sending it to
judiciary.
It, it needs a reworking,
starting with section A to
designate an entertainment zone
with no guidelines, a
municipality could say our
little town is an entertainment
zone, and we're not going to
follow state law.
Even though Section D says they
must comply with the liquor
control Licensing Act, Section C
does have a direct conflict,
notwithstanding.
Limitations set forth by the
liquor Control Act in the
entertainment zone, the
governing body may adopt its own
regulations.
Governing everything, including
licenses so they could license
that museum to sell alcohol if
they wanted to.
It's not limited to a specific
day or hourly time, it's a zone,
and the contemplation vision is
like maybe on Saturday nights or
maybe after a game.
That's not in here.
Um, it's just too wide open and
the conflict is too obvious. So
for me, I can't support this as
yet even to go to judiciary, so
the concept has a lot of
positives.
Thank you, Senator Figueroa. Any
other questions or comments from
the committee?
What is the will of the
committee?
Madam sure and it, in my
understanding, and I, I
certainly understand senator
Figudo's concerns and that
definitely need to be worked on,
and I would think that uh the
ordinance would certainly have.
ordinance is that the cities and
the counties have to put forward
in order to, this is sort of
enabling language and that they
would have to really get into
that sort of thing, but um, I, I
think that
Uh, it does need some cleanup,
uh, and uh hopefully you can get
it worked on before it does
reach Judiciary, Senator, I
appreciate that. Um, so, Madam
Chairman, it depends.
All right, we have a due pass
from Senator O'Malley. We have a
second from Senator Bergman's
and we have a couple folks on
judiciary as well, so I have a
feeling.
Uh, Senor Maestas will, will
make sure as well. So if you
will, please go ahead and take
the vote.
Senator Figueroa, no, Senator
had a meal. Yes.
Senator O'Malley. Yes, Senator
Paul. Yes, Senator Ramos.
Senator Sanchez.
to share.
work is excused Senator
Bergmann.
Senator Hamblin.
Senator.
Yes.
8 yeses and 1 you have H1 do
pass the time, Madam Chair.
Thank you.
All right, we're now going to
House Bill 323
as amended. Thank you.
So, uh, Representative Sanchez,
thank you for being here.
Um, just to let you know, give
you kind of a rundown on what we
do. Uh, we, uh, allow you 10
minutes for your bill
presentation and your expert,
then we will go to public
testimony. You have 5 minutes to
respond to that public testimony
if you so choose, or we'll just
go straight to the committee.
So let her out. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Uh, thank you. Uh, I just
want to introduce my uh
co-sponsor, uh, representative
Pettigrew. So what this
legislation does is this takes
us back to where we were about
2.5 years ago for 80 years, uh,
electric co ops were not
required to uh get PE stamps on
designs on work that they do
every day, uh, a lot of jobs we
do 10 times a day. There's a RUS
standards that we built to.
There's our US specs that we
built too.
Uh
This is basically uh
fixing uh
A consequence to a bill that was
passed uh several years ago and
I'll let my uh co-sponsor speak
to that a little bit, Madam
Chair.
Madam Chair, uh,
I'll hold off until the 5
minutes after public comment.
Thank you.
All right, thank you so much.
I'm sorry. Go ahead. I just want
to see you real quick, uh, I
guess when I do respond, I'll,
I'll talk about a lot of the
safeguards that we do have in
place, uh, that, that for sure
that we are doing things safely,
so I'll just respond to that.
Thank you, Madam Chair. OK, I do
know members of the committee do
have some questions. Um, first
and foremost, we'll go to public
commentary. Are there those in
the audience who are in support
of this bill?
OK, if you will, please keep
your hands up.
345.
All right. Well, thank you very
much. Roughly 12. Anybody in the
audience in opposition of this
bill?
123, OK?
Um, anybody online? Nobody
online. All right, so we're
gonna go ahead and do 5 in
support.
Uh, if you will go ahead and go
on up, and then we'll do the
three who are in opposition. Uh,
remember you have one minute,
and you'll get a 32nd warning.
Go ahead.
Good morning, Madam Chair. I'm
Vince Martinez. I'm the interim
CEO of the Mexico Rural Electric
Cooperative Association. As you
know, the co ops cover about 80%
of the state, only about 20% of
the population.
Um, while investor owned
utilities have 50 to 100 people
per mile of line, we averaged
just over 3.
Uh, people from Mile a line.
Our work process, uh, our
systems must be designed, built,
and maintained following USDA
rural uh utility service
engineering standards and adhere
to the national Electric Safety
Code.
We fall under CFR Title VI,
Volume 11, Part 1728 Electric
Standards and specifications for
materials and construction.
Safety is our number one
priority, and we can't deliver
reliability, reliable and
affordable electricity without
good safety standards.
Our self-insurance group, which
is we've been self-insured since
2000.
Our, um, self-insured group
averages 93%, which is under
100, which is an outstanding
safety record, 25% of our budget
for
Self-insurers goes to our safety
programs. Thank you, Madam
Chair. We encourage you to vote
for 320.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Jay Santiannis,
registered lobbyist for the New
Mexico Exchange carrier Group.
Uh, we're at 10 local rural, uh,
Broadband and telephone
companies, uh, our companies,
uh, actually, uh, utilize the
polls with the local co-ops to
do uh fiber on the poles, which
is uh the aerial attachment, so
we don't have to dig through
rock or whatever, but, uh, so
it's very important and we want
to thank Senator uh
Representative Sanchez and
Representative Pettigrew to
bring this forward because this
is standard uh stuff you do with
putting it on the pole.
and, and, uh, it, uh, it, it
It, it just makes sense and uh
we urge your support on this
bill and uh thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, uh,
the
OK.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
my name is George Dodge Junior.
I am a registered lobbyist for
the New Mexico Rural Electric
Cooperatives.
And I'm also a registered
lobbyist for Western farmers uh
co op.
Uh, that covers the east side of
the state.
I am also a trustee for the on
the board of directors for
Western, uh, I mean Farmers's
Electric Co op.
Uh, we're based on the east side
of the state in Clovis, and we
cover many small communities on
the east side of the state. Um,
I'd like to thank the sponsor
for carrying the bill.
And, and I'd, I'd like to
To focus on the safety aspect of
this spill.
Safeties are number one priority
at all co-ops. We follow all
pre-approved uh rural utility
services rules and regulations
covering engineering. We serve
many small communities across
All of our territories, our
friends and neighbors work for
the co op. We stress safety
every day.
So our employees return home
safely to their families.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I, I, I'm stressing
the safety aspect of this, and,
uh, for those reasons and
reasons mentioned before.
Um, we fully support this bill.
Thank you very much.
OK.
Um, good morning, Madam Chair.
Members of the committee, Carlos
Lucero, with public service
company in New Mexico, and also
a licensed professional
engineer.
House Bill 323 would offer more
flexibility and not impose
further restrictions.
And could expand the jobs in
which non-licensed engineers
could operate under. For these
reasons, we support.
House Bill 323. Thank you. Thank
you, Madam Chair. My name is
Clementa Sanchez and I represent
the continal divide energy and
telecommunications co op in West
Central New Mexico, about the
3rd largest co op in the state,
and it's good to see some of my
former colleagues up here in
this committee, first time I've
testified here in this committee
and glad to see you all got new
chairs, but anyway, we, uh, we
wholly support this, this, uh,
this bill and thank uh
Resentative Sanchez for bringing
it forward and as was
mentioned before and I won't
mention anything else but safety
is our main concern, and
We will never compromise that,
but uh our co-ops are owned by
our membership, and they will
make a, make sure that we are
accountable to them for safety.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, members of the committee.
Thank you so much. All right, so
those in opposition, you're
giving me the list of who's.
Nobody? OK. So there's an
opposition. Go ahead. You have
one minute.
Good morning. Uh, my name is
Richard Martinez in Mexico
Society of Professional
Engineers. I've been practicing
as a registered PE in New Mexico
over 37 years, Arizona and also
do tours in Saudi. The first
canon of engineering and
especially professional
engineers, protect the safety
and welfare of the public. This
bill does not do this, doesn't
even mention the word safety
once in this bill. The only
reason these people are talking
about safety is cause I cornered
him in the court in the hallway
outside. This bill is poorly
written regarding financial
burdens to electrical.
s If you look at their budgets,
it includes overhead for
salaries, employee, uh,
recognition barbecues and lots
of alcohol camping
contributions, um, materials
engineering safety training.
This bill will reduce that
safety training. I mean, it's
very important that everybody
understands that this bill would
sponsor and result in
contributory negligence if
someone gets hurt and is killed
by the exemption for electric co
ops as a PE I'm responsible for
my design, and I follow through
construction. This bill does not
do that. This bill, I am begging
you, please.
do not pass this bill. Thank you
very much.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Perry Valdez. I'm with
the exec, I'm the executive
director with the New Mexico
Board of Engineers and
Surveyors. Uh, we do not speak
in favor or against the proposed
amended bill.
We wish only to point out that
in our FAR this will allow for
unlicensed engineering practice
by Royal Electric co-ops within
easements and right of ways for
where there could be physical
interaction with and potential
harm to the public if the bill
is passed.
With that said, the House
Amendment seems to exempt the co
ops entirely from the
engineering and Soing Practice
Act, a friendly amendment in
paragraph C, line 2 could
possibly be shall be.
Exempt from 61-23-22B provided
that the co op does not provide
engineering services to the
public.
With that
All right. Thank you so much.
Um, you do have an opportunity
to respond. You have 5 minutes
to respond. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Just briefly, uh, you
just heard testimony from Mr.
Richard Martinez. He literally,
literally did a corner us and
actually threatened to file a
complaint against myself in a
ref Pettigrew's PE licenses, uh.
We're gonna file an ethics
complaint, nobody that carries
legislation should have their
livelihoods threatened, I think,
uh, I just wanted to mention
that, uh, thank you, Madam
Chair. I'll pass it over to my,
uh,
Co-sponsor.
Thank you, Madam Chair, out of
the
Many years since the late 1980s
that I've had my license, today
was the first day I've had my PE
license threatened by another
engineer, and I don't take
kindly to that.
Focusing on the bill.
Chair and committee.
Uh, I will agree with some of
the statements that were made
today. One of the major cannons,
the primary canon.
As a professional engineer. This
public safety and welfare of the
public.
Uh, Madam Speaker, uh, or Madam
Chair, and, um,
Committee
This bill fixes something that I
did 2 years ago, which was House
Bill 411.
411 had a lot of great stuff in
there, and the intent.
And 411, 1 of the main intents
in 411 was to
Ease the process for reciprocity
for surveyors and engineers.
Coming to the state of New
Mexico.
Some of the other fixes inside
of here was focused on the
mining side, and um,
Unbeknownst to me at the time,
and uh we can have that debate
later, but uh there was
rulemaking and process that
rulemaking um chair and
committees on a May 2021 letter
from the National Transportation
and Safety Board with respect to
natural gas distribution.
The intent was to from the
rulemaking, according to the to
uh the PE board was to fix some
of those issues.
Um, um, Madam Chair and
committee
after 4:11 paths in the
rulemaking continued in June of
2023, we met with the board in
their public meeting in Socorro,
uh, expressed our concerns with
the industrial exemptions and uh
we're today here dealing with
the fact that
We are, we have
National standards.
To
deal with expansions within
existing right of ways.
To fix and and to expand the
poll size or wire size, um,
transformer size, etc. through
that. Any new construction.
Has to go through survey and
engineer review.
All this does is set and with
respect to this, is the engineer
review happens at the end of the
project.
Everything is inspected before
it's turned over. The engineer
review does not go away.
Whatsoever
And, and so,
Without this bill, as you heard
from the exchange carrier group.
What you didn't hear is this
also will impact do its ability
to do the expansion for
broadband.
With that, I'll stand for
questions, turn it back over to
my co-sponsor. Thank you, Madam
Chair. I just want to add uh
co-ops were required to follow
RU US standards, basically.
If you have a PE.
Injected into the process they
want, you're basically gonna
have them uh reinventing the
wheel. We have standards.
that we do every day when we
have linemen go put up lines,
they don't have a PE go tell
them, oh, you can do this, this,
they know how to do that work
because we do it every day. Uh,
in order to get loan funds, we,
we have to hire a PE to put
together a 4-year work plan.
Basically, that's how we get our
funding to do uh any new, new
large construction, and in order
to draw out those uh those
funds. We have to have a P at
the end, inspect the work to
make sure it was done properly.
So all this does is it's gonna,
it's gonna add additional costs.
It's not gonna add safety
because
Uh, like I said, we're already
building to standards that have
been around 80 years that have
been proven and, and tested and
they're talking about safety and
I can't think of a single uh
issue for those standards have
been compromised and they caused
a safety issue, the, the entire
country uses these standards,
all the coops use them, so uh
that's, that's why I'm carrying
this bill. Uh, it's, it's not
only gonna, it's not gonna add
any value. We're already doing
things safely. We do, this is,
this is what we do. This is the
work we do every day. We have a
journey ignment that do this. We
have uh
speaker estimators that designed
the work and like I said,
there's a process in order to uh
get these projects approved so
we get money reimbursed. Uh, we
do have to get a PE to put the
plan together and at the end, we
do have to get a PE to sign off
that it was built correctly, uh,
and for the data based off where
we run uh line extensions,
running a transfer to somebody's
house. Again, that's stuff we do
every day. If uh we have to hire
a PE to stamp every one of
those, that's gonna raise the
cost 10 to 20% on everyone, and
this isn't about cost, but
We already served the Navajo
Nation. We serve Reba, some of
the poorest people in the areas
and uh typically uh to connect
power to someone's house, it
could range anywhere from 30 to
6000 and if we're paying a PE
engineer, 2 to $300 an hour plus
overheads.
That's gonna increase the cost
10 to 20% without adding value,
like I said, these, these
standards are already proven and
been around 80 years and uh
Madam Chair, we now stand for
questions.
Thank you,
Senator Hermio, do you still
have a question?
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representatives. So we
represent rural New Mexico, and
I know this doesn't have an
impact on the cops, but I want
to know how this bill would
positively have an impact with
our rural electric cars.
Madam Chair, uh, rep uh sorry,
senator, I know some senators
take that as an insult for the
senator, uh, I'm just used to
being in the house. So, uh, the
positive impact is, uh, we go
back to the status quo. We have
a tremendous safety record
before 2 years ago, before this
was being forced on us. We have
a proven track record, uh, 8
years of, uh, following tested,
proven.
Standard designs and specs.
So, uh, does this take away
liability from us? No, it
actually puts it on us. If we
build something wrong, we get
sued. This isn't taking away
liability. And obviously the
last thing we want to do is
build something that's going to
hurt somebody or put the coop
coops in a, in a bad place where
we can get sued. Thank you. And
Madam Chair, representative,
that's why I support this. It's
definitely going to help those
of us in rural parts of New
Mexico where we need something
like this. I want to thank you
for bringing this forward. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you,
Madam Chair, Senator.
Senator Ramos, Madam chair,
thank you very much and uh
representatives, thank you for
bringing this bill. First, I
just want to say,
That no one.
No.
be threatened on a bill they're
presenting.
That is ridiculous. That is
uncalled for. There's many times
that we as legislators disagree,
but we maintain decorum, and
that should always be, no matter
what.
Now, I'll get to my question
because that really upsets me
because we're all volunteers
here taking time away from our
businesses and working hard to
represent the state of New
Mexico.
Um
Madam Chair, Representative.
Do your plants already get
approved by PE?
So I'm a chair, uh.
Senator. So like I mentioned, we
do do a 4-year work plan for our
major projects, which are major
reconducting projects, building
substations, things like that.
That plan is put together by and
stamped by a PE. So in order to
get funding to build those
projects at the end, we have to
submit what's called the 219 and
uh with that 219 is, it's uh
signed and stamped that uh PE
engineer inspected that job and
uh made sure that job was built
to RUSE and built correctly. So
we do have a process to ensure
that these things are, are built
safely and uh to meet spec.
Madam Chair, Senator.
Madam chair, um,
representatives, you know, I,
I've been involved in many
projects from $250,000 projects
to $30 million project. So we've
always used the PE and when we
connect our electricity, it's,
it's up and done and we can't uh
turn the electricity on until
it's very well inspected. And,
you know, I, I think this is a
great deal. I, I appreciate
y'all bringing it forward. We're
New Mexico really needs this
bill, um, I represent some of
The lowest income counties in
the state.
And if this is gonna help keep
uh keep prices down and uh
benefit our, our residents,
then, uh,
This is a great deal and I
appreciate it and you have my
full support.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Sanchez. Thank you, Madam Chair,
and thank you, representatives
for bringing this bill. Um, I
work in the industry with the
co-ops and stuff and um
You know, Madam Chair represent,
like you said, this on your
everyday work, you guys don't
need a PE to see over every day,
you have your journeymens who
and their apprenticeships or
whatever they've done, they
don't need a PE to tell them to
stand up a pole or to, and this
also, Madam Chair
representatives, keeps the cost
down like you're saying. I don't
want to repeat everything that
uh Senator Ramos said, but we
really appreciate you bringing
this bill, and um,
You have a full support on this.
I, I just being in the industry,
I, I am with Socorro Co op,
great co op. They're my tower,
and with them 25 years, uh,
seeing different projects that
they do, working with other
co-ops too, very safe, always,
you know, I don't think they
have any issues, um, so not
sure, uh, representatives, thank
you for bringing this bill.
Thank you so much, Senator
Sanchez. Any other questions? I
figure out
that you, Madam Chair and thank
you representatives and thank
you for coming to talk to me
earlier. I'll take full credit
for pulling this off the consent
calendar because what it reads
like, especially the original
bill is we're relaxing safety
standards, and that always needs
to be discussed and debated
fully in committee, especially
after the amendment went on,
Madam Chair, and representatives
when it's
Sounds like we're relaxing
safety requirements in our rural
areas, which sounded like a
two-tier system of safety and
one class of citizens don't
deserve protection. So what I
wanted to come out in this
committee and what I think
really has is the level of
safety and safeguards that are
already in place around our
rural co-ops who are doing this
work, and in particular, the
things that were mentioned today
is the engineering plants.
That have to be stamped.
Right? And then the inspections
at the end.
That have to be done by the
state organization, state
License.
So we've got the safety
protocols at the beginning and
the end. Do we really need
That state licensed engineer in
the middle, and I think we've
heard a pretty complete and
clear argument that this
exemption is OK, and I am
willing to support it too, and I
want to thank you for bringing
that, bringing that argument
here and making it clear to us
and to the public. Thank you
very much and thank you to our
rural co-ops to keep the lights
on for 80% of our state.
Thank you, Senator Figueroa.
Senator Worth.
Right, what is the will, are
there any other questions? We
have a due pass from Senator
Sanchez. We have seconds from
Senator Adamillo.
So anybody in opposition to the
Dufas? OK, so if you will,
please take the vote.
Senator Figuero.
Yes.
Senator had a meal.
Senator O'Malley. No.
Senator Paul, Senator Ramos,
Senator Sanchez, Senator Sher,
Senator Wirth, Senator Berkins
Senator Hamlin. Yes, we have 99
to 1 do pass. Thank you, madam.
Thank you.
Thank you so much. Um, all
right, so just to give you kind
of a run of show.
We are supposed to be on the
floor at noon-ish. Um, so my
apologies, but HB 405 and HB 143
are going to be rolled to
Tuesday.
My apologies to those sponsors.
Um, so now we've got House Bill
20, and then we will finish off
with House Bill 253 for today.
So we have it noted 405 and 143
will be rolled to first thing
Tuesday, first thing.
I'm so sorry, I didn't bring
breakfast
He would have cut? Well, we can
do another Saturday committee if
you want. We can do it also
tomorrow, yeah. All right, so,
uh, Representative Dixon, this
is your first time here in the
committee, so you have 10
minutes to provide to present
your bill, uh, then what we will
do is go to public testimony.
You have 5 minutes to respond to
that. You can either respond to
that or you can just go straight
to the committee. So go ahead.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. Um,
I'm here today to present House
Bill 20, which is a
comprehensive initiative to
accelerate New Mexico's economic
diversification and position our
state as a leader in key
technology sectors. I'm joined
by my expert witness, uh, our
economic development secretary
designate Rob Black.
Madam Chair and committee, New
Mexico is at a critical
juncture. Emerging sectors like
artificial intelligence,
aerospace, and clean energy are
projected to grow by over 30%
annually.
The window of opportunity to
establish ourselves in these
industries won't stay open
forever.
Other states, Utah, Texas,
Arizona, and Colorado have
already demonstrated how
strategic investments in
technology and innovation can
drive significant economic
growth.
New Mexico has unique advantages
in these sectors, with our
national laboratories, research
universities and existing
technology base.
But we're missing the
comprehensive ecosystem needed
to fully capitalize on these
advantages.
The 2021 strategic plan for the
economic development department,
identified this exact challenge,
noting that while regional
competitors have actively
pursued opportunities in new
industries, New Mexico has
failed to capitalize on its
immense assets.
The plan identified the urgent
need to foster growth in a
greater number of industries to
expand our economy for
opportunity, sustainability, and
resilience.
It's specifically called for
creating industry councils to
connect stakeholders,
establishing support systems for
for entrepreneurs and developing
comprehensive frameworks to
drive innovation.
House Bill 20 addresses that gap
through 3 main components.
First, it creates the technology
and innovation division and
network advisory board,
implementing the plan's call for
industry sector councils that
provide real-time feedback on
market conditions and
opportunities.
Second, it establishes the
research development and
deployment Fund to provide
matching funds for projects that
can attract significant federal
and private investments,
addressing the plan's emphasis
on developing new funding
mechanisms.
Projects like NSF grant
challenges for artificial
intelligence and quantum
computing.
Third, it creates a technology
innovation prize program to
drive innovation and attract
talent and companies to New
Mexico.
Together, these elements create
the coordinated strategic
framework that we need for New
Mexico to seize this moment of
opportunity. I'm happy to walk
through the details of any
component and answer questions
from the committee. Uh, thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you so much.
Um, do you want your expert to
go ahead and make any comments
or no? All right. So now we're
gonna go to public testimony,
uh, just by a show of hands, are
there folks in the audience who
are in support of this bill.
We have 3 people. Thank you. We
have
4? OK. Um, maybe Rob's head was
in the way. Um, all right, just
by a show of hands, do we have
anybody in the audience in
opposition of this bill?
seen none. Do we have anybody
online?
Uh
4. OK, well, bear with you. All
right. Let's hear from two folks
just for time situation, uh, you
get one minute apiece, you will
see a 30 seconds if you go over
30, if you go over 1 minute, I'm
gonna cut you off. But Madam
Chair, members, my name's Nathan
Bush. I'm staff at the
University of New Mexico. We
strongly support this bill,
really appreciate the sponsor
working closely with the
executive to bring these ideas
forward. I do want to flag for
you all that we have a
tremendous opportunity. There is
an NSF National Science
Foundation, Major Grant, this is
called an NSF.
Engine, uh, under the new
federal administration. We were
wondering what would happen to
this program, the new
administration has now preserved
the former work of President
Biden, now President Trump, to
move the NSF program forward.
This is a $160 million
opportunity for New Mexico. We
are a finalist with our partners
throughout the state. Thank you.
Thank you so much. Go ahead,
Jason.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh Jason Espinoza
speaking on behalf of New Mexico
ADA and acknowledging that the
Mexico Chamber also supports the
bill.
Uh, New Mexico springs or
research institutions workforce
and entrepreneurial spirit gives
us a competitive edge, but we
need the right tools to
capitalize on the assets, uh,
this legislation before you
really provides that framework.
Additionally, this bill directly
aligns with the uh work and
implements the work of the 20
years strategic economic
development plan. Uh, it's a
strong investment in the state
of Mexico. We stand in support.
Thank you.
Thank you so much, Jason. All
right, we do have 4 people
online who have registered
opposition. We have Saraswati,
we have, uh, Anita, we have
Sandy and we have Alex, um, just
for the sake of time, I'm gonna
go ahead. We're registering all
four of your names, uh, in
opposition, but we're going to
go ahead and go to 2. If we can
have Sara Swati and Alex, um,
and Edith and Sandy, we have
recorded your opposition,
Saraswati, if you can go first,
please. And then, um, we
will, uh, give you one minute,
you'll get a 32nd warning in
your chat box.
Go ahead and start.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair and
committee. My name is Sarah
Swady Carson. I'm from Aspinola.
Hello, Senator Jaramillo.
Uh, it be 20 proposes to invest
a huge sum of our public money,
$100 million a year into a slush
fund for economic development
grants that have no criteria for
protection of public health, the
environment, or climate
emissions reductions. One of the
target sectors, clean water and
energy is purposely big so that
it can allow for dangerous
technologies like fossil fueled,
hydrogen, carbon capture, and
produced water reuse that.
danger the public. It should be
amended to specify renewable
energy. I have lived in
countries that President Trump
called, and I'm quoting him, so
I apologize. Sithole countries.
And one of the key differences
between those countries and ours
is the fact that people are
protected from dirty industries
that turned the sky black and
poison all the water.
Now that the EPA plans to roll
back nearly all environmental
regulations. We are at risk of
joining those countries. New
Mexico must do better and ensure
that
Thank you. We did have a time.
Um, we do, uh, wanna make sure,
um, Alex is actually, uh, said
that he is in support, so we're
going to go to one other person
in opposition, and Edith, if you
will, please unmute your mic.
You have one minute, you'll get
a 32nd warning if you go
anything beyond that, we will
cut your mic. Go ahead and use.
Good morning. My name is Emily
Lopez, and I'm here on behalf of
Yucca. We are deeply concerned
with House Bill 120. It leaves
us with a series of questions
that remain unanswered. The lack
of definitions regarding clean
energy and water means that this
bill could fund false solutions
like produce water reuse,
hydrogen, and carbon capture and
storage. At this point, none of
these technologies are proven to
be financially viable without
significant ongoing public
subsidation. These technologies
also pose significant
risk to the environment and our
public health.
New Mexicans, especially
land-based communities face a
freshwater storage and need
intentional investments in water
infrastructure that bolster
current initiatives led by
grassroots water advocates. The
lack of clarity, oversight, and
community involvement for this
proposal, especially regarding
the language on a target sector
for clean energy and water
creates doubt in the intentions
of this bill. It is critical
that we invest in our local
communities and their agency on
economic development. This bill
primarily centers institutions,
private partners.
laboratories that lack the
relationships necessary for our
community's climate resiliency.
New Mexican, New Mexico is on an
endless loop of build it and
they will come.
My apologies, you did go over
one minute, um, but thank you
very much for um calling in. You
have an opportunity to respond
or if you'd like, you can go
ahead and go straight to the
committee. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Um, I would, um,
highlight a couple of things,
uh, regarding the comments that
were made. Number one, the um
technology and innovation areas
that are identified in this bill
are based on the sectors that
are identified in the 2021
strategic plan. Um, number 2,
innovation network advisory
board is comprised of
representatives um across the
board, bringing together folks
in the um skilled trades,
regional economic development
organizations, community
colleges, uh, we have New Mex uh
Navajo Technical University, New
Mexico Tech, the Health
Sciences, um, someone from
representing the tribes, private
equity capital, um.
Business incubators and
entrepreneurship, um, as well as
folks that are currently
involved in either the advanced
computing, biosciences,
aerospace, or um clean energy
sectors, um, and finally, um, I
would note that if we looked at
the um funding opportunities
that have come up that the
University of New Mexico just
the University of New Mexico has
been able to apply for, um, they
span.
From, um, you know, water
security issues to grid
resilience and quantum. So it's
a whole range of things, um, and
we need for our department to be
able to be flexible and work
with its partners, um, Secretary
Black may have a comment as
well. Madam Chair, members of
the committee, uh, I think one
of the things that is really
important to remember is why we
created uh the economic strategy
to begin with. That is to help
the state be intentional and
proactive.
On its ability to diversify the
economy off of our reliance on
oil and gas. Um, so,
These sort of investments are
essential for us to be able to
diversify our economy, to ensure
that we've got revenue coming
into the state, but also
creating pathways for
opportunity for our next
generation of New Mexicans, so
that they have jobs that they
can move into here in New Mexico
and not have to move to Texas,
Arizona or Colorado for those
innovative jobs that are good
paying and help build that
economic resilience throughout
our community. So that's, that
is why, uh, we do believe that
EDD that the HB
20 bill is the most
comprehensive and tactical as
well as intentional approach to
looking at tech technology, the
technology sector and how to
grow it as an ecosystem. It is a
holistic approach and, and
that's why we're here to
support.
All right. Thank you so much.
Now we go to the committee,
Senator O'Malley.
chair, um,
And uh uh.
Representative Dickson, I, I do
have some concerns that were,
um,
That we're a state from folks
who are have concerns,
especially if I, I think in
terms about water environment
and I do come from a place where
um and uh you know, where I had
was very involved in my
neighborhood many, many years
ago, uh finding a polluter and
had to do with groundwater uh
protection issues, pollution,
things like that. So I probably
am a little, uh, you know,
hyper aware of those kinds of
things, and very concerned about
industry and uh not always, they
haven't always been forthright,
and it was, it was a long
struggle to get things done. And
so I think it's so important to
have some very clear, uh, you
know, clear, uh, descriptions
and so I, I, I, so I'm just
gonna say that, I mean, I, we
can't support the bill as it is,
but if it does go through, I
will be looking at a.
in Senate findings. Thank you,
thank you. And that is where
this goes next. Um, any other
comments or questions from the
committee?
Senator Figueroa, Madam Chair,
and sponsors, my concerns are
more along the um
financial fiscal lines, looking
at page 17, line 17, um, the
Economic development bills
usually have really strict
requirements. What are we
getting as a state for this
money. And these 16 says shall
be reasonably expected to do 2
or more.
Um, and I'm not comfortable with
the choices here. Advance
innovation and at least one of
the target sectors.
It's great. I love to advance
science, but what's the, what's
the economic benefit to the
state.
B fostering collaboration,
again, it's a good thing, but.
Is it worth millions of dollars
of taxpayers, what are they
getting from it that we can
measure and say yes, it's money
well spent. Leverage federal or
private investment. I think that
refers to matching. D, create
new economic opportunities.
Could you clarify, Madam Chair,
what that means? Because jobs is
listed on the next item, and
that's the one I love. Create
new jobs and workforce training
opportunities. That is crucial,
Madam Chair, that we can
measure that um we can justify
as economic development advanced
the commercialization section F.
Again, if we're advancing
commercialization, we're
probably getting more GRT. So
there's a measurable return. But
what's
What?
What's the economic
opportunities indeed and given
that it says reasonably expected
to do 2 or more of these, we're
not getting measurable economic.
Return
Um, unless we say they have to
hit D E and F.
So, Madam Chair, if you'd like
to address that.
Madam Chair, uh, Senator, a
great question. I think one way
to think about this is, is part
of it is this, is, uh, as part
of the fund is around matching
programs. So, um, and the NSF
program was mentioned during the
public comment. One of those NSF
programs is quantum. Uh, we have
already won, uh, a part of uh
elevate quantum in partnership
with Colorado, uh, which is
bringing federal dollars into
the state of New Mexico today.
So that's a very measurable
piece. It's $150 million.
Uh, at stake for the next phase
of that quantum NSF grant
opportunity. So very tangible.
Um, also, if we are landing
quantum companies based off of
investments into those
technologies, very tangible, and
that gets to the, the, I think
both the innovation and the
collaboration, because that NSF
grant is based around
collaboration with the labs,
with the universities, and
that's where you get that
special sauce that creates the
hub.
And if you, and, and again it
requires that intentionality and
then the ecosystem that the
other parts of the bill creates.
So it does investments with our,
our universities to help create,
um, the opportunity to bring in
a chairs in particular areas. It
creates the opportunity to have
innovate or incubator spaces
that again accelerate and
support that ecosystem. And part
of the thing about doing it with
advanced technologies.
The reason Boston and
Massachusetts has about 80% of
biosciences as it's captured
within the context in America is
because they invested early in
both the innovation side and
then bringing in larger
companies to create that
ecosystem.
Prior to it really becoming a
major industry.
So if we think about industries
where we are uniquely
competitive because of the
national labs.
Quantum fusion, things like
that.
That's the place where we can
really capture that market share
now. Um, as opposed to trying to
catch up on the fringes later.
Madam Chair and sponsor and
secretary, thank you for that
answer. I
I agree. It's just over the edge
of speculative for me, um, I
think we could support those
things in other ways more
directly. I think we could get
at the economic development by
expanding Lita and JTI things we
know that work and things that
have the clawback pieces that I
don't see in here. Um, but thank
you, Madam Chair. I know we're
pressed for time, so I'll leave
it at that. Thank you. Any other
questions or comments from the
committee?
Well the centers.
You
Madam Chair, I'm not entirely
sure if Senator asked this
already, so I apologize if you
did, but can you just
And I'm pretty sure she did, but
can you just elaborate on the
types of rules the department
would set to ensure
That everything is done
strategically and up to
standards.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator Bergman. Um, so let
me start with the sort of the
overview, um, and then I'll pass
it to Secretary if I can just uh
if you can just answer the, the
questions, um, just because we
are, so what I would say is that
You're compiling a an advisory
board that knows what's going on
in all of these sectors, knows
what strategic, know what the
state needs, and so you're
relying on, you know, not only
the department, but also experts
in these areas to help make
these decisions. Um, this is a
missing component to our
economic diversification. Lita
and JTip are wonderful, but they
don't actually support building
of the ecosystems, which is what
we need.
Madam Chair, Senator, um, as to
the rules, we will start if, if
this does pass, we will start a
rulemaking process immediately,
uh, to, uh, make sure that we
have those sort of clawbacks and
and uh and and
Insurance that we're protecting
the taxpayers' dollars that
they're utilized well. Uh, we
are operate grants like this
already. Um, we have been doing
this in advanced technologies uh
in advanced energy, uh, for the
last couple of years, so it is
something that we have
experience doing and we have a
constitutional authority to do
so.
OK.
OK
That's all. Thank you. Any other
questions or comments from the
committee.
What is the will of the
committee?
I'm gonna do that.
We have a Du pass from Senator
Berman's. Do we have a second?
OK.
2nd from Senator Sanchez.
You will please take the vote,
Rebecca.
Senator Figueroa.
No.
Senator Hara.
Senator O'Malley. No. Senator
Paul.
No.
Senator Ros? No.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator Sheriff is excused,
Senator Wirth is excused Senator
Bergmann's. Yes.
Senator Hamblin.
Yes.
Senator Sanchez.
I have 3 yeses and 5 nos.
Unfortunately, your bill does
not pass with a 3 to 5 vote.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you.
All right, we're moving on to um
House Bill 253, the committee
sub of House Bill 253.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, members. Um, House Bill 253
is a front end sort of
opportunity for folks to deal
with their eviction records. Um,
right now in the state of New
Mexico eviction records are
public information for those who
win or lose their eviction um
hearing. For those who win,
oftentimes that data is
convoluted with those who lose
their eviction hearings. So what
we're trying to do is seal those
records for those who win those
um cases.
And then ensure that after 3
years for those who lose those
cases, that information is also
sealed. Uh, we know that
eviction can be a scarlet letter
for folks and what we're trying
to do here is help them um in
the path of having safe and
secure housing, um, after that
3-year period. Um, again, if
you're a repeat offender that's
still public information, so
that remains on your record for
those who are really trying to
get their lives back after an
eviction, that 3 year period is
uh where that would end. And
with that, my um expert.
Here's Alison Friedman from the
Center for Housing Law at UNM
and with that, we'll stand for
questions.
All right, thank you so much.
Um, just by a show of hands, is
there anybody in the audience
who is in support of this bill?
see none. Is there anybody in
the audience in opposition?
Alright, 1234567, so we will do,
um, let's do 4 of those in
opposition. In the meantime,
we'll gather he's online.
Uh, remember you have one minute
apiece, you'll get a 32nd
warning. Go ahead, Randy. Oh,
thank you. Randy Trainer, the
apartment Association of New
Mexico. Um, it's important to
know that there are 2 types of
evictions. There's an eviction
for nonpayment, and then there's
eviction for substantial
violation.
And, and what happens with this
bill is that a person who is
evicted because of a substantial
violation, which could be
threatening somebody to be
property damage.
They get the same protection as
somebody who has fallen on a
hard tonics, and, you know, we
need to know who we're renting
to. I, I get what this bill is
trying to do, but we think it
reaches too far. If somebody has
a history of damaging property
or threatening people, they
shouldn't get the protection of
this bill. Thank you.
Madam Chairman, members of the
committee, my name is Brian
Fennell with Albuquerque Journal
and our related community
newspapers. Our concern is that
selling court records is just
another chip away at the Ira of
New Mexico, and anything we do
to lessen the public's
access to public records is very
harmful. Thank you.
Thank you. Just for those of you
who are speaking, you'll notice
our sergeant at Arms brings the
mic down. That's just because
there's distortion on the
webcast if the mic is too close
to your face. Go ahead. Good
morning, Madam Chair. Members,
my name is Joshua Sanchez. I'm
the chief judge of Metropolitan
Court, not to be confused with
your esteemed Senator Joshua
Sanchez, uh, who
Who I received lots of phone
calls and text messages for
during this time of the year.
Um,
I'm here on behalf of the really
They're entertaining, um, I'm
here to speak on behalf of the
courts. The procedure required
by HB 253 creates uh a really
big challenges for the courts.
Unlike other case types that are
sealed upon filing like mental
health cases, eviction cases are
a subset of civil cases overall.
Uh, there's 3 major problems
that I foresee happening.
There's the asking our court
clerks to assess documents and
determine if the case is an
eviction, manually.
Sealing the case and manually
tracking the case to comply with
the schedule of sealing and
unsealing, the process can't be
automated because eviction is
not a case type, it's all CV
cases, uh, subject to errors,
emissions and potential
liability for not sealing or
unsealing documents correctly or
incorrectly. Uh, there's also
this would require additional
court staff. Uh, last year, or
I'm sorry, in fiscal year, uh
24, I think we had 9300 eviction
cases that were filed and
handled by 3 different civil
judges.
automatic sealing change may
require that hearings be
sequestered the way some of my
judges have read the proposed
bill, um, HB 253 also prescribes
court procedures that conflict
with existing court rules
running into issues with an
Aberman hearing, um, HB 253 also
directs judicial branch
technology advisory Committee to
determine, yep, and again we
also fear that this is also
going to be access to justice
issue for pro se lis.
Thank you.
Madam Chairman and committee, my
name is Dan Bryant. I'm the
Next, Chief District judge in
the 12th Judicial District.
Lincoln County and Otero County,
um, concerned about the impacts
on the courts and the clerk's
offices in the courts. I'm not
going to repeat what you just
heard from Judge Sanchez, but I
want to highlight the impacts in
rural New Mexico.
I have 3 magistrate courts.
Locations in my district.
Eat there about 50 or 60 miles
apart from one another, I have
one clerk in 12 clerks in the
other, and 6 clerks in the 3rd,
and with a caseload in that
district, although we don't
have.
The magnitude of cases that they
do in metric court, but with a
total set of filings of 1700 to
2000, that makes it very
difficult to do the kinds of
things that have to be done.
Finally,
We won't be able to help people
over the phone because we won't
be able to verify their status
under HB 253 to be people who
are permitted to have the
information, and that's one of
the largest functions we do in
our magistrate courts, they are
the people's courts, that's
where the self-represented
litigants come. Thank you very
much.
Thank you so much.
And, um, so we do have some
folks online. We have 3 people
who are in support of Rachel
Biggs, Winter Torres, Deanna,
and then Joanna Donn, uh, as an
opposition. Um, given that we've
had, uh, 3 folks speak in
opposition here in the room.
Joanna, we'll mark your name
down as an opposition, uh, but,
uh, we'll go ahead and have
Rachel Biggs, Winter Taurus,
Indiana speak. So Rachel, uh,
you are welcome to unmute
yourself. You have one minute,
you'll get the 30 seconds.
warning in your chat box. Go
ahead, Rachel.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Rachel Beggs with
Albuquerque Healthcare for the
homeless. Everyone in New Mexico
deserves a stable place to call
home. However, inaccurate and
incomplete eviction records are
unnecessarily harming our family
seeking to relocate. This
information is automatically
sent to tenant screening
databases, even if a tenant wins
their eviction case, simply
being associated with an
eviction case will follow and
burden people for life, harming
families and their chance at a
stable home. We see firsthand
the devastating impact
impact of inaccurate and
incomplete eviction records on
families. It makes little sense
to punish people for life and
condemn families to live on the
streets unnecessarily. Please
support HB 253. Thank you for
your time.
Thank you so much. Winter, you
have one minute, you'll see a
32nd warning in your chat box.
Go ahead.
Good afternoon, uh, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Winter Torres, and I am
the CEO and founder of New
Mexico Eviction Prevention and
diversion, uh, licensed attorney
here in New Mexico and in
Colorado.
Um, I want to respond to the
concerns of the courts. I, I
think it's very unfortunate that
they are opposing this bill, and
um
I want to respond to the
concerns of the courts. I, I
think it's very unfortunate that
they are opposing this bill, and
um
they could update their systems
and should update their systems.
They are extremely antiquated.
You can't even download an
eviction case, you have to go in
and download it document by
document, um, and the poorest
folks among us should not be um
burdened with the um
Inability of our court system to
be even semi-modern in how it
manages its court records. There
is AI available. We are doing
some AI work on our own and um
and that it definitely could be
done. So, um, I would ask the
committee to consider that.
Thank you so much, Dianna. You,
uh, have one minute.
Um, or it's Maria Griego, um, if
you will please state your name
and uh we will make sure you
have one minute, you'll see the
32nd warning in your chat. Go
ahead, Vienna.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Deanna
Creighton. I am a co-founder of
Amparo, which is a housing
nonprofit in Albuquerque. We
seek to keep families and
children housed, specifically
through eviction prevention
assistance over the past 5
years, we've gathered data from
hundreds of families that we've
assisted, and this shows that
often these families, especially
those with school-age children
encounter temporary financial
hardship, but because of the
short timelines for eviction in
our state, they often are
evicted. In our experience, no
one
gets evicted into better housing
situations and almost all of
those who have experienced
addiction struggle to find
housing with this eviction on
their record, and they very
often end up homeless. I urge
your support for Hospital 253 to
protect New Mexicans from this
lasting harm of an eviction
record. This bill ensures that
sealed records remain
confidential, preventing unfair
discrimination while maintaining
access for courts and authorized
parties. Housing is a human
right and housing stability is
critical for economic security
and mobility for all New
Mexicans. This bill helps ensure
that a temporary hardship
doesn't become a permanent
barrier. Thank you. Thank you so
much. Um, and just for the
record, Joanna, um, has, uh,
she, she misheard the
instructions she is in support
of this bill. Um, uh,
Representative, you have 5
minutes to respond. Thank you,
Madam Chair. And before you do
that, if I may, um, our floor
isn't starting until 12:30. So
we are hoping to
Bills on today's agenda.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
just a couple of things on, uh,
administrative oversight. So a
couple of things that we
understand about the process.
Sealing is not a new process for
the courts, uh, while we
understand much of the
administrative burden we are
working with the AOC and have
had many discussions with them
on this bill through the
legislative process thus far,
um, and I will defer to, um,
Alison on some of how that
works. Madams are members of the
committee, thank you, um, you
know, we have been
working with the administrative
officer of the courts very
closely on this bill and have
made several changes to ensure
that um the burden on court
clerks, particularly those in
more rural areas, um, is not
overwhelming, so I'll just point
the committee to a few places in
the bill where changes have been
made on page 3, line 17, um, the
words upon written request of
the owner were added, um, so
this ensures that if a bill was
or excuse me, um, if an eviction
record were to become unsealed,
the landlord would basically
fill out a piece of paper that
has some check boxes saying yes,
this wasn't.
conviction case, I received a
judgment of possession 15 days
have passed, which is the time
to file an appeal, so there's
not a ceiling and unsealing
burden on the courts there. They
would check those boxes, hand
that piece of paper to the court
clerk so that there's not sort
of this, you know, manual
guessing of which cases need to
be unsealed. Um, we, uh, also
spoke to the judicial Technology
Council, um, and they have
indicated that, you know, a
court, a case type could be
added um for evictions
specifically. Um, so, you know,
cases that are filed.
Have that, but everything going
forward could could be filed
under that eviction case type.
Um, in terms of access to
justice, um, I will also note
that this bill specifically
indicates that tenants, um, so a
party to a case, page 3 lines 5
and 6, a party to a case and if
represented the party's
attorney, um, have access to
their records and so if somebody
calls in and needs help, um, the
court should be assured that in
fact, you know, an individual
that has, you know, their name,
telephone number, case number,
and such, the court would be
able to help them. Um, I
practiced, you know, in the
criminal records expungement
area and right now.
on my clients for sealed uh
criminal cases are able to call
the courts, and they are able to
assist for non-conviction cases
which are currently um sealed.
So, um, I think I will leave it
at that. Thank you.
All right, great. Thank you.
Questions from the committee.
Senator O'Malley.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, I'm going to support this
bill and I'll tell you why. I, I
think, um, I'm not surprised
that the, you know, the industry
is against us.
And quite frankly, the landlords
there, they have the advantage
right now and they've had the
advantage for some time. I think
it would post.
Post um pandemic.
Um, I see all of the effort that
goes into housing people,
especially from nonprofits. It's
time consuming, it's frustrating
and it's costly and um
And I think that they're just
looking at every, every way that
they can to help folks get into
housing, and again, uh, and I
have homes that I that I rent.
Um, and I think it's, it's, and
we're, we have the advantage. I
mean there's there's never, I
don't know how long this is
gonna be until we have more
product. Things are not going to
change. The product is slowly,
you know, building up, we, we're
gonna get more apartments, new
apartments, and, uh, and quite
frankly, what that's gonna do is
that's the folks that have
apartments that are getting
rented now that are not well
maintained, uh, they're gonna
see some competition, and I'm
glad that they're gonna see some
competition.
Because, uh, but we knew new
product and I'm happy about that
and I supported something
recently that um that work had
had uh tried to get through,
which didn't go anywhere. But uh
it was 2, you know, to get more
product, uh, so, um, and so I,
I, I can understand the
frustration, um, and we need to
do what we can to house folks.
So, thank you. Thank you,
Senator O'Malley.
Any other questions, comments
from the committee.
Center Figueroa.
Madam Chair and sponsors, I came
in all gung ho, having read the
bill and support the bill,
support the intent, utterly
dismayed to hear from our court
system about the problems and
the fact that they can't support
it even with the um compromises
that have been made. So I'm
asking, are you still working?
Are there future compromises on
the table and would a delayed
implementation date give them
time to change the electronic
system to gear up and
get their budget built up to do
this job.
Madam Chair members of the
committee, um, yeah, if the
courts need additional, um, you
know, time to, to implement
this, um, that is certainly
something that we, you know, um,
if the committee supports us
today before this goes to to
judiciary, um, we'd be happy to,
to work with them on that, um,
that wasn't something that that
they had raised previously, so
we'd be happy to, to discuss
that with them.
Then Madam Tay, I would suggest
looking at an effective date
addition to this bill, and you
can do that in judiciary. I
don't wanna hold it up, um, but
I, that might be needed before
it gets to the floor. That's
really concerning because in
order for it to work, the courts
have to have what they need to
make it work. Otherwise, it's
not gonna be effective anyway.
Thanks, Madam Chair. Thank you,
Senator Figuero. Other questions
or comments from the committee.
What is the will of the
committee?
I'm gonna do. We have a do pass
from Senator Bergman's. Do we
have a second?
second from somewhere over
there. Senator O'Malley.
We're all coffee and it's that
juniper pollen that just
Other folks can't handle if you
will, please take a vote.
Senator Figueroa. Yes.
Senator had a meal. Senator
O'Malley.
Senator Paul, Senator Rum
Senator Sanchez, Senator shares
excuse, send to work is excused,
Senator Bergmans. Yes. Senator
Hamlin. Yes, we have 5 yeses and
3 no but you pass on a 5 to 3
vote.
All right, so we uh have about
15 minutes.
And uh we are going on with
House Bill 405.
And then we will finish off with
House Bill 143.
And thank you for committee for
sticking around.
Yes, we all are just real sneezy
coffee snotty. So, uh,
representative, I think this is
your first time in the
committee, so you'll have 10
minutes to present your bill.
Uh, we will go to uh public
comment that 10 minutes to
present your bill also includes
if you have an expert witness,
then we'll go to public comment
and then we will go to the
committee. You do have 5 minutes
to respond to public comment if
you want, but I can encourage
you to please be cognizant of
the time. Thank you.
Um, thank, thank you, Madam
Chair. Um, thank you, senators.
Thank you committee. Um, I'm
here to present House Bill 405.
Um, this bill creates the
volunteer firefighter service
and job training retention Act,
which aims to support volunteer
firefighters by establishing a
framework for leave of absence
from their primary employer in
order to respond to emergencies,
it offers job protections for
both training and in-service
time for a volunteer fire
personnel. This bill helps with
recruitment, retention, and it
adds value to the role of the
volunteer firefight.
That is sent for Christians.
Well, that was short and sweet.
Uh, all right, is there anybody
in the audience in support of
this legislation?
Is there anybody in the audience
in opposition?
So anybody like.
All right, let's go straight to
the committee.
any questions or comments from
the committee.
had a meal, but I'm sure this is
actually a vital bill for those
of us in rural New Mexico who
depend on volunteer
firefighters, more so during
this dry seasons of climate
change who are really working on
keeping us safe and without that
I move it to pass.
All right, we have a due pass in
a second. I'm gonna do double
duty today. Oh, Susan, can you?
All right, is there any, um, so
we have a, um, motion from
Senator Jail.
And a second from
O'Malley
Tumbler. You'll do first here.
Most
at a meal.
in the 2nd round.
O'Malley.
Is there any opposition to this
DuPass motion?
There is opposition, so you will
need to go ahead and take a
vote. So we will call the names.
Here you go.
Senator Figueroa.
Yes.
Senator Harramio.
Senator O'Malley, yes.
Senator Paul.
Senator Ramos.
Yes.
Um, Senator Sanchez.
Senator She's absence, Senator
Worth is absent, Senator
Bergmans.
And Senator Hamlin, yes, we do
have a pass though from senator.
So.
All right, so we have 1234.
7 yeses and 1 no. So 7 to 1, you
have a due pass.
Mhm.
Thank you very much.
It's always the quickest bill
when the secretary's out of the
room.
Thank you, Susan, for filling
in. My pleasure. All right, um,
if you will turn off that mic.
Thank you. Uh, we have, uh,
House Bill 143, um, as amended.
Do we have an amendment to this
as well?
OK.
We do have an amendment. Susan,
we'll take care of that. We'll
let you back take care of that.
Is there an amendment to this?
There is.
Madam chair.
I
sponsors.
It's OK, it's from Saner share.
There is an amendment in the
book.
I don't know if that's from the
sponsor or not.
Madam Chair, committee, we've
not seen any amendments.
All right, hold on.
Madam Chair, just to clarify for
the committee also.
Since, uh, we saw this in rules,
uh, which is the other committee
I'm on, the, they printed the
House floor amendments for our
binders, but we removed that and
um rules.
So dispersed yellow piece of
paper, the House for Amendment
number 1, you can just ignore.
Just a note for the binders,
Madam Chair, we don't have a
copy of what was done in rules.
That is true, but that was the
only change to the bill was that
it removed.
The House for Amendment number
one.
All right, so, I believe Senator
shares since your back, I
believe is, is this your
amendment?
solution.
Yes, if you will. All right,
since this is a news to you
cause this apparently will be a
committee amendment. Why don't
you go ahead and explain the
bill and then we'll uh bring up
the committee. Yes, thank you,
uh, chair and committee, uh,
it's good to be here. I'm
Representative Sarah Silva, a
sponsor of the bill um for House
Bill 143 with my uh other
sponsors, Senator Jeff
Steinborn. Um, so briefly, this
bill would modernize our state's
lobbying reporting system in
order to give
Legislators, constituents, and
other stakeholders a full
picture of what is happening and
who is shaping bills and
defining the playing field
during each legislative session.
But the bill does is require a
new activity report that lists a
lobbyist's employer.
But also positions taken on
introduced legislation.
Uh, a lobbyist would have to
update that report if a position
changes and they would have 48
hours to update, but it's one
report that they would have to
fill out. Um, if they lobby at
the end of the legislative
session, but before the governor
has to sign a bill into law, uh,
they would file a supplemental
report. So that's all the bill
does. It has um a start date of
2027 to give the Secretary of
State's office time to implement
and uh promulgate rules and uh
Lindsay
document from the Secretary of
State's office is also here to
answer any questions. Thank you,
chair. Thank you,
Representative, and if you
could, could you and Senan
Moreno, if you could uh maybe
briefly address the amendment
situation that happened in
rules.
Yes, Madam Chair, and uh
committee, so, uh, when this
bill was presented on the House
floor, there was a floor
amendment added to it, um, I
accepted it as friendly and then
um it was moving very fast and
then had some time to spend with
it and determined and brought to
the Senate rules that this
amendment was um a little
convoluted and messy and Senate
rules agreed, uh, and there was
an additional.
in that too. So there was um an
introduction of putting in
Senate Bill 248.
Um, into that too, and all of
that was struck from the
original house bill. So now what
we have is the original house
bill that we introduced, um, at
the beginning,
my share
with the House Judiciary
Committee amendments though,
right? Yes, um, thank you,
Senator Bergman, Madam Chair, on
the House Judiciary did, um, put
in, uh, rather than, um, letting
the Secretary of State
promulgate all the rules we did
um accept an amendment that
would uh create a 48 hour rule
for um changing positions on uh
introduced legislation. Um, so a
lobbyist would have 48 hours
just like they do with
expenditure reports, Madam
Chair, committee.
Thank you, Senator Steinberg,
did you want to say a few words?
Um, Madam Chair, committee, I
just want to say, I think.
What I want to know on this
committee, this is really
nonpartisan bipartisan bill.
This is going to bring full
disclosure no matter what side
anybody is on on an issue. This
is going to make it public so
that we can all do a better job
and see exactly who is behind
every bell as far as paid groups
and so I hope we see it for the
incredible bipartisan
transparency opportunity it is
for us, but also our
constituents to really have
transparency into really
important.
things that we consider, and
that's what this bill does and
why it's being brought forward.
Thank you, man.
Thank you so much.
Um, now we're gonna go to the
audience first, and then we will
go to the committee and I think
that's where uh the proposed
amendment might be discussed.
Anybody in the audience in
support of this legislation.
12, do we have anybody in the
audience in opposition of this
legislation.
See you compiling anybody
online? Is there anybody there?
OK. All right. So if you will,
we'll give you a minute of
peace.
Um, you'll notice that the
sergeant at arms will keep that
mic at a certain length. That's
just so there's not distortion
on the webcast. Thank you, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
My name is Mason Graham. I'm the
policy director and registered
lobbyist for a common cause in
Mexico. We are in strong support
of this legislation as written,
Common Cause believes that
government transparency and
accountability are core
principles that are essential to
a healthy democracy. We also
understand the critical role
that lobbyists play in the New
Mexico legislature. 143 helps to
ensure that the public has a
clear understanding.
understanding of the forces that
shape our laws, disclosure of
lobbyist employers, expenditures
and positions of policy help
shine a light on political
influence. Additionally, these
reports would close the gap for
positions have changed or when
lobbyist activities continue
after session. We employ many
lobbyists in many different
states. So we welcome these uh
changes which would be a first
of its kind step and a bold step
forward for New Mexico and
government transparency. Thank
you.
Thank you.
Good morning, uh, uh, Madam
Chairman, members of the
committee, thank you for the
time to speak this morning. Uh,
my name is Oren Pope. I'm a
graduate student at the Fukundo
Valdez School of Social Work at
New Mexico Highlands University.
Um, I'm here in support of this
bill because I believe it has
the potential to raise New
Mexico's standard of
transparency, as was cited on
the house floor, New Mexico
currently ranks as one of the
least open states when it comes
to disclosure of lobbying
dollars. We currently sit in the
41st position. Disclosure of
lobbyist compensation, of
lobbyists and client identities,
the timeliness of.
this disclosure and how easily
the public can access this
information were considered, and
contributed to New Mexico's low
ranking. The mission of social
work is built upon 6 core
tenants, the value of integrity
is primary in establishing trust
with the communities we serve.
The bill shares the values of
that mission and works in favor
of integrity, in favor of
transparency, and in favor of
all New Mexicans. I respectfully
request your support for HB 143.
Thank you.
Alright, thank you so much. This
is your opportunity if you'd
like to respond to public uh
input or we can go ahead and go
to the committee.
Pleasure of the chair. Thank
you. All right, uh, now we go to
the committee.
I'm looking at you, son.
I'm sure before I run this
amendment, can I just talk about
the bill? Let other people talk
about. Absolutely.
So
First, I don't think it's that
hard to figure out who anybody
is. You can go to, I can pull up
CA right now, look up lobbyists
to know what.
What
Who they gave money to.
Look and see who they who they
work for.
The whole idea that we're
hiding things from people, just
boggles my mind because
People do that. Why did you take
money from them? I don't know.
Because they gave it to me.
Not a secret, not a secret at
all.
In fact, Madam chair, if we
want, I can look up your
donations right now.
We do that right now.
Because it's, it's really simple
to do, really, man.
So it's just not, oops.
I pushed
It's just not that difficult to
do.
Um
And that's it in that confuses
me.
But the implication is
That, uh, your fault, Madam
Chair, can be purchased for
A meal
Really, really, really, really,
really troubles me.
Because Madam Chair, if either
one of our votes can be
purchased for a meal?
Then we have the ethics problem,
not them.
The other part of this is,
When they're talking in here.
If somebody buys me a meal,
And they have to disclose what
bill they're talking to me
about. Well, the reality is,
it's relationships.
Its relationships.
Like
It may have happened, but rarely
have I sat down at a meal with
any lobbyist where they said,
please support or oppose.
House Bill 143.
That's not why they're eating
with me. Being with me because
they're trying to build a
relationship, same reason that
they'd be eating with you.
Not because they oppose or
support, they do want to know
who you are.
They want to know what makes you
tip. They wanna know what's
going on. So they know how to
talk to you.
We don't have a relationship. I
never met you before. If I met
you, I forgot.
I do know your, your co-sponsor
there.
And it's the relationship.
portion that the lobbyists are
really working at.
Yes, eventually they'll come and
say, yes, you know, can you
support this? Or here's why we
support this.
And sometimes they're not gonna
come to me. The union people
rarely come to me.
Although occasionally Brian
Condo does. Why? Because we have
a relationship.
Because they know where I stand.
So, all right, let's put our
effort somewhere else because it
makes sense.
But don't have anything to do
with buying a meal.
And whether the world's
You know, it does seem it's
interesting here.
There have been several times.
When a lobbyist will stand up
there and say,
Madam Chair
ABC Company supports this.
Madam Chair, XYZ Company does
not support this.
And they're making their best
cases, in both cases, OK?
In both cases, they're just
doing what, what
But there's other things.
Madam Chair, we, we, we, we hate
this particular bill.
The amendment went on. Madam
Chair, we support this bill now
that the amendments on.
That happened within minutes.
And now we're gonna make them.
out a lot of extra forms that
he, I'm not sure the Secretary
of State can even handle.
But
But I just, I, I reject the idea
that people can't figure out.
Who's a lobbyist?
And who they're working for.
And who they're giving money to.
I absolutely reject that.
Because I know
In fact
Since I, since I failed, I bet
Senator Brantley already looked
at my thing sitting right there.
She, she's much better at it.
I
And so the whole premise of this
bill just
bothers me.
Because if you can be purchased
for a meal.
You're the one with the ethics
problem, not the lobbyist.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Sher.
And so it this point, Senator
Sher, did you have an amendment
or was that, or are we not gonna
have that amendment?
Well, let me try this first,
Madam Chair.
If this fails, we'll do
something else. I move to table.
All right. We have a table in
motion that is non-debatable, so
if you will, please take the
vote on that.
Senator Figuero noted table.
Senator Harrami.
Senator O'Malley. No.
Senator Paul, yes, Senator
Ramos, yes, Senator Sanchez.
I
Senator, chair.
Senator Wirth is excused Senator
Bergman a table.
Senator Hamlin, not a table. We
have 5s and 3 yes. The motion to
table has has failed. Uh, we now
go back.
OK, Madam Chariton, I do have an
amendment.
Oh
So I would move
Amendment number the the.
Bottom number 231-956.1.
that we're moving that for
discussion.
Yes, that
matter. You can call me
whatever. It was Queen at one
point.
Your Majesty. Oh, thank you.
Right, we have the amendment for
discussion. We'll let the
sponsors go ahead and review
that.
Madam Chair committee, may I ask
a question?
Yes, you may. Is this the, uh,
is this an identical version of
the floor amendment that we saw
in the house, kind of chair.
Um, that I'm sure, I believe it
is. I didn't.
OK.
Madam Chair, uh, Senator, thank
you for the amendment. It is an
unfriendly amendment, and just
to be clear what this is, so
I'll summarize it for folks,
this.
would put a cap on lobbyists
spending of $50 per member per
day.
During the session. And number
one, Madam Chair, this is a
disclosure bill. This is not us
restricting free speech or
lobbying activities during the
session. So that's number one.
But number 2, if we're gonna get
into lobbying spending,
respectfully, madam Chair, we
don't do this is very robust. I
mean, $50 per member per day,
per lobbyist is really no
spending limit at all. Um, and
it's
You know, I think it's just a
poison pill designed to weigh
down the bill and so it is an
unfriendly amendment.
Thank you. All right. Thank you
so much. And so now we have a
vote on whether or not to adopt
that amendment. Uh, is there a
discussion on the amendment.
This is where I really suck at
getting those procedures. So,
committee, I know you're very
grateful for for Senator
Bergman's to be here. Senator
Ramos' discussion on the
amendment. Madam Chair, the
reason I do like this amendment
is for the same reasons the
sponsor stated earlier, this
should be a bipartisan
amendment. Um, full disclosure.
is a huge thing for me. And if
you look on C, it says any
appointed public official with
decision-making authority over
laws of the state administrative
rules or public contracts would
be included in the People Rear.
And I know there's legislators
here that receive funds when
they're out of here from some of
these corporations, and even
sometimes when they are here.
So I think that needs to be
disclosed and that if we're
going to truly put together a
good bill.
That's going to have full
disclosure.
And that's the type of a bill we
need to put out.
Not just the not just picking on
the lobbyists. Let's, let's be
fair. If the lobbyists have to
do this, and why shouldn't we
have to do this as elected
officials.
And I think if we truly want a
good bill, let's be fair to
everyone.
Let's disclose all of our
incomes and where they come from
and when you're getting paid.
I, I think that's, that's
definitely something that we
need to do as elected officials,
we need to keep the
The uh trust from the people.
And not just pick on the
lobbyists, but do the right
thing and disclose where all our
funds are coming from, not only
for campaigns, but what we do as
an individual who we're out
there working, working as a, as
a person.
As an employee of another
company or a contractor for
another company.
Madam Chair, and that's why I
really like this, uh, this
amendment.
Madam Chair.
Thank you so much, Senator
Ramos. Other discussions on the
amendment.
That Juniper stuff, man, it's
killing all of us.
All right, my friend. Uh, if
there's no other discussion on
the amendment, um, will you
please go ahead and take a vote
on the amendment. A yes is to
support the amendment and no is
to oppose the amendment. Senator
Figueroa.
No to the amendment.
Senator had a meal. No. Senator
O'Malley.
Senator Paul, yes, send to
Ramos. Yes, ma'am. Sanchez.
Senator Sheriff.
Senator Wirth is excused Senator
Bergman's.
No to the amendment and can I
explain my vote?
Senator Hamblin notes to the
amendment.
Have 4 yeses.
The amendment failed on a 4 to
5, Senator Bergman's to explain
your vote. Do people do that on
amendments, I guess in
committee, yeah, just, just
briefly, um,
I was looking for the committee
report from rules and I can't
remember correctly, but I'm
pretty sure we removed the same
amendment unanimously in rules,
and that wasn't only because the
sponsors told us that's what
they wanted, but
The bill, the bill is still a
transparency measure, and we
don't need to necessarily be
doing this right now and this
amendment to also be providing
more transparency to the public.
That's all.
Thank you so much.
All right, we're now back on the
bill. Any other questions or
comments from the, I just want
to make a comment, madam chair.
I noticed that we disagreed and
we didn't threaten each other,
so thank you all very much
because I have to tell you.
Senator Ramos
I think this committee is a true
example of working together in
collaboration and communication,
and I'm grateful for that.
Thank you. Any other comments or
questions on the bill. Senator
O'Malley, yeah, I know we've got
time crunch, but you know, we do
a financial disclosure. I mean,
I was, I, you know, I put where
I got my money from, I mean real
estate and other things like
that, so I guess I don't
understand why I'm, I'm confused
as to what you're talking about,
Senator Ramos. Um, but, uh, you
know, it it it and you know, I
have good friends that are
lobbyists, but they know where I
stand on issues, and that's
that, but uh
I guess I, they find it taxing
or whatever, I think they need
to ask more money from their
clients.
Thank you.
Thank you very much, Senator
Berkins. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Just quickly, can you explain
what's in subsection E at the
top of page 3,
what that report is and where it
will show up.
Yes, thank you, Madam Chair.
Senator Bergman's, uh, so on
page 3 section E, the lobbying
activity reported for each
specific piece of legislation
shall be included or linked on
the legislature's website for
that specific piece of
legislation. This is the part
that I really appreciate, um,
and I'm really glad to have in
because um what it would do is,
uh, a person, a constituent, one
of us could go to the NMLedger
website and when we look up
Bill, so House Bill 143, for
example, you, you click on the
page, you see analysis reports,
um, and all the other things on
the left hand side um that
described the lifespan of that
bill. There'll be a link that
also uh will uh link to a
lobbyists that have supported,
opposed, or were monitoring that
bill during that time. So thank
you for the question, um, Madam
Chair, committee.
Thank you. That's all. Thank you
so much, Senator Figueroa.
um, Madam Chair, that question
brought up uh another question
for me because that's gonna be a
linkage between our NM legis
website and the Secretary of
State because these reports,
disclosure reports are going to
be in the Secretary of State,
and that'll take some creative
coding to make that happen, but
I agree if it will make things
more transparent, it's worth the
effort. We do have candidate
financial disclosures for
personal incomes.
Campaign financial disclosures
for all of our campaign
contributions and then we have
the lobbyist Act, um, and this
piece is just disclosure and
anything that we can provide to
the public allows them, Madam
Tay as a as a senator on this
committee said to use their
smarts and make decisions and
follow the money. They are smart
enough to do it if we put the
information out there. So adding
to the information is helpful
and Madam Chair, I.
Thereby make the commitment to
work with anybody on this
committee to beef up the
requirements of the other three
pieces. The lobbying regulation
Act, the campaign finance
requirements and the candidate
financial disclosure. They all
have loopholes and weaknesses
that we could address on behalf
of our constituents. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you, Senator
Figueroa. Senator Ramos, Madam
Chair, I, I thank you and thank
you everyone for their comments
here and I definitely would like
to participate, especially our.
candidate financial disclosures,
because we don't have to
disclose anything under $5000.
And that's where I'm headed.
You know, a lot of people are
still getting funds and you
know, it blows my mind that
they're receiving these funds
and they don't have to disclose
them. Disclose of them when
they're sitting here locked as,
as lobbyists slash.
Last uh
Uh, elected official slash.
Oh
Um
I mean, worker, I'm working for
that company.
And uh, and legislature.
So yes, I think we definitely
need to work on that. Now, I'd
love to work with that work with
you, Senator, on, on that for
the prior years to come. Thank
you.
I'm sure. Stuff like this gives
me goosebumps. I love that.
Thank you. Thank you for those
opportunities, and so do we, uh,
have any other questions or is
there?
So
Madam Chair, there's lots of
people that come in this
building.
Uh, to lobby us.
Lots of people.
Sometimes this room is filled
with yellow shirts or blue
shirts or pink shirts or
whatever. Those are all.
They're all here to lobby.
We need to disclosure on every
one of those folks.
How about all of the people from
Planned Parenthood a right to
life to come here, demonstrate,
walk around the building. Why
wouldn't, why wouldn't
Why would we want to know where
their money comes from.
Especially big corporations
that, you know, Planned
Parenthood doesn't come here for
free. It's a lot of money, right
to life, probably they're, they
really are nonprofit, but
Uh, their people probably show
up on their own time.
But we also know that
Uh, we have the white coat day.
We had a couple 100 doctors
here.
We want to know what the income
is for every one of those
doctors. I mean, they're here
lobbying.
They might even bought you a
meal. I mean, where does this
end?
Thank you, Senator Schr. I look
forward to what comes out of the
interim.
Uh, with that, especially
bipartisan conversations about
that, uh, and so at this point,
given that we are being called
to the floor, um, do we have,
what is the will of the
committee?
I overdue pass. We have a pass
from Senator Berman. We have a
2nd, 2nd Senator Figueroa. Um, I
have a funny feeling that you're
gonna need to take a vote on
this, Rebecca.
So if you will, please. Senator
Figueroa. Yes. Senator had a
meal.
Yes. Senator O'Malley, Senator
Paul,
Senator Ramos? No. Senator
Sanchez. Senator Sher.
Senator Worth is excused,
Senator Bergmann's.
Senator Hamlin, yes.
We have 5 vessels 54 do pass.
Thank you. So, um, we have, uh,
just a brief, uh, well, what may
be a brief, I may have just
jinxed it, uh, meeting tomorrow
after the floor to discuss the
potential patent tax package, I
will be in communication with
you today while we're on the
floor and provide information to
you, uh, to go over that, um,
because I believe the tax
package just came out of the
house. And so, um, I look
forward to having conversations
with all of you. So we will have
that meeting tomorrow, uh, 30
minutes after the floor
tomorrow, but we'll be continued
contact today. At this point we
