Are we, uh, we, we get on the
web? OK, great. Uh, thank you
very much, uh, for being here
for the organizational uh and
first meeting of the tax
business and Transportation
Committee. My name is Carrie
Hamblin. I'm the senator for
District 38. Today is our
organizational meeting, but we
also have um really the, the
foundation of what this
committee is about. We have the
Secretary from Taxation and
Revenue here, and also Ismael
Torres, who's gonna give us tax
101, as I've mentioned in my
meetings, please talk to me like
I'm a 10 year old so that I can
understand this, so I'm very
grateful for this.
Um, before we go into, I wanna
go ahead and, and talk a little
bit. I've had a great
conversations with Rebecca's our
secretary with vice chair
Bergman's, and with ranking
member Sanchez, uh, to talk
about these different things,
but before we even do any of
that, Rebecca, as the secretary
is reminding me that we need to
call rolls. So if we can, uh,
Rebecca, if you don't mind
calling roll before we begin the
meeting.
Right
Senator Figueroa.
Here.
Senator had a meal.
Senator O'Malley.
Tended your paw.
Pres
Senator Ramos, excuses.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator Shar.
excused. Senator Wirth.
Senator Bergmans. Senator
Hamlin.
We have a quorum.
All right, we have a quorum.
That's always a good thing. So,
welcome everybody to the
meeting. It is an honor to be
here with all of you in the
audience, and the staff, you
know, we've got a small group,
you know, we'll have full houses
at a couple of times and so I'm
very excited, um, to be working
with the staff and uh as this
committee as well on some
incredibly important legislation
in the 8 weeks that we have
coming up for us. Those of you
watching on the webcast, thank
you very much for tuning in. Uh,
the tax Business and
Transportation Committee meets
every Tuesdays and Thursdays at
1:30, uh, in this room or we
meet 30 minutes.
after the floor, we get to
announce that on the floor. Um,
so today we decided to meet at
1:42. Um, there may be times as
we near the end of the session,
uh, that we may meet on the
weekends, so I do want to give
that a heads up. And um the odd
time, just to let you know as I
used to work in broadcasting and
so I talked to a clock, so 1:42,
I'm like I can do that. Uh, so,
uh, you know, there may be a 146
start time at some point, um,
but to give you a clear path of
today in the days ahead, I would
like to share with you how
I like to run committee
meetings. I like to run tight
meetings. Um, I feel that when
we have people who are coming
and spending their time that we
want to be respectful of their
time because they're here ask at
our request. And so I do have
the utmost confidence in this
committee, uh, will bring very
informed and impactful
conversations and discussions to
our bill debate, looking at the
people here and knowing the
people on this committee. I
expect nothing less. Um, and so
I'm very excited about that. But
I would also like the actions of
this committee to be efficient
and informative. So I do ask.
All of you that when we are
having conversations uh with
bill sponsors that we'd be
concise and direct with our
questions. Um, I know that, uh,
ranking member Sanchez and I
both are like, let's get this,
we've got legislation, let's
deal with the legislation. Let's
move on because if you might
have been paying attention on
the floor today, we got a bunch
of bills referred to this
committee. So, uh, what we will
have in the two days ahead is on
Thursday, we will have the
Secretary of Transportation and
the Secretary of Economic
Development. Speak with us and
then we will go full blown next.
Tuesday with bills.
And so, given that I would like
us to be efficient and I do hope
that this committee will do
that, that I do see, um, we've
got a lot on our plate, but I do
feel that we can get through it.
And so we also want to make sure
um that our agendas which will
be filled, um, that each and
every bill sponsor wants and
gets a fair and robust
discussion. And so in order for
us to be diligent in hearing
every item on the agenda. Again,
I ask the dark questions and our
discussions stick to the bills
being debated at the moment. Um,
and as we do on the floor, I do
ask that every member treat our
presenters, the public, and
ultimately each other, uh, and
the rest of the committee and
staff, uh, with respect. Um, I
also request that of our
audience, uh, and those giving.
testimony. I know that people
will be respectful, um, but
should there be an instance of
attacks on anyone on the
committee, or in the or uh
presenting or even people in the
audience, I will ask them to
leave, um, because this is
supposed to be a respectful
place where we are making
decisions that impact every
single New Mexican.
And so I do appreciate your
commitment to creating policy
and law where the public, the
experts, and lawmakers all have
a place to thoughtfully discuss
the merits of a bill and help us
understand that the impact it
will have on our state. And so
for committee members, I do want
to clarify that during the
presentation, if you want to
make a comment or ask a
question, either let our
committee secretary know or let
me know we do keep a running
list, um, and, um, if our
meeting goes unusually long or
if it seems a break is needed, I
may call a recess at times, just
to be considered of uh
considerate of the
Committee members and staff. Um,
what I do want, we will do some
time limits, and I'll get into
that after, um, after we uh have
introductions, but, um, I will
ask for committee uh members. I
will not ask committee members
to stifle their discussion. Um,
I feel that that's the role of
this committee, um, but again,
asking that we maintain uh
sticking on point. However,
there may be times where I limit
public testimony, all depending
on the amount of people who are
in favor or in opposition, that
would be on a bill by bill
basis. You will
See that what we will do is ask
for those in support, those in
opposition. We will see that,
and then we will go ahead and
make that decision. So, um, we
do wanna make sure that it's,
uh, it's fair, um, and that, but
we're also very efficient. And
so before we get to um our
presentation today, I would like
to acknowledge those who make
this all work. And so if I can,
I would love our attendance and
our staff to introduce
themselves. There is a, is there
a microphone that we can pass
out or if you all can come up to
this, this microphone here at
the desk. Cause I do want
folks to get to know you, yeah,
you, and then, if you will, come
on up. And then we're gonna go
around to to staff.
Uh, and then we'll go to
committee, OK? So I just I've
got all my folks over there. So
if you will first.
And say who you are and what
your title is and what you do.
Good afternoon. I'm Dan Nava.
I'm a 35 year veteran of law
enforcement, and this is my 3rd.
or gain a security with the
senator.
Hey guys, I'm John Roberts. I'm
a 20 year veteran of private
security, and I came out to New
Mexico. I'm an actor and I work
in the film industry as well.
Um, I'm also sending security,
so if you guys anything, set me
up.
I
Oh
Yes. Oh, OK, I'm John.
clinic. I'm a Senate majority
analyst. Uh, this is my 2nd
year.
Didn't realize we were going to
be this many bills, but
very busy already. I already got
like 20 bills to work on. I'm
glad.
Oh, I'm Kathleen
I
You
Lisa Maxwell, this is my 4th
year as a uh minority analyst
here. I'm a CPA and I'm also
just completed my first year as
a school board member in
Farmington.
Miss Susan Yule, uh, this is my
3rd session. I'm an attendant on
the Senate chamber and I'm the
attendant for this committee.
Hi, my name is David Mia. I am
with Senan IT. This would be my
3rd session.
My, my name is Sam Houses. Uh,
I'm the Zoom attendant for this
meeting and this is my first
session.
Good afternoon. My name is
Rebecca Martinez and I and the
committee secretary. This is my
5th year working as a committee
secretary, uh, 3rd year on this
committee, I was with the Indian
Affairs Committee prior to this,
uh, I come to, uh, the
legislature by way of a state
government. I was with the
Indian Affairs Department for 8
years and aging and long-term
services for 8 years and uh glad
to be back. Thank you.
You.
Senator Nicholas Paul, when you
see me on the street, I go by
Nick, um, but uh live in
Alamogordo represent the great
counties of Chavez, Lincoln, and
Otero, District 33.
I'm Bill Sherrer. I'm the
senator from District One, which
is Farmington.
As opposed to 12 counties.
Uh, good afternoon, everyone.
I'm uh Senator Joshua Sanchez. I
represent Socorro in Valencia,
and it is an honor to be back
with the committee to see all
the new faces and all the
familiar faces from last year,
so can't wait to go.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
committee, and Natalie Figueroa,
a new freshman senator
representing District 18 and the
eastern midsection of
Albuquerque with experience in
education, 34 years as a teacher
and then 6 years in the house,
some of that on commerce.
Good afternoon, Debbie O'Malley
and I represent District 13 in
Berlin County. It's a
Um, goes all the way into the
far North Valley and some of the
old historic neighborhoods like
Morela Martineztown, San Jose,
um, so I'm very honored to
represent those areas, um, my
background is in community
development. I run a nonprofit
for many years with the focus on
affordable housing. Um, I also
have a uh consulting firm that
does land use development, um,
And um,
And I'm happy to be here.
We want to start this, Madam
Chairwoman, I'm Senator Leo
Jaramillo from New Mexico Senate
District 5, which includes Los
Alamos, Ria Riba, Sandoval, and
Santa Fe counties. I'm a proud
native son of the Espanilla
Valley and Senator O'Malley is
my cousin.
And so I have another primo, so
Linda Salazar senator. I mean,
Linda, Senator Linda Lopez got
off as one prima and I got
another prima who's here and if
I may, Madam Chairwoman,
congratulations on being named
the chair, it's exciting to see
you and ranking member Sanchez
as members of the same freshman
class moving into these roles.
And I'm looking forward to
working with all of you. Thank
you.
I thank you, Madam Chair, and
congratulations to you as well,
uh, Peter Worth, Senate District
25 in Santa Fe. Um,
Super happy to be part of this
committee. We've done some
amazing work. And I just think
the last 6 years in terms of tax
policy, uh, it has been
something we can be really proud
of and it, and it's been mostly
bipartisan and I think that's a
good thing. And I appreciate
that this committee, and we had
a couple of little bumps with
the house tax committee, but
we've worked through those and
are working well together and
I'm just also delighted to have
uh Senator Bill 2% share.
On this committee. Maybe if he's
on the committee, he won't
present the 2%. Senator Sheer.
2%. Thank you, man.
Good afternoon, everyone. My
name is Heather Bergmans and I
represent District 15, which is
in Midtown Albuquerque, and I am
really excited the work, the
work that this committee will
get done and to learn as much as
we can. Thank you.
Thank you. And I'm Carrie
Hamblin and I represent District
38, which is southern New
Mexico, which starts at the
street right above, just north
of my street, so right up my
backyard is the top of my
district, going all the way down
covers New Mexico State, uh,
covers La Mesa, Chammarino,
Mesquite, Vaddo, uh, all the way
down to Santa Teresa, so I have
the Border Industrial
Association as part of my uh
district, which I think they're
having an event on Thursday
night here. Um, and so, um, it's
uh very much an honor to be here
and to serve as the chair of
taxusiness and Transportation.
I've been the vice chair for the
last 2 years, and uh I'm very
excited about this because this
is a good committee and I'm very
excited about the members that
we've got, the new members that
we have, um, and, uh, the lineup
that we have, and I'm grateful
for Rebecca because she's the
one who makes sure we do what
we're supposed to do every
single day. So, um, I'm grateful
for that. I'm gonna go over just
a, a little bit of some
housekeeping just so that um
that the committee is aware of
uh kind of the protocols and
procedures, you do have it in
front of you, um, but I do wanna
just highlight a couple of
things, uh, that we
want to do as a committee, um,
in terms of any amendments or
any substitutions, we are
sticking with the 24 hours in
advance. That is in fairness to
not only the bill sponsor, um,
but also the committee so that
they have plenty of time to be
able to uh to look at the bills
before we bring them up in
committee. Um, and so, uh, this
requirement is non-negotiable.
We want to make sure that uh we
are following that and making
sure that everybody has a chance
to read those. Um, as you know,
we do have Zoom, uh, public
testimony, uh, that is part of
our, our committee.
makeup now, um, because of the
pandemic. Grateful for that
because we have people who can't
take off from their jobs, uh,
and come up here just for the
possibility that a bill will get
hurt and not get bumped. So with
that, um, I do try to make the
Zoom, uh, very clear. Rebecca
has instructions that she sends
to people, um, when they do
register to get the Zoom link,
uh, and our Zoom team uh has
that information. They will be
chatting a lot with people in
the, the, the chat function of
Zoom just to make sure they're
ready because even 5 years after
starting to use
Zoom, we still have people who
don't, myself included, who
forget to unmute. And uh that
always adds to extra time.
Um, what I do want to do because
we've got so much that's coming
down the pike for this
committee, um, and speaking with
uh ranking member Sanchez about
this is having a total of 20
minutes for the bill sponsor and
their expert, because that also
allows us time as a committee,
and I will not curtail the
comments from the committee. Um,
I want to make sure that we have
an opportunity for a robust
discussion. Um, what we will
have time limits on, and this
will be per bill basis and per
supporter opponent basis is
times may be changed. So for
example, if we have 10 in
opposition, 10 in support. I
will give each of them one
minute to speak so that there
will be fairness and the same
thing will happen on Zoom. Um, I
wanna make sure that that is
equal and fair. um, but then
we'll also give uh the bill
sponsor after public testimony,
5 minutes to address any of the
comments that come out in public
testimony. Um, Vice Chair
Bergman's will be the the, the
timer on that. Um, she has all
the fancy little laminated
carts.
And um we wanna make sure that
we do that, but that is
something that is going to be
sent to every single bill
sponsor, um, that, that comes
up. So I wanna make sure that
everybody knows that and that
the committee and I'll open it
up for questions as I see
Senator Sheer looking, I want to
make sure. OK. Um, we will, um,
be, I, I, I do also want to
encourage build sponsors to work
with experts because we know
that there are many times where
we have experts who um like to
chat a lot.
And
I think I can echo the
sentiments of this committee is
please answer the question. Um,
and so that, that we can be very
efficient in that. So I do
encourage those sponsors to work
with their experts, um, and then
addressing the issue. And so,
and then there are also in the
procedures that you have is
pretty much how we'll, we'll do
public testimony is, is to, to
play it by ear depending on the
amount of people in conservation
this morning. We had a room full
of people and several people in
support, several people in
opposition. And so there's
always that possibility, and
I've seen it in here.
before. So I do want to make
sure that I'm fair, um, and that
everybody's voice gets to be
heard, but I do want to
reiterate that um with the
committee, there won't be a time
limit, but I do ask, please stay
on topic and ask questions that
are relevant to the bill so that
we can be very efficient in, uh,
in our processes, processing the
bills. And so, um, at this
point, I'm wondering if there
are any questions from the
committee or any comments from
the committee.
All good.
Oh
All right. Then, at this point,
um, I'd like to welcome
Secretary Chadon Clark, uh, who
is the Secretary of Taxation and
revenue. Um, we are looking
forward to this presentation,
uh, and then Israel is going to
be doing the follow up and kind
of covering uh anything that we
have questions for. And I know
that we're gonna be seeing you
throughout the session. Uh, so
it's great to have you start off
our very first meeting. So
Secretary Clark, thank you for
being here today. Uh, and we're
grateful for your time. Thank
you so much, Madam Chair. It's
wonderful to be here with the
committee.
um for those I haven't met and
for those that I have, it's nice
to see you again, but for those
I haven't met before, I'm
looking forward to working with
you on all things related to tax
that come through your
committee, but also tax and rev
includes motor vehicle division
and so occasionally we come here
for transportation related
reasons too, so, um, just a
little bit of background about
me for the new members. I've
been the secretary of the tax
and rev department since 2019
and I've been a public servant
in New Mexico for about 21
years. Most of that was spent
previously.
at the finance department. I it
used to be a bond person and a
municipal finance person and
then made the leap over to tax,
um.
So, and before I jump into the
slides that we sent through the
committee, um, you know, I want
to talk just a little bit
orientation wise about the
department and our role in
analysis to you. Um, we probably
in a 60 day session we'll send
you something like 200 FIRs. Uh,
we do an FIR in just about every
bill that affects revenue unless
it's, uh, maybe state treasurer
earnings or state investment
council related. Um, we take all
of those very seriously. We send
them through review of all 7
divisions of tax.
and rev is necessary. Uh, we
take a very team approach to get
all the information, then we
have economists who compile it
down into the analysis, and they
have to do a fiscal impact
estimate on just about
everything, which we don't have
a button we can push and just
sort of say what what's the GRT
on this one activity, you know,
they, they dig into the gentech
system and do their best to use
the data we have, so we take a
lot of pride in that and if
you're ever, you know, need to
give feedback on an FIR you
don't have one, feel free to.
reach out to me directly or to
the team.
Oh,
all right. Um,
I will go onto the slides and
basically I'm going to be pretty
quick. I'll be covering the
highlights of the executive
priorities for the tax session,
um, I'll start by just sort of
saying we don't have a number in
mind and I, you know, the
legislature may or may not, um,
it hasn't been talked a lot
about though, um, and so really
without giving a number, I'll
just say we're looking for a
responsible tax package that is
sustainable, um, a sustainable
amount of recurring tax relief
for the general fund.
In future years, um, I think
we've given the revenue estimate
presentation 6 or 7 times and
big picture we're at peak oil in
New Mexico, where we expect to
stay at that peak oil revenue uh
level for the next couple of
fiscal years, but we need to be
planning as a state for ramping
down of oil production, starting
within the next decade, and so
we're, we have the challenges,
policy makers in the state to
make sure we keep our fiscal
house in order. We're finding
ways to trans.
Translate now money into future
money through endowments and
investments and things like
that, so we're just looking for
something that's responsible for
the state for the long term.
Um, some of the highlights, I'll
go over are basically to
continue the work that we've
done in the past 6 years
together to prioritize, uh,
families.
Businesses, supporting
businesses, and fostering
stability and growth. So a mix
of support for families, you
know, looking back at the last 6
years, Senator Wor mentioned the
work we've done together, we've
twice increased the working
families's tax credit, we've
created a child tax credit.
We've increased the low income
tax rebate all kinds of things
we've done, and it really has
moved the needle on poverty in
New Mexico, uh, backed up by
census data, so things along
that nature, I think the
executive continues to support
and be interested in.
But also I'll talk about some
economic development related
things, and then some just nuts
and bolts.
Um, we'll also see, and we've
already seen introduced several
proposals to earmark general
fund revenues to different
places, and I think, I think
folks can reasonably discuss
which ones of those are
appropriate, which ones are
sustainable for the general
fund. How much is the
legislature comfortable
earmarking revenue versus
appropriating it each year, um,
probably will be a lot of
discussion about that. We've
seen those bills come up year
after year, and not too many of
them have moved forward thus
far, but we'll be looking at
proposals.
to earmark the motor vehicle
excise tax, uh, the liquor
excise tax, the tobacco tax, the
cigarette tax, some others, the
corporate income tax is now in
that list.
All right. On to the next slide.
Two governor bills that have not
yet been introduced, but I
expect will be shortly. I have
to do with the establishment of
New Mexico and Colorado as a
quantum computing hub. So they
were jointly awarded $41 million
in federal funding to advance
the quantum sector this past
summer, and we think there's an
opportunity between economic
development department, the
office of the governor, and then
tax and Rev is an administrative
arm to basically draw that.
Uh, activity to New Mexico
versus Colorado and draw it here
to our hub versus other hubs
that were established by the
federal government. And so we're
looking at two different um tax
credits related to that. The
first really has to do with
offsetting part of the costs of
quantum infrastructure in New
Mexico, um, they will be capped
in aggregate and per facility
and per taxpayer. Um, these are
credits that will apply to
personal and corporate income
tax and would be certified by
the
economic development department,
which is uh similar to some of
the other credits we already
have in place. So again, it's,
it's really just aimed at
offsetting costs of
infrastructure to induce
location of quantum computing
infrastructure here versus
elsewhere. And the second one,
moving to the gross receipts
tax. This is a state only GRT
credit to reduce the GRT that
basically will be paid by New
Mexico's two national labs on
activities, services that
they're selling related to
quantum computing.
And the idea here is that by
offsetting the state tax, which
is about 4, what is it 4.875%
now. It's a savings on all that
activity that then our national
labs can use to turn around and
provide federal matching funds
for federal grants.
Again, this would be capped, and
it would be certified by the
Economic Development department
and we've got listed here, we
expect the lead sponsors to be
representative Dixon in the
House, Senator Padilla in the
Senate, and I, I think those
will be introduced shortly.
Next, um, this is an item on
slide 4, that was discussed in
the governor's state of the
state address, and it's a fairly
simple personal income tax
exemption benefiting families
who foster as well as families
that provide kinship care and if
you're not familiar with that
phrase, that would be a
grandparent raising their uh
their grandchild, perhaps an
aunt and uncle or a parent
sibling. So it's a a family that
is caring for a kin and not just
loosely caring for.
would have legal guardianship,
and we've been working on the
estimate of this, uh, this is
another bill that hasn't yet
been introduced, but uh should
be shortly and the sponsors are
looking like Representative
Armstrong in the House, Senator
Padilla again. I have an update
to this slide, um, there's a
bullet that estimates 1.9
million as the revenue impact
for the foster exemption, um, as
of today, we're looking at about
19.2 million to exempt all
kinship care providers, roughly
half of that is grandparents,
roughly half of it.
is other
Can. And so really the idea
here, of course, is to continue
our march to eliminate child
poverty in New Mexico. We know
that families, uh, you know,
these children who are in
substitute care of one form or
another or some of the most
vulnerable children and to do
everything we can to support
their ability to make ends meet.
That's the the purpose of this
proposal.
All right. Next, um, House Bill
47 has been introduced and it's
carried by representatives de la
Cruz and Alan Martinez, and um
basically this bill just
effectuates the property tax
constitutional amendments that
were enacted by or that were
passed by the electorate in
November 2024. So as a reminder,
there were 2 veterans
exemptions, um, one is the sort
of standard veterans property
tax exemption that's been
adjusted for inflation up from
$4000 per
veteran up to $10,000 so we need
to put that in statute. And the
second one, there is existing,
there was before this a disabled
veterans exemption that only
applied. It was a 100% property
exemption for veterans who are
100% disabled service disabled.
Um, now it will be prorated, so
for each 10% uh veteran is
disabled, they'll be eligible
for that percentage.
Exemption. So we'll bring more
veterans in, so if you're 10%
disabled, you get a 10%
exemption and on up all the way
to 100%. And so House Bill 47 is
time sensitive, and we've talked
to um leadership on both in both
chambers about potentially fast
tracking it, the time
sensitivity of this bill has to
do with the work of the county
assessors. They are statutorily
required to send out their
notices of value to all
taxpayers by April 1st, and it's
difficult for them to
adjust from 4000 to $10,000 the
uh, the first exemption I talked
about without that bill being
enacted and signed by the
governor. Um, so we're working
through, I think that's gonna be
in its first House committee
tomorrow and just be aware that
that's coming.
And then
Last are the tax code cleanup
bills if you sit on the revenue
stabilization committee in the
interim, uh, you heard about
these in October, but basically,
um, these bills are going to be
carried by the House tax and rev
chairs uh representative Lente,
and they're very voluminous. I'm
not gonna lie, one of them is
over 400 pages long, but don't
be afraid. All I can tell you,
and we're, we're working on an
analysis that really boils it
down to something that's a lot
more digestible than that, and
while
that is a lot, it kind of speaks
to the lack of housekeeping
that's been done throughout
chapter 7, the tax code for many
decades. We really went through
every single section of the code
and fixed every little thing
that we could find. There were
places where the department was
still called a division or a
commission or a bureau and it
hasn't been that way for
decades, even those little
changes we made, and that's,
that's really why it adds up.
But in terms of simplifying the
tax code, we found about 70
sections of of law that can be
repealed.
like, for example, personal
income tax rates that only
applied in 2005 or credits that
haven't been eligible for a
decade, you know, things like
that that we just need to take
out of there because if like
let's say you're a new business
or a new person that just moved
to New Mexico, it doesn't help
you to have these obsolete
things there where you spend
time looking at them and, you
know, I just spent, let's let's
say I just spent a day looking
at the film tax credit, thinking
I can come here and make a film,
I realized that now a a day
later that that was the 2016.
version I can't use so let's get
rid of all of that.
Um, there's a lot of, uh, little
cleanup related to moving to
destination based sourcing of
the GRT back in 2021, um,
something kind of interesting
for the department operations.
Uh, we remove this kind of
outdated Attorney General
approval of refunds and
abatements over $20,000. The
reason for that is that the at
the time those were enacted.
Every agency didn't have its own
council, and so the the AG would
have been acting as our general
counsel, and that's no longer
the case, but also for more,
probably 4 out of the 6 years
that I've been with the
department. The AG's office has
told us we don't have anyone to
do that work. They don't know
that area of law, and can we
just commission your own
attorney to act as the attorney
general.
I don't feel good about that.
That doesn't seem to be useful
or the spirit of the law, so
sometimes that that position
will just turn over and then
those refunds and abatements
just have to sit there and
taxpayers shouldn't be waiting
to reset that money for no
reason.
Right, um, there's some sort of
work smarter, not harder kind of
things in here too for the
department, like being able to
file tax liens electronically
rather than go in person to the
33 county clerk's offices
statewide. That'll help us quite
a bit.
Um, the second, the smaller bill
is um really this one that it
adjusts for inflation, um, all
these penalties throughout the
tax code. There are penalties
that haven't been adjusted for
inflation since about 1965, some
of them, one of them that I, I
think is maybe the most
interesting, but this makes me
sound like a big nerd, is that
right now, we have a panel that
we, there's a thing where we
can't impose interest on a
taxpayer unless it's more than
$1 of interest.
And they don't have to pay us.
We won't bill them or and we
won't pay them unless it's more
than $1. We want to take that to
$10. Imagine the time it takes,
the value of the time it takes
the state to bill someone $1 you
know, so.
Like that, but it goes both
ways. The amount we are owed,
the amount that we pay goes up.
So there's, there's all kinds of
little inflation adjustments
throughout the code, and that's
in the smaller bill.
And then the last thing to
mention that's kind of
noteworthy. There is already a
statute that makes it a crime,
but it's a misdemeanor to
unlawfully disclose confidential
tax information. Uh, we would
like to make that a felony to
match the federal code. That's
what happens if versus, you
know, if you versus the IRS. And
really that penalty won't apply
very often. If it did, it would
probably be to one of our
employees, which is, which would
be an unfortunate circumstance,
but just want to match the
federal code.
and make it just as serious of a
problem.
With that, members of the
committee, I'm happy to stand
for any questions you have on
these priorities.
Thank you, Secretary.
Appreciate, uh, your
information, and I know we will
be seeing you, uh, frequently
during this session. Uh, are
there any questions or comments
from the committee?
That are worth just thinking,
just two questions, the caps on
the quantum. What are we
thinking in terms of
Capped amounts. You know, um, I
thought about trying to put that
in here, Senator Wirth, but they
aren't nailed down and so I'm,
I'm hesitant to um to go forward
with that. I will say that the
infrastructure credit, it's a
maximum of 30% of, of the
infrastructure investment, but
also capped if if 30% is above a
cap, but there is a per
facility.
As well as an aggregate cap
across the mall, and we should
have that for you very shortly.
OK. I thank you very much.
Second question, is there an
income threshold on the foster
parent and kinship. I mean, what
if you got someone who's got a
million dollars worth of income
that's a foster parent.
Madam Chair and Senator Worth, I
think that as it's currently
being contemplated, there is not
an income threshold that said,
that is something that we've
been discussing.
OK. But, you know, the, the
assumption is that foster
parents and those providing
kinship care, probably tend to
be very moderate income, but
it's not impossible. You could
have a high income earner.
Yeah, I just it just jumped out
at me that you could have a
Huge unintended consequence if
someone's doing.
Doing the good work, uh, but
also has a massive
Income tax liability.
So we might want to look at
that. Thank you, Ma.
Thank you, Senator Wort. Senator
had a meal.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and the
cabinet secretary, so good to
see you. Thank you for your
presentation. I wanted to thank
you as a senator who represents
Los Alamos proper, um, for the
quantum testing GRT credit. And
what I really appreciate is that
it won't have local impact. So I
wanted to thank you on that. And
just as a comment, um,
grandparents raising
grandchildren in Rio Riba aren't
the legal guardians, which has
become an issue. We have a
number of adults or parents who
are users and haven't given up
their guardianship.
The grandparents have talked
about the struggle they're
having raising kids, but not
being able to provide for their
grandchildren with state funding
or programs because they're not
the legal guardian. Thank you
for that.
Thank you, Senator. Any other
comments or questions from the
committee?
All right, see you then,
secretary, thank you. Oh,
there's one more. Oh, I'm sorry.
You gotta be quick. All right,
Senator, sorry, madam's right.
You can always just say, hey,
and I'll get you.
OK, thanks, Madam Chair. Just a
question about the veteran
property tax exemptions. I've
had some constituents reach out
with concerns about the language
about the kinds of discharges
that will be included. Are we
making sure that it's broadly
inclusive so general and
honorable are both included. Um,
Madam Chair and Senator
Figueroa.
To my recollection, the
House Bill 47 language doesn't
address.
types of discharge, but that's
something I'll, I'll get with my
colleague at the Department of
Veteran Services after that and
and make sure that that's an
issue I'm not real familiar with
and so I'll, I'll make sure that
we do address that.
OK. Anybody else?
And
Secretary, thank you so much. We
appreciate it. We look forward
to seeing you. And also, also
appreciate you and your staff as
always being resources for us
when we have questions. Thank
you. Thank you.
All right. Our next
presentation, we're going to
welcome Ismael Torrez, who is
the chief economist for the
Legislative Finance Council. He
will be making a presentation on
tax 101. His is the hefty.
packet that we've got here, um,
and as I had mentioned, for him
to, uh, if he does sound, uh, it
doesn't mean to sound
condescending, but I did ask him
to talk to me like a 10 year old
when it comes down to taxes.
Just to get this like, so to
make sure that we all know it.
So, um, Ismael, thank you very
much or Izzy as we all really
know you. So thank you very much
and thank you for being here.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, I
will be merciful. We're not
gonna go through this entire
packet, a lot of it, more than
half of it is resources for you
all to use, um, if you wish,
but, uh, yes, my name is Ismael
Torres. I'm the chief economist
for you all at the Legislative
Finance Committee, and during
the session, we primarily
staffed the tax committees that
would include you, you all, and
uh
The house Tax and Revenue
Committee as well. So you'll
frequently see myself or or a
member of our team sitting here
to the left. So if you ever have
questions on FIRs or, or just
general process or finance,
we'll be here to help you answer
them throughout the entire
session. So if I could, I'd like
to take a second to introduce
our team. We have Jennifer
Fabian, one of our economists,
and Brendan Gray as well. And uh
Jennifer's been here maybe going
on 4 years now. Brennan 3 years
or 2 years, something like that,
and I'm not quite at 10 yet, but
I'm, I'm getting close and so we
all have uh training
in economics and expertise,
hopefully and growing expertise
in in tax policy to assist you
all.
Um, that being said, I'd also
like to invite you all, um, new
or veteran members who are new
member orientation on tax
policy, that's on Thursday at 7
a.m. Um, we will be going into
some of this material in in more
depth. And so I'd really
encourage you all to go and
that's a really um helpful time
to have one on one conversations
with staff, uh, about any of
these topics. So,
That being said, again, we're
here to help if you have any
questions on FIRs or process or
finance. Um, that being said,
let's start by turning this
presentation to page 2. I think
it'd be helpful to to give a
little bit of context about
Uro's work as you go through the
session, and you all have the
tremendous responsibility, uh,
being on a finance related
committee to maintain our fiscal
house. And so what I'm showing
here on this slide on the left
is an abbreviated version of
what's called the general fund
financial summary, that is the
state's
balance sheet, and as you all
know, we have a constitutional
mandate in New Mexico to pass a
balanced budget every single
year. And so this balance sheet
on the left helps us keep track
of how much money is coming in
and going out each year and
hopefully helps you all do the
same, and you'll, you'll notice
the top line here, of course, is
the revenues. I'm sure all of
you have seen these types of
balance, balance sheets before,
and this is really your domain.
The revenues at the top, which
have to be balanced with the
appropriations or expenditures
down below it, and then you, you
sort of get to
bottom line, which includes our
reserve figures or our cash on
hand at the very bottom. And so,
um, as you all go throughout the
session and we talk about how
much money is being spent either
through appropriations or
through the tax code that all
comes down to the bottom line,
which of course has to be in the
black. And this chart on the
right here just shows some of
the, the expenditures that are
made from the general fund every
single year. This is a a chart
we need to update, but you can
see public education is about
half of all spending from the
general fund, Medicaid.
has been a growing share um for
well over a decade, but uh of
course, all of these important
priorities coming from the
general fund that you all um
effectively touch in your work
as a revenue committee.
So moving on to to slide 3 here,
a little more context on what's
included in the general fund.
These are pretty broad
categories of taxes that I'll
get into more shortly. Uh, the
gross receipts tax is our
version of the sales tax, that's
the largest form of revenue in
the general fund that's
represented in the blue bar
here. Uh, that represents about
1/3 of the total revenue in the
general fund. Energy-related
revenues, these are directly
taxed from oil and gas,
primarily oil and gas, about 95%
oil and gas.
represents about 22% or almost
1/5 of the general fund
revenues. Income taxes also
about 50% of our total revenues
that includes personal income
and corporate income taxes, and
then a very significant and
different source of revenue in
New Mexico's general fund
compared to other states, this
investment income, which is
quickly growing and is actually
become uh larger than the
personal income tax in terms of
our total revenues in the
general fund. Um, that's new to
this year. This is due to a lot
of the investments that you
as a legislature have made into
interest earning accounts the
permanent funds, which then spin
money back with compound
interest into the general fund,
helping to reduce reliance on
volatile.
Revenue sources like the oil and
gas industry there. And then the
other taxes include excise taxes
and revenue sharing and and all
uh go through that shortly. OK.
Turning to slide 4.
Here's a little bit more context
on what those revenues have been
doing.
Over the last 40 years. And
really the story in New Mexico
is one of volatility. This is a
very famous chart that if you
all aren't familiar with, I'm
sure you will become familiar
with. This is what we call the
roller coaster of New Mexico.
Roller coaster being represented
by the black line here.
Certainly looks like a roller
coaster. This reflects the
revenue change every single
year, growth or decline, growth
or decline, and you can see an
extreme amount of volatility,
and we actually, as you're all
staff, data volatility analysis
this summer, and we found that
Mexico is in the top 5 most
volatile states in the country
and actually our volatility is
growing over the most recent
years. So if you look back to
the 60s, we had a uh several
decades of high revenue growth,
tax uh large tax reform was
implemented in the early 80s,
which resulted in that one year
dip in revenues before we had
pretty steady revenue growth,
pretty moderate and, and
reliable, stable revenue growth
for the following almost two
decades before, uh, um, the
Great Recession in 08 09.
You can see the dip there, and
then really the energy boom that
followed in 1516, the boom, the
crash, and then subsequently
followed by the most recent
shale boom in 1819. And then of
course, the COVID pandemic, and
then you all know the story from
here. So what I want to point
out is the difficulty this
presents you all as policy
makers in making strategic and
long term decisions when you're
having to go in, in many of
these cases, paycheck to
paycheck. Anytime you're
experiencing a boom, you're
almost always worrying about
when is the next
bus gonna come and, and it
happens quite frequently. And so
this is uh uh something that you
all have tried to address by
Tapping oil and gas revenues in
the general fund, taking the
volatility out, sending it to
interest earning accounts, which
are very stable and having those
supplement your income rather
than those direct energy
revenues. So we are seeing that
play out. We're seeing stability
being reintroduced into the
general fund, and we're, we're
seeing that in our analysis. But
I do want to point out, after
the most recent revenue boom,
uh, record rates almost 20%
revenue growth over the last
several years, as you all know,
the state's been in a great
financial position. We are
seeing those revenues slow down.
quite quickly. So the chart on
the right of page 4 here shows
those record years in 22 and 23,
and then we saw half of the
revenue growth in 24, and then
we're seeing that slow down even
further in 25 in part because of
tax cuts that you all have have
implemented, but we do expect
that economic and revenue growth
to continue to slow to a little
bit under the
pre-pandemic revenue growth
trend of about 4%. So we do
expect general fund headwinds in
the years to come, and that's
part of that conversation that
Secretary Sheron Clark mentioned
about sustainability. Keeping in
mind that our revenues are
slowing. And so what is the
sustainable mix of of revenues
for New Mexico in the years
ahead.
If you turn to page 5, this is,
this is a continuation of that
story, and Secretary Shadon
Clark brought this up as well.
We are expecting New Mexico oil
production to follow closely
with global oil demand, and we
expect that that global oil
demand will peak in the next
decade. Many projections around
the 2030 time frame, and at that
point, so at the end of this
decade, we expect New Mexico oil
production to begin to plateau
before gradually declining along
with global oil demand.
And what that translates to is a
a a consideration of of
sustainability that actually
Will come up in in a couple
slides. So, so moving on to
slide 6 here, how are we at
your, your staff at the
legislative Finance Committee
thinking about all of these
issues. Well, the graph on the
left here is what we call a
stress test. So your
forecasters, your economists, we
Attempt to, to um estimate how
far revenues could decline in a
worst case scenario. What
happens if we have a recession?
What happens if oil crashes
again? How far could our
revenues fall? And we, we do
this exercise on the left here
and see how far it could cut
into our appropriations, right?
Because keeping in mind that
balance sheet, if that top line
declines and the appropriations
are the same, we could be in a
really tricky situation. So we
do these stress tests to see how
much cash we might need,
reserves we might need on hand
in the event of one of these
severe.
scenarios to continue paying our
bills. And uh the short of it is
we estimate at least $2.1
billion to get through this year
and next year. And we are, the
good news is we have $3 billion
in cash on hand, and so we, we
find that we are in a good
position to handle some of these
stress scenarios.
Um, but the, the graphs on the
right here.
Just speak to those investments
that you all have been making in
the permanent funds, the early
childhood trust fund, and other
endowments. The chart on the far
right, the blue represents how
much of that money you're taking
in the general fund, while the
green and the orange represent
your investments in endowments
and other funds. So you're
taking a significant amount of
those oil and gas revenues,
turning them into investments,
and the chart in the middle here
represents your revenue growth
by source. It's kind of hard to
see, but it's probably not hard
to see that that green line is
by far and
large, the, the largest growth
source in the general fund and
that's coming from those
investment accounts that you all
have have been populating.
And if you turn to page 7, this
is how that oil and gas chart
relates to overall spending and
how we're thinking about what
could be a sustainable spending
target. So the bars reflect a
budget scenario, how much
spending the state does. The
black represents our long-term
revenue expectations, and I do
want to highlight that when you
all um pass revenue reducing
measures, tax cuts, this has a
very similar effect to the, to
the balance sheet as additional
spending. So if it says 6
% spending scenario that could
be 6% in new spending and 0% in
tax cuts, or it could be 0% in
you spending and 6% in tax cuts.
They have the same effect at the
end of the day when it comes to
the balance sheet. And so you
can see how a 6% scenario.
I sustainable through 2030, but
maybe a 10% scenario, we would
expect to be in a difficult
position by FY 28 or sooner.
So, um, as you all are thinking
about that, we're happy to help
you think about that and
continue to run these scenarios
in terms of uh the
sustainability of, of your all
spending programs. OK, so moving
on to more tax focus now that
you have all this context, why
you care, of course, um, we can
move on to some ways to analyze
or think about tax policy
issues. So on page 9,
These are just a selection of
some of the ways that folks
think about tax policy. Of
course, you think about
simplicity, the, the tax
secretary was just here talking
about cleaning up the tax code
so it's simple for taxpayers,
but we're also worried about
ability to pay, making sure that
those who can't pay aren't being
asked to pay. Fairness that
taxpayers of the similar status
are treated in the same way.
Competitiveness as this relates
to our economic development
goals, and of course, so much
more. So right here at the top.
The table reflects the tax
foundation rankings for what
they call our business
competitive competitiveness
climate, and you can see that
New Mexico's overall tax system
is ranked 31 in the nation for
competitiveness, but there's a
little more detail in here based
on which tax program you're
looking at, or corporate income
tax above the pack at 22.
Personal income tax at 37%,
sales tax, that's our gross
receipts tax, is what really
drags New Mexico down at 41. Um,
property taxes frequently
ranked as the most competitive
in the country, if not the 2nd
most competitive in the country.
Unemployment also, we have a
very um solvent unemployment
system in our state, which
provides benefits to taxpayers
and lower tax liability.
But if you were to drill down
deeper into some of these
rankings. For example, in the
sales tax ranking, you would see
that the state rate is actually
quite competitive. It might be
in the in the
Most competitive quintile in the
country, but our local rates,
which stack on top of our state
rates are some of the least
competitive in the country, the
highest in the country, and so
that's what really brings us
down there. But the charts below
it are of course uh uh maybe the
ability to pay lens here, a
progressive tax system is one in
which the proportion of tax.
By your income grows as your
income grows, while a regressive
tax is the proportion of tax
that you pay as a share of your
income shrinks as your income
grows, and a proportional tax is
where it's the same regardless
of your income. And so this
might be one way you can
consider ability to pay.
If you turn the page to page 10,
this is those charts reflected
in New Mexico's specific tax
system. And so it's really
helpful when you all are
considering tax changes to
consider the whole tax system in
New Mexico, um, in terms of
determining ability to pay, and,
and the chart at the top left
here reflects the GRT based on
your income, and the gross
receipts tax is a regressive
tax. So again, it, it actually
shrinks as a share of your
income, the more income you
have, and that's because if
don't have much income, a lot of
it is going towards consumption
and all of that has a tax
applied, and so that's why the
gross receipts tax is a, a
regressive tax in New Mexico.
The middle chart shows property
taxes. This can also be a
regressive tax, especially
because property tax tends to be
passed on to renters. So if you
are a property owner, you're
generally passing that on to
your renters, and of course,
low-income folks tend to be
more, are more likely to be
renters and that share is a is a
larger share of their income.
That's also regressive tax. You
can see income taxes on the
right are the most progressive
by far, and intentionally so,
the legislature has sought to
reduce uh the liability to the
lowest income folks in New
Mexico in the grocery receipts
tax and in the property tax
through the personal income tax.
So that's why you see a negative
liability in the personal income
tax, in part offsetting the
regressivity of those other two
taxes, and then the overall
progressivity, regressivity of
the tax program on the bottom of
page 10 here. You can see where
we were in 2018 compared to um
after the most recent tax
changes in 203, so this does not
include 24, but you can see that
New Mexico's system is
progressive up through the top
the
Through the bottom 4, income
quintiles, and then it again
becomes slightly regressive at
the top quintile. Although,
Those top earners are still not
paying less than the bottom
earners, which used to be the
case pre 2018.
OK, turning to page 11, another
important tax policy
consideration that we remind you
all of frequently is a neutral
tax base is one that has a low
rate for a broad base. So the
concept is, if you've heard of
the Swiss cheese, if you have a
Swiss cheese, the tax rate has
to be higher and higher to
compensate for all of those
holes in the Swiss cheese. And
so the tax base being the
cheese, if you all make
exceptions for certain folks or
industries or practices or
behaviors that puts holes in it,
which
Requires the rate to be raised
on everybody else in order to
maintain those levels of
revenue. And you can see how
that plays out in these two
charts. This Albuquerque chart
is quite old, it would continue
to grow in the most recent
years, but this is a uh an
effect or a result of that Swiss
cheese in large part, you can
notice the large jump in maybe
2004, which was the result of
the food and medical hold
harmless. That was a big hole in
the Swiss cheese, which we saw a
lot of local governments raise
um tax rates after that.
And we've continued to see that
in the most recent years, even
despite the tax cutting our own
gross receipts tax rate.
So
Those are a lot of lenses to
keep in mind, but on the next
page you can see one more thing
that that we would encourage you
to keep in mind, which is all of
the tax changes that you have
been making. So we, we, uh, um,
consistently see new tax
proposals, which may not
consider a previous attempts to
address that issue. And so, you
all have passed over a billion
dollars in tax cuts over the
last 5 years. This page shows
just the gross receipts tax
cuts, and I would draw your
attention to
The largest in the middle of the
page, the gross receipts tax
cut, almost $250 million back to
taxpayers from that tax cut
there. Also some large tax
reform related to the gross
receipts tax in 2019 that was
hospital GRT reform that was
online sales bringing them into
the tax base that was
destination sourcing as the tax
secretary mentioned. So a lot of
changes have been made in the
gross receipts tax recently that
you all might want to keep in
mind as you consider additional
changes.
On the next page, um, just for
your information, these are
changes to the personal and
corporate income tax.
$800 million in tax cuts back to
New Mexicans there on the next
page are all the other tax
changes that you all have made,
and you could see the total of
those 3 slides on slide 14.
On slide 15, there are some
generally accepted best
practices for tax policy. These
come from the the table on the
left is from New Mexico's own
tax research institute, which
has great national recognition.
I would highly encourage you all
to attend their conferences if
you are available, but the
legislative Finance Committee
has also adopted our own, the
committee has adopted 4 staff,
our own LFC tax expenditure
policy principles. They are
generally that things should be
vetted, they should go through a
committee process. They should
be targeted and trans
parent and efficient, all the
things that I think we can
generally agree on. And I just
want to flag this, particularly
for you all, because when you
receive your FIRs from us, they
will have tables at the back of
the bill, which reflect these
policy principles, and they'll
have little checks or X's on
them, whether or not they meet
these principles, and they might
have comments as to why or how
to rectify them.
And another important tool for
you all on, on slide 16 is the
tax expenditure report. This is
published by the Tax and Revenue
Department. Um, you can find it
on their website, this goes
through all of the credits,
deductions, exemptions that the
state has, and it's hundreds of
pages long. It estimates how
much they cost and how many
people are claiming those
credits, and it's a really
useful tool for you all in, in
considering your tax policy if,
if maybe there's a credit or or
a deduction that looks like
something we might have on the
books.
might look to it to see how much
is it going to cost or, or how
many people might be benefiting.
I do want to skip too, so, so
that's pretty much the bulk of
my presentation, the rest of the
presentation are resources for
you all, um, as you work through
your bills in front of you, but
I do want to highlight a few. If
you could turn to 18.
This is sort of the, the Sesame
Street version of what what all
these terms mean.
Exclusions are those.
Changes that define the tax
base. So in many states, their
sales tax or gross receipts tax
only includes goods. So an
exclusion might be, it excludes
services. These are not common
for you all to be dealing with,
but they're helpful to keep in
mind and how they differentiate
from the other three which are
commonly before you all.
Exemptions are our least
favorite form of tax
expenditure, because they have
the highest risk for abuse, the
lowest level of transparency.
These tax, but it is the highest
form of simplicity. Taxpayers
don't have to report an
exemption. They don't have to
file for one, they just get it.
So you can imagine how difficult
it is for us or for the tax
department to figure out if they
are claiming the right amount or
if it's done correctly because
we don't see it, it's invisible.
So typically we would recommend
that if you all are hoping to
target tax relief to a taxpayer,
you do it through a deduction or
a credit, that is filed on their
tax return, a deduction reduces
their tax liability, usually by
a
ating income or receipts, um,
from their, from their um
Um
Filing, but a credit is after
the fact, after you've
In uh decided what your income
is and what your receipts are.
You apply your tax, and then you
can get a credit applied against
that tax. So it kind of is like
above the line or below the
line, uh deductions and credits
there.
And then I want to draw your
attention to slide 20.
I think it's probably helpful
for you all to just keep in mind
what are the largest tax
expenditures in the state, the
Groce receipts, um, exemption
for food and medical are at the
top of the list because they
also have an associated payment
to local governments to keep
them whole, called the hold
harmless distribution. So those
have been for many years, for
almost 2 decades now, our
largest tax expenditures, but we
also have a 60% deduction on
hospitals, uh, new and rapidly
growing deduction for
manufacturers against the sale
of services to those
manufacturers. We have the child
income tax credit, working
families, those are growing as
well.
after recent changes, but film
is up there, uh, capital gains
that will fall as um with recent
changes, but it's, it's maybe
helpful to keep in mind what
some of our most expensive tax
expenditures are.
Um, and with that, Madam Chair,
I just would encourage you all
to flip through some of these
slides. They have some very
helpful bullets on each tax
program in New Mexico, gross
receipts tax might be worth
looking at since that's our
largest tax source, um, maybe
I'll flip really quickly here to
oil and gas taxes since those
also are highly important. There
is a table.
On page 37.
Which has a helpful
Uh, uh, accumulation of all of
our oil and gas taxes in New
Mexico, and you can see that
they do differentiate based on
price, although, of course,
we're almost always over $18 a
barrel now these days, and you
can see that our excise tax is
between 8 and 9% on oil and
natural gas, that does not
include royalties. So if oil and
gas is being produced on
state-owned land or federal
lands, of course, those minerals
belong to the people of New
Mexico. And so the revenues, the
profits are shared with the
state in royalty payments,
that's in addition.
To these taxes here.
And with that, Mad I'm sure, I
know that was a lot, but I'm
happy to to take any questions
you all might have. Yeah, my
brain's getting ready to
explode, but I'm very grateful
for this and I have a feeling
that this is what I will be
reading every night before I go
to sleep, so it goes from short
term to long term memory. Um,
thank you, Izzy, um, for this.
And, uh, this is where I opened
it up for the committee if they
have any questions, as you can
tell, uh, he is a bottomless pit
of information, uh, since
Senator O'Malleys like eyes
rolled into the back of her head
with all this information.
But if there are any questions
or comments, uh, from the
committee, I'd like to entertain
those now.
We do know that you and your
staff are available and, um, and
I am grateful for that. We've
already had one visit, uh, and,
um, I know that there's a lot,
there might be times where
there's some bills coming up
that we might need uh to have
conversations with Izzy about to
understand because there might
be a little bit heavy in that,
but if there are any comments to
Senator Worth. So man, I'm sure,
I apologize. I had to step out.
You might have addressed this.
So capacity in the current
LFC recommendation just for the
new members, uh, why don't you
just explain what that means and
then let us know.
Kind of where we are.
Uh, Madam Chair and Senator
Worth, yeah, if you could turn
to page 7 again. I think this is
helpful for understanding the
capacity discussion. Um, so, in,
in the capacity just to, to
understand where we can give tax
breaks and where we have to
increase tax. So that's, we have
to look at what our cushion is,
right? That's right. OK. And,
and as passed by the LFC, the
recommendation coming into the
session does not include
capacity for net tax declines,
tax cuts. So that would mean um
tax cuts would
Be accompanied with revenue
raisers that would keep them
revenue neutral, and that's in
part because the LFC
recommendation follows this 6%
spending category on the left.
And so, of course, any sort of
trade-offs if you all are
looking to make net revenue cuts
might need to be um
Dealt with also by reducing
maybe appropriations, but I
don't think that's currently the
plan.
So I'm sure, I think that's
important. Again, we just heard
from the administration that
they've got a list of.
Ideas that are going to cost
money, and there's no money in
the budget to pay for them, and
this is something that
Again, I think it's
Super smart. We didn't used to
do this. We would have a budget
recommendation and then all of a
sudden a along would come some
big political move with a huge
tax cut, and it just wasn't
factored in. It's obviously it's
a recurring expense when you do
it. Uh, so one of the things I
think
We need to think about and think
through is are there other
places where we can generate
some revenue by making some
adjustments to pay for these.
Um, because if we don't do that,
then we are in a situation where
it's a recurring expense that's
not built into the budget
doesn't mean we can't go back
and adjust that and increase the
spending, but I did think it was
worth just pointing that out. Is
that something we do look at in
this committee.
You out of you.
Thank you, Senator Worth. I
don't know if I if you wanted to
respond to any of that or
confirm or deny.
Thank you so much.
Any other questions for
Busy.
Well, thank you. I know we're
gonna be seeing you and your
crew, um, quite a bit, so I
appreciate that and uh I
appreciate you spending the time
and really thinking of the
Sesame Street version.
Of that, you should put a little
Elmo, but that might be
copyright, uh, there, if you put
a little Elmo or cookie mustard
on there. All right.
So at this point, um, we are
going to go ahead and adjourn
until Thursday when we have uh
Secretary Serna coming in from
the Department of Transportation
and Secretary Blot coming in
from EDD, um, we do have a bunch
of bills that are being dropped
and we're getting those uh FIRs
going uh on that. I know that I
think we have 20 that are
already in process. Um,
something like that. So on
Tuesday of next week, we will go
full blown into our bills, um,
and the pres the sponsors will
will be informed of the time,
uh, the time restraints, uh, so
that we can try and run as
efficient as many as possible or
Zoom coordinators will be on
board as well, so at that point,
if there are no other comments
or or questions, um, I'm very
excited about this committee.
I'm very excited about this
session and uh and I'm grateful
for the committee members here,
uh, today. So on that note, uh,
we are recessed or adjourned
until Thursday, 1:30 or 30
minutes after the 4.
