We're we're not gonna be able to
join us tonight okay.
Senator Padilla I don't see him
either.
And Senator Shendo so you have
five people Nelson one more.
Yeah I'll call Senator Padilla.
I'm gonna mute myself now.
While we're waiting I just
wanted to say I am Senator
Kernan I really appreciated your
comments after the vote on SB
sixty six about being in the
room with an amazing group of
women negotiating.
I did buddy I said I want to be
in the room where it happens to.
Well I I kind of tried to warn
him I listened last night I
don't know I was just thinking
I'm gonna listen to the house
for awhile and that was the bill
and I thought good I don't know
if you were one of them.
And that it was an amazing group
of women who came down.
I'm proud of them so at I think
thank we had some good points.
So is this going to be the the
last committee meeting of the
committee.
I hope so.
Right we are getting close to
the end yes just just for the
committee members the.
House bill sixty two will not be
heard the sponsored wanted for
that one.
We'll start with house bill
three hundred.
Senator Padilla is in the house
and he's coming in to log in so
you should be in a few minutes
okay great there's comments so
we can get started here now.
All right.
Thank you members of the
committee we we have a.
Six bills.
Take care of hopefully will be
this will be our our our final
committee meeting I think so
we'll see but house bill three
hundred state leadership pilot
program Representative
Stansbury.
Thanks Mr chairman and CENIC's
to see you all today I'll try to
keep this quick so House Bill
three hundred it really came
about starting last year because
of initially you know
observations I think we've all
had about how our state agencies
are able to address vacancies to
recruit and retain people make
sure that we have you know the
right elements to be able to
innovate and accomplish our
goals and really achieve that
and goals that all of our
programs want to do and I think
one of the big deficiencies that
we have in state government is
that there are a lot of pipeline
and leadership opportunities for
people to come into state
agencies to advance themselves
get the training that they like
and also the pipeline and new
talent into our agencies so this
bill was developed in
conversations with different
state agency leadership and with
the state personnel office and
the purpose of the bill is to
create a pilot program and
report back to the legislature
this next year to foster
leadership innovation
streamlining and performance of
agencies and improve their
delivery of services so the bill
directs the state personnel
office to work with the agencies
to create this program to
advanced training recruitment
retention it lays out the
guidelines and how to do so and
then directs the agency to come
back next year in October with a
report it was based on language
that comes from the federal
government through the office of
personnel management and the
civil service Reform Act of
nineteen seventy eight which
created the federal S. yes
program if any of you are
familiar with federal leadership
programs we also had Council
Service do research for us and
we reached out to NCSL to see
how other states have done this
so even though it's a simple
bill it's based on a lot of
research and evidence based on
how best practices it that are.
Other states have adopted in the
federal government and I stand
for questions.
Okay.
Thank you Representative.
I'm go to the public comment do
we have anybody are registered.
Mr Chairman I'm here now I'm in
the house present a bill but I
came back to be with okay great
thank you thank you senator.
For Senate.
House Bill three hundred we do
not have any members of the
public register in advance to
speak in opposition if there are
any members of the public with
us here today wish to speak in
opposition please raise your
hand now.
Seeing no hands raised we will
go first to Ricky Serna speaking
in favor of the bill.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee I I am Rick you
start on the acting director of
the state personnel office and
I'm here to recognize that
Representative stand Stansbury
is reached out to us and has
provided us with an opportunity
to time in on the bill we
believe that the the provisions
within the bill compliance with
the appropriation crisis
resource the successful in
providing the legislature with
those successful our report
filled with successful outcomes
because forward the opportunity
to be part of the success of the
mission.
Thank you.
Thank you very much are there
any other members of the public
who wish to speak in support of
house bill three hundred please
raise your hand.
Thank you very much that
complete public comment at this
time.
Okay thank you so now we'll go
to the committee for questions I
have Senator Hamblen.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative Stansbury for
bringing this forward I really
appreciate this and I certainly
agree that we need to cultivate
new our folks into all aspects
of our government and I'm
looking forward to it the one
thing I have a question about
he's on page three of your bill.
I'm mine's eight through ten.
and for those who don't have
access to it it's the need to
advance equity inclusion and
Justice throughout the
organization and in the
implementation of its mission.
Can you expand on that a little
bit because I have a feeling I
know where you're going.
But I think it's kind of a vague
statement the mind expanding on
it.
So I mean so obviously you know
I think all organizations right
now are working to increase
equity in terms of opportunities
for diverse different people who
are identifying different kinds
of ways whether that's their
culture or and racial heritage
or gender diversity sexual
orientation all of those things
are represented in our state
agencies but the other aspect of
this is making sure that our
programs are state programs
whether those be programs that
provide direct services are
grants also are seeking to
advance justice and equity and
how they administer the programs
themselves so it's both sort of
to help increase our internal
justice inequity within our our
state agencies and institutions
as well as the way in which we
interface with the public.
So thank you Mr chair
representative Stansbury was
there a reason why you didn't
kind of go into more detail just
because I I guess I worry that
it can be kind of a blanket
statement but that there might
need to be more clarity in that
just to make sure your intent.
and the whole the the intent of
this bill actually gets carried
out does that make sense.
Yes the bill is really drafted
to be answered if you're one
pilot program and so the idea
here is CPO in partnership with
the agency's leadership will
explore all of these things and
come back with recommendations
to the legislature so it wasn't
my intent to be overly
prescriptive in the language
here but really to provide a
framework to help so work with
agency leadership to explore
these concepts okay all right so
then that that's Mr Chairman
representative of stance
recession opportunity to go back
if we see that these areas are
not being addressed to be a lot
more specific and at.
Absolutely okay great that's my
only question Mr chair thank you
representative Stansbury.
Thank you Senator Hamblen the.
Don't see any other hands up so
what is a pleasure the
committee.
Okay Senator Corman.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator Representative Stansbury
for bringing this forward.
At.
What's the.
The problem with the issue we're
trying to solve here.
So thank you Mr chairman thank
you senator and there are
multiple challenges that our
state agencies face that this
bill is targeting so I'm going
to kind of the error original
intent behind it I'm you know
for any of us that have sat on
the spot in the center agencies
particularly through the budget
process come and talk about
vacancies and silliness you know
critical roles within the state
government there's a whole host
of reasons one of which is
salaries which is tied to the
budget but there's also other
reasons you know we we do as a
state as an organization
struggle with recruitment and
retaining then of talent within
our state agencies so that's one
slice of the pie another slice
of the pie is really fostering
innovation and you know all of
us have really great policy
ideas and I think we've probably
had the experience where we got
a bill passed and then our state
agencies may be struggling to
figure out how to implement it
and so part of the idea here is
that part of the leadership and
and growing our talent our
ability to solve problems as an
organization and all private
institutions do this these days
is that they provide leadership
training for leaders on how do
you foster organizational
innovation and achieve your
goals so that's another kind of
piece of this and then the the
other pieces as I was just
mentioning Mr chairman and
senator was about fostering a
greater institutional awareness
and ability to deliver on equity
and justice
goals for it for state agencies.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for and against what you're
trying to do this trying to get
a better sense is it's a pilot
program so what what agencies
would you start with.
Well that that Mr chairman and
senator the bill directs our
state personnel office to
initiated so they would consult
with the other agencies and so
is you know our state agency
that that does all the personnel
training and work with there are
other agencies.
Yeah I'm sorry to have the
benefit of re in the F. I. R.
this is something is being
Voted by the NCSL by insurance.
So I'm Mr chairman and senator
we consulted with myself and
Council Service consulted with
NCSL I'm in the development of
this bill and we ask them to do
research on there's really only
one other state which is the
state of Tennessee which is
implemented a program quite like
this and so we borrowed some
concepts from that but it's not
being pushed forward by NCSL
specifically but they helped us
and kind of crafting the idea.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative yet you answered
my last question is one of ten
any other states that are doing
this thank you again for
bringing this forward and I I
moved to pass.
Okay we have a I don't see any
other hands up so we have a
second moment a second by a
Senator Padilla all the lane can
you all please call the roll.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Griggs.
Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Hickey yes Senator how to meal
yes Senator Kernan yes senator
Sanchez.
Senator Clemente.
Yes Senator.
The idea.
Yes Senator Shendo yes.
So in the affirmative and for
excuse.
Thank you very much Mr chairman.
Right thank you and will now
move on to I don't know if the
Senator Ortiz the piano is
available.
I don't see him if not we'll
just move on to the house bill
thirty four eight.
Representative.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee for
meeting with us
How rural house bill thirty four
is an investment in preventive
health care particularly for
those with diabetes and those
with vascular problems.
Die interest are one of the key
health care providers for people
with these conditions.
Patients covered by private
insurance are often prevented
from seeking podiatrist for
preventive care because the
insurance company says copays of
eighty five two hundred twenty
five dollars for office visits
under HB thirty four copays
charged by private insurers for
office visits your podiatrist
would be limited to no more than
what the insured would pay for a
primary care visit generally in
the range of twenty to twenty
five dollars
visit
This bill increases the
accessibility of critical health
care by making it more
affordable and with me today is
my expertise staff again
assignment a podiatrist who
of can add some detail about
what the problems were talking
about.
Thank you but go ahead.
Thank you Mr chair am I audible.
Okay thank you very much
Yes Representative Matthews
indicated this bill has been
but for us to decrease
financial burden that many of
our patients experience
especially are diabetic patients
who are often frequently or more
frequently coming in for foot
care issues for instance with
diabetic ulcers that frequently
need to be seen on a weekly or
bi weekly basis especially if
they may not have
family support or access to home
health care they can perform
some of those dressing changes.
We have identified this burden
when patients tell us.
Dr I'm sorry I can't come in for
that appointment and get a week
or two weeks I can't afford
doing so can we push that out
and in doing so that certainly
increases the risk that the
condition will worsen or
especially in our diabetics that
it will
let's say.
Increase the rest of amputations
and I can say that throughout
the last year with COVID we have
definitely identified that as an
unfortunate trend.
Also at this point I you
certainly will stop my comments
and would be open to any
comments from the chair
committee thank you.
Thank you.
Representative and T. mobile
will go to the committee.
Miss Mister chairman and members
of the committee the only thing
I would add is that New Mexico
is just the I believe it's the
in terms of percentage it's the
leading.
Meeting is kind of awkward to
this but that has the most
highest percentage of diabetics
in the country and we have well
over two hundred thousand people
plus pre diabetic folks
which makes is a critically
important bill for this.
For this state and with with
that we stand for questions okay
thank you the Representative
Matthews at this time we'll go
to the public for house bill
thirty four as amended if you
wish to speak in opposition
please raise your hand now.
If you wish to speak in favor of
this bill please raise your
hand.
Thank.
Mr Chairman okay.
Sorry Mr chairman I'm not sure
what I'm struggling with getting
recognized on my my approach
here but thank you so much Mr
chairman members of the
committee mollis shows
registered lobbyist for the
cross the shield in New Mexico
and we stand in opposition to
house bill thirty four we
recognize that the roll that put
that put actually care services
place at play in our health care
delivery system the primary care
physicians are first line of
defense we have confidence in
them to be that.
Thank you Sir not primary care
providers and should not be
treated as such a guide to scope
is limited but I don't ankle
what primary care providers role
is overall patient care head to
toe managing and coordinating
members care from medical to
surgical to psycho social
aspects of health decrease in
the out of pocket Care for
specialty services like the guy
to increase cost provide primary
care services Wall impact to our
already small heavily burdened
commercial market in addition.
Thank you.
That concludes public comment.
Okay thank you I will go to the
the committee.
For any questions.
Dr Hickey Senator Hickey.
Unit size.
I'm sorry I'm in two committees
at once thank you Mr chair and
Representative Matthews the
question I have is.
Podiatrist do a lot of
outpatient surgery in their
office if I recollect.
And
as such.
I it seems to me I mean when
outpatient surgery is done by
anyone.
Are there is a higher copay by
any specialty.
The.
And it's not necessarily of of
primary care visit can you speak
to that with that be excluded I
understand you make a great
point about diabetics to do need
to get their toenails at the and
that C. that's probably a CPT
code rather than in New Mexico
so I I don't know if this would
be better.
For.
The just doing it only for CNN
R. E. evaluation and management
codes.
Representative Matthews and and
that Mr chairman of the that's
my question.
What.
Mr Chairman at Senator Hickey of
the bill
specifically provides that this
is not the cover surgery
including surgeries that would
be done in the office it is for
diagnostic and evaluation work
and and Dr Simon may want to
add a little bit to that because
they use coding systems and so
forth to make it clear the just
to have the charges are are
done.
Yes
Thank you Mr chair
as Representative Matthews
indicated it is focused on non
surgical treatments
There are as is being discussed.
Different
close sharing.
Relationships with surgical
culture and that is not what
this bill is addressing it is
the diagnostic in New Mexico
just we talked about them in
medicine that the CPT codes.
Thank you for the answer
Representative and then Simon
what is where is cutting
toenails
I would that that is we yes it's
not a CPT code at seven
management of.
And and doing dressings through
the chair no it is
a CPT code and essentially
all procedures that
We do are considered surgical
codes so although the.
Trimming or debridement of
toenails is not necessarily
surgery in the eyes of probably.
Ninety nine point nine percent
of us here on the call of the C.
P. chief coding identifies that
under the surgical categories so
there are clearly you know.
A lot of procedures that are
done that would not be
considered surgery in most
peoples consideration.
Thank you for that Mr chair and
Representative Matthews and this
on mentor drive side of the
so basically I
just in general if I said you
know we do need to cover it
primary care right all the
diabetic potential complications
and and toe dipping toenails
becoming ingrown can set up an
infection that can lead to
losing a foot
and budget in a longstanding
diabetic or vascular early
compromised individual
but since you assure me that all
other kind of procedures that
can be done in the sometimes
minor surgery for the
metatarsals for the
so I'm.
The I'm forgetting my exact
anatomy anyway
bear with me
But it's so those are those are
set aside that I think this is a
good deal and I thank you for
bringing it up.
And that and that and with that
Mr Chairman I I thank you the
representative and Dr Simon and
Mr chair I yield.
Okay thank you the.
Senator thank you have a Senator
Padilla thank you Mr chairman
and taken a meeting from the
Senate floor to get around the
house here in a little bit I
thank you Representative
Matthews what is that.
Or was in the amendment what.
Difference.
As a result of the strict.
Thank you it.
Mr Chairman at Senator Padilla I
you're part of what you said
risk are garbled I can
understand you know all I was
asking was is there going to be
a significant change in cost one
way or the other I think I saw
some of the analysis for the
state of New Mexico it's about
eighteen thousand dollars is
this is this a significant
change or is it something that
can be easily shoulder.
Mr chair Senator Padilla this
actually should save the
The insurers money and I'll let
doctor Simon talk about the
difference the the the cost
involved in surgery if these
conditions are treated and I
want if I can just add one of
the things we're not suggesting
that the but doctors become the
primary care.
Position for
of the four all causes it ET
most of the time people are
going to go to their primary
care and nurse practitioner or
PA or whoever they see and
there was some evidence of the
problem and the referral will be
made it's not as if the
podiatrist is going to also
start doing all the other
primary care kinds of care this
is really focused on at the foot
care obviously but and also for
a fairly unique population which
is the it diabetic and vascular
area and so with that thank you
senator a little bit about how
the cost really play a.
Okay.
Thank you Mr chair and Senator
Padilla
let me in terms of the point of
being primary care providers.
How we see ourselves are being
part of that primary care team
as Representative Matthews
indicated.
We often since we are seeing
some of our patients especially
or chronic disease patients
potentially more frequently than
their primary care providers we
often can identify problems that
may be occurring and do the
proper referrals I can certainly
say that we take blood pressures
on our patients and clearly can
identify elevated blood
pressures and and patients that
may not know that and that just
happened to me on one of my
patients and getting them to the
primary care doctors in a timely
fashion to have that addressed
in regards to the cost
differential the.
estimate is
know where the cost of what an
amputation would cost even a
partial foot amputation and
average for that is
approximately forty five
thousand dollars compared to the
faster potentially increased
preventative care so this is our
certainly effort at increasing
the preventive care aspect and
decreasing the increased cost
that unfortunately occur when
patients go to the hospital and
have these higher risk problems
such as the amputations and
You know in sections.
Thank you.
It was so I appreciate that
thank you and thank you
Representative Mr chairman I
just wanted to kind of
underscore the fact that this
isn't a bank breaking change or
or you know that that's going to
happen here I just think that it
lines everything up the way that
it should I'm I am fully support
I just wanted to hear from from
a Representative and Dr Simon I
think that's all I have Mister
chairman thank you.
Thank you I don't see any other
hands up so the pleasure of the
committee I'm moving to pass
motion for the past present
second.
you can't quite.
Who is that home drive Hickey
but happy to yield the doctors
and the act.
I'll pass degree
examiner to Sierra we're good Dr
Hickey you're good.
Already lane please to grow
Senator Brandt.
Senator Griggs Senator Hamblen.
Senator Hickey yes Senator how
to meal yes Senator Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes thank you
senator Sanchez Senator common
yes Senator Padilla.
Yes Senator Shendo yes seven in
the affirmative and for excuse
thank you over the past
Representative Matthews thank
you very much appreciate the
time thank you of the sponsor of
house bill one oh eight has to
has to rule that or pull that so
we're not going to hear that
will move down to
H. J. R. three I'm not sure if
You for.
Representative el Cajon.
This available.
Yes chair if I don't have any
I have any information.
Well you it is a Representative
Castellano.
Available well senator Cormann
the thank you run over to the
lanes goats all right.
I think that some information I
believe so so we'll go with
expeed to twenty eight well the
Senator Tallman a.
Just information to present
Representative Alcon to okay.
Representative.
Missed Mr chair what what bill I
don't have that on my agenda
what is it that was added this
afternoon it's a
house bill two twenty eight it's
a.
The queen of Bill.
Give me a minute.
No no no no we.
Senator Shendo Attorney General
would you would you like me to
put the the the bill analysis
stock share my screen it's a
really email and start yes no
what want to go ahead and do
that doctor no.
Not.
I have to figure out how to do
that but I will.
And that Mr chairman if I can
help Senator Kernan also this is
a duplicate of SB twenty I
believe and it passed the
chamber and it passed the house
sixty five to zero so Dr done
was actually correct and and
December for just want to give
that additional help to.
And you're on mute.
Let's go ahead.
Okay go ahead the
representative.
I I I remember this bill this is
this is fine just look at all
right go ahead Representative.
Mr chair I don't think he's on
yeah I don't think is either
this is a duplicate of Senator
ones out Senator Gonzales asked
me twenty this is changing the
distribution of motor vehicle
taxes
and again it did pass Mr
chairman through our chamber and
it just passed the house by
sixty five zero okay can we just
made it on yes we can do that so
let's uh demotion somebody who
do pass what do passed by a
Senator Padilla thank you
September hello male name of
these to grow.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Griggs.
Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Hickey yes Senator how to meal
yes.
Senator Kernan yes senator
Sanchez I don't want to.
Senator Clemente.
He's running around yes
thank you Senator Padilla.
Yes.
Indo but yes that seven in the
affirmative for excuse.
Okay thank you and then the.
What will the next one that we
added which we've got to roll
overs house bill I mean the
three twenty five which is I. B.
I believe is a duplicate of
Senate bill.
Twenty.
Is that correct Kelly.
No not Senator twenty
The airport airport or.
Chair is is at the airport bill
where they match.
Right I think it's the the.
Yes Representative Lundstrom
spill yes.
I'm okay with that if you want
that rural air service
enhancement.
Act.
Wonder Mr chair of Kelly could
tell us if there any differences
in the bill yeah that was a it
really maybe there is because a
says relates to Senate bill one
thirty three so Dr Donna can
you.
Mr chairman I don't believe
there are I'm gonna I'm gonna
double check because this one
just came back on my right are
to the when we mentioned to me
about ten minutes ago but as I
recall call let let me check
what we and and just to make
sure because I don't want to
miss but I don't think there are
a.
Okay what were you doing that
and that will be moved to a
house joint resolution three
with the.
With Representative of alcohol
which Tom is going to present.
Okay.
Thank you Mr chair
House joint resolution three
What.
Jose amendments to the counts
New Mexico constitution to
increase the property tax
exemption for honorably
discharged members of the armed
forces and their widows and
widowers from four thousand
dollars.
To ten thousand dollars.
So the.
There is a two hundred their
estimates under just two to one
thousand dollars a cost.
for the election is determined
by the secretary of state's
office.
And there are
This veterans that would qualify
to be a hundred thousand.
Two six hundred twenty four.
And according to the FIR the
rest can conclusion is that this
property tax exemption we create
an annual average property tax
reduction of a hundred eighty
dollars for almost.
Hundred thousand qualifying
veterans as this would create an
additional annual per capita
burden of thirty four dollars
for the population in general if
the joint resolution is passed
by the legislature.
Then accepted by the people
than.
Thanks and Representative of.
We'll define.
Further the fine fine these
estimates.
So.
Thank you very much and may be
a.
The analyst missile Donald may
want to add something further
thank you Mr chair.
Okay thank you at this time of
the we'll go to the public.
Did not have any members of the
public register in advance and
to speak in opposition if there
are any members of the public
who wish to speak in opposition
to house joint resolution three
please raise your hands now.
Claudia do you wish to speak in
opposition.
But I do have you on the list
for those in favor so it would.
We will begin with Dorothy C.
ten speaking in favor.
Thank you Mr chair I'm a little
slow on the mute button but I am
here.
I'm and I'm a retired army
veteran of twenty one year
service I'm iced service
volunteer with the veterans and
military families caucus.
on the advocacy committee and.
I'd like to point out to the
committee that this have been
changed since two thousand six
up a lot of financial things
have changed in the world since
fifteen.
And and it's time for a change
here
Homeownership is one of the most
treasured benefits of a veteran
particularly those just getting
off active duty so I I urge the
members to vote yes on this
thank you Mr chair.
Thank.
Thank you very much next up we
have Claudia Red Star.
Thank you good evening chair and
members of the committee
on Colletti Risner retired navy
captain served twenty nine years
active duty and moved back to
New Mexico I'm testified in
support of this the capacity as
chair of the caucus that this
for veterans and military
families increasing the property
tax exemption for veterans and
their surviving spouses from
four thousand to ten thousand
dollars is really important to
our community of that's and
their families as Dorothy said
this hasn't been changed or
updated since two thousand and.
And over the past fifteen years
home prices have risen in New
Mexico and the buying power of
the dollar has decreased today
it takes a dollar and thirty
cents to buy with a dollar
bought just fifteen years ago so
the net effect is that the four
thousand dollar exemption no
longer reflects the intended
benefits and it should be
increased to ten thousand
dollars I respectfully ask you
to support this joint resolution
and bring it to a vote to the
public thank you for your time.
Thank you very much next up we
have a subpoena crystal.
Chair committee members money
that the increased to do and I'm
a retired navy commander I would
like to see H. J. R. three right
in front of the voters and ask
if they are in support of those
who serve their country that
fifteen dollars a month that it
saves me might mean the
difference for somebody else to
be a homeowner so I ask do
past of H. J. R. three thank
you.
Thank you very much are there
any other members of the public
wish to speak in support of
house joint resolution three at
this time.
Thank you very much that
concludes public comment.
A we'll go to the committee
Senator Padilla.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
thank you to the advocates of
the focus of spoke in favor
hello I haven't seen in awhile
Mr chairman I I guess the
question I have is and and I
could you know expected to know
something about nine thousand
subjects or up here Mister
chairman as you all know why do
we go the route of a of an H. J.
R. and and not just a bill I I'm
maybe there's a good reason for
I do serve on the interim
committee
Mr chairman the doctor Donald
wanted to chime in.
Miss Mister chairman I can
answer that question if you need
me to that's all go ahead eighty
we need to do it's it's a
constitutional provision so
we'll have to be voted on by the
voters as property tax.
Understood that's all thank you
I'm fully supportive I just was
curious why we did it that way
thank you.
Thank you of.
I did not see any other hands
what is supposed to the
committee.
Over the past two passed by
Senator.
Thank.
Lane please to grow.
Senator Brandt Senator Griggs
Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Hickey yes Senator how to meal.
Yes Senator Kernan yes senator
Sanchez.
Senator Tallman yes Senator
Padilla.
Yes Senator Shendo yes seven
with four excused.
Okay great over the past.
Thank you Mr chair.
Thank you and then now we'll go
back to House Bill three twenty
I miss o'donnell.
So Mister chairman members of
the committee it does appear
that the HB three twenty five
was amended on the house floor
at the same time SB one thirty
three which passed out of this
committee was also amended so
the bill is no longer a line
that said the are the house
floor amendments to three twenty
five simply
excluded groups that already
received or were already
receiving subsidies through the
federal rural air service
program basically said you can't
double dip the federal money and
the state money so I you know I
I don't I don't see that as a as
a terribly Mike monumental
change to the bill it but it
does not line up one for one
with the bill we passed were you
passed okay January.
What Senator current.
So Mr chair and Kelly
Would that take out because I
know there were certain
communities that we talked about
in the bill that we thought
probably couldn't qualify based
on the type of planes it
currently in some communities
they already have service that
would be this small plane rocked
that with that is that gonna
take out any of the ones that we
have in the Senate bill can you
tell.
Mr chairman and Senator Kernan I
can't but I'll look back and
okay.
Find it is not concern is
without really.
Understanding of because I want
to build that left the Senate
because in that bill there were
no exceptions there and
I just I hate to move the bill
forward.
That then we may have to
conflicting bills that we think
we're doing a good thing and
maybe they are for some
communities that we might be
leaving out some communities and
I don't think I'm in favor of of
hearing the bill without really
asking and I don't have the bill
in front of me and I I just feel
uncomfortable voting on that
with that released saying the
differences because we passed a
good bill and I just don't know
that I want to send to built up
and.
Until I know what's in the
outlook thank you Mr chair okay.
Okay of having said that we'll
go ahead and I'm not put this
bill on of oil what will whole
rolled over I'm not sure we're
going to meet again but I think
the the bill that we pass I
thought was comprehensive in
terms of their portion the size
and and and the services and so
forth so I'm fine with that of
so I think that really.
So Mister chair just to be
certain he can Representative
the sponsors not in the meeting
is that correct no then then I
feel comfortable with what you
are saying yes no sponsored on
a meeting of.
So with that I think that
concludes our committee for the
session unless we get another
referral emerged a referral but
I want to thank all the
committee members for your
commitment to this committee I
know we have some of the loan
nights this committee used to
meet Monday Wednesday Fridays
but cutting down to two days and
long hours the reset all your
your patience and a certain want
to extend our appreciation to
our our staff as well through
the main
Well consider.
The car a.
J. yes and and and all of us so
thank you again Senator Padilla.
I was just putting up the
virtual and I want to say thank
you all so you been fantastic
everybody and I thoroughly enjoy
the rest of the committee to
it's been fun about a lot about
each one of you thank you.
Thank you thank you to it's Mr
chair it says it's been an
interesting process of I feel
like I know the new members.
Because you've been on this
committee and I appreciate that
and certainly want to thank wind
and and the staff they're just
wonderful and Mr chair your you
get a good job is your first
chairmanship of this committee
in a month thank you I I I I
thank you I I didn't realize it
was that much work I I I told
folks seven coasting for eight
years and then now I got a plan
are going to schedule a gonna
you so it's a lot of work but
and and but it it takes a team
and I try to be fair to
everybody and make sure that we
don't do the right thing for for
our state Mr Chairman and Mr
vice chairman as a freshman I
want to thank you for your
leadership for working with us
for teaching us so much Senator
Kernan tall men every Senator
out there thank you for
everything that you've done for
us it's been inspiring learning
from each of you and working
with each of you and I look
forward to sessions to come.
Thank you so
any Senator Hickey I think guys
hand up first and will come to
Senator development.
Of Mr Chairman fell Senators
first Mr Chairman thank you for
taking on this really kind of
complicated committee in many
ways me taxes and death there's
certain but taxes are tortured
to
so I want to thank you for being
able to guide us through and I
want to say to all of my
colleagues Republican colleagues
as well I learned so much from
you all
it's it's amazing and I want to
give a shout out to.
Kelly o'donnell wrote who is yes
that you know because it is so
complicated I would I would have
been under water on so many
issues without your ability to
yes the things analyze things
some of your tables of and just
right and thank you for being
here and helping us out thank
you Mr chair thank you doctor of
thank you Senator Tallman thank
you thank you Mr chairman on.
Yeah I got to know Senator.
We work together last year what
used to be called corporations
and I just want to echo what
everyone else is saying if you
did a great job is not an easy
committee with a lot of complex
complicated issues and the
enjoyed getting to know some of
the new members and look forward
to working with everyone in the
past give a shout out to land
and staff and also a applaud the
excellent work of
Kelly o'donnell so thank you
thank you Mr chairman.
Have a great day here.
Thank you thank you senator
Thomas Senator of hamlet.
Well I could not say anything
everybody's like saying great
things and and that so you'll
sure I mean I my colleagues have
said a lot of what I'm feeling
as well as a freshman Senator
and appreciate the guidance and
mentorship that those of you who
have been here before providing
us I think you know we came into
this with really just unclear
expectations just because it was
such a bizarre time and it's you
know it's it's not like our
other sessions and so in the
staff has been absolutely
fantastic those of you who have
already been here this is not
your second time around you've
done an incredible job in some I
think you know we're really
grateful I'm just the expertise
that staff has been providing
the thing I'd like to end with
is it leases background makes me
think of honey I shrunk the
kids.
Are you the size of an ant
because you're in grant so
that's the thing that I'd like
to and with thank you everybody
and it's been such a pleasure
and I look forward to more thank
thank you and then I I too I I
want to extend my appreciation
to Dr Kelly o'donnell what went
when they promise chair they say
well you know we got a major
analyst but you need to
committee and I was like
scrambling to I don't know what.
So I got some recommendations of
Dr Kelly and the she took a leap
of faith on on on on us and the
as an extraordinary job I I
think background
analysis been really spot on and
and and she's a committee for
all of us all not just the
Democrats but for all of us the
Republicans as well and
everybody was so was had access
to her and and and just
extraordinary job she did for us
and hopefully we can continue to
keep breast part of our
committee Alice going forward so
with that Mr chairman Mr
chairman we do have
Representative day Hochman Vigil
who is here I didn't know if you
did that that we need to do we
should hello Representative I I
saw you there and I didn't want
to bypass the reason of the
purpose was are I know you
already during the committee Mr
chairman I wanted to acknowledge
the Representative and thank you
Representative and find out what
what we can help with.
Thank thank you very much Mr
chair thank you so much Senator
Padilla I did not see house bill
three twenty five an ounce on
the agenda state so I apologize
I was not here and ready to
present the bill I am ready to
present the bill if you're
willing to hear it I guess it's
subject to the the will of the
committee.
And Mr chairman we would be
having impromptu.
A quick committee meetings like
we do periodically with this
committee on the floor in the
waning hours of the session so
since the Representative is here
maybe we could afford to talk
through it Mr Chairman I I don't
mind hearing this one but I want
to be very clear and careful
about going forward with any
other bills popping up because
I'm not going to agree to that
but I certainly don't mind with
the representative here to move
ahead that I do want to be
cautious that we don't call
everybody for quick when I see
some bills on here I'm going to
have problems with it so anyway
thank you very much Mister chair
Mister chairman we did three
twenty five as part of the
agenda and and but I see the
ranking members feedback but I
think since representatives here
we will we should get ready this
absolutely no yeah we had three
twenty five and a beta March
sixteen but we Dr Stewart and
race over.
We'll go ahead of Representative
state thank you so much miss Mr
chairman members of the
committee thank you very much
Senator Kernan as well also
three twenty five is a companion
bill Senate bill one thirty
three it creates the essential
essential air services fund
which will be appropriated it's
our the money's already in
hospital to to the department
transportation aviation division
to create role neutral air
service routes throughout
communities in New Mexico that
meet certain requirements you
have to have a population of
twenty thousand people or more
they have to be within fifty
miles of an airport or if
they're not they already have to
have access to an airport or
services we amended the bill to
look like Senate bill one thirty
three we added a competitive
procurement process for the
bidding for these types of
minimum revenue contracts with
carriers to provide these routes
it is an excellent opportunity
to improve connectivity
throughout our our very big role
state and this will help New
Mexicans are faster additional
economic development
opportunities and get around so
with that Mr chairman members of
the committee I will stand for
questions.
Thank you Representative before
we go to the committee I don't
know if you have any public
comment.
If you wish to speak in support.
Pardon if you wish to speak in
opposition to house bill three
twenty five please raise your
hands now.
If you just in support of house
bill three twenty five please
raise your hands.
Thank you very much public
comment at this time.
Okay thank you of we'll go to
the committee of Senator Kernan.
Well thank you very much Mr
chairman and thank you for being
here Representative because I
was wondering.
We just Dr Donald how the two
bills are different so tell me
if there's anything in your bill
that is different from what we
passed out in the Senate no
ma'am it is they're both are
amended to be the same bill now
the only thing that we added we
did have a subsection are was
that is taken out subsequently
because you're to promulgate
that requirements rule so really
the only thing the amendment did
was again advocate Pettit of
procurement process to avoid
anti donation clause issues and
striking appropriation language.
So thank you Mr chair and so
through the rule making process
which they're going to do anyway
regardless of of it so does it
does it take out
Airports are our communities
where they're receiving federal
funds and so is that the
difference in the two and and
they're gonna do that Sir well
anyway.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
and senator care and great
question what we were trying to
do with that amendment as we
don't want to interrupt the
federal essential air services
programs we do have a few routes
New Mexico that do research
receive those types of plans
and we wanted to make sure that
this is for new routes which of
course do not qualify for
essential air services under the
federal program and we want to
make sure that we're maximizing
state funds for this type of for
this purpose so we what the
language is confusing at first
we thought it would be better
for DOT as part of the
application process you just you
attract make sure that that
specific route isn't already
receiving essential air services
funding and move on to the
application if they do not.
Thank you very much thank you Mr
chair.
Right thank you Senator Kernan I
don't see any other
And so what is a pledge of the
committee I moved to France
ocean produced passed by Senator
Padilla I'll second that second
by Senator Tallman laying up
please take Rowe.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Griggs Senator Hamblen
yes Senator Hickey yes Senator
hada meel yes Senator Kernan.
Yes.
Senator Sanchez Senator Tallman
yes Senator Padilla.
Yes.
They're Shendo yes.
We've got seven in the
affirmative and poor excuse Mr
chairman I want to thank the
ranking member for a allowing us
to go to move forward on this I
know we're trying to work as a
team thank you very much.
Sure thank you.
The ranking member has been a
motion for adjournment so with
that that concludes our meeting.
I want to thank everyone for all
your information and your
questions I was constantly
writing all session long and I
just really enjoy the humor of
that some of you in the hallways
and I look forward to seeing you
again sometime.
thank thank you Sir.
So with that we will see you on
the floor here in about thirty
five minutes thank you all thank
you.
Okay thank you.
