Here.
Hey all right so let's do house
bill three sixty.
these license plate bills we
should move quickly although I
know Senator Brandt loves them
so much.
But.
Go over.
Just give me a chance.
All right Representative ready
government gets left off.
Thank you.
The.
Mr Mr chairman committee on a
Representative Jimmy by an.
I'm here today to present house
bill three sixty.
The.
FFI license plate bill I have
with me today.
But to.
Expert witnesses.
Lara Miller sees the state
secretary.
And Michael live with the state
vice president of the if if
that.
Quickly then you know we're just
bringing this in.
This is a special license plate
in support of the FFA
organization there's eighty
three chapters in the state of
New Mexico and FY around five
thousand members.
The black a hundred and thirteen
instructors.
As plate was first introduced in
the up here in twenty seventeen
and for various reasons it is
never by the that the entire
process with fellow understand.
It's hard to do sometimes to get
through the house the Senate.
The floors but the.
If the I just I need to support
this.
The FFA organization that the
all of the.
As far as the fees and
everything all the sign for our
taxes all of the governor of the
house tax all right the side of
the the date with the end of the
not enough so as all the side so
with that
Any question of
experts Representative to say a
few words that will.
While your call is experts but I
don't.
When she on I would recommend so
what just to let you know as a
the protocols to go through the
chair see our state like madam
chair or when Mr Shendo was
Senator Shendo is here's Mr
chair side is more committees
microphone yes please the people
I'm I can hear you.
madam chair you guys talk to is
is experts actually we're
experts in FFA and this is what
we're here to talk to you guys
about I'm super excited to be
here to share my support of
house bill three sixty my name
is Michael Lightfoot and I am a
member of the Logan FFA chapter
I am serving as New Mexico state
district to president state vice
president.
That is really in my blood and I
grew up in both of my parents
were at the state teachers and
so this jacket has been in my
family for a very long time.
And they were my first FFA
teachers and for many FFA is not
just a student leg led
organization it's a home it's a
belonging and for many act
teachers serve as their second
period.
As our creed says we believe in
the future of agriculture FFA is
preparing students to take on
the tough roles in agriculture
they keep this world fed.
Growing up in agriculture there
was never a day that I wasn't up
before the sun spending
countless hours spending time
with my family are born caring
for our livestock and
contributing to the agriculture
industry thanks to FFA in twenty
twenty two FFA members here in
New Mexico accounted for one
hundred one point six million
dollars in their individual
projects and over thirty five
thousand hours were spent
schoolbased our goal to
education challenges students to
inquire engaging implement the
lessons that they have learned
in the classroom into the real
world our creed also states that
we believe in leadership from
ourselves we are taught to be
strong individuals and to
respect others today New Mexico
buffet serves more than fifty
three hundred FFA members in
eighty five chapters across this
great state this year these
members who travel callous miles
to fair shows judging events and
community service activities
conferences in our state of the
commission.
For us House Bill three sixty is
about more than just a license
plate this bill will help
support our organization with
the recognizable symbol across
our state but more importantly
the funds generated what we put
to use to support our FFA
members although we have fifty
three hundred members.
There are more than twelve
thousand agriculture education
students across our state and
yes we have eighty five chapters
but there are more than two
hundred schools so there's a lot
of potential for growth the
funds contributed from the sale
of this license plate will help
to support agricultural
education programs across the
state in rural and urban areas
I'd like to leave you with the
words of our motto learning to
do doing to learn earning to
live and living to serve members
of the committee at the members
are living this mission every
day we're contributing to our
communities and will continue to
look towards the new day in
agriculture I ask for your
support and house bill three
sixty thank you.
Good morning madam chair
Senators I am here today to
speak in support of house bill
three sixty my name is ally to
Miller and I'm proud member of
the Los crucis FFA chapter the
FFA is a national organization
that has been part of my life
for several years now growing up
on a dairy I can tell you the
value of hard work and I can
personally attest to the lessons
learned in my act classrooms.
Today I serve our state as the
state secretary I've spent the
past eight months travelling our
state visiting FFA chapters from
Eunice to Shiprock and
everywhere in between in my
travels I've seen the diversity
of our state not just in terrain
but in our members and the types
of classrooms at those members
are learning and from industry
level welding programs to
greenhouse and hydroponic
production students are learning
to be successful contributors to
society.
Our mission statement says FFA
makes a positive difference in
the lives of students by
developing their potential for
premier leadership personal
growth and career success in
just two short weeks we will
host our New Mexico FFA career
development events approximately
eighteen hundred students will
visit Los crucis to put the
skills learned in these
classrooms to the test and
hopefully win state titles.
Students competing in that
science will be judged on how to
remote remove sutures or.
Practice packing a surgical tech
for doctor Water Act mixed units
will be practicing residential
wiring or fixing electrical
motor with so many different
contest in between.
The students have put in
countless hours preparing for
these events and we look forward
to a great competition if you're
in Los crucis in a few weeks
make sure to swing by.
FFA and ag education our
programs you can count on.
Today we are here to discuss
house bill three sixty which
would grant The New Mexico FFA
license plate every time we step
up our jackets we represent the
emblem with pride by granting
this plate we are giving members
supporters and FFA alumni the
opportunity to symbolically step
up the jacket and show their FFA
pride.
Our emblem is one of the most
iconic and recognizable symbols
of our organization I believe
that the FFA emblem on the
iconic New Mexico yellow license
plate shows our pride for both
our state and our organization I
ask for your support for house
bill three sixty and all five
thousand three hundred FFA
members across our great state
thank you thank you very much in
in the audience there anybody in
support of this bill slide show
hence.
Can we have three.
Representative Ortez I.
Yeah.
There we go okay how about hello
so funny hello we get like to
from the side to from the side
just quickly will give you a
minute.
What is it just like it all
right we'll let you will just
know that anybody online.
Okay tell you on the thank you
very much we've got her listed
as supporting anybody here in
the audience opposing.
Everybody online okay seeing
that so we have up folks who are
in support now I go to the
committee senator how to meal.
Madam chair might will be really
quick I just want to thank you
Representative and young ladies
for bringing this bill forward
adjusting about FFA plays a
major role in my district both
in Rio Arriba county and Los
Alamos County and the northern
Santa Fe County which is part of
my district as well Senator
Sanchez is from the land I
taught in the land and believe
it or not young ladies we had no
homework policy in the middle
school because the amount of
students who went to work on the
farm where the land because it's
rooted in who we are as New
Mexicans I wanna give a shout
out to mess of the state FFA
which isn't all come get that my
district they represented the
state at the national conference
and they also do something
amazing not only are they doing
that welding and food science
but they're teaching you
presentation skills and I
noticed that today and the
should be very proud of yourself
for the presentation you'll have
my support today thank you madam
chair.
Thank you senator rex Senator
grant grant.
Grant ranks I is early Senator
Brandt first and then sent fix.
We're all at that point we were
all just thank you
Representative and.
expert witnesses appreciate you
being here
I do have a few questions and
you know I was actually part of
a growing up as well
and so you know part of FFA is
is you know having principles
and then standing on them and so
when I vote no on this is
understands my principles I
don't support any driver's
license built place bills
because we have at least a
hundred of them and most of them
were sitting in a warehouse
taking up space and we need to
come up with another solution so
don't take it personally but how
much does it cost for the state
to have these license plates
developed and made.
Around twenty six thousand
dollars out madam chair
committee around twenty six
thousand dollars worth of New
Mexico and
Madam chair and representative
how many plates do we get for
twenty six thousand dollars.
what segment expert witnesses
but I'm sure they don't know
that that is.
To me that is I was in the other
the.
Yes that's what it costs to the
design and to get it ready to.
We're we're gonna spend that
whether we sell applied or not.
Why I understand it I don't know
that might not be true if
anybody madam chair committee if
you know different that.
Madam chair representative so
These place I think the the
group gets twenty three dollars
I believe.
to MFA for each one that sold
who pays the twenty six thousand
is that come out of that first
order the taxpayers pay that.
The.
All Madam chair representative.
In the bill The the first is the
at the first issue is thirty
five is is is more thirty five
dollars twelve twelve about
twelve dollars going to the
motor vehicle department twenty
three dollars of the national
for the going to the sociais.
After the initial it drops to
twenty five of all the fans of
the.
the of the fifteen to the
organization.
Thanks a lot that settlement.
And you know that's that's one
of my concerns with all the
plates that we have.
love the organization thanks
great organization but.
We have at least.
Eight maybe ten license plate
bills just this year.
A new license plates that's the
state taxpayers are gonna have
to pay for.
Just this year so twenty six
thousand run as to R. sixty
thousand dollars in license
plates.
That's how significant it gets
and by that most are sent in a
warehouse because you know
there's only so many people bein
enemigos license plates.
Definitely not a thousand of
them to to to make it may be
close to worth it
years probably would sell more
than a thousand
so we need to go with a
different solution so I don't
support any of these I haven't
for years
the solution we should be doing
is a blank license plate and
then have stickers that go on
supporting the organization.
That would be a simple solution
that wouldn't cost the state
much money and would take care
of everyone being able to have
whatever wonderful plate they
won't have but it just becomes
way too expensive for the state
to continue to put new license
plates and the new license
plates and also gets very
confusing for law enforcement
because they're looking at
hundreds of different plates.
Instead of being able to
identify very quickly what state
it's from Bernalillo try to
figure out what state it's from
by getting you understand the
the issue and so there's there's
things that we need to change
and not just do these plates
because everyone wants one so
anyway madam chairman I just
want to.
Help you understand a little bit
why I will vote against everyone
of these and and they want to
put him on the consecutive floor
and I told my filibuster
everyone so thank you thank you
Senator Brandt Senator Griggs.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative for for
bringing this and all.
I'll be a little quicker than
Senator promotion Brandt but the
the.
The truth about what he say and
is the is the overall cost of
these things does get a little
bit little bit out of control
and we do need to find a
different solution but we don't
have that right now.
Show I think you know I'll I'll
support you all's bill
and we get to mother two others
come in right after that one one
Smokey bear and I I have to
support small here but the
that's kind of where we are with
some of the issues you know we
we are we do need to probably
have a some sort of solution to
this overall sign but you guys
get out there and sell a whole
bunch of and pay for the that we
dislike so thank you madam chair
and thank you.
Thank you senator Greg Senator
Kernan and then Senator Sanchez
thank you very much in thank you
for your presentation did a
great job in Madam chair in that
you know we've had these of
bills come before us for many
years and I carried one actually
and did that back in maybe two
thousand four five and it was a
breast cancer awareness bill and
I will tell you there is a
little bit of an up front cost
and they don't print very many
at first and they save on that
they just kind of do a few and
then as it expands and I
remember I remember once
thinking about well I wonder how
many there are out there and I
was in Texas one time and pulled
up behind someone in there was
one of those breast cancer
awareness license plates it was
a pretty high number and it
tickled me to death because I
knew for every plate that was
sold part of that money went
into a fund to provide screening
for low income women for breast
cancer and so Senator make a
difference I may have a little
bit of cost but not only does it
spread the idea of what you all
do and people recognize FFA but
it really does make a difference
in where some of those dollars
go we're paying the extra fee
when when I has been has it on
his car every time we pay our
registration we pay more in part
of that money goes for those
purposes so down the road you do
get your money back on that so
you know I'll support the bill I
do agree we ought to do
something a little bit easier
where we have one plate in CPUT
a sticker on there if that is
we've tried that before for some
reason that never gets through
but we need to do that again
because you could put your
simple on and can have your
plate and still like the money
so their solutions certainly
will support this bill but as
legislature we really need to
seriously look at that so that's
all thank you thank you Senator
Kernan Senator Sanchez you madam
chair thank you guys for
bringing this I will support
this today and madam chair if
you don't have any comments or
thing up moved to pass thank
you.
The.
all right we have a motion for a
new pass in the second before we
go to that I I just want to make
my quick comment of learning
really more about what F. A. FFA
does through Russell Walter and
so as a colleague he and I went
to graduate school together and
that's when he was really just
just so excited and so he did
send me a text and so thank you
for being here today and I agree
with my colleagues is that we've
we've got to find a different
way but I appreciate the
visibility that it gives for
your great organization and also
for what you're doing and I do
hope to be able to to head on
out when your dad is in a couple
of weeks to see what you're
doing so we have a motion and a
second so if you will call the
roll.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Have I guess is and one okay
yeah we do pass I do want a
graduate yes thank you committee
own the professional privilege
absolutely Senator Brandt.
Madam chair I just want to
recognize our doctors that are
here today thank you for coming
you know we have the this
situation coming up in our state
with that mentality insurance
and we we need to address this
issue and honestly you know we
tabled the bill in this
committee that would address
that issue if we don't get
addressed we're gonna lose our
doctors so thank you for coming
up I thank you for being here hi
I hope we can figure something
out in the next coming days to
be able to keep you here because
of not I guess I'll be moving to
Florida with you so thank you
madam chair for six given the
opportunity and
I if our regular chair was here
at us what's going on with that
bill I don't know if you I don't
know I know there are
conversations.
the conversations are pretty
much come to an end okay there
to stand still impasse
and we're gonna have to actually
act as a legislature act like we
are the legislature for once and
take action whether we like it
or not we need to fix this issue
we're the ones that because the
we need to fix it so
you guys want to table that you
can bring off the table right
now if you'd like and we can
help you get past I wouldn't do
that without consulting with the
chair first but I know that
there are those conversations as
well thank you venture thank you
Senator Brandt all right next
house.
And.
Yeah we'll see if that it's hard
H. B. three sixty three.
Good morning madam chair until
we do get a new way of doing
license plates we're here to
present the House Bill three six
three Smokey bear license plate.
as previously stated twelve
dollars will be for the making
the issuing of it thirty eight
will go to the energy and
minerals and natural resources
department for fire prevention
education
as all of the plates there's a
phase out period if that if they
don't reach at fifty percent
threshold and that we faced out
they will be sold anymore so
With that their the to answer
the question that was previously
asked there will be a hundred
plates originally made and that
will be a three year into that
twenty six thousand it's up on
this and so with that there's a
rich history of us Smokey bear
in our state and so my co
sponsors a great part of that
history and and please share
thank you madam chair members of
the committee I represent house
district forty two which is most
of house County and little is
known about that's house public
snowballs role in rescuing
Smokey bear but it is documented
and it is real they were there
very famous noble crew I went to
fires all around the state all
around the west made up of
members of tufts Pueblo and they
rescued to Smokey bear and to
their stories forgotten and this
is one way that we can on our to
the test Pueblo role in history
and that.
Are the co sponsor it
Representative Vincent his
wife's grandfather was a
firefighter in there and when
they found the couple's well so
we stand for questions all
righty there anybody in the
audience who is in support of
this bill.
Bipartisan bill bipartisan bills
okay we got a couple.
Anybody in the audience thank
you for raising your hands
anybody in the audience in
opposition of this bill.
We know we know.
And nobody online okay all right
we're just gonna go ahead and
note that just for for time's
sake and at any questions from
the committee would do passive
okay we've got to move for
secession real quick Senator X.
real quick competition Okey bear
was found by a guy named GW
Chapman.
And G. W. lived in Alamogordo
around the corner from me for
years she Shannon Gerry played
basketball from court couple
couple years behind me show of
course I have to support Smokey
bear's license plates so that we
thank you senator grace we do
have a motion from Senator
Sanchez second from Senator
Kernan if you will please call
the roll Senator press of
Senator.
Yeah Senator how the LCS.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator Hamblen yes.
Yeah they do pass with five to
one thank you madam chair we
look forward to working with you
as we figure out how these
license plates were.
Yes
I.
For the first point is going to
stay here madam chair as you
should.
Shell I present the bill yes
please.
This is nearly to identical
madam chair to what we just
heard twelve dollars will go to
the MVD into distribute creating
the plate and the remainder to
the second community ditch fund
sectors are the lifeblood of the
north
and they've been troubled over
the last of definitely over the
last year and this is a way that
we can show pride and support
for a second community and the
I'm gonna have a hard time
really picking which one I'm
going to do if we had to a front
plate and backplate I would have
that okay where the front and
and Senator Brandt in I don't
want I don't want to get into it
but it's it's it's so important
for our staff as and our ditches
all over all over the state to
issue to show pride I have an
expert here rubber of the
hundred make a brief statement
yes madam chair members
committee my name is Robert up
with us to I'm a consultant with
the New Mexico sikit Commission
yeah we bring up this Ford you
know understanding the that's
what's the Senator Brandt before
we we have an and and understand
that we appreciate that there
are about seven hundred acequia
statewide order just of northern
New Mexico with everything
that's happened with the fires
in the flooding your up north
motor us on the of County the
the
they will will be substantial
revenue but it will be some
revenue to help address some of
those issues so chair members we
appreciate your support on this
bill.
Thank thank you so for the
second for the audience anybody
here in support of this bill.
Anybody online in support okay
anybody in the audience in
opposition of this bill.
A line of okay go to the
committee.
The two passed that I had to be
a movie passed we have a second.
Senator Sanchez a second please
call the roll.
Senator Graham.
Senator.
Yes Senator.
Yes.
All right you have a do pass.
Thank you madam chair thank.
After this all right I do need
to have a signified to break I
have a a request out the hallway
and we'll be right back.
Okay.
Action in support.
Yeah.
Right.
Representative.
What is.
Right those.
We do retire.
The health care.
System there and I.
Very happy to.
Specialises.
I was at a
recent.
Get back to practice.
The same.
And this is.
In my.
Sure.
You know.
Thank.
Yes.
If you.
This.
Intentional.
The.
Right.
I.
On that.
This.
Thank.
The state programs.
Yes.
Because of their.
A lot of and in.
We all know years.
This.
Soon as.
So.
Is.
Now doctor.
And so.
That.
In.
This is also
going to help.
Fifty four.
To make sure a lot has.
Insurance.
Passes.
Actually.
Never.
Yes
Never had.
Our side are.
As far.
And.
A couple.
In.
This
is.
As
I said.
Is.
And.
The ten
year interest.
Right.
What was
his.
I mean I.
They.
This
is.
And.
From.
Is.
Misinformation.
She's.
She does.
Looking.
There's.
Thank you.
But there's only.
Just.
We.
It
is here.
Okay so I do have word from the
chair we're going to recess for
now we may we are scheduled to
be on the floor at one o'clock
so we may if we can wrangle up a
quorum then we'll be back but we
are going to recess at this
moment.
Okay.
