not yet.
President of the United.
Of the million.
Senator Brandt there Senator
grace Senator Hickey here
Senator how to DO.
Senator Kernan.
Here thank you senator Sanchez
here Senator Wirth your Senator
Hamblen here Senator Shendo here
Sierra will be a common will be
lady did call so
Okay with that we will the.
Start with Senate bill fourteen
connected to where the clean
fuel standards act.
For that purpose thank you so
much Mr chairman so do you have
with a committee substitute is
yes correct syntax so.
Do any of those motions so we
can discuss it.
You know for.
Thousands on social fourteen and
to do some research to build
fourteen discussion for thank
you all right.
The motion.
I see none.
Okay all right so we have a
septic you Mr chairman I have
with me a trough in Clark's we
know him from LFC he's now with
the economic development
department so he's going to add
caught my comments after I make
money so this probably will feel
familiar to you we passed the
clean fuel standards last year
from the Senate that passed the
committees in the house but then
of course as we all know they
ran out of time that's what they
say.
So this built on the work from
last year there are some changes
Senate after meeting with
industry we really do think that
this is going to
We estimate four hundred seventy
million annually in economic
investments four thousand jobs
over eight years last year when
our agencies made the
announcement that they were
looking into clean fuel standard
we had over twenty businesses
reach out to us that want to
expand their operations in New
Mexico and these are businesses
committed to cleaner energy and
unless emissions so by twenty
thirty were estimating eighteen
point five million tons in
reduction of carbon emissions
so at with no change in behavior
needed by consumers this will
result in a substantial decrease
in emissions from the
transportation industry that's
the industry that has the second
highest emissions in New Mexico
so it works this way clean fuel
standard will require that fuel
providers transportation fuel
providers reduce the carbon
footprint of these terms
transportation fuels the numbers
that we're using have been
increased based on last year
stakeholders at this requires a
carbon read reduction in carbon
intensity by twenty percent by
twenty thirty and twenty eight
percent by twenty forty we think
those are are at that
significant milestones and we
think we can reach them so those
businesses that refined blend
may import transportation fuels
are covered by this act does not
apply to fuel retailers like gas
stations.
so those who refined when maker
import transportation fuels can
meet those clean fuel standard
by the reducing the carbon
intensity of their fuel for
purchasing credits so this idea
of generating credits is where
we introduce this market
mechanism to reduce greenhouse
gas emissions from these
transportation fuels they can be
generated from all over the
state agriculture to oil and
natural gas if you can reduce
carbon emissions and
transportation secretary you can
generate credits.
So all of this Madam that we've
we believe that this clean fuel
standard will clean up the air
along interstates and busy
highways often
disproportionately affect over
burdened unities and we think
this will benefit those
disproportionately affect
environmental justice in rural
communities by requiring our
utilities to reinvest at least
fifty percent of the money they
earn from credits and I believe
the substitute actually now has
set at a hundred percent.
so
that's kind of how it works and
the first thing that does is the
environmental improvement board
is tasks to within the next
twenty four months to start
developing the standards to look
at how they do this in other
states we have several other
states that have these clean
fuel standards California has
had it for ten years
let me just comment a little bit
about how formula because of
what they've experienced is
The the the biggest complaint
about this is that it will
increase transportation fuel
that's not what's happened in
California they have these
cleaner fuels that are actually
selling less than the regular
fuels they would certainly be a
market for New Mexico help for
New Oregon Washington so I'd
like to turn this to Jonathan
for now and he'll say things are
happening for if anything I've
said that was incorrect.
Thank you Representative thank
you Mr chair members of the
committee I certainly don't into
correct anything that this set
of parameters to be here today
to support Senate bill fourteen
it's a bill that would create a
clean fuel standard in New
Mexico ensuring that the state
remains a healthy place to live
work in to create jobs the
rising level of carbon emissions
is a global issue climate change
is happening and our health for
quality of life in our economy
your old state here in the land
of enchantment we want to be
leaders in reducing our
greenhouse gas emissions we want
to be at the forefront of the
clean energy economy and the
jobs and investment to convert.
This bill will create a tool for
private investment in clean
energy technology it will keep
New Mexico at the forefront of
innovation.
Establishing a standard for
clean transportation fuels will
spur research and development at
our universities at our national
labs in the private sector.
The creation of an equity market
of credits will boost
infrastructure investment in New
Mexico.
The Economic Development
Department recently completed a
twenty year strategic plan for
the state's economy called
empower and collaborate New
Mexico's economic path forward
one overall finding is how the
pandemic disproportionately
impacted lower income and
disadvantaged communities and so
I'm glad to see that one big
improvement in this bill from
last session is that
disproportionately impacted
communities will see you will
receive priority consideration
for investments from the CFS
credits.
This is the point is populations
with both environmental and
socioeconomic stressors that may
negatively impact health and
well being.
Once again this is innovative
policymaking that will deliver
more resilient economy in all
corners of the state New Mexico
already has a skilled energy
workforce and we have technical
assistance and partnerships from
the national labs when was
conducting research in several
areas beneficial to the industry
including identifying methods to
eliminate bacteria that can harm
bio fuel development.
No other state has to department
of energy research laboratories
this gives New Mexico a
competitive advantage in
developing this technology.
Well the clean fuel standard by
title Mary's concern for those
areas historically reliant on
oil and gas.
This really should find hope
what was your first at standards
it allows for those traditional
carbon industry to generate and
use credits allowing them to
maintain levels of operation
while still contributing to the
overall level of the economy and
job creation in the region's
Honda Toyota Hyundai Audi BMW
and Volvo are leaning into clean
fuel technology the Boeing
company said it will begin
delivering commercial airlines
capable of flying on one hundred
percent bio fuel by the end of
the decade you on mosque the CEO
SpaceX and Tesla has pledged one
hundred million dollars to
whoever develops the best carbon
capture technology.
E. P. is a major player in the
space and plans to boost its
investment in low carbon fuels
like firewood Energy hydrogen
and carbon capture ten fold to
five billion dollars by twenty
thirty attracting one or more of
these companies to New Mexico
would be a major economic boon
driving investment and jobs
across the state but there are
also other states in this race
no voter Colorado Illinois
Nebraska and Minnesota or all of
all the leading clean fuel
initiatives once again getting
this done now will distinguish
New Mexico and give us a
competitive advantage they will
sue the New Mexico once
developed this expertise
diversifying our economy and
transition to a clean energy
superpower thank you very much.
Thank you for I think they're
ready to questions or comments
for.
Questions we will off.
In the the.
So with that
the.
All over again this bill will
have for.
Members
the
moment after fifty Rivera said
this Mexico part of life for
euro we appreciate the phone
work on this effort however we
are concerned with the fuel cost
that California Oregon and
Washington have experienced
instead of the state mandating
environmental regulations we
instead recommend that they
support voluntary and incentive
based opportunities that are
driven by the market.
This is the bill will
disproportionately affect our
rural communities and they have
to travel much further for basic
necessities like groceries
doctor visits and other
transportation I think you for
the opportunity to come in this
afternoon thank you very much.
To.
If you.
The.
All right okay of.
Anybody on zoom that are in
opposition.
If of.
So.
First name disappeared after use
of the opposition.
Okay so.
Are those that are opposed to
the hands of.
Can you just go ahead and call
of.
Good afternoon Mister chair of
committee members is actually
very contact here
Representative New Mexico
business coalition we have
Representative hundreds of
businesses of thousands of New
Mexico our focus is to make New
Mexico a better place to live
and work further is not funded
by the food bank jobs I for our
families.
We respectfully oppose Senate
bill fourteen and after the we
feel standard that for a variety
of reasons
what if detail presumption
opening the conversation coming
from the committee members but
this is basically a cap and
trade
bill that is very complicated
with card ballots for credits
and.
deficits and.
It heading of the market state.
But this California and Oregon
and as we know New Mexico's is
not we're close to that level of
what companies look at upon.
This is not something that's
going to be good for not
available in the short term.
And certainly give them to the
doctor businesses have probably
have.
I.
Because.
to vote no on Senate bill
fourteen thank you for seven
apartment thank you.
Bronson point.
Four.
Mr chairman and committee
members appreciate you taking
the time to.
Here are some like I said my
name is wrong or not.
Mexico caterpillars.
We we stand in opposition to
this bill we feel that it is
affecting us is agriculture
you're going to be getting the
brunt of this we're one of the
pandemic tax on this
there's many things that I need
clarification about this deal.
Thank you for your time.
Thank you.
Ruby.
Yes Sir.
Are you in opposition.
Yes Sir my name is ruby niner
thank you for having me to speak
I am in a position of this the
fourteen I am a small farmer and
currently all farmers that I
know in our community are paying
extremely high fuel prices of
course everybody has an this
bill I honestly believe should
be review what further before we
implemented in New Mexico we
need to see the impact that it's
going to have on our farmers and
ranchers or producers because
right now farmers we're we're
struggling to stay afloat and I
don't believe this bill
Would benefit us currently in
the state of our economic
position with fuel prices water
issues land issues we need to
look further into this before it
is put into place thank you.
Thank you.
The.
Greg Olsen hello games.
We're still.
The the new.
Please on mute.
yes we can hear you if you can
speak up appreciate it thank
you.
Yes thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee thank
you for this opportunity to
provide comment this afternoon
my name is correct augmented on
the president New Mexico farm
and livestock bureau and I also
meant farmers and ranchers and
eleven New Mexico.
I thank the sponsor for her work
on this bill would be intended
to reduce emissions however I am
the respectfully be in
opposition.
I believe instead of a statewide
mandate that says the
legislation to should look more
to provide incentives and make a
market driven innovation and
introduction rather and and and
use other environmentally
friendly sources rather than
fees in these types of things.
It's been proven by
implementation of this policy in
California Oregon and Washington
that it will lead to a direct
increase in the price of fuel
which will negatively.
Affect our state in the cost to
our state for the maintenance on
the roads needs tax.
Hey at on the one part think
Rauner concerning the carbon
credits that.
A difficult situation.
The determined to I think
there's more of a conversation
that needs to be made on that hi
thank you for the opportunity to
speak with you this afternoon
thank you thank you.
Michael.
Go ahead.
Mr Tonio yes.
Can you hear me now yes.
sorry I'm I'm on the support
side and so is it are we about
to give me a thumbs now is that
no we're we're still in the
opposition so okay.
Following in.
Okay so if you were to.
That was the last one so now
we're in favor and we'll go over
the opposition for.
My job all of these
The gentleman
Charlie Marcus with New Mexico
Chile Association the New Mexico
Chile Association stands in
opposition Senate bill fourteen
Mexico to associations and
nonprofit the representative
farmers processors distributors
and manufacturers who mission it
is to the Chilean free range of
and to prosper in New Mexico
legislation proposed regulations
will be cost for your members
also includes price of Chile to
consumers our members are
already C. director I.
Record high cost and freight
costs to ship Reports retailers
frightening price takers limited
access to funds to recoup
additional transportation
expenses because of the proposed
bill standards we have members
of the committee support for
children farmers and processors
for opposing Senate bill
fourteen.
Thank you for this anybody else
in opposition in the audience.
If not we will now go towards
those individuals that are in
favor of Senate bill fourteen.
Charlie.
Approval.
Americans.
Is this through the lens of
automotive innovators.
These are these are these are
amended.
They were present or represented
about thirty nine percent of all
the new cars and light trucks in
the industry.
Today in New Mexico we only have
about one point nine percent
expe percent of electric
vehicles they have in support of
this effort and of course it is
necessary in order to introduce
electric vehicles and that seems
to be the trend.
But without something like this
then it's not going to help
drive that technology so the
alliance of automobile mobile of
innovators do stand in support
of the legislation thank you
right.
Good introduce yourself for the
record so if you have a
workaround among former issues
thank you Mr chairman and
committee on or let me testify
on behalf of the bill for fees.
What amount that reviews
supports of bills fourteen and
we believe that as often which
is a very important step
forward.
Regional gap in agriculture is
vital and will New Mexico's
farmers and ranchers the
opportunity to convert their
plants and animal waste into
energy I believe converting of
farmhouse fifty dollars.
Adding additional assets such as
advanced part of markets rule
form for for maintenance slight
increases yourself.
Along with requirements immunity
we look forward to job creation
that would result in rural New
Mexico.
For too long and we see our
children graduated from local
schools and and leave and never
return.
simply because we just do not
have jobs in rural New Mexico
thank you.
Thank you next up.
Madam chair members of the
committee Charles good marker
speaking now on behalf of the
New Mexico Public Health
Association five hundred members
throughout the state and we
stand strong support this bill
you know if you have a clean
fuel standards gonna lessen
adverse health effects from air
pollution these include helping
long disease and cancers also if
it's going to be great just for
the people living near roads in
those communities located next
to major highways are currently
exposed to that pollution we
thank you for the bill and thank
Sanchez thank you thank you very
much.
Please.
Chairman members of the
committee you can speak up just
a little bit for people on the
webcast can hear you.
good afternoon chairman and
members of the committee
I'm at a London weather my and
the policy adviser for the
energy minerals and natural
resources department and we are
here in NBC aspects support of
Senate bill fourteen
for the reasons that have been
stated but also are we really
want to emphasize that
implementing Senate bill
fourteen is going to lead to a
reduction in the carbon
intensity which means over time
a reduction in carbon dioxide
emissions from the second
largest secretary of emissions
in the state.
and from a position of.
Energy minerals natural
resources specifically we
administer the state alternative
fuel program which is our energy
conservation and management
division does and this promotes
alternative fuels vehicles and
ensures that state fleets comply
with federal law.
And federal lawsuits legislative
vehicle purchases must be at
least seventy five percent
capable of being able
tentatively field.
And this is from the department
of energy state and alternative
fuel provider fleet program.
So every year the state we
should be requiring seventy five
percent of their vehicles being
alternatively fuelled there are
exceptions for things like
ambulances
are not currently
technologically feasible.
And we do that we need that will
affect the way we do it in New
Mexico.
Has directly including this year
and last year has been by
purchasing flex fuel vehicles
thanks very Abel's can use
regular gasoline and also
gasoline is been blended with
ethanol at a very high rate
except in New Mexico we only
have thirteen gas stations that
have blended fuel.
And that means that.
Ninety eight percent of all fuel
purchases made by state cars
even if they can use.
several what if you don't so we
believe that this bill will
encourage the adoption of
alternative fuel infrastructure
which will allow us to not just
need a letter of the law that
meet the spirit of the law thank
you.
So anybody else in the audience.
If not we will go to the zoom.
And I believe we have twelve
people on soon so we can give
for its folks with at least a
minute.
Michael.
Your is.
Good afternoon.
Mr chairman members of the
committee might be Antonio with
Xcel energy just reflected the
to the same part of the state we
are working with the bill
sponsor and up for subject
matter experts two of six and
technical issues on the bill we
up aren't supported electricity
connected out of this committee
we've got some issues with our
transportation electrification
plan that the file with the
commission so we're gonna be
working with the sponsor on
clarifying those issues
television eligible for
additional and we really think
the the bill will help promote
the penetration of electric
vehicles in New Mexico and we
would like to support for those
reasons thank you very much.
Yes good afternoon
Mister chair members of the
committee did economy on a
registered lobbyist for the
natural resources defense
council action fund and we want
to think of the pro tem and
Administration for multi year
progress on this very important
aspect of New Mexico's
transition to a clean economy in
a clean environment more
importantly this is it serves
the dual purpose of not only
moving us towards the future
moving us into the same economic
environment that the clean
energy environment will be but
also seeks to to clean up our
air in protecting unity such as
self balance of Albuquerque
which is known to have the brown
cloud New Mexico is a diverse
state in both urban and rural
components the folks who live in
that urban area contribute
substantially to our economy
from their wages and their taxes
in our own title to clean air
just like everyone else more
importantly all those folks if
every corner of the state are
entitled to the opportunities
that science is supporting them
in the in the in the way of
electric vehicles the committee
will hear all a very good bills
on electric vehicle tax credits
leader the luxury vehicles on
your microphone to kind of
support that so are possible
thank you yes can I stick with
your one minute we appreciate
that thank you.
Thanks for.
Katie Bolton.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee this is JD
Bullington speaking on behalf of
the greater Albuquerque chamber
of commerce which supports this
legislation because it will
reduce the carbon intensity
transportation tools and in a
way innovative way that
encourages technological
advancement across the private
sector it's narrowly targeted
bills and the implementation one
way about two years is
appropriate assuming the carbon
intensity reduction targets
remain reasonable this bills
approach to improving air
quality is balanced focused and
responsible cleaning up our
transportation fuels will go a
long way to reducing greenhouse
gas emissions in our state and
the greater Albuquerque chamber
of commerce urges your support
for this legislation.
Thank you.
Gary Payton.
Mr chairman committee members
I'm a representative of the
coalition of sustainable
communities New Mexico the
coalition comprised of the
cities of Albuquerque Santa Fe
Los crucis Santa Fe County Los
Alamos County entities that
represent approximately forty
two percent of the population of
the state of New Mexico our
communities have made
significant strides in recent
years of their own climate
action plans we appreciate the
past work of the legislature to
address issues in the energy
sector whether it's the ETA grid
modernization or community solar
this bill specifically directs
is that second most polluting
sector the transportation sector
each of our members as important
greenhouse gas emission
reduction plans in place your
passage of SB fourteen will
enable them to be able to reach
their goals and reduce the GHG
gases across our state and our
communities we urge you to vote
yes on SB fourteen thank you
very much.
Have to panic.
Good afternoon members just
really want to appreciate your
continued support for the
cleaning our environment and
moving New Mexico forward
particularly the Senate pro tem
this bill fourteen and urges
supported we believe that this
bill will go a long way to
supporting the goals of
diversifying new Mexico's a
growing economy and providing an
innovative platform for clean
fuels moving forward
particularly when you look at
it's agricultural the stand.
Thank you.
Five more people so we thought
thank you.
Members of the committee are my
name is Ryan can't even clean
energy my company is the
nation's largest provider of
renewable natural gas field no
matter gas stocks stocks why
waste water treatment plant in
landfills
it is nine percent near the
diesel and fuel itself is carbon
negative.
Or carbon usual that apartment
and the yes the level of I think
if I get that here you are in
need so we are ready at Calvary
success story because of the
Authority LCS that represents a
has a each station alone in New
Mexico I would stand on with
friends and B. claim your
standard credits actually
applying for the federal reserve
rate is basically supercharged
the cost reductions needed yes
the board thirty he's still
I process so if you are in need
of support of SB fourteen thank
you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee I am
representing the Sierra club's
real grounded chapter thirty
five thousand members and
supporters around the state
we're speaking in support of all
fourteen we especially support
the committee seven thank the
sponsors for the improvements
made to the bill including
doubling that aspirations for
greenhouse gas reductions and
one hundred percent investment
of utility credits and
electrification in impacted
communities and the elimination
of credits for carbon reductions
not based on transportation
fuels this bill supports the
transition away from fossil
fuels towards electric vehicles
which will cut down on carbon
pollution and fight climate
change thanks for your support
of this bill.
Problem Mr.
All.
How all of Mr.
And
how may you please.
Yes hello good afternoon
chairman members of the
committee thank you for the
opportunity to speak in favor of
Senate bill fourteen
Representative chairman clean
cities coalition to the next in
the state since nineteen ninety
four supporting alternative
fuels advanced power train
technologies transportation.
We support Senate bill fourteen
is an opportunity to create a
platform for economic
development environment
stability with generating new
technologies carbon reduction to
markets and transportation
centers thank you very much for
the opportunity to speak in
favor of the bill.
Thank you
Mr chairman.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee Scott scanner
registered lobbyists for New
Mexico government affairs
representing the CFL and
transport in the T. owns over
sixteen hundred trucks six
thousand trailers and we are
currently the largest privately
owned transportation plea in the
United States and all of this
house in Los crucis New Mexico
we supported this bill last year
we supported this year we
believe that it incentivizes the
transportation sector to use
more clean energy and we support
the bill we think the sponsor
and urged support thank you Mr
chair thank you.
Thank it tonight.
Mr chair and members of the
committee my name is Paige
knight and I am here
Representative New Mexico voices
for children to stand in support
of Santa forties I want to thank
the sponsor for this legislation
which we believe offers the
right incentives to reduce
carbon emissions in the
transportation sector at which
we know is necessary and
effective steps to protect our
environment and improve
community health and the other
three we also believe that
credit system will help drive
innovation create jobs and help
diversified economy and lastly
we really appreciate the
environmental justice provisions
that were included so we urge
your support percent thank you
you.
so I'm Solomon.
Thank you us chairman Senate
ever to the committee on honest
compliment him of the co
coordinator of the New Mexico
and on behalf of our a eighty
thousand members and supporters
around the state budget from
support of this bill and thank
Senator Stewart for.
A sponsoring
of course the carbon emissions
from the transportation are
either one or two in terms of
the impact on the global warming
of locally and this bill will
act to begin to transition to a
cleaner Senate transportation
solutions and fuels which will
be very important in your
reducing global warming
emissions from the
transportation sector so we
supported for that reason I
would also like to address some
of the objections that were
raised in the up position
section of specially from the
agricultural sector
because in fact what is damaging
agriculture in this state and
locally is global warming and
the increased level of around in
heat waves in the state return
making it harder and harder to
farm in New Mexico so I would
hope that the agricultural
community we recognized that the
real solution to making a good
culture a continued viable
operation in the state is to
address the sources of global
warming which is fossil fuel
emissions from burning oil and
diesel and cars and the solution
to that part of that is
represented by this bill the
clean fuel standards at and so
we stand strong supporters of
Bill thank you very much you.
Our system.
A registered lobbyist for
western resource advocates.
this will increase the use of
wide variety of cleaner
transportation fuels including
electricity which New Mexico out
of half for zero emission and
the bill that's already Mexico's
transition to electric vehicles
it would generate billions in
new revenue to support for
patients especially in Turkey
facilities can use new revenue
transportation a lot recreation
program which will reduce
pollution stating quite in every
public health the purpose of the
bill would reduce carbon
pollution from transportation
and health Mexico reaches
one of those federal beginning
stabilize fuel prices with our
incentives electricity I move
away the very politic how.
I next.
You Mr chairman members of the
committee I hope you can hear me
yes we can excellent I just got
hundred with a company called
renewable energy group we.
owner operated a partially built
biodiesel facility that is in
Clovis New Mexico and I'm happy
to talk about why partially
filled just a moment I do want
to dress two things first and
foremost are strong supporters
of this legislation we were
supporters in.
Hello.
Can you hear me yes we can I'm
so sorry computer issues on this
real quick response to concerns
that were brought out one around
agriculture one around cost of
fuel California's of the place.
It is an unfair comparison to
look at the the the price at the
pump in New Mexico versus
California and I'll tell you why
first and foremost California
pays over and ninety five cents
in tax diesel fuel Mexico is
half that amount the other is a
California the regulations that
were passed in the seventies and
eighties they have to have a
special type of these of it's
not the same level as the that
screen in the other forty nine
states it's carb diesel that
field has to go through an extra
finding process that adds cost
we begin to normalize that out
the price of fuel between
California New Mexico is pretty
similar the same differences a
client working in Washington
they have their own
environmental rules those three
states lead the nation in
taxation on fuel California one
Washington to work at three with
respect to agriculture our
company is based in Ireland were
our roots are agriculture I I
think it's unfortunate that the
agriculture community because
misinformation on impact our
company directly goes out and
buys things like soybean oil
animal fats ways right Reese
from the hard market if you look
at the price back to cattle
biodiesel and renewable diesel
at about twelve to fifteen
dollars a head twenty six a
small amount.
That's a small amount compared
to the price that it that the
livestock operators are getting
but it's a positive dollars
soybeans and just about forty to
fifty cents for used cooking oil
collection this is a great bill
it should be done the rest of
the world is moving in this
direction New Mexico does not
get thank you.
Okay.
What.
This is for
transportation planner for
Committee council governments
turn Albuquerque metro planner
manage teaching on the outcome
of the stations were working we
do long range transportation
plan for the region and as their
contribution Westinghouse gases
in our metropolitan
transportation plan your command
motion in our current fuels
dollar will turn if you want the
speaker as a means of improving
a viral since you can change ask
for info help through group
calling million investors in
fact function.
we're also on on the verge of
being out of compliance officers
panels on twenty second Sir.
Going over that
would come with affects the.
How federally funded
transportation projects are on
the.
On a mission from each plan and
each.
The effect of our thanks for the
this is a primitive
Representative at.
Okay thank you want to let
people know that they're being
tied up we are timing you folks
so please stay within the sixty
second rule.
Revenue or yes the.
I'm done began speaking on
behalf suburban propane for the
nation's third largest propane
retailer we have more than
thirty five hundred customers in
New Mexico thank you Mr chairman
and members of the committee for
the opportunity to testify today
we're we're hearing strong
support of SB fourteen the card
the technology neutral approach
that a C. I. score allows
provides for innovation and in
business and industry and allows
for readily available
technologies to lead the way to
do car reductions including
propane renewable propane
renewable time athletes there
and plans there we're excited to
be part of this and in New
Mexico I think that this will be
good for the state and for the
country thank you very much for
the opportunity to testify here
today.
Thank you the minimum.
Thank you committee members my
name is Daniel and I
Representative chargepoint one
of the largest providers
electric vehicle charging
stations across America and
Europe
we strongly supported passage of
SB fourteen this possible drive
private investment in clean
energy economy and
infrastructure New Mexico
premium markets and jobs for
local businesses and reduce
emissions air pollution from the
transportation sector over the
past decade clean fuel standards
like SB fourteen in the U. S.
have generated more than ten
million for clean fuels and
structure including over one
point five million for
transportation electrification
including charging stations and.
Having these as recent gas
prices increase as recent gas
price increases New Mexicans
demonstrate gas prices fluctuate
based on the global petroleum
market with or without stated as
the fourteen create competition
in the transportation markets
which will benefit consumers
consumers of all types and all
thank you all for those of
strong support press the
fourteen.
Thank you.
Richard Mason.
Yes Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Dick Mason
I'm sharing the action committee
of the state government programs
of Mexico
million dollars Mexico supports
energy transition away from
fossil fuels and towards
renewable energy sources and we
take it has to be what came
makes a strong contribution
towards that goal so we stand a
strong supporter to do pass
thank you thank you you know and
then there's just more folks on
the line but I'm gonna ask you
just email the committee that
you're in support of it for the
record we have one person in the
individual in the audience that
will.
Commenting Mr chairman members
of the committee and so you're
you're one of the Public Service
Company of service and support
is thank you thank you so at
this time but we will go to the
committee for questions.
Of Senator Hamblen thank you Mr
chair and thank you the sent pro
tem Stewart for this and for the
comments that you made and also
I know that there been some
amendments and modifications
made so thank you very much for
that I want to just make sure to
clarify because there has been
the concerned about fuel prices
going up can you address that
and clarify how that's going to
affect people if it is going to
affect people and we're going to
see with this bill.
So Mister chairman and vice
chair I actually have two
experts online Amy brown and
Sandra Ely I'll give you a brief
answer but if if I can't answer
questions and Mr Clark we could
if we could ask them they've
been working on this for years
they really get it so.
In the other states you heard as
several people try to talk about
that yeah they have higher gas
taxes then we to overall but
there's been basically no impact
from the clean fuel standards on
the price at the pump it's been
something like nineteen cents
over ten years of what really
happens discretion California's
that the local markets is what
affects gasoline taxes not this
clean fuel standards so in fact
right now in California the
proposed price for renewable
diesel is forty cents cheaper
than regular petroleum diesel
and Hybl in ethanol is more than
one one dollar twenty five cents
cheaper than gasoline so the
reason so many companies were
interested in coming here is
this really is a market based
approach besides the cleaner
Department etcetera so it
doesn't affect gasoline stations
I mean yes we want to eventually
have that fuel be cleaner but
all of that will be part of the
production and when we asked the
target the credit to the market
you can see how you could really
affect the our activities all
over the state agriculture has
the ability to get more credits
than anybody else with methane
and etcetera so I hope that
answers your question does
Mister chair and Senate pro tem
um you know I have to say that
when I filled my gas tank in the
southern New Mexico before I
came up I spent three dollars
and forty nine cents a gallon
and here in Santa Fe it's three
dollars and three cents a gallon
so we don't even have include
clean fuel standards in place
yet so thank you for that
clarification I appreciate that
thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Senator Kernan.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
thank you for the presentation
on the Montevideo off because it
sort of messes up one hundred
had I do have a couple questions
and want to circle back to the
the fuel retailers and the
refiners and so when you talk
about the refiners we're we're
yes most of the gasoline for New
Mexico three five.
And so Mister chairman if I can
have my experts now answer the
question either Amy brown Sandra
Ely should be on so.
Okay either one of you.
Members of the committee my name
is Sandra Ely on environmental
protection division director of
the New Mexico environment
department Senator Kernan it is
my understanding that
approximately thirty percent of
the fuel in New Mexico is
produced and refined to refine
in Artesia.
So Mister chair and that's
thirty percent so
we certainly may I get some of
that fuel in southeast New
Mexico but I do know of a great
part of our fuel comes from the
refinery in Texas in the spring
do you know how much kids we
actually get from from that
refines.
Senator Kernan I do not have any
grammar helps as a response to
that.
Through the chair I don't know
specifically with respect to
thanks for your spring finally I
apologize I can get that
information follow up.
Thank you very much wanted
member and Mr chair.
In this bill was introduced last
year I did a little bit of
checking with our refinery there
because I think most of the fuel
that we get acceptance New
Mexico is trucked in from the
Big Spring refinery I did have a
conversation with that
with that refinery and and
basically what they have to
retrofit their refinery to meet
the standards that are now going
to be in the house in New Mexico
with regard to do bring in a top
fuel that will be required.
Senator Kernan.
If they want to sell the proper
products here in New Mexico they
could either write the plan for
the land
lower carbon fuels with the
fuels the important to the state
the are you know those people
would not be such as P. fourteen
until they're actually imported
into New Mexico.
So in and I think that's kind of
my point so as we talk about.
Refiners that are going to
provide fuel to my part of the
state these are going to require
right it can have to do a
different kind of billions of
the aposta dead and I think
that's where my concern is with
regard to increase costs because
someone's going to have to pay
an increase in the refining
process to to be able to make a
standards and so that is one of
the concerns that I have that I
think will increase costs for my
area Decatur fuel is sent sent
across the state in a couple of
ways I think it's track and I
think it's probably in you know
you talk about Santa Fe having a
little bit hello costs I think
it's probably related to how the
fuel is receipt in Santa Fe as
opposed to tracking it in
different parts of the state but
the cost is one of my concerns
and and and and I think we're at
that I wanted to swing that do
retail retailers and refiners.
Sometimes our refiners also the
owners of the retail gasoline
stations with Mr chair could
somebody answer that question.
Mr chairman and senator Amy have
an answer.
Mr chair Senator Kernan this is
retailers are not subject to
just fourteen there it's only
for a providers which are
considered producers and
importers so that are finally
wants to find that mature that
fuel to there really retail
location they would have to make
sure that the your legislative
requirements.
Okay thank you very much so so
again if you have a recliner
that also owns retail stores and
it would be impacted from a
retail standpoint I think just
trying to clarify everything and
make sure we're on the same page
I want to swing back real
quickly to the idea of the
credits and I thought I heard
and I understand the credit
generation credits and the sale
of the credits and and certainly
went from unwanted guests on
seventy three reviews in our
area here there are producers
that that really will benefit
because apartments the
frustration and in in you know
that makes it difficult for me
because of federal and gas
companies that are very
supportive of this and I got
some that are not and and I see
the the credit generation in the
state of the credits is going to
create money so is transaction
takes place in regards to to the
credit
about that time in the selling
of the credit Representative
activity transponders
transaction taking place who's
involved in that is a state or
that often are we have offices
stated in Mexico is a state of
New Mexico generate any revenue
from that exchange credit if you
could just tell us a little bit
more about this is a major
change change for New Mexico
with regard to to cap and trade
so help me understand where the
transaction takes place who
benefits from it in when it
stated New Mexico is also
inefficient.
It okay.
If I may chairman Senator Kernan
this is would be the first
market K. mechanism for reducing
pollution for greenhouse gas
emissions in the state of New
Mexico the state definitely
however important role in the
development of this market in
fact directed in SB fourteen the
environmental proven Ford
establish rules around that
market to make sure that it's
fair and equitable so that
creditors committee purchased
and sold and to ensure
compliance and to insurers
against price spikes make sure
to Smith market in some state of
the state could have a third
party managed that market for us
there may be a fee there will be
peace generated pursuant to SB
fourteen so only for the
administration of the program
so that'd Environment Department
would collect fees so that we
can manage the program have the
resources and the staff to run
the program smoothly to
potentially hire those third
party contractors to help us
manage this market
the other benefits of course to
the state park are almost
multiple related to the
generation of credit outside of
those that are regulated in any
source that wants to generate
credits.
Creditors provided
transportation and so there
could be you know.
Definitely economic benefits to
the state which could result in
greater taxes for the state and
more revenue coming in the state
and economic development.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
another question just based on
the on the kind of stuff that
I've heard one person was
testifying
indicate it was a change in the
bill that basically says credits
can only be used if that were
not possible related did I
misunderstand that or could
someone explain a little more
clearly what that means with
regard to to have credits can be
used and it is and there are
some people excluded from that
process because of their
relationship fossil fuels.
Chairman of a little difficult
participating remotely sponsored
efforts
Okay our fielding this question
please in section fifteen for a
second paragraph five home page
six it does identify that all
the related to transportation
secretary one gas which is I
know which could.
Which is electrification of our
of our transportation sector so
it is approximately twelve
operation has to be related to
transportation does not exclude
fossil fuels but the credits are
generated have to reduce
greenhouse gas emissions in that
that sector of the economy.
Thank you Mr chair that was very
well done and not I do
appreciate where I did carbon
sequestration would be
considered
an opportunity to generate
different it has to keep
pushing.
That that helps me understand
that portion of it
I think I had one more question
tell me about with with regard
to the environment department
and Senator generated I know the
registration fees in various
these is there anything in the
bill that allows fireman
parchment to avoid at the
reversion of the funds back to
the general fund or is that
already in place with regard to
the environment department
percent of New in this
particular field.
A you will see that there is a
creation of the clean fuel
standard Fund in section four on
page nine and that is where the
fees collected to administer the
program will be deposited and
this is a non diversified.
Thank you and one last question
with regard to Mr chair
you know the entire state is
under the environment department
with regard to air quality is
the City of Albuquerque's
separate segregated out did they
do their own
rules and regulations and they
can exempted from that into
their own are they now under the
state of New Mexico under the
direction are are.
The
members of the committee we do
have one local board in the
state of New Mexico New Mexico
Albuquerque air quality control
board and so under certain
sections of the year under the
air quality control act they
establish their own rules this
will would be separate from the
air quality control act would be
under the environmental
improvement act and so would not
necessarily require separate
rulemaking by the Albuquerque
from the air quality control
for.
So thank you Mr chair so that
that I guess that says that
Albuquerque would also be
included just like the rest of
the state with regard to the
numerous districts of that kind
of question thank you very much
appreciate the answers.
Senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
up.
Program for continuing to work
on this I do think this is an
example of.
About a bill one more time and I
really appreciate the effort
that's been made to balance out
some of the industry concerns
and if you can tell from the
testimony that this isn't I have
a one sided.
just a couple questions I want
to follow up Senator Kernan
asked about this the and so I
was looking at that as well so
that there's no fifty is just a
registration fee there's no
ability to write a chapter and
ineffective yourself I mean on
the black credit but there's no
object okay you're you're you're
short you all us X. amount of
dollars that we're going to
respond or is it just it just
the registration.
Thank.
Mr chairman if Sandra Ely can
answer that question also.
Thank you chairman Senator Wirth
yes the fee that would be
collected here is just to run
from the program the.
Exchange of funds to our part of
credit the whole separate
entity.
Sciences and this particular
person purpose here so we would
not have questions questions
that we we would not receiving
them for somebody to purchase
credit what happened in the
market is yes.
Separate from the environment
for.
Okay so I and I appreciate that
so those the whole credit
markets not gonna end up in the
fall.
I'm saying that as a yes.
Yes that's correct great some of
my other question is on.
Page eight signed a deal with.
But subsection for the thirteen
electric utilities that generate
credits so there was a change
made in this originally the
bills at fifty percent of the
revenues generated and now we're
sending all of the net revenues.
Not can you just explain what.
That how do we determine what
the net revenue are from state.
Mr chair Senator Woods I
apologize of we have our budget
here next door and Senate
finance and I I apologize I have
to run to that I'll be back over
soon as we're done over there.
So Mister chairman Senator if
you could answer that question.
Senator Wirth
We the intention here is to have
a hundred percent.
Of the
revenues generated from the sale
of those credits by the
utilities to go towards
electrification projects minus
their administrative and
operating costs I think we can
do a better job at describing
that here this is one of the
points that might be Antonio
with S. P. S. excel pointed out
in his comments and so
the that is the intention that
is not mine so it's operating
costs and administrative costs
removed from that so that they
are not in deficit just managing
this program.
Madam chair I appreciate that I
do I do think you need to look
at that again is it kind of the
the follow up questions about
this paragraph.
How to apply to this as well
because it looks to me like
basically we have the electric
utilities determining what that
revenue is so they're going to
make that call and that and then
I guess the question is.
The the money the credit value
has to be spent on certain
projects and have to go for the
impact of environmental justice
a rural community thirty percent
and I see that's all being done
by.
The electric utilities are they
making those decisions on their
own as to where that money goes
and how it gets allocated and
who have the oversight of that.
Chairman Senator we're the this
is part of the rulemaking that
will go in front of the
environmental improvements for
and so some of those details
need to be worked out then.
For example precisely how they
establish with your
administrative and operating
costs are you know what will be
included in an easy project we
language instructors broadly so
that the you know can get have a
have a little bit of flexibility
in determining the needs of the
different communities and what
kind of the the current project
yes yes but some of these
details will need to be worked
out in front of environmental
treatment for.
And and Mr chair and we
appreciate that answer I do
think this is one of those bills
were again the difference
between we have provided you and
regulating and kind of
implementing the legislation is
an important distinction I just
as I read that that one
paragraph in making pause
because again I think if you are
looking at the language here
It would be hard to determine
exactly how that would work so
clearly that does need to get
implemented felt really does the
questions I have I I do think
this is a.
This is a really important
direction and and for a whole
bunch of reasons including
economic development for reasons
I think obviously changes
changes scary.
And so I guess the.
Industries are all trying to
figure out how this works I
appreciate very much Senator
Kernan families current kind of
the same place the Charlie
markets.
Got constituents on both sides
you've got clients on both sides
and he and I just appreciate the
work that's been done thank you
Mr.
Senator four thirty nine.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
again for the discussion I just
a quick clarification what's the
difference between
implementation this year or in
two years is there something
that's why we're setting on that
instead of next year.
So Mister chairman and Senator
Hamblen if you look at the
bottom of page four section do
it's no later than twenty four
months I mean if you remember
Senator Wirth question this is
this going to be having left for
both the environmental
improvement board and the
department of the environment
Environment Department so we
were just giving them enough
time to get it done correctly no
they're they're looking at third
party administrators from other
states they're trying to look at
how this is done the best in the
other states that have already
done it you heard their thirty
five or six other states trying
to do it too we don't want to
rush we want to get it right but
I'm not it could be done earlier
than two years we're just saying
up to twenty four months no
later than twenty four months
great thank you so much for the
clarification thank you Mr.
madam president so I guess just
a follow up that question that's
a question that I have closed
the promulgation of rules and
implementation all can happen
within that twenty four month
period.
for Mister chairman if you to
read is no later than twenty
four months after the effective
date that the department still
petitioned the board to
promulgate rules rules first EIB
has to do the study and put it
together and then they have to
work with the varmint Department
who will do the rules so we want
that done no later than twenty
four months but you know sooner
if possible.
It is a complicated process I
don't I I can't think of any
other.
Credit program market based
credit program that we have in
New Mexico.
I'm I'm not sure if they do it
very many other states I think
that's creative and it hopefully
will create by and we certainly
heard that and that people that
testified in favor of it
so I hope it creates buy in from
our help growers and livestock
bureau once they understand how
it might work well for them and
and we all work on it together
so we we don't Reshet.
We we want to do it right.
Okay thank you one more question
just with the in section
thirteen on page eight you know
I know that talks about the
credit to notifications in rural
and the term of armament Justice
gets thrown around how do how
how or how is that the fine you
know within the context of what
we're talking about here.
It says environmental justice or
rural communities.
so that.
Fifty seven hundred fifty seven
number twelve so prioritize
mechanisms for current
generation that benefit
disproportionately impacted
formal to assist rural
communities and reduce
cumulative impacts.
I mean I think we're all trying
to do that but how we do that is
is our creativity going forward
certainly
in the talking points that the
that the secretary Kenny gave me
It it's a new part of the bill
from last year and
It says it something that we
have to do but we're not quite
sure how we're going to do it
yet.
But if you think about where
some of those communities live
there near highways there near
large plants there in areas
where the pollution is much
higher so certainly those
community should see a reduction
in emissions and pollution
better health over the next few
years if we do this right.
Thank you madam chair of we have
a Senator Griggs.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you senator just Google Google
think center Kernan talked about
the the refineries and getting
the the fuel to New Mexico
really is what what we're trying
to determine how much
of blended fuel will be able to
take a here in order to you know
they help keep prices down I
would I would presume
There are people in New Mexico
right now that still shell and
people who still drive with
automobiles if they won't put
blended gasoline the.
Because of of wear and tear they
believe is on the on the engine
of of the vehicle has anybody is
part of this.
Deal
look into what they believe is
the potential impact to
automobile engines if in the
we increase the amount of of
for.
being blended into the into the
gasoline and there's that
there's that destroy those
engines
quicker.
Have we looked I guess Mr chair
Senator do do you know anything
about whether we have
Mr chairman and senator Griggs I
don't really I was thrilled to
hear the auto dealers in support
of the bill so maybe one of them
can answer it I don't know if
Sandra Ely are Amy brown can
answer that question Mr
Chairman.
Chairman Senators I just I want
to note that.
One of the things that the
fourteen does is provide choice
for the public so they'll still
be able to purchase other fuels
in addition to those reported
for you all I also know that you
know all the local sold in the
United States since about two
thousand one have been certified
by EPA as clean fuels are flex
fuel capable they will have no
difficulty running on on these
fields will be sold here in
addition to other people.
and and shared thank you thank
you for that I mean the.
Have you know New Mexico is a
little different than some of
the other station we're we're
talking about in that the
You know travel distances the
the people who have different
types of of the able some may
not be as new as others
you know and when we when we do
anything.
That potentially drives up the
cost to to those consumers who
in most instances are
individuals who may not be as a
as economically
situated as people in this room
You know we we have to be sure
that we're we're looking at is
our.
In the right way in the whole
way to to be sure we can assure
them.
That some of the staff that they
fear.
Won't happen or whatever will
happen to a to a minimal degree
you know when we look at we look
at gasoline prices currently all
across the the way actual we're
about we're about the lowest in
gasoline prices California
Oregon places who have imposed
this this clean fuel standards
are among the highest whether or
not they claim to expanders
drove up by or not
they they most certainly
category.
so I don't I don't know I'm
gonna have to take a little more
time you convention on this I
didn't I didn't vote for your
I'm not ready for yet.
But center at one one picky
little point following page on
page six
on the phone lines twenty one
and twenty three.
We we use the word we.
And I've shared in committees
where we've debated for time.
Seems like forever on words like
reasonable.
To determine what they are what
they need Sir Senator I would I
would.
After recommend that usually
move forward with the bill
because we we know which it's
moving forward is to.
Agency of those words need to be
changed need to be left out
because we wind of we wind up
fighting over things that we
really don't need to fight over
on something right.
Reasonable and maybe there's a
better choice words maybe a
better way to to do that so Mr
chair Senator thanks for
bringing avail
I'm looking forward to finding
out more more.
Thank you.
Yes a motion if you read.
Of the so but Canadian.
Half of the.
that the
to the Senator Wirth and
seconded by Senator called.
Okay so for the world.
Senator Graham.
Right now.
Fifty.
Yes.
Yes Representative.
No.
Those out.
Yeah
we're yes.
Yeah.
Thank you so much thanks for the
conversation today.
The Senate bill five.
The staff.
All this.
These will this bill.
The.
For the past is.
That.
Thank you Mr chairman and all
members of the committee and I
also have all and soon will
Secretary part she needs to be
elevated to a panelists.
Okay thank you.
Very well Mr chairman members on
Senate bill five reduces the
need for you I was.
Thank you there you go.
Senate bill five reduces the G.
R. T. compensation tax rate.
By reducing the state G. R. T.
in compensating tax rate.
By.
Point two five percent this bill
will provide a hundred and
ninety one point four million of
broad based tax relief for every
New Mexico business and system.
This will be the first
reduction.
In the state G. R. T. right in
forty years the state rate has
risen over the years two of five
point one two five percent and
local option taxes risen to as
well the total right in some of
the sopranos is now over ninety
percent.
Salt tax policy tells us to.
That's a broad based have a
lower rate since twenty nineteen
New Mexico's G. R. T. basically
being brought.
To include internet sales
taxation now we can lower the
rate for the benefit of all New
Mexicans.
The bill will help New Mexico
businesses compete with the out
of state businesses New Mexico
G. R. T. food services well
services aren't taxed in most
states.
This bill will also help lower
the income New Mexicans the G.
R. T. is regressive tax meaning
that the lower income families
spend more of their income G. R.
T. lower income New Mexico New
Mexicans will circulate this tax
savings back into the local
economy.
This bill does not affect local
option G. R. T. or compensate
taxes Neil impact of the local
government is the one point one
million.
Reduction in local shares of
companies tax Mr chairman of the
members so at this point of of
like or secretary or see if you
have any additional comments.
Great thank thank you madam
secretary on.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I hope to be there
with you in person today but I
with the committee all the way
up now so thank you for the
committee virtually in addition
to what our sponsor described
about the tax relief offered by
reducing the statewide gross
receipts tax and compensating
tax I just like to highlight
that this fall also defines
disclosed Agency and the gross
receipts in compensating Tax
that's something that unless
your tax practitioner or tax
administrator you might not have
heard about but it is really
important and an important
thanks to prevent litigation in
our tax system disclosed agency
has been a frequent source of
litigation between the taxation
and revenue department and
taxpayers since the nineteen
nineties and this is high on the
list of tax practitioners to fix
this and prevent issues it was a
two thousand and three court
decision cooperating with rules
that taxed revenue drive decades
ago that if significantly
complicated this issue and
basically if you are an agent
who works for principal you have
to be very strict sometimes not
realistic in the real world
documentation standards to be
able to avoid unfair pyramid any
and this bill will provide
businesses certainty it'll
reduce your meeting and I want
to just give you one example
what disability agent in.
Imagine that there's a temporary
staffing business that receives
money from a business in
exchange for finding them
temporary staff then once the
staff work the business passes
the staff wages through the
staffing company to the staff
but that staffing company to
find out if they didn't plan all
their tax documentation just
right that they might find out
they OO five to six to seven or
nine percent G. R. T. on this
receipt that really does pass
through them and the disclosed
agent definition would fix that
problem and prevent litigation
going forward thank you.
Okay.
Thank you anything else Senator
Gonzales.
All Mr chairman of just one more
part is so from the small county
cities assistance fund get a
combined twenty percent of the
state.
State tax the the there.
They don't they don't use by the
local option contacts but as of
seven one twenty one now there
are local option income taxes in
the N. M. M. L. the consider
themselves lucky that the entire
twenty percent has not been
repealed.
Of you in the hall not to get a
local option income tax so
between that and the internet
sales tax revenue the revenues
are are I feel that these
participate there so with that
we would stand for questions
thank thank you senator.
So now go to the audience of
those that are in opposition
will go first anybody in the
audience in a position of this
bill.
The log it but once.
do we have anybody assume that's
in opposition of the bill.
They have gone.
What.
There's no reason you.
Then your client on mute.
All the way from above.
It.
If not we can go to the next one
that this other person.
Just hello Mike submitted
reviews okay.
This.
Members of the committee my name
is that it makes New Jersey
actually previously one of his
public Mexico and speak in
opposition to the SP five.
I'm Lisa poses reduction in G.
R. T. as a difficult decision as
of late
G. R. T. is is a regressive tax
and debt reduction that would be
consistent with that but
position of making that tax
system more progressive but the
league also believes that the
tax system to generate revenues
adequate to finance the
essentials of government agency
exemptions and would reduce
overall tax revenue threatened
ability to fund essential
service and we've been here
before that times tax reduction
how times have you programs
we don't want to go through this
again we we experienced just a
few years ago so we urge you to
do not pass on SP five thank
you.
Okay thank you okay so now we'll
go to the those that are in
favor of Senate Bill I.
The general.
Trials for speaking on behalf of
New Mexico voices for children.
We're seeing if they were still
there Senator Gonzales to refuse
it while we are still we do have
some concerns the more focus on
at this time this year fire on
all of the staff in the FIR of
the bill lowered gross receipts
taxes taxes reduce revenue
diversification contributed to
revenue volatility.
This built this will impact is
estimated to increase the
general fund requirements on oil
and gas related revenue for.
For this reason we urged passage
of the bills and so forth with a
trigger mechanism.
some Senator activists on the
page I will build your way or
speaking from voice search or to
have.
How to questions related to
your.
There's they're certainly going
to be a downside in the oil and
gas in the future of major
source of revenue we know that
the only question of where most
of the year where you're Andrew
helps having date twenty
eighteen or picking up
especially those parents.
Heard New Mexico tort throughout
the state.
I was.
Our national education
association survey numbers there
were seventeen responses with
enormous number of details about
house prices of products that
have that happen I'm sure it's
very difficult for all the
legislators to happen
want to speak to all of them but
after school program for parents
student teacher ratio went way
off because positions were
eliminated many students are in
employees didn't get the
services maintenance because of
the taxes are so thank you very
much.
Appreciate the opportunity.
Thank you.
What product.
Mr chairman of the members of
the committee Charley markets on
behalf of New Mexico business
coalition.
Of we appreciate of the server
bringing this for we for
business of regulation was a
little bit larger but we do
appreciate
option makes us more competitive
the state.
So we.
Thank the.
Okay anybody autism support
filled with we have four.
I okay.
Go ahead with your in.
Thank you Mr chair and members
of the committee on Bill Jordan
with New Mexico voices for
children we all know that the
gross receipts tax is a
regressive tax and we'd all like
it could be lower if this passes
it would be the second largest
tax cut in the last several
decades topped only by the two
thousand and three personal
income tax cuts we do have a
concern about such a huge tax
cut without replacing the
revenue since that's not in the
bill we respectfully urge you to
add a circuit breaker or trigger
in the middle so they didn't
revenues drop below projections
for some designated level for a
couple of quarters then this tax
break is automatically reverse.
Not only for tax revenues would
protect you from having to vote
to cut budgets again or raise
taxes.
We are deeply grateful for all
the big investments you're
making this year education
health care and public safety
what we want to protect those
in the out years by protecting
revenue by simply putting the
trigger on the tax cut.
If you're convinced that
revenues will remain strong and
that you won't have to cut
budgets in the future then you
should feel secure and putting
the trigger on the bill because
it'll never be an act.
If you believe revenues might be
sufficient in future years then
you should want to trigger this
bill so that education and
health care and public safety
are protected from future cuts.
I hope you never take those
hormones to make the budget cuts
like.
In some of the last year that
lost decade it was painful to
all of us.
We ask you to please protect the
investments you're making them
work that you're doing this year
by ensuring that it's not on
done when revenues fall thank
you so much.
Thank you.
For those of the testifying just
a reminder that the will give
you each one minute.
Well that we we have a
discussion at the committee
level.
Table Mr Bolton.
Thank you Mr chairman JD
Bullington represent a greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
who supports Senate bill five
New Mexico's gross receipts tax
rate is too high and wearing a
permitting the cost of our gross
receipts tax imposes on
businesses makes us less
competitive economically when
compared to other states
additionally the chamber
supports additional rate relief
in future years along with
substantial reform that broadens
the gross receipts tax based and
significantly lower our rates
the chamber also the fourth
edition on local governments
raising their local rates for
the next five years and finally
we must further address tax
payment in a major way we have
the resources available and it's
one of the most important things
we can do it a level playing
field for New Mexico business.
Thank you.
Well we.
Thank you for.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is bill
Lee president CEO of the element
in the county chamber of
commerce are cheaper stands in
full support of the Senate bill
before you today and we we
realize that the problems that
have been created
and the effects of tax committee
from through G. R. T. over the
years which made it very
difficult for our state to be
competitive lowering the G. R.
T. right without change that
make isn't mechanism current
permitting but of course you
would provide some relief for
that in that we see this is a
significant help to businesses
and to consumers both at this
much needed time and we
encourage a do pass and thank
you for your time and interest
thank you committee and Mr
chairman thank you.
Thank you hello chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Jeanette congrats and I am
the president and CEO of New
Mexico Society of CPA our
society is the poorer of Senate
bill five because it will
decrease the tax burden of New
Mexico businesses and citizens
we believe this bill will be in
are often in the state of New
Mexico thank you for your time.
Thank you for.
Mr Nelson.
Hello.
Committee I Bobby Allison New
Mexico CPA based in Albuquerque
and I have my own tax and
consulting practice I also serve
on New Mexico taxation and
revenue departments tax
practitioner advisory committee
disclosed agency regulation is
overly complex and involves
reimbursed expenditures most
businesses whether they are
large multinational corporations
or small mom and pop shops have
transactions that include
reimbursed expenditures because
of the current the current loss
complexity it is very difficult
for reimbursed expenditures not
to be subject to Mexico gross
receipts tax this causes New
Mexico difficulty with economic
development efforts because
almost every state in the
country does not tax these types
of transactions most consultants
accountants and attorneys pass
on their client plus to the
customers if I pass on my email
costs to my clients I will need
to R. G. R. T. on that cost
twenty is already you're too
young the cost would be
purchased a service for my tax
return provided the tax losses
taxed twice this law has far
reaching ramifications it
affects staffing companies in
today's market third party
staffing companies are used by
many types of companies
construction companies use them
to try to find skilled labor
Hospital season to try to find
doctors because of this law
The most.
Your your statement so that we
can stick to the time.
Thank absolutely because of this
log is so Regis.
To be impacted hospice providers
to provide faster service to the
nation.
Hospice providers in New Mexico
I have to pay in in G. R. T. on
the Medicare receipts there due
to the nursing this hospice
providers page here T. R.
receipts they don't want to get.
Thank you Mr.
Okay so what is that phone paid
nine.
Thank.
For.
Yes good afternoon Mister chair
and members of the committee my
name is New Mexico voices for
children who to support just the
facts as many had mentioned the
G. R. T. is a regressive tax and
lower income families in New
Mexico you have to spend a
larger share of their incomes to
pay GHC actors and Services but
I do just want to reiterate just
one concern that I was trying to
really years and that is the
cost and we certainly don't want
to be at the point in the future
we have to cut the budget and
important services like
education and healthcare so I'm
considering here to retire
really just for deciding to
consider a checker or circuit
breakers which is good money
fiscal policy to protect
revenues and we also need to
continue to hold a second tax
reform for the long term I don't
really think that given our
historical volatility there
should be some way to protect
revenues and the programs that
are most of it is so we can
avoid those really hard
decisions that affect making the
past thank you very much.
You.
Okay of the that's it for the
support zoom at this time we'll
go to the committee.
Senator have.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator Gonzales for bringing
this forward I know there's been
a lot of conversation about it
there was the suggestion of
doctor a circuit breaker in here
and it does make sense just
because then you won't have to
come back in two years again and
say let's undo this is is that
something that's comfortable for
you or how do you feel about
that idea Mr chairman of the
Senator all yes the we have some
parts of the trigger and let me
just call.
Secretary part to weigh in.
Thank you senator is Mister
chair and
I appreciate where the where the
speakers who brought up the
possibility of a trigger on this
are coming from but I do have a
couple concerns I think first of
all we should recognize that B.
reserve structure of the General
Fund has been improved pretty
significantly over the last
seven or so years you know used
to be that the general fund saw
a lot more volatility than it
does that we've put in place not
to laws that sent windfall of
various oil and gas related
revenue you know federal mineral
leasing and in severance tax
specifically into reserve funds
so that they're taken off the
top and the general fund is
insulated from the swings that
used to be that used to feel
fully
so that's one one thing I think
we should keep in mind is is
that it might be better policy
and it might allow policy makers
to keep more control over the
issue to just keep a high level
of reserves and then it just
Revenue and budgets as necessary
and and spend down reserves and
in depth in difficult years the
other thing I want to put out
there is that a traitor like
that would take place at the
very time the state was in a
recession and I would argue that
during a recession is probably
not the ideal time to raise a
broad based tax like the gross
receipts tax so I do have some
concerns of that but I also
understand where those groups
are coming for from and I think
executive shares their desire to
make sure that we have adequate
stable revenues for state
services.
Okay thank you madam secretary.
Of the.
That is thank you Mr chair all
right Senator thanks.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
senator you know tax catcher or
something the mission in which
it it's something everybody
wants and then when you find out
how much it cost you go then how
do we replace all that.
And one of the.
One of the real economic issues
with the bill is it should have
been I think.
Been more comprehensive
discussion.
but you know here's what we've
got this is the this is the
approach that we've we've taken
you know you Mexico's per capita
income is about twenty eight
thousand dollars twenty seven
twenty eight thousand.
If you should look at what a
person can be in line to pay.
On the
in gross receipts tax.
Yeah that person may wind up
having say a thousand dollars a
month that they can spend on
things that will gross receipts
tax so.
Because I've got to make car
payments state government cafe
which again make other things
are not shown.
The gross receipts tax so if you
look at it and use that number
and I understand there's other
numbers but if you use that
number that saves the day that
the the per capita data saving
two dollars and fifty cents a
month.
It saves the guy obviously
making more than that.
Maybe that and say we need more
Sure we tried that we try to
give a tax break to when we look
at the position gross receipts
tax the are we trying to give a
tax break to the to the lower
income New Mexicans we try to
give tax breaks to the higher
income tax because frankly this
approach gives a tax break to
higher income Mexicans should
just and measures the fact can't
can't get around that that's
what is that.
they benefit the most the New
Mexico has a tremendous cost.
To our state and we didn't try
to figure out well what do we do
you know to to offset that cost
we have several other you know
tax bills are program that there
the
the limitation of
The special security income tax
that's after military retirement
after a variety of things that
we're trying to do that are a
little more targeted and then
this decision just give it to
give it to everyone.
Now I think everybody in the
audience and make everybody in
the committee understands it
gross receipts tax or pay will
live divisions.
But all businesses pass that tax
through show it's all fable why
people
You know it's it's a hard it's a
hard bill to.
Really think it's it's the right
thing for the state it's hard to
believe that
it really is gonna make a lot of
difference in the lives of most
New Mexicans.
But I think.
At least at this point you know
we need to
I mean I need to vote to pass
the bill.
But I'm real conflicted about
this because I know what it I
know what it's overall impacted.
in addition I I wish we had
taken a different.
Approach to this Senator Wirth
is talked about having a big.
For next year talking about
staff the where we can really
put together a program that.
We do the right thing is for the
future growth for she stacked
maybe.
Your you know there's no
statewide lodgers tax just so
everybody understands that or
not one of the there's other
things you might be more
beneficial.
But.
This one this one is this worked
hard we we awhile back that I
think I don't have many of which
were here maybe maybe senator
Wirth and back when he was
Representative controllers we
have.
We took the tax off food.
How much funding we have with
that since we excel for.
just a little bit just a little
bit and have major ramifications
and so here here we are
almost in way me jerk in this
one and issues please Gesch.
It's going to be hard but
Senator I'm almost supported out
of the committee.
But after that I'm really not
sure where I'm going with.
So so thank you Mr chair and
thank you secretary thank you a
Senator Hickey.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Senator Gonzales for
bringing this forward
this isn't earth shaking by any
means on the other hand it's a
step in the right direction and
I commend you and and to the
others who are for bringing this
forward I'd like to speak to the
issue of a tracker.
And I would really hope that as
this tax moves forward and
they're different pieces that
that we do not put a tracker to
put the tax back together.
Doing that is enabling us to do
what I've observed from afar for
many years before I joined
the Senate and now that I'm
here.
We particularly this committee
have an obligation to grow the
economy that is the substitute
for this is we must grow our
economy and revenue to be able
to tax that rather than going
back and putting this the.
I almost called Sliq regressive
if we were to have a trigger I'm
I'm hoping that as we look at
all these issues we as a
committee will realize you can't
just kind of re tax again and
the observation about if we go
into recession it's a terrible
time to do that what we need to
focus on is how.
Somewhat through tax incentives
but also making the right
investments and so forth in
making investment easier in the
state that we grow the economy
so that we can substitute
revenue that people get through
wages through good jobs to be
able to take care of the issues
we need to take care of in the
state and eventually the
decrement of the revenue we're
going to have from gas and oil
given and renewable energy so I
just want to strongly and I
don't need to answer back but I
just want to comment please
don't do the trick or thank you.
Thank you of Senator Hickey as
senator Wirth.
thank you Mr chairman again I
appreciate discussion and
senator grace I certainly do
appreciate looking at this in a
bigger picture which is a much
easier thing to do a couple of
thoughts one one question I
start with is there anything in
this version.
That prevents local governments
from turning right around and
bring the one quarter right back
on the minute we pass this.
Hi.
Well Mr chairman and Senator
Wirth of.
We have a discussion this
morning in secretary parking
myself and now.
you are correct if they have
capacity they could.
Enough so all in all that would
be at the local level.
Mr chair I I don't think the
plan is to advance this bill
today again I just want to
confirm that I think we need to
figure out what what we have
with the capacity is but I
really think we need to look at
that issue to just defeats the
whole purpose again here in
Santa Fe we.
I hi give great credit to the
fact that the three eights was
not put on by the city of but
it's a real it creates a real
roller coaster because minister
Alex are so reliant G. R. T. and
so I just.
I would it would just seem to me
that in terms of trying to solve
this overall problem we take it
for almost two hundred million
dollar.
Yet here to the state please
send a tax goes right back on
the local level and for all of
our constituents dealing with
these higher growth of taxes
they're right where they were
the board just different revenue
from the state and local
government self I think that's
something we need to look at I
will tell you when I saw the FIR
on this I was.
You know maybe there were up to
five thousand years over two
hundred million dollars for one
quarter so did lower the G. R.
T. five one percent eight
hundred million dollars and it
just shows how over reliance
we've become on gross receipts
tax when you look at our our
portfolio of different taxes
you know this one is the we're
going to war worldwide yeah the
local governments for cities
this is there's their primary
source I pardon in the pharmacy
we are best in the nation for
property taxes and I'm not in
any way suggest the network we
need to go here but some have
but I do think that having a
bigger discussion is something
we have to do because again we
have a base the rates are higher
higher higher
and it just gets really tough
to.
To make it dance is in this
right.
I will kind of disagree somewhat
with my good friend to the right
about the trigger having been
here long enough to have been in
the situation there was a
trigger I wasn't here when the
two thousand three tax cuts the
income tax cuts for staff
looking into thousand for us.
Representative got Gonzales was
and I'm sure he'll remember
there was a trigger in that bill
all the way to the very end of
the trigger got removed.
the problem is that when we.
The ten years that I think were
referenced by one of the
speakers during that time we
reached the number of points
where there simply was not
enough revenue to pay for the
school budget and we some of us
try to raise revenues there was
not a willingness to do that and
it resulted in costs education.
And so.
I realize the hope here is that
you have a of economy that is
growing as a result of all the
work we're doing and certainly
that.
That's the whole but I think
it's it's worth having the
discussion about some type of.
For your just because it's it's
really easy to vote for these
bills it's really hard but for
building raise revenue.
And in twenty seventeen is that
I give great credit to the state
Senate because we passed a bill
that raised about three hundred.
Forty million dollars
If they didn't didn't.
That's fine but I think that we
have in our chamber I really
appreciated it was bipartisan it
was a bipartisan discussion
about how do we how do we trying
to fix some of these holes and
was a bipartisan vote I think
there were thirty four votes in
favor phone number right
so again if.
This is part of this is part of
a major discussion if we start
we start cherry picking and just
saying oh we're going to do that
this year for the one next year
it gets really really tough so I
do think that you're last year I
had amendment in this committee
trying to take the corporate tax
back
and to lower the G. R. T. five
eight.
And and that returning the
corporate tax back to where it
was you before we made that
change in twenty thirteen did
not raise enough revenues to pay
for the one eight that was a
shocking thing to me given all
of the discussion about the
corporate tax
and so I was really surprised by
that but it just shows how
challenging of this all is so.
I do think look at the local
government peace and we should
look at that
again I think we should look.
We should look at some language
and and and debate the language
about possible trigger
you know I'm not sure if you
know.
The discussion about well it's
just keep our reserves.
You know hi and that's the
solution the challenges that as
we we go on a one year of
complete freefall like we've
done recently twenty twenty we
did some of that those reserves
can go away really quickly so
again I think it's the balance
of a lot of things and this is
this is exactly the committee
to be having this discussion and
and and all the marijuana but
folks know I will support this
because I I take this is a piece
of a much bigger.
Puzzle and so not just support
this and then other pieces down
the road maybe this year but I
do think that you need to lower
that
as part of our overall system
operation also look at the
impact here many pieces in here
real small we'll have that
discussion to.
So that's what I have here thank
you very thank you
The to get go ahead the Senator
Hickey on that point Mr chair of
the gentleman to my left I'm to
the right I don't know if that
symbolic here of.
But
I I I I don't have the PTSD of
having passed the taxes in the
past but I would also encourage
us is the committee with all due
respect of that PTSD to go into
the future.
Looking through the windshield
and not the more.
And by that I mean change the
culture of us just saying though
the only way we can do things is
to taxed more and get we get
into a whole we have to become
creative and higher and higher
as that is to think about how
we're going to do economic
development that's really I
think one of our accountability
is how we gonna grow the
business you grow the business
to grow the number of people
getting good jobs you have a lot
more revenue to tax and I I just
hope that we don't use this
crunch provided with the trigger
is really a crotch and we've got
to get ready on that so thank
you for allowing me to speak on
that point I have thank you
thank you we have Senator Kernan
that we have Senator Brandt
Senator called till.
Thank thank you very much Mr
chairman and and this is been a
very good discussion and I
appreciate the comments by my
colleague senator Wirth when he
talks about how reliant our
municipalities are on G. R. T.
in and that's one of my concerns
and and
the idea that this along with
some of the bills we're getting
here in the next few days need
to be part of an overall tax
passed package so that we can
can I get what the consequences
will be what the budget will be
but we harm our municipalities
we take away their ability to do
the things that really generate
economic development when we do
harm to our municipalities they
can't provide the infrastructure
for businesses and oftentimes in
creating tax policy and
Have a bill that we're gonna
talk about hopefully in the next
a couple of days that we
sometimes make a status with the
tax policy and I think it's
really important.
Especially as we talk about this
particular bill which I will
support I'm here to support a
tax increase but I think it's
really important to look at the
whole picture to make sure that
we're not missing any details so
question quickly in this is
actual COVID nineteen on one of
the proponents of the bill and I
believe it has to do with the
pyramid and the idea of the
agent when she talked about
hospice agencies and how they
are disadvantaged because
evidently
Medicaid I don't really take
your tea on the test is agency
handling those activities I
wonder if the secretary of
explain a little bit more about
what and this they are because
additional help that or does it
make it worse.
Mr chair and Senator Kernan
thank you for that question I
think that I became Nelson was
the CPA were speaking and she
brought up house hospice's
another temporary staffing
companies and and yes this bill
would help it prevents an
additional layer of the pyramid
attacks on receipt passed
through a staffing company so
for example if hospice workers
are founded recruited through a
temporary staffing company and
they do work on behalf of
whatever agency agency has the
wages through the staffing
company to the workers and if
they're not very specific in the
way that they keep track of
their books and everything they
can end up unexpectedly became
G. R. T. on just the pastor of
that money and so she brought up
hospice it also happens and
construction hospitals a lot of
different areas.
Thank you very much for that and
and I think you indicated that
this piece of legislation would
actually help that situation
individual would be able to
afford that that problem with
that so.
I'm in when we talk about the
cost of this one hundred and
ninety one point four any tax
relief and I think I heard you
say it there is a very minimal
impact back to the
municipalities in this in this
particular bills are read.
Senator Kernan and Mr chairman I
can take a stab at that so the
the main cost of this bill is
reducing a statewide G. R. T.
and that's a cost of only to the
state general fund however the
G. R. T. rate is equal to the
compensating tax rate and so
when we take the compensating
Tax down by a quarter percent
when we bring in compensating
Tax the statues has eighty
percent of it goes to the state
general fund and a combined
twenty percent goes to small
cities and small counties
assistance funds so there's a
small piece of about one point
one million per year it would
reduce the municipal and county
distributions of compensating
tax and I think with the
sponsors Senator Gonzales was
mentioning is that that should
be viewed in context of it
didn't so that they're used to
only be a state compensating tax
but as of seven one the twenty
twenty one another local option
compensating tax so just to to
question the committee to review
that revenue reduction in the
context of that that now and as
opposed to never before local
governments are also receiving
their own compensating Tax
there's less reliant on that
state income from steady tax
distribution.
Thank you very much notice
that's helpful so just to
confirm Mr chair that this
particular bill along with other
tax bills that we hear over the
next hour or so we're gonna look
at many as
from the picture and and keep
him in this committee and until
we decide whether they go on to
sing COVID to set right Senator
that is correct.
Thank you very much that's okay.
Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr president and the
they can the the great words of
Torah markers so my friends are
for the summer against the to
stay with my friends
but sorry I hadn't been able to
get that one in the of.
But you know its
I I kind of this one's really.
I'm on the fence on this one.
Because it's not a very large
deduction where it's really
going to be a life event for
anyone.
It does help people to spend
more money more than it helps
you'll spend less money.
But I've always felt like the
sales tax and local sales tax on
orders G. R. T. but that's most
people relate to the cells Tax.
You know the the sales taxes and
that's always been my preferred
tax
so that people are more courage
to save money instead of spend
it.
and
Yeah we've we've talked about
all these other taxes as I guess
my.
I have more request than a
question
and I think when we get ready to
start making some of these
decisions I wonder if we could
just have a break down for all
of us of all the revenue sources
categorically so we are what we
get from income tax what we get
from corporate tax what we get
from
G. R. T. you know how how is
that all built into in our
budget we don't need the whole
budget which is and we don't
need micro we just kind of the
the you know a large picture of
what does that look like
because I would honestly support
more getting rid of our income
tax instead of having to say oh
we're gonna look at so security
taxable look at military tax
returns of this person's income
tax you know maybe we'll look at
getting rid of all income tax
and not reducing our G. R. T. or
maybe even increasing our G. R.
T. a little bit like a lot of
other states have done
and then we don't have to worry
about the whole so security tax
military tax whose income should
be taxed as income shouldn't be
taxed but it's really a use tax
and so to me that's that's the
kind of a better way of doing it
this is my own personal
philosophy on this so that's
that's really just one request
I'd have as we get looking at
all these taxes if we could just
kind of have an idea maybe have
it on our books we can reference
it has to you know how are the
sources of income generated for
state thank you.
Of the thank you senator a
senator Coleman.
Thank you Mr chair.
Thank you
Center for bringing this
forward.
So that.
Senator Wirth that here you
click to zoom that connect on
this today yes visit to a
package.
We are we have several of of
these
Of bills okay that we don't know
what the capacity is we know
we're work with the finance as
well to see you know what it all
looks like so.
We're not gonna take action I
thank you for your finances so
if we had a trigger what.
Photo look like would be as
specific day or would it be once
we reach zero reserves are we
are now.
Mr chairman of Senator Tallman
of new people.
You know you have to be
What what level you know with
the trigger someone will be a
combination.
Okay thank you for the yes Sir
Senator.
So the
I is certainly agree with
Senator Hickey.
About.
Being is quick to throw money at
problems to
The some problems the general to
to see.
Aware that doing that the.
Didn't work.
For a lot of reasons that we
won't go into right now.
property tax.
Mr chair
Thank you senator Wirth say the.
We have one the lowest property
taxes.
The country Senator Wirth so Mr
chair Senator Paul and if you
look at the FIR.
on the second page FIR on three
paragraphs according to tax
foundation twenty twenty one
state business tax index New
Mexico ranked forty first in the
nation for its gross receipts
tax when compared with other
state tax rates for all taxes
New Mexico's in the middle of
the pack right now twenty third
due to better rankings for
personal income taxes a top ten
ranking corporate unemployment
insurance taxes and best in the
nation for property taxes
meeting Lois.
Thank you that's a good thing
because property taxes are the
most regressive.
Think of taxes Elise regressive
improper and.
Sales taxes and in the middle.
However.
I have a house.
Okay that is the highest
property taxes.
And that's how I as far as
property tax.
And I'm paying.
This is March when I first moved
here thanks to paying more.
For property tax and was in
Connecticut generally as
similarly priced house but
that's.
At whether that's when I cancel
that today it is fine.
It's a good thing I think that
we have property taxes on it
would be
In favor of
Increasing at their the of the
we have the slaughter think it's
unconstitutional although I went
to the courts and was not found
you know we we have a three
percent limit on property taxes
the only you can only.
Gos has only read it where the
house goes for sale it's
reevaluated and the taxes are
increased so we have what we
call.
get the.
Tax lightning very.
Very often the a
A little seller.
Egolf house and move into a
smaller house and our taxes are
are more than what she's paying
and the smaller and larger house
because the tax lightning.
So that that's that's the
problem.
That place is that once the
court side and that was found on
constitutional authority of.
So madam we are grow the economy
before we in order to increase
access size a wonderful idea.
Until we get a handle.
A high crime and poor education
we're gonna have a tough time.
Growing our cat and I think we
can and we won't we won't be
able to do.
Growth is fast.
Until we get a handle on those
two
so again thank you Senator.
The ring is forward.
very interesting situation
where.
Thank you for.
Reluctant to
lower the tax.
We've heard some interesting
comments in one of the two again
thank you Mr chair so I have
thank you Senator Corman Senator
Graeser for a second time.
Thanks for sharing all the we
really really brief I feel way
better now that I know we're
keep in the bill in the
committee.
but I I need to make one other
one other coming on brought up
the the food traction issues
that we've had with that.
We just need to go back.
Two years to the internet sales
tax and what issues that created
with that estimation consortium.
To say that a one when we can
get ahead of ourselves.
We we run in the issue and I
think it's just important Mr
chair Senator that we do see
some of that so we don't.
We don't make.
Published date like we made with
that and we're now back in the
how we fix it mode show or so
thank you Mr chair thank you
Shane.
Thank you Senator Griggs I don't
have any other a Senator the
full Senator Wirth just one more
thing that important about the
Tax remember with the food tax
came off the G. R. T. one half
planned half percent.
On everything else everything
else that's exactly right so
look at look at that so we're.
This just understand that came
up one place in the right the
tax year.
Office two hundred million
dollars take off at eight.
I'm sorry just order cool.
Thank you okay thank you
thank you Senator come since all
of us for bringing this bill
it's been a really good I think
discussion and taxes are
complicated and hopefully we can
in all of put some together to
move forward and certainly you
know this is something that's
going to.
No of.
You know what we do on this
session into the in the sixty
day session so for us we look at
all of our tax structures and so
forth.
The civil servants have.
Both were worried about the two.
We'll find out social security.
Well for is a seven million.
Our reserves
This.
All right thank you for the
public announcement to.
Comment and with that we will
take no action and want to think
since we go through this bill
thank you Mr chairman thank you
members.
Yes.
Colliers.
You want this one.
The study.
Whatever the committee likes.
Thank you Mr chair SB forty four
this is already law there are
three changes in what is
currently logged on the solar
market development income tax
credit that this bill changes
the first one on the first page
it changes the sunset from
twenty to thirty to twenty
thirty two is anticipated to
line up with federal tax credits
in this area drop off so that
they are in sync with each
other.
the next one on page two at the
bottom is it expands this from
eight million dollars maximum
payout by the state to here to
sixteen million as we see the
continued of the corporation of.
Solar systems on houses it's a
good thing the more that we have
and we want to make sure that
we're able to handle whatever
the market is producing with
that and that's why the
expansion from eight million to
sixteen million and the most
substantive of these is that it
now makes it a refundable to the
taxpayer there's been criticism
of those solar energies market
that it is only been for the a
fluent in the wealthy because
they're the ones that have a New
Mexico tax burden can reap the
benefits from this by making it
refundable every person gets
treated the same under the state
law and so if somebody does not
have a tax liability they would
get a refund from the state at
the same rate so it treats all
the same that's what SB forty
four yes.
Will that work okay all right
the.
To the point.
Okay thank you at this time
we'll go to the audience those
that are in opposition of this
bill.
Those that are in favor of this
bill.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee.
Public service hello Mexico we
support this legislation as it
flow out of our local store
providers to.
Read more business opportunities
allow some of our homeowners to
really participate in solar on
their rooftops and we feel it's
a good way to keep expanding the
market as relates to our service
territory helping the customers
how to diversify their energy
decisions and choices four seven
support thank you senator for.
Your
Although.
Jennifer.
However where Jennifer.
Yes good afternoon Mister chair
Shendo and committee members my
name is Jennifer Weber on behalf
of the New Mexico chamber of
commerce the chamber support
just the forty four which makes
changes to the new solar market
development income tax credit
including extending it by four
years doubling the aggregate
happen making a refundable
credit has been successful in
road and solar in New Mexico and
believe it will expand and
accelerate that growth in the
urge your support thank you.
Thank you.
Yeah Louise.
It is always good at all.
Yes good afternoon Mr chair
members of the committee and was
gonna with the Sierra Club
chapter Representative over
thirty five thousand members in
from Mexico our state is you
know the second sentence
statement in the country with
one to three hundred and ten
days of Science Center here we
can produce one thousand times
our current energy demand with
solar program such as these
residential tax credits help
rural solar in New Mexico
creating jobs lowering bills and
even one of the best things that
the this credit is refundable in
senators also mentioned which
means that if you're taxed lower
than your tax credit you can
actually get passed back in the
form of reading this remember
help a lot of families to get
solar on the roof just because
young homeowner myself solar
seem kind of unattainable
sometimes for people in my
estimate graphics of these kind
of rebates make a lot of sense
to do some of the legislation is
also key in growing the solar
market in our state and I'm
urging you to vote yes on SB
forty four thank you for your
time.
The.
Excellent.
Yes
Representative.
I thank you for caring.
I would I'm not and local media
I.
Just like to say that I strongly
support this bill I think it's
very important for other schools
aren't as.
Well as well the well off to
of a solar panels are pretty.
It should be available to many
more New Mexico's someone from
supporters.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Your services.
Yes that deliver services
Armstrong in support of this
bill our experience since the
ten percent was added more solar
and geothermal air conditioning
installer is that our personal
people increased.
Fifty percent of which is twenty
far careers in my careers our
technicians generally in between
fifty five and seventy five
thousand a year in income.
With the frontier ability of
this bill will increase the
market size New Mexico we are by
about five times or median
income and Dona Ana County forty
two thousand so most people did
not qualify under the previous
and this greatly enhances that
he will grow jobs which will
then create huge economic
development and we're strongly
in support of it thank you for
considering.
Jim.
The thirteenth.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee my name
is Jessica and I'm with the
renewable energy industry
association of New Mexico we've
been around since two thousand
four hundred forty five diverse
members and we advocate on
behalf of renewable energy
policies the solar market
development tax credit has been
instrumental in the stimulus of
the solar economy and it has
resulted in over thirty five
thousand solar system
installations so far today and
in the process is created over
two thousand jobs over one thing
that has been lacking is the
access of disincentive to low
and moderate income families
since it's a tax credit
currently many families do not
have sufficient tax liability to
take advantage of this great
program at any fund the building
will help many more families to
take advantage of this credit an
overview of our model cost
saving benefits of having so
we're to do yes thank you very
much.
Thank you.
Mr chair in the.
You can use speaking from the
collections thing about
communities.
By the Los crucis salts and.
Albuquerque and Santa Fe County.
I was able to put it so last
year she lives on a fixed
income.
Your pension and social
experiences did you remove
taking advantage of the solar
state tax credits is not alone
in.
but I can see a lot of other
pensioners around the state who
could really stand up take
notice so I can get a refund if
I can use tax liabilities
provisional is worth supporting
additional thank you very much
thank you we have five folks on
there so if you can keep your
remarks within one minute
appreciate that thank you.
Luiz Martinez Louise Martinez.
Good afternoon Mister chair and
members of the committee.
Money is the least Martinez I'm
the director of the energy
conservation and management
division with the EMNRD.
And linking the solar market
development tax credit which
expired in twenty sixteen was a
priority for the governor and
the state legislature.
X. created just for creation in
the last two years a solar
investment in our state and it
has Nishi.
The credit is more popular than
ever and applications have
exceeded we had anticipated the
CD.
As we noted in our FY are the
changes to the tax credit in a
likely increase the number of
applications and there will be
increased fiscal impact for
staff support to expand and
handle the seeing these this
report card Asian both
operational and staffing is
important to at least support in
the.
Accessing an issue in taxes.
To New Mexico taxpayers thank
you for your consideration.
Thank you.
Sen.
L..
Members of the committee my name
is Danny count on the time and
energy advocate a conservation
voters
and we stand in terms of this
bill because New Mexico is last
year round sunshine and with
climate change creating even
more extreme weather conditions
it's very important that we
harnesses and shine as in the
past and equitable transition
away from fossil fuels the
extension of the tax credits
another encouraging step in the
right direction for New Mexico
in addressing climate change
you've heard comments of support
from both the environmental
organizations as well as
internet companies and
collectively to support of this
bill thank you.
Richard.
Yes Mr chairman members of
committee meetings act makes
sure the action committee the
lady marauders New Mexico you
I'm here to speak in court
against the funding for
and remember this at supports
energy transition away from
fossil fuels works at renewable
energy sources and for that
reason we stand strong support
in order to do passed on yes the
pharmacist thank you.
Thank you.
Also.
From some of the.
Yes some members of the
committee and the chairman thank
you for the opportunity to speak
by Solomon of three fifty New
Mexico in a half of the thousand
members and supporters
with three fifty that stand in
strong support of extending the
solar market development tax
credit thanks Senator schools
recurring this forward
extending the ability for lower
income communities to take
advantage of the tax credit for
the small holder.
On the roof is just thing to do
and will actually six all right
option of clean renewable solar
energy in New Mexico and around
the globe which is a vital part
of transitioning us to ace
survival plan in the future and
cutting emissions of a climate
change pollution and the for
that reason we stand in strong
support of the thank you.
Thank you.
The.
Okay so with that we go to the
members of the committee.
Senator Representative.
Thank you Mr president thank you
Sir appreciate you bringing this
so we're extending the
Cut off by four years and so
that aligns with what the
federal government is doing in
their program.
Yes and I I do appreciate that
you listen to my constant
complaints about how this is
only for the rich I thank you
for that
As someone who doesn't have a
tax liability most years
I never even considered because
I do it.
The.
Sixteen million increases that
you think that'll increases
significantly were that we use
is the eight million being used
now every year have you know.
Mr chairman and senator I we are
getting close to bumping up
against that cap of few years I
think it is gotten to where
people who applied late in the
year there was not capacity
there my understanding is
typically they get a rush of
applications you late in the
year and then the other trying
to juggle whether there's
capacity to meet all of those
this certainly opens it up that
we can can manage for what the
foreseeable next couple years
are going to bring at least and
I have one more question on for
we're taking it from being the
carryover credit to a refunded
what happens to the person who
bought solar panels this year.
And didn't have the full.
Capacity and it's been carried
over now the sun is refundable
with the changes in the way this
is written will they lose that
carry over.
Sure they won't be able to get
that next year Mr chair and
senator my understanding is what
will happen with that is
whatever they carried over would
be refunded this year okay thank
you for saying that I I hope we
can just double check that
because taking out the fact that
can be carried forward which
would then become come out of
the law so there may be some
kind of provision and just put
it in there to temporarily allow
that could be carried over.
so that they don't lose that
carry over credit they already
qualify for Mr chair and senator
I I will verify that.
the second bills got an issue
like that I think we've already
taken care of because well we'll
get to that when we get to that
bill but because this is already
in law that this just taking
that out with anything that is
hanging on future liabilities
will be a refund and but I will
verify that thank you very much
for sheet that Mr okay this work
on this point yeah you're free
to look at the FY are brought to
me I they actually get money
which to address exactly that
issue.
for this reason we are the
suggested Kerry for information
is not removed for the
refundable portion of the credit
clarified as follows so this
would be at that at that exact
would read that portion of the
solar market development income
tax credit exceeded taxpayers
liability the tax year in which
the credits claimed may be
carried forward from maximum
five consecutive years of
leading again but then saying
starting for those credits
issued with the first playable
Tax Year starting January first
twenty twenty two any credit
that exceeds the taxpayer's
liability the taxable year in
which the credits claim shall be
refunded to taxpayers I think
that addresses exactly that
point so I definitely think you
know this is an amendment when
you I want you to look at it
coming from TRD but that seems
to make sense and just eliminate
the ambiguity.
Yeah I look at that and make
sure that that's prepared for
the next committee.
You have in fact that that fixes
all the problem.
If I could I think all these
factors are gonna get help here
so we'll actually be able to fix
this okay we can fix it you know
what to do other stuff and so we
don't have to run a line for you
look at a good rate but that
that's a good cap went on the
floor and.
Thank you Senator meal.
Thank you so much Mr chairman
and senator Brandt thank you for
that committee over that
something that was almost
residents have wondered about
and thankful that you brought
that up so in my Mr Chairman is
just the comments of the center
thank you for bringing this bill
forward so the credit aims to
address climate change and
energy waste prevention so we're
really excited about that
although my only concern is low
income families this will give a
tax credit there's still a very
on them trying to afford a
qualified but we're headed in
the step in the right direction
I heard from so many of my
constituents in Los Alamos who
were excited about this bill and
I definitely see this is just
moving forward and I want to
thank you for bringing this bill
to thank you very much have a
hundred thank you very thank you
I don't have any other of
committee members of thank you
and we're gonna hold is here
give up thirty to take a look at
some of those suggestions that
were made and then the.
Thank you for that will move on
to the Senate Bill Clinton Mr
Chairman just for my
clarification if I have an
amendment drafted to fix that do
I bring that to you to sit with
the bill when you determine that
you're gonna move things forward
so I should work on that now
read it to you.
For the term okay yes this will
make sure I understand how
you're committees functions
thank you.
The.
I will.
Thank you.
All right so all right so I've
got a surrogate here Senate bill
sixty eight.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
sixty it is very similar you
have a substitute yes okay so I
need a motion to.
Let me explain the substitute
there's nothing substantive
about the substitute.
All it does is it makes it the
new geothermal heat pump tax
credit.
Mr chairman I move we do not
pass for Senate bill sixty eight
and I do passed to the Senate
committee substitute for Senate
bill sixty eight four sessions
thank you all right the
opposition emotions none yes up
to two bill thank you and I did
go with to the committee chair
yesterday I know you have a
twenty four hour rule but all it
does is it calls it the new one.
The.
Do you thermal ground coupled
heat pump tax credits you're
logged into this couple years
ago and through COVID and busy
and all kinds of other things
nobody carry the one to a
continuing extend this so this
is reinstating what was law in
New Mexico.
The reason for the substitute
saying the new is because it was
a law in the past and this is
that same issue that there were
several people that had carry
over tax liabilities there was
concern that.
Can using the old one with the
Kerry over tax liabilities with
a new tax credit would cause
confusion so people that were
under the old one because it
last is not just the same law
would still be on the old system
with any continuing liabilities
that were carried forward making
this the new one this one
doesn't have that same issue
because all those people were on
the old system if that does that
make some sense.
So this is the new.
geothermal ground coupled heat
pump tax credit similar to the
last extended up to twenty
thirty two similar to the last
one it makes it refundable so
that people who do not have a
tax liability are able to
participate in this and are
treated the same by the state of
New Mexico that they would get
the refund
instead of just a credit against
their liability and it extends
this from again like the other
one from
then it looks like it was two
million dollars in the past but
up to sixteen million dollars
for geothermal ground coupled
heat pumps he comes or not the
clean renewable energy they are
renewable energy efficiencies
and they greatly improve the
efficiency of both.
Heating homes improving homes
New Mexico's climate is
perfectly suited to take
advantage of the very much
increased efficiencies of ground
couple geothermal heat pumps and
with that I'll stand for
questions.
Thank you Senator souls first
we're going to do is go for
opposition all is there anybody
in the audience here today that
is opposed to this bill.
I see none do we have any online
no thank you very much next is
there anybody in the audience
who supports this bill.
That Charles we did speak after.
you have to.
Actually one of.
Offering this bill over.
Right
the.
That.
And
businesses
and very important step in
helping us achieve our goals.
Much more there is no.
Issue of what kind of we should
be created with this measure as
some others that are also
asking for us to the rules this
is a very.
Thank you anybody else in the
room in support of this bill.
I see none do I see any online.
Good service.
Sorry Allison Smith Allison
Smith Alison please go ahead yes
thank thank you very much madam
chair members of the committee
my name is Allison Smith I'm a
registered lobbyist for the New
Mexico groundwater Association
the groundwater association does
support this piece of
legislation in this tax credit
however we would like to make
bring a point to the committee
that we feel that the definition
of geothermal ground coupled
heat should be amended to
exclude a direct exchange
geothermal heat pump this is an
old type of heat pump that would
pass refrigerant through the
ground loop and opportunities
there is a closed loop system
that we do feel would be good
for this and that is that is one
that is approved by the
international ground source heat
pump association but we do feel
that this definition should be
amended to exclude the direct
exchange model thank you very
much I do appreciate the
sponsoring this bill forward.
Thank you all for anybody else
different.
Okay Tammy.
Chair members of the committee
on TV cable corn without always
to do need addition C. project
suite we strongly support SB
sixty eight he pumps of this
sort are incredibly efficient
and they're an integral part of
our strategy to electrified
buildings in New Mexico to fight
climate change we ask you to
please support SB sixty eight
thank you for your time.
Thank you Terry.
Number four.
Tracking.
Is back as we go over to
services I am a certified
international grounds installer
individual rights certified.
Engineer for certified systems
I want to just teachers.
Amendments recommended that you
to work and all except for the
ones that would change the
description or definition I
would support with the changing
the description information
would only allow systems that
are the most expensive and that
are not.
Of what will serve most of the
population if for example
someone or cancel an order you
have to take that out with the
system in and that is not what's
helpful for the majority of our
people I believe that the
definitions remain **** and
that will keep it alignment with
the federal tax credit
definition and it will make it
available to the greatest number
of people and currently the
market you need a permanent
Mexico's lessons one percent and
if fully implemented this is
able to be able to cut almost
five percent and then be able to
create more jobs as well as help
with the department and the most
severe times the dealer will be
most helpful when the power
production is the most polluted
thank you very much.
Thank you.
Please.
Yes good afternoon madam chair
and members of the committee we
scan it again with the Sierra
Club minutes after we are in
strong support of SB sixty eight
with the were you when it is
many New Mexicans want to be
able to keep their phones during
cold winter months in a way that
may not and gas is eight
feet make sense for families
from an economic standpoint from
an energy savings standpoint a
well installed ground source
heat pump that is a capable
providing three to four point
five times the amount of
electrical energy consumes in
the form of heat energy for your
call so making this type of
technology portable to all
families is very passionate this
bill just like the one we just
heard before this allows for a
rebate which is which is key for
moderate to low income families
by voting on this bill today
voting yes for this bill today
you are given an opportunity to
many in our state to help
achieve the goal of shifting
away from fossil fuels and into
renewable energy although saving
money as well and installation
utility bills I am asking you to
please vote yes on SB sixty
eight thank you very much for
your time thank you is.
Richard.
Yes.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is that it
Mason I'm chair the action
committee of the members of the
New Mexico and that we stand in
terms of what are just the sixty
eight in order to do that thank.
Thank you for the short
testimony of our.
To help wells can you can.
Good.
okay we when you please R. yes.
This Madam can members committee
can use commercial student
communities and we support this
bill one as was a similar for
the refund.
For those who don't have the tax
liability thank you very much.
Thank you.
Reporter sensitive cap Sammy.
Hello again madam chairman and
members of the committee my name
is in the town that I'm energy
advocate with conservation
voters New Mexico we discuss tax
credits to have ready for non
fossil fuel energy and
geothermal graphical pumps are
yet another way for New Mexicans
to use highly efficient reliable
non fossil fuel energy for this
reason and this is the third
inter Sian and urges your
support of this bill as the.
Thank you so much.
Remove Kevin.
Your next Kevin.
If you will on mute.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee can
roll all the CEO of the rule
like trick coop association here
in New Mexico we stand in
support of this bill we've got
several years of experience with
ground source heat pumps
get a major
You made a push for a few years
ago our wholesale suppliers also
offer rebates and credits hello
what's up front
possibly installing these
systems you know up front that
costs a lot more for the you
know the savings eventually
catch up it is by far the most
efficient way to do home or
business I called up down in
Artesia their headquarters
building in ninety years ago and
the whole parking lot underneath
there's about a hundred twenty
of these what else though it is
yes it's just makes a lot sense
education as is and we stand for
this thank you.
Right.
That.
Okay thank you so much for your
time the committee.
The legislative finance Senator.
Thank you for the error and the
and senator looking at the fact
the F. I. R.
it indicates credit.
you are and what they said and
they say that you know the
biggest number that eight
hundred eighty two thousand back
in sixteen and three of sixty
five thousand now
Have reached a cab for two
million in a year but yet you
want to go they were.
Just a manager with the other
one for consistency sake or
reporter what do you think you
should.
Very very fair question it does
have you know kinda nice square
a look to all of the bills when
they match up but no this is an
area that only recently is
really started taking off as
people realize how much money
they can save with the
efficiencies we expect over the
next several years that it will
become much more popular and the
we will start utilizing are that
much higher rates if we get to
where we're getting close to the
cap that's a good thing we are
saving lots of energy the old
saying that the cheapest energy
is the energy you don't use and
so this is exactly headed
towards that is that would that
we as a state are we using less
energy to heat and cool but
using our natural climate.
For sure.
Primarily used in commercial
applications or mobile.
Our our phone users.
Mr chair nationally it was
probably more businesses because
of the higher upfront costs the
costs have come down and many
more are being installed in
homes as you look through the
bill it actually has two
separate pieces for homes in for
businesses some of the
differences is homes tend to buy
a system and for businesses it
tends to be a bit more custom
made because of their different
volume sizes and and needs and
some other kinds of of issues
with it so we've really is
trying to move it more into the
home market and provide that for
New Mexico taxpayers.
This also.
This.
Thank you committee I appreciate
very much and I look at that and
then the on the first one to you
within a couple of days or days.
Thank you.
What is a.
One
of the federal twenty one
electric vehicle income tax
credit.
One.
The committee says.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chair for saving
the best for last on last.
Thank you for the compliment.
You need to look good I
appreciate that.
So are you have a.
Good afternoon and this chair
and.
Distinguish the one of the most
distinguished to committees and
Senate committees and also
Committees meet to three times a
week we only need to because you
run such a tight ship.
You give people a minute if they
don't the to try and use its are
given the seconds are ticking.
For the.
One moment to the one minute to.
You have a substitute the
substitute hello a motion the
latest from with the.
For more on the vessel
substance.
Senate bill one customers thank
you.
No opposition to the motion you
have a substitute bill senator
Clemente to go and explain the
Senate bill twenty one this is
to to.
There's three changes Mr chair
one of the first one is reduce
the registration.
Fee for a.
Very electric vehicles from
eighty dollars to fifty four and
four hybrids reduced from fifty
four to twenty seven.
How we made the change because
Consumer Reports so thirty
center there was a fair a fair
amount and also increases the
Incentive from price increases
of the violence to be a close
second changes
There is a tax credit for
leaseholders of the payroll and
one is here not over three years
now some people say will.
Referred person breaks their
lease early did a study in
California tend.
Thank you lease holders are
seventy five thousand and to
their lease early so to a one
one hundredth of one percent.
Another changes to make the tax
credit transferable from the
customer to deliver something to
take the credit off the price of
the car so.
Senator so six point.
Very elegantly.
What transferable.
Means.
This meant by doing this of.
Mr chair this maximize the
incentives to the customer to
buy a needy to the cuts the
price to the point the point of
sale.
And dealers obviously would be
strongly.
In favor of this.
Both of this bill of those of
the changes now on to the the
main bill.
Thank you right.
Two refundable of tax credits.
one.
Dealing with the purchase of the
car and the other one for.
charging unit with the five year
is actually four and a half
year.
Areas to this will be in effect
from may of this year until
January of twenty seven.
Senator was the purchase of the
these.
And the representative.
This is the definition of a.
Area electric vehicle and the.
Hybrid defined in the bill.
And the last year had this bill
and the
The
order to be eligible for this
part of the.
The price of forty eight
thousand dollars or less.
And we've increase it to fifty
five thousand.
Which taking into effective we
are well aware price of
vehicles is increases
financially.
Over the last year.
The ten million dollar limit and
the tax and
Representative doesn't believe
that we will we'll exceeds that.
And we may not even.
Use that much the twenty five
hundred dollar tax credit for
every one.
However.
For those filing single tax
filer if those folks from fifty
thousand dollars or less will
receive a
A four thousand dollars bills of
my married filing separately
making thirty seven thousand
less we The New Mexico to the
four thousand and those married
filing jointly.
I making your thermostat seventy
five hundred dollars or less
will be eligible for the four
thousand charging unit the other
a refundable tax credit that's
three hundred dollars to in
store and the purchase the
charging unit is a one million
dollar cap on that there's no
distinguishing between the
different
Amounts of income.
So you you know you've all heard
of.
The expression
Exergy for the country's.
Well charging stations are more
much more expensive in Santa Fe.
I I had mine for over two
hundred ninety five dollars I
know somebody paid seven hundred
fifty dollars.
And Santa Fe which was.
Excessive yes I'm.
I think what they do is the
contractors check the address.
The higher income areas Senator
charge more.
Another thing at the
distinguishes us from the.
The tax credit on the purchase
of the car is that businesses
entities of such as partnerships
and limited liability companies
are eligible for the stuff three
hundred dollar tax credit on the
on the on the charges.
From the.
TRD estimates the first year.
This is the first year for
fiscal year twenty three
it'll
Generate of two hundred and
eight thousand dollars
increasing to five hundred and
seventy nine thousand dollars in
the fiscal year.
The.
The the vantage of this
Of this tax credit will this
season encouraging Kerr
disabilities and reduce the
transportation.
Commission trance emissions from
transportation will increase the
number of lower income folks to
purchase CD's and number three
hello New Mexico New Mexicans to
take advantage of the benefits.
Of the.
The the the owners who now we
able to contribute to the
construction and maintenance of
our roads and bridges to the
thrust of this bill is to
promote and expedite the sale of
the in order to contribute to
the goal of a cleaner safer
requirement.
Of thirty state.
Levy of.
For additional registration fee
and
I'm very electric vehicles and
hybrids.
Obviously because of the the
owners don't pay
tax.
Which incidentally is the third
lowest in United States to
seventeen cents.
So.
This is.
Wondering because are usually
buy used cars.
So
But
Hi so but I I sold cars brand
new cars once R. as in college
of I'm gonna sound like a car
salesmen here.
Levi's the.
A quiet because there's no is
off.
They're very smooth causes of
transmission.
That is very fast because the
electric motor.
Has a hundred percent of toward
zero RPM and gasoline engine
forty has of thirty three
percent torque at zero RPM so
that's of.
so fast so.
That's all I have Mister chair
thank you for everyone for
listening so intently and the.
Thank you question all right
thank you up before we go to the
committee for questions will go
to the audience those that are
in opposition of this bill.
Appropriations those that are in
favor of this bill you can go
ahead and.
The back.
Mr chairman members of the
committee Charlie Marcus for the
alliance for a more of an
invasion.
what we found state to state is
the incentive but in fact the
buyers
of course with the
infrastructure now playing field
standard act all those are
complementary type programs to
to get people to buy the US.
First of we've got with this
however are the you know it's
maybe not big enough but it's a
good start and so we welcome
that and stand in support of
thank you thank you.
That Mr chairman members of the
committee it's a exciting day
today I have the privilege of
supporting two senators and we
usually don't see.
So hopefully that translates
into a some of the other
legislation that we always talk
about as many of you know
transportation is one of the
largest emitters of all the
missions we think this
legislation goes a long way to
do a couple of things one
increasing the availability of
electric vehicles to allow we
like Senator how to DO and
senator Helena said recent
availability to lower or fixed
or limited income individuals to
participate in the electric
vehicles as well as battery
storage related to charging
those vehicles we stand in
support of this mission really
centers on the for supporting it
is one.
Yes Mr chairman members of the
committee that are COVID my name
is Jerry about this executive
director of the department of
transportation and this
discussion cap we have without
the flip side of it impacts to
the state road fund and the
local government wrote one as
well we believe that Senate bill
twenty one addresses those
issues through a mechanism that
allows the collection of
registration fees at the time of
renewal that will help to
contribute to those funds and
it's a definite starting point
in a.
A great way to incentivize and
move Mexico into the no you
have.
The state we're we're looking at
an emissions and and the DOT
staff to support of Senate bill
twenty one but I would.
Thank you.
Okay
The only in a that's right thank
you.
Hello.
And my son then yes your honor
thank you my name is Stephanie
Clifford and I am with the rural
caucus and three fifty New
Mexico rural caucus and I only
elector car I love it my husband
and I fight over who gets to
drive it and I think this bill
is wonderful because it allows
more people access to be able to
time and I'm very excited about
all the electric trucks that are
coming that would be able to
serve rural communities thank
you so much.
Okay thank you.
But.
You Mr chairman members of the
committee this is an Roose long
representing Mexico rural
electric cooperative association
on behalf of Kevin will all.
And we have supported Senator
Koeman's bills in the past and
you know so we support this bill
as well.
Thank you for bringing this
forward thank you.
Hello again chairman members of
the committee my name is in town
the prime energy advocate of
conservation voters Mexico
CNN strongly advocates for all
policy that helps Mexico achieve
addressed and equitable
transition to in the year
missions teacher
greenhouse gas emissions make up
nearly a third of all the house
passage in the US in
transitioning to electric
vehicles can drastically reduce
emissions make a large impact on
climate change mitigation
however alleged emails are still
more expensive than comparable
internal combustion vehicles
making them a lot less
attractive to New Mexico this
bill can help align the Mexico's
interests electric vehicles with
their ability to purchase them
and for these reasons we are so
we are support is L. as in it
thank you.
Mr mills.
This is your yes thank you Mr
chair
David economy with the natural
resources defense council action
fund and I'm glad that I can
join money hello what I'm you.
Supporting your.
Bill again are on.
This bill institutions in the
past this bill was first
introduced electric vehicles at
best sort of a novel concept now
that Ford has instituted the
Mustang in the largest selling
vehicle history of vehicles the
F. one fifty as electric
vehicles electric vehicles are
here now this will help
incentivize the customer to
participate in this you exciting
technology we applaud senator
Tom and for his relentless work
in to see this to the finish
line and thank you to partner
transportation for working with
center on over the years and
solving their concerns we look
forward to seeing this bill
passed thank.
Okay Representative.
Mr chair members of the
committee antennae cable former
staffers energy efficiency
projects we we definitely
support this bill thanks funding
for bringing this back to us
every year the time has come to
pass this bill to effectively
fight climate change we must
adopt electric vehicles
throughout our state in this tax
credit will jumpstart that
electric vehicle market for New
Mexico it's also going to help
every day New Mexicans according
to like to be able to do so much
more affordable operation
against the vehicle I do have an
electric vehicle and I can tell
you that I spent almost no money
on fuel and almost no money on
maintenance and I want that
budget to make it to all New
Mexicans in this buying down up
front cost of these vehicles
will really help make sure that
every New Mexicans have that
opportunity so for that reason
and all the reasons you've heard
before we ask for your support
is the twenty one thank you so
much for your time.
You.
Committee members my name is
Gerry creating representing the
coalition of sustainable
communities New Mexico our I
members are aggressively
pursuing their own expansion of
their fleets and encouraging
their citizens to do to do so
there working on expanding their
their particular fleets and
their individual very charger
stations it's important to be
able to put this bill in a
broader context at the United
Nations climate conferences last
out last November major
manufacturers from around the
world committed to all new
passenger cars and vans being a
hundred percent zero emissions
not later than twenty thirty
five that's for GM VW Sadie's
jaguar Land Rover additionally
second macro point is that in
the president's infrastructure
bill which passed he committed
seven and a half billion dollars
to be able to build a five
hundred thousand PED charging
stations across the nation it's
important for our citizens to be
able to take advantage of this
opportunity and on a personal
note I've had my TV for four
years and I've not spent a penny
on maintenance for a P. across
the forty eight month period we
urge you to pass this bill thank
you very much.
Previous to this Thursday
afternoon Mr chairman and
members of the committee you
Senator with the Sierra Club
your budget after again our
presiding over thirty five
thousand members and in New
Mexico we just promise support
SB twenty one this bill helps
make the purchase excess full
immersion in harmony with the
cleaning parts of rural and the
clean fuels Act to promote
money's climate solutions
successful all New Mexicans we
strongly support the additional
credit amount of four thousand
from low income purchasers of
these the credit can be used to
pay the cost of the car at the
point of state this bill how
good is great and we're strongly
supporting it thank you very
much for your time.
Hello
chairman and the members of the
committee my name is Tom Solomon
three fifty New Mexico and on
behalf of the eight thousand
members supporters around the
state we stand in the strong
support of the V. tax credit the
bill Senate bill twenty one
thanks senator Clemente for
introducing it and updating it
with some important provisions
of Louis Carrera discovered a
couple of but yeah out the
provision to allow the precursor
to transfer the tax credit.
At point of sale in immediately
lower the
payment price is really
important and that makes it
truly and enticing Tax.
tax credit bill an incentive it
is a will lower the price of the
vehicle right then and there in
the show room the dealership
level because that allows them
to sell a less expensive vehicle
at no cost to them
I have been an electric vehicle
driver for nine years now.
that electric vehicle continues
operating it is awesome R. you
find zero emissions I can start
it up in my garage and I don't
die apartment thank you like
others would and of course
transportation emissions are
some of the most significant
sources of global warming so for
all of those reasons and the
ability to
it is very xcelerated adoption
of clean renewable
transportation support
crisscrossed and strong thank
you very.
Thank you.
All right so we will now come to
the committee for a
professionals in the.
Senator Hamblen.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Sierra for bringing this I know
this is been a long standing
passion I do have a question but
I would like to just kind of you
know folks that you know who can
afford electronic vehicles
electric vehicles certainly want
to pay their share to help
contribute to the.
The new infrastructure that we
need in our state there several
folks that back in Los crucis
who said that.
However what I'm here is there a
lot of folks who are able to
drive electric cars but there
are a lot of folks in New Mexico
the can't afford him and I think
the reality is is that we need
to have
not only a public awareness
campaign for the economic
benefits long term but also ways
that everyday folks can afford
these vehicles and so the the
question I have is we have a tax
incentive why not a cash rebate
when somebody buys a car because
for me and I'm thinking of
people who live in southern New
Mexico one of the poorest
counties in the state.
That this is not something that
is feasible it's not something
that is within their reach it's
not something that's even a
priority and so
But a cash rebate might be
something that is that is much
more tangible so that has there
been a discussion about the the
cash rebate.
at all in comparison to the tax
incentives.
Thank you Mr thank you for the
question Senator.
The answer question but.
In a sense you could argue that.
The fact that they're receiving
this.
Twenty five hundred dollars
point of sale it.
It is almost like cash.
XP you know you're getting
twenty five hundred dollars off
or if and some cases four
thousand dollars.
Right off the top.
Is the census like handing you
cash.
Would you agree.
Actually no because I think we
have to look at Mr chair I think
we have to look at the narrative
on Google how we're presenting
this to people who who the
audience is that we're talking
to.
Because if we want every every
day in New Mexico to be able to
afford an electronic the
electric vehicle
we have to recognize that we
have to meet them where they are
and there are there are those of
us who are in positions where we
have might have a disposable
income we might have that extra
money to where we can go ahead
and actually consider purchasing
an electric vehicle and then
there are others who are worried
about putting food on their
table but also have to put a lot
of effort into maintaining their
own car their current car and so
I I think we we do have to be
cognizant of the language that
we use when we talk about this
I'm not discouraging as I think
I've I've I completely support
this I just would like us to be
aware of what we're saying to
trying to encouraging as many
New Mexicans as possible to try
and purchase these vehicles
because the language we're using
tax rebate even if it is
transferable which is is what
I'm being told is that it can be
given the credit directly to the
dealer at the point of sale.
Some people would much rather
have that money right in hand
rather than have it taking off
you know and and it it I think
we we just need to recognize
where people are and what will
incentivize them directly to buy
a car tax credits for some
people are really great cash
rebates for others are really
great and I think it's just
something just to just something
to consider but then we also
look at how we're we're we have
a public information campaign to
let people know about the budget
and what is available for them I
think those are things that we
also need to think of we were
trying to reach the cyber
opportunity of reducing
emissions.
Are we being effective enough by
the people the audience that
we're trying to reach for we
reaching a select few because
they can afford it thank you for
that
thank you for that Sir and the
other three responses one
according to the
The fiscal impact it says the
average price of a car thirty
five thousand but it's got to be
closer to forty because cars
prices of inflated so much over
the last year so even at thirty
five forty you can buy.
A lot of those electric vehicle
for thirty five forty thousand
you could but not not everybody
could.
Hello I just wanted to be aware
of that well then secondly
As we all know it the
What the vehicles continue to
get the less expensive and they
and they've already come down a
considerable amount over the
last few years and thirdly I'd
like to ask.
Senator Wirth.
Would be legal for the.
State to give cash no.
I think what Senator Mr chair
with seventy seven or is that a
rebate yes the people can get
when they buy a car yeah I I
don't know exactly how that
yeah.
Economic development but I think
we just saw you know Center
souls coming in with the rebate
similar to everybody how exactly
the timing of that.
I think I think that we it would
be you buy the car and
immediately that the looking
into it five thousand dollars
grant these to go through a
system I think everybody can
work yes me just let me know
it's transferable so that they
can give the credit directly to
the dealer at the point of sale
so if you don't mind exploring
that that would be revenue us so
however Mr chair and senator rob
are you and I am the co
sponsoring a bill of up to the
effective here.
Let's do it.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator.
Okay seventy rigs.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
secretary you've been you've
been working nation.
Yeah of course is that what we
need to.
A lot of people for you know
whether they've got a rebate for
a tax practitioner the state or
federal level for most people
Or not quite interested yes at
the minute I'm gonna get there
I.
Mr chair Senator you've added an
eighty dollar fee the
I yes on top of the normal
registration fee.
For no if you know if you buy
fifty four that is that correct
fifty four dollars after we
lowered the details one of the
changes in the substitute bill
we lowered from eighty dollars
to fifty four.
Correct every time sure sure
you've you've have you added
eighty on top of that number two
eighty total.
No fifty four total for which
the eighty.
The issue in the original bill
that we regional we killed that
Senator Brandt kids.
This.
He reduced it to fifty four
Senator maybe or some of those
all facial there's a little bit
but you you set up fee of fifty
four dollars.
Your reserves are registration
charge for electric vehicles.
If you're you're I see your
point in addition to the regular
registration because they don't
pay yes I think that.
Well and and see the I guess the
question regardless of of that
get to that the number of why is
that not.
but we get the from Consumer
Reports you said there was
They did a study and I thought
it was a fair amount.
What what I'm gonna tell you
senator and I mean this chair
Senator is it if you were a
former senator Wirth and Dr that
Toyota truck fifteen thousand
miles a year you're going to buy
about eight hundred thirty three
gallons of gas.
Sure you're gonna spend hundred
forty one dollars and dashed
Act.
And this is what you what you've
done here whatever number you
picked eighty fifty four years
that substantially lower.
Then.
He's going to pay a registration
fee of something for that truck
and he's going to stand hundred
some odd dollars in gas that.
So the registration fee sixty
four dollars sixty dollars any
space for the two hundred
dollars a year.
To drive it from.
other and and you're you're let
it be substantially less.
Drive electric vehicle the case
the H. far less than his
registration fee to apply.
The gas tax in the
more often based on my these are
obviously wrong with the with
the eighty nine you can argue it
is yeah I got I got a lot of
pressure with the decreases.
All right but that's that's what
I see center and the New it just
looks to me like the number of
the shitty are what to
You can use the moment to
increases.
So that well we're here yeah I
mean I can give you can I give
you these all of all time I mean
all that.
If you drive twenty that yet
again I twenty miles the card is
zero point
I can do that and I can.
See what those numbers are are
you still cheaper fifty for a.
Thank you Mr chairman and
section thank you thank you
senator to senator.
Thank you Mr chair so I think
the discussion about the
rebated transfer ability
triggered a couple of things for
me and I think somebody should
look at
in the up to stable building tax
credit which I carry we had a
transferable tax credit and the
reason that was so important is
because all the green build
houses basically allowed the
developer of the house to in
effect do the transfer rate
sales and so that created the
immediate effect of giving the
benefit.
So I just I think you should
visit with and we should have
that conversation with Mr Deputy
about adding a transfer ability
provision in here because that
would do exactly what Senator
Hamblen is looking for the
dealer in effect purchases the
tax credit from.
The purchaser of the car right
at the spot of sale it does get
there's a reduction in the feet
and there but it allows for
immediate transfer
and reductions in in a different
way that that I think you might
look act the way I read this you
have to file a tax return you
should get the credit he says
here it's transferable from the
customer to the dealers so they
can take the credit off the
price of the car okay good
that's the only way the if
that's what I was looking for.
Racial.
Now I have the the longest text
messages to this on behalf of
four million there I think
that's the key that actually put
page the that addresses the
colitis.
That came but if it is a
mediation yes hi for Mister
chair and says service site
your.
Critique.
that's great I just yeah I think
the phone again I appreciate the
clarification on that I think
that other dressed.
That issue and make it a lot
easier to get.
You know having our credit the
last more of the administrative
work if the file.
Yeah not only that but it's a
meets more media system does two
things and whether and they're
out the state that that we.
That there are number of tax
benefits apartments for rural
and we've actually got the
market system doesn't have the
tax the income to use it can
actually transfer to someone
who's got the tax liability and
so this is a creative way to do
it by having a dealer actually
so I think that's great again I
just I appreciate the work
you've done on this
and I and I do think I if it's a
five year credit correct the the
actually says five year but is.
Thank you for your the court may
of this year to.
January twenty seven.
But the.
Right up.
The
The fire said five years but
it's usually for half years
please you are extended.
In August.
Now here's the thing that.
On page nineteen affordability.
I want to live tax years
beginning on or after January
first twenty twenty.
actually.
Well anyway we can talk about
that I do think I think it's
important to have have that
window because the technology is
changing so rapidly.
That I think it's point is when
you want to go back and take a
look at the again thank thank
you Sierra.
All right Senator a friend.
Mr chairman all the quick
I looked up the average price of
electric vehicles you always
like to get the local with the
average price is fifty six
thousand.
In the average price of gas you
were also low on.
Is now up to forty five
thousand.
But that's still sixteen
thousand R. eleven thousand
dollar difference.
And that's about two hundred
dollars a month for zone seven
to make our payments.
On every two of the every every
ten thousand dollars Mr chair
Senator the city average price
is forty six forty five thousand
the average price of gasoline
vehicle today because of all the
first time ever two hundred
forty five thousand Mr Chairman
says because my argument.
Like I said you like to lowball
you can I tell you can because
you want to get the lowest price
we six thousand.
For forty like to get the lowest
price for electric vehicle not
the average price for a
comparing it to the average
price of gas vehicle so you have
to do our you know apples that
was the lowest price for gas
vehicles under twenty thousand
dollars.
So we can do the lowest if you
want to that's a greater
difference but I can assure you
that there are few very short
number of years.
Would be able to buy electric
vehicle for twenty thousand and
I think that actually
strengthens my argument because
I don't think that the
government needs to subsidize
something that is already Mr
chairman and senator well it is
already going down billion
reason we subsidize something is
to actually help it gives
Stallis in the market that we
think provides great benefit to
the community well that's why we
subsidize things occasionally as
government I think we should
ever subsidize anything which is
why I always vote against
subsidizing everything.
But that's the reason you do it
is a government is because you
want to encourage that industry
to get a stronghold.
Well that's already here with
electric vehicles we don't need
to encourage that anymore and I
will tell you that most people
cannot afford to fifty six
thousand dollar automobile.
you have to be according to
Google and the other perfect so
according to Google's get to
have an average income about
ninety thousand dollars a year
to forty fifty six thousand
dollar automobile.
That's probably about right so
let's be honest what we're
talking about we're talking
about providing welfare for
people who make ninety thousand
dollars a year.
That's what we're talking about
we're not talking about helping
the middle class or the poor get
into electric vehicle they can't
afford electric vehicle yet I
hope that one day they can't.
Now if they travel anywhere of
any distance.
Then I get electric vehicle most
are very very patient have ten
days to get to Florida.
They're not taking electric
vehicle that they might take a
hybrid which I actually prefer
hybrid to electric.
Because you know then you can
charge it up go on the charge
but if you want to take a long
trip.
You have that availability so
the your bill does allow for
hybrids those ones the pro
plugins correct so those one
thing I saw that I liked.
So the the my favorite part of
your bill you changed.
and that was adding the fee and
you lower the fee and I think
that Senator Griggs right it
should have been higher not
lower.
Based on the average mileage the
vehicle gets.
everyone is playing the roads
whether electric vehicle or gas
vehicle that we're entering the
roads is the state.
It's it's tearing up the roses
the same if I drive the
lightning Ford pickup truck
which I can't afford it wish I
could but I can't.
All those try to tell my travel
trailer for we're taking about
ten days because of stop every
hundred miles have charged up to
own that kind of loan.
And so that would be kind of
impossible
but.
you know the the the point is
that.
That's going to provide the same
we're in terrible roads and they
need to be actually able to
actually pay for that so I
appreciate what Senator Hamblen
said and she believes that
people who own them want to be
able to pay for the wear and
tear so I don't know why you
were getting the push back I
think that's kind of weird.
but I support the second half
with the fee increases but not
the first half to provide
welfare to the rich so.
Thank you Mr chairman again and
get the feeling you know like my
bill.
The end of the day Senator he
likes have built Mr chair and
I'll just leave you with one
we're trying to still trying to
make it more affordable to two
sets of the help those people
that you're.
rightfully concerned about that
that's what we're trying to do
thank you for your comments and.
Thank you thank you Mr seventy
what else on the list so thank
you a senator will hold is here
so we're going to hold this one.
Through.
This.
All yeah I would certainly think
very handy here if you would for
which.
The amount of money from the
feed it goes to the state road
five and local run fun because
most of these cars don't get off
the state payroll.
Sharks thank you except for you
Schecter Jeffrey.
Thank you thank you.
I certainly do appreciate how
jovial we get toward the end of
the day we are at four twenty
nine.
I know that we are so very
excited about what's happening
thank you to our department of
transportation folks of state
throughout the entire meeting.
And so we have our last bill
that we're going to hear today
it Senate bill eighty four was
senator and chair Shendo
construction manager general
contractor Act Senator Shendo it
is all yours please quite in the
chambers please okay thank you
madam chair Senate bill eighty
four basically at the a mensa
procurement of coal to provide
an alternative project delivery.
As an option.
For certain DOT projects.
Representative construction
manager general contractor says
are procured separately from the
contract for design services and
a contract for independent cost
estimate services with me here
is a our chief engineer for New
Mexico DOT a this is David can
Tana and as of those in the
audience as well and I think the
sectors of them but for now is
going to turn it over to David
to explain a little bit about
what this a method is and why
you think it's important for the
O. T..
Thank you senator chairman
members of the commission
chairman chairman members of the
committee of this bill
effectively gives us another
tool in our toolbox if you will
to procure construction services
for the state of New Mexico
everybody's very very familiar
with the typical design bid
build procurement where we of
have sealed bids and we we are
awarded to the lowest bidder
often times this gives us not
necessarily the most quality of
bit of caused off of there is
there is a a very narrow of
profit margin for the
construction industry and they
often look at our plans for poll
if you will to identify areas
where they can make some of
their money back during
construction through change
orders or for other other other
means of with this effectively
does is it allows us to procure
construction services on quality
based approach we enter into a
contract with a construction of
the construction manager general
contractor to support our design
and our project development
throughout the development of
the project so we're looking at
constructive that are assisting
with any potential value
engineering of that can happen
during development this will
effectively reduce any change
orders in the field as part of
that we also under to a contract
with the independent estimator
to provide of sealed separate
testament that we then cut a
hole in our pocket and we
negotiate with the so C. M. D.
C. for maximum guarantee price
that they'd be willing to
do the work under and if they're
willing to do that we're going
to the maximum guarantee price
will go into a construction
contract with them if are
independent estimate New Mexico
guarantee price that we're
looking at for really lining up
we at the duty still have an
opportunity to go back to a
regular sealed bid and open and
do of it openings that.
Way and and go to the lowest
bidder so really effectively
gives us a lot of flexibility of
hearing construction services
for apartments right now we are
slowly not fully dependent on
design bid build we do a design
build opportunities according to
us as well but this again would
just give us a another quality
based of procurement methods to
get construction services so
with that we can stand for any
questions.
Okay before we go to public
comments senator Sanchez.
Yes madam chair I would like to
recuse myself on the vote for
possible conflict of interest
thank you very much Senator
Sanchez.
all right so we're going to
public comment first and then
we'll go to the committee do we
have anybody here in person live
in person who is in opposition
of this bill.
Live do we have anybody on zoom
who is in opposition of this
bill.
At this point.
Michael central okay Michael
Santa please.
What.
You see these what.
Thank you I'm sorry thank you
for okay Amy here in opposition
of this bill.
I am not okay.
Position.
All on a me just a sec nobody's
in opposition alright so first
we're going to go to the room
there anybody here live in
person who is in support of this
bill go ahead and say okay.
Yes a good afternoon chairman
and senator thanks for
sponsoring this.
My name is up for Thomas I'm
with the American council of
engineering companies in New
Mexico sit on the board with
them and we're in a very much a
part of this we help with the
second of this language of
putting it together and so the
industry private industry is
very important so much for thank
you so much that.
Photograph you madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Erin Martinez on the mission
lobbyist for the national
disability group this is also as
an individual is is and what was
American headquarters for
Netflix and we're going out
there very very fast and only
use infrastructure as well to
the tap festival to in this tool
in the toolbox will help places
like Mrs also develop asked
people to speak with new
developers that are tasked
Commission exploded in the.
This is the thank you so much
you may also.
all right we've got any online
who is in support of this bill
there we go ahead and be
yourself.
Good afternoon chair Hamblen and
members of the committee in the
very registered lobbyists for
the New Mexico oil and gas
association on behalf of the
more than twenty thousand oil
and gas workers in the field we
want to.
That we want to make sure get
home safely to their families
every day we appreciate that
chairman legislation that
enables DOT to affectively
construct and repair the roads
using the most qualified
contractor no that would urged
committee members to support
Senate bill eighty four and
thank you very much thank you so
much I mean nobody else.
Jim Garcia please on me
yourself.
Thank you chairman members of
the committee my name is Jim
Garcia I'm executive director of
the associated contractors of
New Mexico and I represent the
have you have a contracting
industry for New Mexico first of
all we are and we are in support
of this bill we think this is a
great bill and then the second
time maybe two comments about
the value engineering and the
quality because we believe that
this is built into this we also
believe this is going to get
jobs out faster and it gives the
secretary and be as.
The industry is a lot more tools
to work with also we we built
this bill also facilitates
economic impact in a big strong
weight I give an alternative
resources for the secretary
thank you very much appreciate
you let us have a time.
Thank you so much anybody is.
Patrick if you well in yourself.
Thank you chairman can you hear
me OK yes we can.
Right chair handling committee
members Patrick Killen
registered lobbyists for chevron
chevron strongly supports ****
for we thank the governor for
messing the bill and we
appreciate chairman Shendo for
bring it forward our top
priority is protecting the
health and safety of our
workforce and the residents of
the communities in which we
operate and continued
development in the Permian basin
require safe and reliable
infrastructure pressures from
population growth in industry
activity resulted in road safety
concerns in southeast New Mexico
and the department of
transportation is working to
address these issues passage of
SB eighty for all legislative
and you'd see with a critical
new tool to help streamline
construction projects and safety
improvements not just in the
Permian but also across the
entire state with that Mr
Chairman respectfully requests
the committee support percent
relief for me thank you for the
time.
Thank you so much.
But if you will please on the
yourself.
Yes.
It would be Mr chair I think Mr
spoke good.
Okay thank you so much for that
bringing for is there anybody
else that has not spoken on zoom
that would like to speak.
Right at this point I'd like to
turn to the committee.
Center branded services of
schools the fear of the lord in
the table.
But you can tell the end of the
day.
Kind of like to okay thank you.
Was that do that to pass okay
Sir second all right I don't
think it's approval chair
Senator Kernan is on and she
would like to ask questions.
Well thank you very much and I
just want to make sure you all
know I'm still here it's been a
very enjoyable.
The distance and not anyway it I
missed some of the jokes that I
do appreciate the chance to to
use your word in support of this
bill as many of you know there
is a great deal of construction
going on in southeast New Mexico
and and certainly appreciate the
department for for doing all
that they're doing to make our
roads safer as they are across
the state in New Mexico we
passed a bill last year I
believe or maybe the year before
giving them an additional
opportunity to to speed the
process I think this is just
going to be an extra opportunity
for them to to be able to get
these projects I've been going
we have a tremendous amount of
money coming into the state for
roads we have to have this to to
make sure that these things get
completed timely so I support
the bill and I just appreciate
it apartments so much for all
the support you give to everyone
across the state that's all I
have thank you very much thank
you Senator Kernan.
Anybody else.
Right thank you etcetera
etcetera we are not moving at
this point this this one but we
are moving on this bill this one
is not any incentive toward
anything okay so we actually
have to vote on this one yes all
rights so do I have a motion to
so would you were serious about
your motion.
Okay all right to have a second.
Second I read from his Griggs
already also okay I don't know
if they were joking of their
series.
All right so like you could call
the roll Senator Brandt dismiss
Senator Griggs.
Yeah.
Senator Hickey.
Senator I would Leo yes Senator
Kernan.
Yes.
The.
Yes.
Representative.
In this we can we can.
Hello Senator Tallinn.
Senator Wirth yes Senator
Hamblen yes Senator Shendo yes.
Nine in the affirmative thank
you you have just thank you very
much committee thank you very
much thank you thank you
as we finish up our committee
will return on Tuesday February
first thank you staff for being
here today and what you're
doing.
And the folks online and
committee members we appreciate
you have a good night we are
adjourned.
