Hundred eighty thousand or so
restaurants who weren't able to
participate nine hundred thirty
nine hundred thirty thousand
they were unable thousand
government and thirty.
Every other person in New
Mexico's restaurant Mr.
anyway so sensually what we're
coming forward with this is that
deduction which would start in
and in four months we did
receive a a FY are yesterday Mr
chairman it was pretty clear but
it really only on on the
financial aspect we were waiting
to see what the the impact would
be there we're hoping to get an
updated one sometime in the next
day or two and we know that
you'll probably part of this
bill like we do with other
things I was on this committee
for nine years I understand how
that works
we do wanna also underscore the
fact that there's a hundred
fifty thousand dollars
appropriation to taxed
Representative to administer the
program to make this work within
their systems they shouldn't
have too much of an issue
because they potentially do this
in any fashion previously number
one and then the localities are
held harmless based on what
those those would would occur
they would be funded for one for
one for what those deductions
with London being or those
exemptions when just a miss
right to say a few words and
expressions.
So basically what happened in
twenty twenty one and twenty
twenty two is that the federal
government came up with a
restaurant relief fund and it
was a two point eight billion
dollar fund for every restaurant
in the United States it was on a
first come first serve basis
fifteen hundred restaurants in
New Mexico fight for the fund
six hundred restaurants got the
fund which left about nine
hundred and thirty restaurants
without that money now that
money allowed those people to
pay off their pandemic debt
basically they got to pay off
everything and they started
fresh for those six hundred
folks in New Mexico the nine
hundred and thirty did not get
it so it's kind of
to me it's just kind of a
fairness issue this gross
receipts tax credit holiday
whatever we want to call it
won't make them hold the weight
the federal relief did but it
will certainly go a long ways to
helping them with their pandemic
debt and most restaurants in New
Mexico are settled about a
hundred and sixty thousand
dollars a pandemic that.
And that's only okay thank you
thank you that's about it and
then a hundred fifty thousand
dollars or I I know that we're
gonna have to park this year to
figure out which ones you want
to advance thank you appreciated
a moment go out to the audience
to anybody here support of
Senate bill one twenty one.
Yes but if you come up with the
Mike
Introduce yourself appreciate
thank you what thank you.
good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee my name
Xander Gilbert I am with the
Salt Yard properties in
Albuquerque.
Through pandemic we came out of
COVID with.
Three million in that.
And current due to the COVID.
So this tax relief would.
Really take that step in order
to.
Relieve some of the that that
that we did in current hearing.
Pandemic.
Thank you.
Nobody else and Williams.
Okay all right anybody in
opposition of Senate bill one
twenty one.
Okay already committee.
This is really all yeah okay all
right just make sure Mr chair
just up so just to clarify so
the nine hundred and thirty two
our New Mexico.
Restaurants that you could not
make it.
Researchers miss miss right
that.
Mr chair members of the
committee that's correct
It because it was a first come
first served and there's some
question whether that was
actually the case those
restaurants did not get any
funding at all.
Thank you Mr chairman you know
the restaurant Moffit more than
any other many industries.
Server more and now.
They were able to be interesting
to know with costs seven and
this one is that.
So is it are you.
Because of that I.
To
That's the that's the general
fund fourteen hundred thousand
feet the local global.
Our.
It is two or three of the bill.
That's all I have.
Initiatives of the death of the
nine hundred thirty this doesn't
just apply to to the restaurant
and apply for this.
Mr chair Senator Senator yes.
Every restaurant could apply but
we we do have a list of those
restaurants that got the
restaurant revitalization fund
and they would not be
eligible for that correct but
but a restaurant that didn't get
the revitalization I like the.
Your comment but also apply
again for this record correct
okay.
Well I just you know again this
is something that.
Really.
Data that think outside the box.
I mean again.
You're in Santa Fe as across the
state the restaurants were just
devastated so that's how we how
we did this.
I came up with this idea models
of New Mexico Colorado.
so again it's kind of a way to
get one time money out.
Mr Chairman does start and stop
its four months only and so the
thing is is controlled through.
Thank you.
Already know how the same
question repeated eligibility so
force of that anybody else.
If not we will.
this here and the.
Take action we need to a little
later point with regard to the
impact coming over so and so
just for my edification Mr
Chairman what do you have a
tough time line and so when we
are going to call us all those
back that you're parked or are
you gonna have like a day we
just last time I was on this
committee there was rock and
roll and things are moving
really fast and I want to be
able to answer any other
questions you gonna do that on a
particular day for certain bills
I I think we'll probably have a
meeting to look at what bills
were considering and then we'll
figure out who the sponsors are
in you'll let us know to be here
Representative thank you thank
you appreciate that Mr chairman
members of the committee and I
just staff thank you also for my
second item here three thirty
six I'm asking you is you know
to roll this to Tuesday we do
have a complete the cooperative
agreement on with all agree to
breeders the horsemen and
racetracks so we'll have a
substitute it'll be delivered to
your analyst and if we can do
that that that appreciated thank
you thank you with that of I'm
gonna go ahead and have the
clerk called role.
Good Senator Brandt.
Senator Griggs.
Senator how to meal.
Senator Kernan here Senator
Lopez here.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator Thomas.
Senator Wirth.
Senator Hamblen.
Senator Shendo your.
We have six present in the court
case great already so we'll go
ahead and up.
One forty
seven as amended.
Senator one forty seven tax
changes I believe we do have a
substitute is that correct.
Yes and we are our folks yes
it's you books.
For that my phone call.
Mr chair I guess so we'll just
is there gonna be discussion on
this are we is this just a
corporation we did before
Chairman yes this is it is
corporate everything we talked
about the on whatever Thursday
already for a lot of.
So would anyone like to make a
maturity what again we we were
just for the just for the
audience and those watching this
is Senate bill one forty seven
we have a full hearing on this
on Thursday and basically the
way we left that was we're gonna
wrap the amendments up into a
substitutes of clean moving
forward that's what we've done
so I'm not going to go out for
more testimony because we've
already done out of this bill
well we're ready for a motion.
Move.
So we need to do that are common
you want to make it.
It's it's it's a substitute make
a do not pass on one forty seven
turn on your money.
you might.
Do that best of.
Senate Bill.
One forty seven and a two passed
Committee substitute Senate bill
one forty seven as.
No not at the magistrate up the
straight up clean up to as our
second.
Second second by Senator Lopez
any opposition to the motion.
Seeing none do have a due pass
Senator Lopez that are COVID
senator Wirth Senator Kernan.
Chair six zero.
Hello Senator army of correct
Senator mail here and I should
call center Hermio you but you
want to vote on the.
No I'm with you yes I did too
fast.
I want to go for you.
This is the.
Thank you.
Will move on to.
Senate bill one fifty nine
Senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr chair Senator one
fifty nine is an appropriation
bill to the workforce solutions
department for a local news
fellowship program this is an
existing program that's been
around that helps
a provide funding to encourage
on the job training in local
newsrooms around our state and
again it's really it's the
emphasis on the program is to
place fellows in rural
underserved communities
including Gallup Carlsbad
Silvercity Edgewood so trying to
get new younger folks are placed
with fellowships in news rooms
and this was brought to me
and it's something that
I have been able to put some
money in the junior bill so it's
actually going to get some
funding and ideal to my experts
to introduce myself and kind of
explain what it is and why this
makes sense.
Thanks thank you Mr chairman my
name is mark laser director of
business and program development
for the New Mexico local news
fund our organization is
dedicated to creating a
sustainable ecosystem of local
news to serve the information
needs of all New Mexicans I know
the committee has a lot of the
agenda so I'll be brief as many
of you know there's a crisis in
local news in America in New
Mexico and especially in towns
that have only one or no local
news sources in those places
news is spread by word of mouth
over social media and
disinformation forces many chain
newspapers are owned by hedge
funds and have closed are
hollowed out coast newspapers
were there no local employees or
reporters newspapers owned by
Gannett in Alamogordo and Rio
does so have no local reporters
now.
One solution we've found is
through this local news
fellowship program which places
diverse journalism students and
graduates from UNM New Mexico
state in eastern New Mexico into
newsrooms around the state and
pays their salaries for nine
months this helps keep young
graduates working in our state
for the long term the first
eleven fellows in the program
eight of them are now working
full time in New Mexico
newsrooms and the demand is
grown with thirty three
newsrooms applying for next
round of the fellows and interns
the fellowship program is a
proven workforce development
program is managed by the
university New Mexico's
communications and journalism
program in fact our local news
fellowship has inspired other
states to consider funding
similar programs inspired a
fellowship program in California
that recently received twenty
five million dollars in funding
through the state legislature
there.
It's currently being support our
programs currently being
supported through grants to the
local news fund from national
and local foundations and SP one
fifty nine would help us make
this a public private
partnership that would attract
increased funding well placing
more fellows in rural and
underserved areas our goal is to
double the number of fellows
from four to eight and
eventually include business and
technology fellows to support
newsrooms on their business side
to help them become more
sustainable in the long term the
bills funding would go through
the department of workforce
solutions the majority of the
newsrooms that host fellows are
locally owned small businesses
and they range from public media
to TV stations to community
newspapers Senator Wirth said
we've already placed L. as in
rural towns such as Carlsbad
Gallup Silver City and add to it
and if you want to see the
fellowship program in action
there two fellows currently
covering the legislative session
genet teddy as a KO NM and hive
your guy a goes from the Santa
Fe New Mexican and you might
even see hobbies photos on the
cover The New Mexican these
paper around here I've talked to
managers many of the senators on
the committee and I'm grateful
for your bipartisan support for
this important workforce
development program.
And with that Mr chair with
several questions thank you
we'll go out to the audience of
anybody here in support of
Senate bill one fifty nine.
By
Senator minutes about this just
for the public that's yes
I'm Michael Marcotte I'm a
professor of journalism at the
university of New Mexico and I
manage the program as it
currently excess we're in our
fifth year now and as mark
explained it's a tremendous
success and I would just add
more covered very well but it's
interesting how New Mexico is
really getting a lot of national
attention right now because the
crisis in local news is so
serious and so many universities
are stepping into the space to
try to do what they can and
philanthropy is stepping in
source state governments and
what markets doing it local news
fund of what we're doing at the
university of New Mexico is
earning national recognition and
cutting edge solutions to this
problem so I just wanted to add
that I'm available if I could
answer any not symbols to
questions about the program
we're running thank you.
Anybody else in the audience
what is what we have to want to
go ahead.
Hi chairman members the
committee Jason Espinoza
registered lobbyists with the
New Mexico property casters
Association and we stand in
strong support of the
legislation as was mentioned you
know I think like many industry
we're working to really build a
strong talent pipeline and this
funding will help do that stands
for and thank senator Wirth will
bring it forward.
The.
My name is Michelle and I'm the
executive director of the New
Mexico local Senator I also want
to stand and support echo the
comments that my colleagues made
and just add that
in general innovation in the
state support of local news is a
very recent trends that we're
seeing slowly expand New Jersey
let it with our a grant program
where they did essentially
direct grants to local news
organizations throughout the
state others have explored tax
subsidies other states are
exploring.
Advertising focused on
communities organizations and so
I'm I just want to
bring everyone's attention that
this isn't just New Mexico
innovating in this regard in
that
but we would be I think leading
in the way of the state's
tackling especially the
challenge facing rural local
news organizations in this way
and I'm happy to answer any
questions if.
That is needed thank you so much
for your support.
Give.
Okay all right anybody in
opposition Senate bill one fifty
nine.
Okay all right the committee.
Sierra.
Thank you Mr chair thank you for
bringing this up before so.
How may students set pieces that
you had this program for five
years.
Hi how many students to
participate a yearly basis.
Let it go on for that sorry.
With the with the cohort that's
just about to finish right now
that will be sixteen graduates
of UNM NMSU in eastern New
Mexico university that have gone
through the fellowship program
this current year we added a
internship component for
undergraduates so that was
another for interns that I've
been through so that's twenty
students that have been served
by the program what's on the
table with the funding right now
would allow us to double the
number of students that were
working with every year.
Thank you for that answer so the
you have to come over here to
get.
The appropriation
Can't think.
So I yeah I can I can address
that issue so this is the first
year that we come to the
legislature they've come and
they reached out to me and we've
discussed different options and
ways to do this and I think it's
one of those things that
Again brought it just as a one
year deal and and and there's
there's money in the junior
built to do not all of this but
a good chunk of this
and and the hope of course is
when you start something like
this it can begin to develop
momentum and then you're right
Sierra we need to build this in
so they could get recurring
funding moving forward.
Thank you for that Sir thank you
Mr thank you.
for some.
A wonderful opportunity for
journalism students thank you.
Thank you thank Solomon Senator
Lopez.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
and I appreciate senator you're
bringing this forward
News information is so important
especially with these things
that we use and constantly R.
well we're addicted to on
but Mr chairman I think in
addition to what you're doing
there are some other groups to
who are trying to I think to
encourage our next generation to
be able to how would I say
decipher the information that is
out there what is good what is
bad what is kind of mis
information I know
you know like even to the
Department of Health they also
have some purpose of where they
also of traders to work with use
in our state encouraging them
again to decide for what is on
the economic of what we see
something happening in your
community how does it how does
it get reported all of that so I
I appreciate you bringing this
forward because there are a few
other groups also who are trying
to do this work so I I thank you
for sure that thank you Senator
Lopez says Senator Hotmail.
Thank you so much I just wanted
to Mr chairman thank the senator
for bringing this bill forward
I'm a former broadcaster.
And so I understand the
importance of keeping them those
of us who are not journalism
degree in the state of New
Mexico because it's not easy a
lot of times Mr chairman
journalists have to leave New
Mexico to get experience outside
the state before we can move
back in and be competitive for a
job with the New Mexico so this
fellowship program will ensure
that New Mexicans stay in state
I'm reporting in small areas
which we can we can find
reporters a lot of the time
we're seeing issues right here
and trauma and sometimes and
Espanola and so this bill has my
complete support I just want to
thank the senator for bringing
this forward thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you center how to me
Senator Kernan thank you Mr
chair so is a dish human M. have
the only journalism school in
New Mexico.
No there's also programs in New
Mexico state and eastern New
Mexico that we're working with
so there graduates are also
eligible for the fellowship as
well hello you Mr chairman and
senator have you in Sentifi some
of the students we want the
rural New Mexico's for problem
and how do you get them to to go
to the course Carlsbad that's a
long way from you have to you
ready some of us and to go out
to the rural areas
Want to be there for I.
Representative.
I mean I think that
Our goal is to really if they
come from those communities to
report on those communities that
would be ideal if there's
someone who actually knows that
area of New Mexico to be able to
go back into their community
coverage would be the bass but I
think just being able to offer
mentorship in this program
training and also a first job in
New Mexico is a big plus and I
to as all of us know you know
going out of these rural areas
summer just gorgeous and amazing
places to live and I think the
bigger problem is even just
going to rural areas as much as
just getting a job somewhere in
journalism is difficult
Yes so the more newsrooms we can
have participating and the more
fellows we can have applying the
better we can mix and match
those those two sites it really
sort of a match making programs
that we that we run newsrooms
apply at the same time that the
graduates apply and so we look
at all kinds of factors but
geographical location and
identity is big part of that
now the case of Gallup we didn't
have a graduate from that area
but through gentle persuasion
and the fact that we're paying
them twenty seven thousand
dollars first for nine months
work
and if we can add some what of a
housing subsidy which were we
would be able to do if we had a
little more money to work with
we can
the not with any difficulty
encourage students to cut their
teeth at a station like the
Gallup independent which we did
so it's really it's kind of a
match making thing but the more
we can get eastern New Mexico
state to represent those regions
in this process the higher the
likelihood we conserve these the
smaller areas across the state.
Chair and senator I think.
It's a good idea for not only
recent you'll state but also to
get some of the young people out
of the metro area Albuquerque
and put them in the areas like
Hobbs and Carlsbad so that they
can learn about those
communities because we when you
live there you really do get a
feel for what's going on and
then you know you come back and
you may not stay there but at
least you can leave with some
sort of impression we had those
will be for sure but it
certainly gives them an
opportunity to experience
something different and so you
mention Eastern Europe purging
them to think not participate
this town and so how do we get
them.
Not for lack of trying Patricia
Dobson who's the chair of the
program out there has been a
good friend of ours I came back
from a road trip two weeks ago
to alright palace we met with
Patricia and the faculty you
know we did our road show
unfortunately we did not get any
applicants
so better luck next next year
but you know really this is the
word of mouth and there's been
momentum so now that we're
entering our fifth year
we thank you know the chances go
up that more more students have
heard of this when we started it
was just three students and
three newsrooms and was a pilot
program but every year we've
gotten more and more newsrooms
to apply and every year it's got
more and more students to apply.
Senator is it both of is it both
newspapers and also media I mean
like the new television station
at
any legitimate practicing news
organization can apply it's
digital it's radio hits
television but particularly were
concerned about the rural
newspapers so you know we're
trying to you know we're trying
to help the whole ecosystem go
well and since that's one of the
most troubled areas there's
definitely a focus on that.
You thank you for of.
You mentioned that a lot of the
some of the rural papers are now
there's no local how how does
that work elective.
I'm just curious as to how.
What with the coast newspapers
and is basically a chain of
newspapers know the connect is
one and they just build more and
more newspapers that I am up and
then they cut costs this is the
way the hedge funds work they're
just basically cutting things
down to the bone so there's a
regional hub in Los crucis that
connect phones and they'll have
reporters let's say the house
reporters in Los crucis and when
something happens in Rio does so
like the wildfires you know
people are talking about we
should really help those
reporters there's nobody there
they had to send reporters in
from other places so that's kind
of how they make them work but I
was in Rio de so I bought a
local paper I look through it I
couldn't find one story that was
written by someone in reassess
and it's just sad to see that
you know and on another front
for the local news fund we are
looking at potentially working
with the National Trust for
local news to create a fund to
possibly buy out some of these
papers and revive them under
local ownership so that's
another effort we're making as
little from these funds to.
Senator Lopez.
Mr Chairman just a question for
rural New Mexico I think any
place actually you know there
are school newspapers right
there's usually a school
somewhat depending you know
there are some students who have
an interest in writing
that you know that we can be of
courage has a continue your for
elementary middle of such but
maybe I I don't know Mr chair
but I'm just thinking when we
look as to a pool if there's any
plans for outreach you know for
with the local high schools to
because those maybe feeders into
eastern or go to a state you
know.
There might be an opportunity
that that's in your plans
because you know there's there's
opportunity and how we encourage
people to be able to you know
kind of feed into this just.
That are in the.
For instance have internet CTE
school and hops one of the
passwords or six pack was one of
the agency media and those kids
are going to be leaving there
with great talent to move on and
I agree with you is I don't
think it also noted your funding
it's a fellowship understand
that needs to be the higher it
but certainly be aware of the
fact that there are high schools
and we need to encourage that at
that level as well to to get
some sixty funding is very
important that I just want to
endorse what you're saying
senators the the pipeline of
talent really does start earlier
than college and journalism
programs at the high school
level have really been just kind
of squeezed out I mean I feel
bad for the schools I have so
many other things they have to
administer
but working with the local news
fund with the universities and
with the eco system that we have
the New Mexico press association
New Mexico broadcasters
Association this is a constant
topic how can we encourage more
training of you know ethical
objective journalism at the high
school level whatever platform
and media literacy is a big part
of that as well and so that that
pipeline is you know there's a a
wrong for every step of the
ladder
but it's it's rather decimated
right now and it's a kind of a
tragic situation and and it was
kind of a slow moving crisis but
it's really kind of reached a
sort of crisis proportion now
that we need to concentrate our
efforts on it.
We would love to you know as
this program grows we would love
to make it a little bigger
pipeline that starts in high
school and you know if high
school students know there's a
program like this they would be
they would want to go to these
colleges knowing that they could
have this pathway into a job
would be a big selling point for
the.
So we've talked about that for
sure thanks Mr chairman it's
just we have a pool of I think
of maybes out there who aren't
quite at the college level but.
Showing them that you know on
this but there's a fellowship
there's something waiting for
you that might be an enticement
of some sort so thank you the
consider community colleges to I
think if we could find people
interested through their.
The committee.
S. S..
So all of.
Hello.
Senator bricks.
Yes.
Yes so if you are just yes.
Yes so if you were yes.
I'm cert.
yes.
Thanks.
For.
Yeah.
Thank you Mr chair
what this bill does is it and is
very much aligns with the energy
transition act is it indicates
that the the.
Electric.
But he's with the New Mexico
shall not.
produce with fossil fuel any
longer it's not needed we are on
track to meet all of the goals
without that it does not require
anyone to shut down any gas
plants coal plants oil fired
plants anything else it just
says moving forward that there
shall be no new fossil fuel
generation in the state of New
Mexico
The the one of the things that
are integrated resource plan
currently and I think on the FIR
from the PRC indicated that none
of them currently have any of.
Fossil fuels in there are
integrated resource plans so it
doesn't even change any of
those.
But it encourages if they need
additional capacity to put in
renewables putting battery
storage indicates that more of
the rooftop solar types of
programs to meet all of the
capacity needs but that's what
it does.
Right.
All righty.
We'll go to the audience anybody
here in support of Senate bill
seventy four as amended.
But it also yeah more.
Go ahead.
He is not on mute saying that's
going to go forward.
Does anyone because it is able
to various I don't think he's
medically okay.
All right.
Will move on to anybody here in
opposition of Senate bill
seventy for a.
But.
Good afternoon.
Some.
Chairman Shendo members the
committee Carlos we start with
the Public Service Company New
Mexico.
And with this bill you know we
it's not that it's a.
We propose that we're because it
PNM is moving the direction of
more renewables and factor forty
percent renewable right now
moving towards eighty percent
the the problem we had to have
with this bill it does remove
geothermal development and maybe
to future options as far as
maybe alternative fuels that are
missions free free as well
because part of the energy
transition act as we have to me
a hundred percent emissions free
and eighty by eighty percent
renewables and next twenty or so
those are some of the concerns
and issues we do have with this
bill and with and also I just
want to point out you know the
resource adequacy we piece of
it.
Without certain
Generation that that's excluded
from this this bill as well so
for those reasons we propose a
bill thank you.
Thank you.
Good morning Mr good afternoon
Mister chairman members of the
committee I Vince Martinez
senior government relations
adviser for tri state generation
and transmission association New
Mexico.
tristate serves eleven member
owners cooperatives in New
Mexico and provides are not
reliable energy which includes a
mix of wind solar cell cell
called gas oil and hydro.
We provide affordable energy
price that has not had rate
increase since twenty fifteen in
a matter of fact this had to two
percent decreases over the last
two years.
We provide responsible energy we
are currently about forty
percent renewable and by twenty
twenty four will be fifty
percent renewable six years
before the TA mandate by twenty
thirty tri state cooperatives
will have on our PS of seventy
percent.
Our energy is verifiable our
energy load I told you about is
verifiable because tri state and
it's forty two members across
four states and generate our
energy unlike for profit brokers
who buy their energy on the open
market all the although the ETA
is far from perfect.
It is the energy policy for New
Mexico and all utilities and
NGOs had a part in crafting.
Based on the ETA utilities
develop energy resource plans
the R. peas are multi year multi
decade plans to meet the
requirements of the PTA
reliability is the number one
goal.
We can insure reliability by
using a mix of energy sources
clean and clean technologies
including hydrogen.
To ensure we meet and exceed the
EPA standards we respectfully
urge you to oppose Senate bill
seventy four thank you.
Anybody else in the audience in
opposition.
Okay all right we'll go to the
committee.
Thank you Mr chair Senator so
just looking at the analysis in
this is the committee analysis
so
I'm just curious about the both
PRC and the in in R. D.
concluded there now sis of the
bill it would increase rates
paid for electricity so.
What is your concert you have a
concern that that that would
occur.
Of.
The things the the indicate yeah
and I'm reading changing
generation capacity will have an
impact on the cost of service.
This doesn't have anyone taking
any energy offline the lowest
cost of energy and I believe
it's called the Lazarus
Are you always mess up the the
term for it the but it's the all
in cost of energy that
renewables are the lowest cost
including battery storage going
from here on out and so this
doesn't require anyone to take
anything off you just can't
build new generating capacity
and so.
Putting renewables on is the
lowest capacity from here out of
the energy company's actually
right now are increasing their
depreciation rate too so that
they are going to end up with
the stranded cost when they are
no longer getting the the gas
power plants that they currently
have that's increasing rates as
it is this doesn't I don't
believe in any way increase
rates that consumers pay because
it doesn't change their current
portfolios and the PRC indicates
that all of the current
integrated resource plans don't
include any current plans for
additional fossil fuel
generation Mr chair what's the
purpose of the bill then if
they're not I mean if if there
are no plans to to do that I you
need to produce thank I'm Mr
chairman and senator it gives
the PRC the power to deny in the
future some plan to put for
instance a new gas generator
that is going to be depreciated
over five years which is very
costly
and putting that on and so
hopefully this would never be
important but it does that
marker in that we don't need any
new fossil fuel generation again
I very carefully say any new
fossil fuel generation it does
not require anyone to take any
of it off it doesn't require in
the shuttering of things that
are currently going on or
anything of that sort Mr chair
upgrading of facilities that
might need some upgrades could
they get a permit from the PRC
two that is not addressed in
this at all the certainly the
idea is we do want them to the
current fossil fuel generation
as back up for as long as they
can keep that alive that is good
for our energy mix.
Thank you Mr chair I I guess my
concern is that we have the new
P. Garcia everybody agreed on on
our most people agree to
establish that and yet we're
telling them now what to do do
they not have the authority to
permit what they want to permit
and I mean I don't understand
why we've established the PRC
and now we're taking what their
ability and authority to do what
what they need to do Mr chair
and and senator the PRC works
within the established
guidelines that we set for them
and this is setting a guideline
that moving forward fossil fuel
generation not needed as in the
new generation.
Chair well you know I don't know
that I agree with that in I
think that we know the
reliability is necessary and we
certainly in my area we we have
wind and solar we have
significant amounts of of when.
With excel in fact I think
they're at fifty percent they're
better than some of the other
areas and and they do that
because they have found that it
it is helpful to them and they
they do that.
That I'm not sure that it's wise
for us to prohibit going forward
because we don't know what to
what is going to hold in I'm not
sure that we have the capacity
now do we have the capacity down
to just strictly transport that
kind of energy most lot of it's
going out of state the
renewables we're not even
keeping it or using it for own
purposes so I I guess I just
worry that that we're.
We're going overboard I think
things are are moving in that
direction anyway I don't
understand the the needs of the
benefit of of saying never never
never again we don't know what
the future holds for sure and we
certainly don't want to position
like you know that Europe has
found themselves in and can't
find unity for their people at I
just think it's a mistake to tie
the hands of the PRC if they're
not doing it anyway what's the
rostrum telling they can't do
something there are not doing
and the I just and really
concerned about this bill and
have not be able to support the
bill thank you.
Okay Senator Tallman.
Thank you Mr chair thank you the
center for brain is for my
questions come along the same
lines as of Senator Kernan.
The utilities even kind.
Also the generation of this
morning.
Mr chair and senator the
utilities don't care and and I I
just I say that specifically how
much it costs to put in the new
facility because they're
guaranteed return on investment
for all of their capital input
and so as Senator Kernan pointed
out we have huge amounts of wind
in New Mexico the gets
transported to California and
Arizona it comes off of those
wind turbines at under twenty
dollars a megawatt hour.
Yes he goes other places because
if the utility doesn't only
generation there's no profit in
it for them it's just a pass
through cost for the actual
energy and so this prevents
putting in a large fossil fueled
peaker plant tool cycle planned
or things of that sort which is
a large initial capital cost
where they get a guarantee
return on investment which is
where the profit is.
I thank you for the answer I Mr
chair.
as soon can I assume that we
have the.
Or you tell the.
C. will.
To to do this.
Mister chairman Senator that is
our role is to set the laws that
the PRC then works with the
utilities to ensure that they
are within those guidelines and
framework thank you for that
answer Mr chair one last
question thank maybe I
misunderstood but.
Of the gentleman from PRC
mentioned the geothermal.
Although I got the impression
that he wanted to be included
but it is included right Mister
chairman Senator yes online
twenty four of the first page it
specifically says geothermal
reservoirs.
Is that his understanding I
don't know.
Eleven respond.
Up to thirty.
Were you under the impression
that.
Geothermal was included.
I see that but I stated that I
think I withdraw my.
is so I misunderstood you.
That's all I have Mister chair
thanks to.
Thank you.
Senator Wirth just Mr chair one
question in the in the FIR.
It notes that the energy
minerals.
This presents some concern that
currently contracted.
Our.
Would have to be canceled
contracts within the canceled
based on this
I'm just curious.
Whether you've thought about
potentially having this applied.
Prospectively to I mean again if
it given entities already under
contract and and and a project
is moving forward all sudden
this comes along is it with this
requires cancellation of the
contract here's what energy
minerals Mr chair and and
senator I think if you see down
under significant issues with
the PRC it indicates that there
are no contracted ones currently
in the integrated resource plans
for the utilities.
And so I don't think that that
would pertain and so moving
forward it would prevent
additional ones.
So I just yeah that's an
interesting that's that's an
interesting piece and if it's
true there are none and that's a
non issue I was just thinking if
there are then you know perhaps
for language making it very
clear this only applies
prospectively to new contracts
that haven't been entered into
Mr chair and senator I would
agree I mean we can't go back
and cancel contract it's already
part way under the process and
everything else but again down
there it indicates the PRC that
there are not any in the current
integrated resource plans which
means even the plans moving
forward.
Okay Mister chair I just think
it if so.
Someone has moved forward you
know just as you get before you
go to the floor if someone flags
that issue or an energy minerals
comes forward and says Hey there
is then we should look at some
language to address that issue
Mr chair Senator I absolutely
agree.
Your Senator Kernan yeah another
question thank you Mr chair
unless you have somebody else.
Okay so Mister chair many times
I know in our community our
local Lee county rural electric
established when source in other
words that could have turbines
but they had to back it up with
natural gas in order for that to
be reliable and I think going
forward I think what it
potentially could do was it you
know I don't know how we're
going to create the reliability
when you have projects like that
that want to be in the they're
trying to be renewable and yet
you don't have wind constantly
so you've got to back it up with
something and so that tells me
that going forward we we can't
do anymore projects that would.
The substantial including the
wind if we don't have back up so
what's going to happen in my
area basically they're going to.
Any kind of
new projects across state lines
in the may have some renewables
that are the the main dais but
then they don't have the
reliability so they just
happened to the then they'll
somehow get that energy over
across at I just see that at I I
don't understand the necessity
of we've got to have the
reliability we're trying to do
the renewables but you can't do
the renewables without a back up
and now we're saying we can't
have the back up the go ahead
build wind turbines that are not
going to create the the
consistency there's certainly
not my area it's not gonna work
so I think we just I think we're
I think it's unnecessary I mean
I think they're doing what they
want to do what's right in your
eyes and and certainly at we all
want to clean up everything that
I I just think it's really going
to hamper any opportunity to
even increase the renewables
going forward is not going to
happen in New Mexico then it's
just going some have across
state lines and then you know
excel is across many states it's
not just in New Mexico so
nothing's going to be built in
New Mexico we're going to build
it somewhere else and then will
somehow get some of that energy
over to New Mexico I think it's
just.
Mr chair Senator a.
What do I'm thank you Mr
chairman I just have a couple of
questions and if you can refresh
my memory Senator
of the analysis for the
committee towards the bottom of
the page.
Excuse me
it does say that.
The renewable energy act
established a renewable
portfolio standard which is
firmly established time
milestones then the analysis
also says the bill would
conflict with the statutory
milestones can you refresh my
memory what milestones is being
referred to.
Mister chairman Senator I'm not
sure I know exactly which
milestones in less they are the
renewable energy standards in
the ETA.
I don't think they're in
conflict with those and in fact
actually are hopeful with those
in that there we use the natural
gas that is already there
generating and providing the
back up nobody is talking about
turn this bill does not talk
about turning that off in any
way shape or form that is still
there but it talks about
reducing the need for turning
those on as we put more
renewables on the system it is
still there for the reliability
issue so I'm not sure how this
hinders in anyway meeting if
those milestones are in fact
those expectations through the
ETA and it also Mr chair also
goes the next portion of the
sentences the bill also
conflicts with the ETA as the
bill dictates how utilities are
to achieve zero carbon
electricity generation by twenty
forty five and I remember when
we were going through that they
were since I called and
standards but
so it the I guess for me is just
you know if.
If there are specific and we
don't have those in front of us
to look at Mr chair you know
where is the conflict.
If we're setting a specific date
on this us happen did the ETA
again without having a friend to
where there's some dates or
timelines that in there that
this would conflict with to I
I'm just looking for what the
analyses to without having the
actual.
Paper front of us thank you Mr
chairman Senator question to ask
on that the if I could the I
don't see how it conflicts in
the in order to reach zero
emissions it's more difficult if
we were to put new fossil fuel
on because that would have to be
depreciated and retired at an
earlier right which is a higher
cost then continuing the fossil
fuel generation that we have now
is the back up and so all I
think this supports those
deadlines.
And doesn't put an additional
cost where you we have to
depreciated to a new generation
so that it doesn't become a
stranded asset when we hit those
those hard numbers that we're
supposed to be meeting.
Just a question Mr chair because
I don't have anything else for
me to read to give a comparison
to so thank you.
Really.
I know it's a question of
reliability issues and so for
that I think that's been covered
up by the.
Committee I have the same
concerns that would just read
out of the conflict with the ETA
so.
I don't have any more questions
with the more questions on the
committee Leo.
Questions for me tension.
One second first normally does
have questions because Sierra
thank you Mr.
Senator.
The situation might develop
I have to.
The.
Go back to.
There is
I'm forcing reason.
With with this your that.
Utilities purchasing.
Fossil fuel generated
electricity and other utilities
Mr chairman and senator nope.
It doesn't prevent them from
turning on their gas turbines
that is you know maybe have sat
idle for.
You know couple of weeks because
they're the baseload was being
met by renewables it doesn't
take any fossil fuel that's
currently available online it
takes none of that off.
All of that is still available
as backup.
Thank you Mr.
Share our.
The M. S. R. P..
Hello.
Full of.
I.
From this bill that I.
Mr chair and senator if you
knows one of them says they
would force it to abandon Corona
plans but if you look into the
PRC there are no current plans.
And the other one will have an
impact on the cost of servicing
consequently rates paid by
customers but it doesn't
indicate why it would increase
the rates when renewables are
the lowest cost and all of the
possible generation for back up
is already there.
and the only argument that might
be made is for the short term
putting more fossil fuel
generation on might be shorter
but because it's going to be a
stranded asset as we move
towards the the full
implementation of the ETA that
full cost has to get paid back
in a much quicker rate which
raises rates.
Thank you for the answer.
Go back and talk to the engine
of our.
Make some members of the
healthcare.
If that's the will of the
committee of course.
But you know as I read.
There are there concerns I think
are pretty soft but I'd be happy
to of that's the what the
committee would like.
Chair of the are you done okay
Senator Kernan thank you just
you know I think this is a
misunderstanding R. the.
The the turbines don't run
consistently for two weeks right
that's the purpose of the
natural gas it it will
immediately so if the wind slows
down a little bit automatically
that case turns on its back and
forth just in a matter of
seconds and so that's my concern
are we prohibiting additional
projects that really will run
mostly on wind.
But have to have that
reliability back up just without
it you can't just rely on the
wind and and so whether they do
or not if they don't have any
plans we don't need to build
that if if for some reason
something occurs what if you
can't get the solar panels of
the you know the equipment or
what if you can't get I mean
that's what's happened with PNM
they couldn't just supply the
the energy that was taken away
from the northwest and so that's
been a real concern either
buying it from somebody else
because they can't find
reliability I don't think
there's a need for this if there
is no plan in place to expand
let's just leave it at that I
mean the PRC can make those
decisions and we understand the
ETA that's coming forward in a
particular.
Methodology that everybody
agreed to so I guess I'm just
really concerned I think it's a
necessary nothing gets a little
risky thank you that's all I
have out of state.
Thank you.
Senator Wirth so does a couple
things you said they're all so
nothing prevents using existing
natural gas speakers as back up
as much Mr chairman Senator as
much as they're needed and the
idea is if necessary using even
more well they they are still
there rather than building a new
one.
Mr chair I think where we're
headed and we're headed and very
fast speed nothing and prevent
season batteries correct that's
Mr chair Senator absolutely
batteries would be encouraged.
Finally I mean again you could
contract for back up power.
As a third option versus the
meeting and this is just saying
don't go to start building new
natural gas peaker plants Mr
chair Senator that that's
exactly right takes nothing that
we currently have it encourages
continue to use those for their
full life and beyond if they're
still functioning Mr chair I was
interested in the amendment in
the conservation committee
nuclear was added as a clean
back up source we certainly had
some discussion about that
This session again I think
that's another option
conceivably so just wanna make
those points thank.
Thank you
Senator a do we know how many.
Or or you will come in like
natural grass in the natural gas
peaker plants we have for where
the situation.
Mr chair I don't I'm me I know
there is one in New Mexico State
University where they're trying
to do most of their own energy
both with solar and use that as
a back up and only go on to the
el Paso electric system when
they need more energy that
they're producing the el Paso
electric has several that are in
New Mexico
there's some show came as to
where the different power is
coming from all the time because
once electrons generated it
doesn't know whether it was made
from natural gas from nuclear
from when an electron electron
electron and so there's some
moving around of the different
ones certainly PNM has a number
of those and they are used
exactly for reliability a back
up and the idea is to run them
yeah until the the car sold it
done right anymore because
that's cheaper than building a
new natural gas facility then
has to get depreciated faster
right so it doesn't become a
stranded asset into the future
which then lands squarely on the
on the ratepayers.
Okay thank you what is the of
pleasure the committee.
I don't have anybody else in the
questions.
I want to pass a motion for the
past place afterwards to have a
second.
With this conundrum bills.
to table okay of the.
Table of.
Under the table so critical
role.
Senator Brandt Senator Griggs
Senator had a meal.
That are built still up.
Take part.
But.
All right.
Continue via.
To go back to the movies.
Senator Kernan yes.
Senator Lopez.
Senator Sanchez senator Tom.
Yes.
Senator Wirth health.
Senator Hamblen Senator Shendo
then yes.
We have three yeses and to nose
for a table.
The but we don't have a quorum.
Of Senator mill.
Sorry impact now.
Excuse me.
Senator just for your
information of there was a
motion for do pass but there was
no second.
And so we moved on to a motion
for tabling and we are currently
on that boat and we have three.
To table and right now to.
Yes this is not an option in the
state of.
Three to table and to not to
table want to let him know who's
voted have to say yes full
information okay so fair Senator
Kernan has voted to table along
with senator tall men and long
was Senator Shendo and then
Senator Wirth and Senator Lopez
voted no.
Voting
Nope.
No okay all right so we'll try
so it's stuck you have.
We don't do know rex to the
floor.
That.
Okay all right okay we have a.
Both of them both.
It is.
All right hello.
Move on to the next bill thank
you senator souls your look into
right it's ME still yes okay
Senate bill seventy seven Senate
bill seventy seven deals with
residential construction and
would require all new
construction to have
photovoltaic systems electrical
receptacles for charging
electric vehicles.
As part of the new construction.
The some of the details within
it is in order to to size it and
to right size things
With this particular.
That was a tough piece to it to
right size it is it would have
one.
What the power per he didn't
square foot so that bigger
houses are required that more
little else is have less this
would be a floor not a required
maximum so people certainly
could have more put in then that
amount the idea behind it is as
we are trying to become more and
more
with renewables heating home
news is one of the largest
servers this requires moving
forward that looking into the
future that are housing and
construction meets that goal.
Okay great ready.
So we'll go to the audience
anybody here support of some
Senate bill seventy seven.
Welcome.
Anybody here in opposition of
Senate bill seventy seven.
Go ahead.
Specials.
Mr chairman members of the
committee good afternoon John
Thompson registered lobbyists
for home builders association of
central New Mexico we sat in
front of this committee have
believe it was two weeks ago we
talked about affordability Mr
chairman and I just a quick
Google search on my phone with
thirty year FHA rate to six
point seven nine percent we
believe that adding the solar
components on to this bill
becomes an affordability issue
Mr chairman the of the
difference between forcing this
component with a higher rates
may make the difference for
folks being able to qualify in
four home and not Mr chairman of
we would offer a simple
amendment page two one one
changed the have to shell offer
we're happy to offer them has as
a component Mr chairman but that
and its current form we must
oppose the bill think Senator
souls and I did speak with him
yesterday about the opposition
thank you thank you.
Mr Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Roy Moore
I'm a registered lobbyist for
New Mexico association of
realtors we have concerns about
the bill in its mandatory nature
of forcible housing is a
continuing discussion here in
New Mexico and by making this
mandatory you're adding to costs
the amendment offered by the
home builders I think is a
reasonable solution so that it's
offered to purchasers but not
forced upon the home thank you.
You.
What is.
But.
Yes this is Steve hello.
And my yes go ahead.
Thank you madam.
Mr chairman my name is Steve
Hale I am a home builder since
nineteen eighty four I am of a
past president of the homeowners
association of New Mexico and
I'm also program director for
building the green New Mexico
the recognize program across the
state certifies Greenville.
I would like to voice my
opposition to this
this will.
Many things to consider when
you.
One with solar on all and I
would say that is been a
commendation to homes are built
over the last seven years but it
is not correct for every home
you have the orientation of the
home you have stating for.
Nibert or future trees and and
there's several things this
would do it would increase the
requirement of a higher down
payment it would recreate
increase the mortgage payment
and quite honestly of these
large community scale
of photovoltaic set ups are much
more affordable than trying to
do with the house plans.
I believe the job of talk about
some of the amendments and I
think that would make this bill
acceptable because of we could
discreetly pre run conduit for
Ruth or run a conduit for a
future.
We have called out in the garage
at the time of construction
that's very affordable and.
say the homeowner a lot of
money.
A woman is in the future.
Thank you thank you.
All right.
With that we will go to the
committee of questions of
committee.
Well you know much Mr chair all
due respect this is the
additional costs and thinking
about building quite a few homes
in my area and I have a friend
who just
have home built in one of the
new subdivisions and we were
talking about gas costs than
what my bill was older home with
her bill was new home didn't
have solar but whatever they did
it was in the construction part
with the installation and how
they they built that home and
away her bill was much lower
than mine it didn't require
someone to do it then it was
just the construction itself
they made such a huge huge
difference that I think you know
I think that's one of the
benefits our home builders are
certainly recognizing that
people want to have a home that
that does not use as much energy
and you know that the thing that
concerns me is the homes that we
are building in hopes that part
of the affordable housing which
the the
the rental rate for those
housing projects is depended on
what your income is we've had
we've been fortunate hops to
have number of those constructed
in our community which name we
have a need for many more thank
I just think that with that
include those particular
projects there there large
apartment buildings that
there used for rental purposes
for people who just are getting
out of really bad situations.
Mr chair and senator this would
be for new residential
construction I don't know on the
definitions whether that
includes I apartments
And so that for the heated
square footage you know I I
don't know well Mister chair I
think that'd be very problematic
for the for the sap organised I
I know our city cooperates with
I can't say the name of the the
program was shut.
Respondents in Mexico of course
funds toward so I guess in the
to raise the cost of those
projects because they are
residential I mean these are
people that are pending.
It's just to me it's going to
make a huge problem for both the
cities that are trying to do
these projects getting funding
from the state to be able to
support the the building of
those and then just in general
you know to to tell people in my
area or any area that
homebuilder has to do something
that maybe just a one so I have
concerns about the cost
and certainly at a time when
interest rates are so high and
we're homes just it's just very
difficult to to even by Jose
stays and then you have a new
home sitting out there that the
the builder has invested in
can't sell and I think it's
going to be problematic I.
I think a lot of concerns on
this thank you.
For us thank you Mr chair so
question what that the cost to
put in a single wrist electric
receptacle for charging what is
that cost with a different range
of.
You know when you're building a
house I mean I didn't get the
sense from the home builders at
that was problematic and I'm
just curious I mean we're
talking five hundred box to to
wire the house to Mr chair and
senator to them and senator dole
and might know better because
he's got electric vehicle.
Three hundred Bucks.
I mean I you know I.
These
other thousand Bucks.
I mean I do I do so so here's a
so the I mean to me there's
there is requiring some solar on
a.
On a house that is covered with
a massive tree right on top of
that I guess you could cut the
tree down but I don't think we
want to do that do we.
Mister chairman Senator there
are always very Ince's that you
can get for any of the building
codes if it makes sense for
particular locations.
So on what about and make again
what about community solar which
I think is where we're going to
get a again.
It just makes it more affordable
to do it on a larger scale and
do a microgrid instead of
putting on every house I mean
this would kind of run into that
would be problematic for that
would not Mr chair and senator I
think it's covered by a
photovoltaic system that powers
the solar residents can be grid
tied great hybrid off grid any
variety and so if a developer
for instance sets one lot of
side to put all the solar panels
on that lot for the whole
community that would still be
covered with this.
That that helps their youngest
here with that eight Krycek
debate to cover thirty comes
then you would have to have a
huge problem land for the
Celeron just to support a
subdivision that doesn't make
sense I'm coming on Mister
Mister chairman Senator I don't
believe that's the case the the
amount you know and I know from
putting it on my house an acre
of land you probably power about
a hundred houses off of that if
that was completely covered with
solar.
It provides a whole lot of
energy if you cover the whole
thing.
Mr chair what what I I I I got
geothermal on my house and I
don't want to solar of
geothermal that I'm gonna have
to.
I don't get that choice anymore
I'm gonna put solar Mr chair and
senator geo thermal doesn't let
your house.
It doesn't cook.
Of the fifteen zero one watt per
square foot is it going to power
everything that you need if you
are doing heating with electric
if you're cooking with electric
if you're charging a car with
electric it's good not going to
be enough it's going to cover
more basic electric utilities
not a of full everything
electric and so this is a
minimum amount of if you've got
a geo thermal one.
What per square foot would about
cover all of the other electric
needs that you've got if your
heating with geothermal or the
dance T. pump type system and so
how big a systems of I've got a
three thousand square foot house
how big a solar system as
required.
We would have to have capacity
of three thousand watts and so
how many panels.
Each panel in the that's not Mr
chair and senator that's not
easy answer because they are a
very is different wattage
on my particular house.
My particular house be my panels
are sixty watts each and their
one meters square that's a very
low
energy output per panel it had
some other advantages when I
bought that many of them the
panels are approximately two
meters and provide three hundred
to four hundred watts per panel.
Some of the higher per
efficiency ones and some of the
chair I live I live in the
bottom of the valley where I
only get solar for.
You know I only get sun for a
limited amount of time this
bill.
I'm still putting solar on under
this correct.
Mr chair yes the less you
applied for a variance for part
of the building code of which
this would fall under.
And and those are granted all
the time by the local building
authorities and various other
people because there are
specific situations for almost
everything in the building code
where there is an exception and
there needs to be a mechanism
for making exceptions for
instance you don't want to cut
down all the house the trees on
the south side of your house
that are stating the house they
have a benefit as they are and
the variance may be appropriate.
I guess I'm just a you know
Mike.
I'm all in to require electrical
receptacles for charging because
I think that really is something
that we should do I.
I don't know that I'm all in
said mandate systems at this
point I kind of wipe the
suggestion that that their offer
because that right now is
something that I think
homeowners really do need to
understand doesn't make sense
and and it made for some it may
not for others so I'm kind of
inclined to propose an amendment
but also listen to see what
others have to say I again I
guess if I guess my question is
what's what's your thought about
about what's being suggested
basically that we offer they got
to be offered a full photo what
tax system and then we install
Chargers and.
Again is this the the everything
is changing so rapidly here
you know the other piece that I
I would just tell you that
causes me to pause is.
We're all going to be what are
elector cars in as back up for
all of our houses and so you may
not need a system that's as big
as I'm driving up for lightning
the give me three days worth of
battery backup and so it's a
weird this is so so it could be
that I you know the specifics of
my system I don't need is big
solar system because at night
you know I've got it perfectly
set up so that I'm you know run
everything off my.
Rock at night and then I'm
plugging in during exactly the
right window and I can use a
smaller system than what you've
got here so you're over building
something and I I would worry
about that as we just setting us
that and I guess you can get a
variance you could go through
that process but.
So I guess what what are your
thoughts about about having it
be an.
A non mandated but but but I
mandate that they offer the
system explain how it works
versus the mandate thank you Mr
chairman Senator certainly I
think that's better than than
having it die here because I
think that does move it forward
that this is important
the one question I might have is
we and this comes more from as
we all talk with that the chair
of Judiciary what how do we
enforce that it was offered you
know what where does it say in
the contract you want this on
your house or not
when somebody's doing a whole
subdivision pre built before
they're sold.
You know how is it offered to
somebody to have a solar system
put on the house that they're
going to buy and so certainly
having houses pre wired for that
having the plugin receptacles
there is better than what we
have we all the time in the
construction industry dictate to
people things that they must
have in their house whether they
want it or not installations a
great example you never see the
walls it didn't show up anywhere
but you're not allowed to build
a house that doesn't have
certain our values of insulation
in it for the sole thing of it
makes the house more energy
efficient we do it all the time
four of those kinds of of things
because it's good for society
the idea behind this is kind of
the same thing but certainly you
know a mechanism where it is
required to be offered you know
I I think that's certainly
better than where we are Mr
chair and do you envision it
that's required to be offered
that it would be the house will
be built with that.
Wired and ready to go I guess
probably would have to be if
they turn around and if if it's
a spec house read yeah.
Okay well don't don't listen to
what others have to say about it
I guess I need to to move in
that direction as a because I
think is an important bill I
don't want to die Mr chairman
and senator I I think I feel the
same way is yeah we've given
that's how to move it forward
that gets us further along on
this mission of really
electrifying everything and
maximizing renewable energy.
Senator Lopez.
Thank you Mr chairman
I think you know for Senator
Kernan senator Wirth there's
similar concerns that I have
also.
And for me it also goes back
sorry.
This thing with regards to cost
you know for persons in my
district of south central south
valley area our our cost of
homes are you know in two
hundred range if you're looking
for bare minimum but we're
talking about affordability for
persons to be able to access the
home you know any additional
upgrade that you get on your
home field is that's a chunk of
change.
There's a I know here in Santa
Fe too if you get just a basic
call you looking about three
hundred thousand dollars just
for basic entry if you're gonna
upgrade anything else looking at
almost you know four hundred
fifty thousand dollars that's
just for a new home for the
family is looking for something
new here Santa Fe I don't know
what the costs are down Los
crucis but you know in my area
we're looking at two fifty just
entry level basic basic in my
area if you go north of the
interstate it jumps up in
another almost a hundred
thousand we talk about
affordability Mr chair I my
concern is if we mandate that
the costs are going to go up for
for families who want to get a
starter just to start you know
for me I I could go something
more of to be offered then to be
mandated in on all said one more
committee Mr chair so we talk
about electric cars.
Folks in my community we can't
afford an electric car.
It also is there any I mean
people in my district.
Yeah we still drive some
clunkers.
I upgraded a few years ago from
my other car I had just with
mileage on it but I'm since you
know looking us to where some of
these homes could be affordable
and acceptable is great but in
some other communities in our
state Mr chair I just I don't
like the mandate so just FYI
thank you Mr chair could I and
and senator I I fully understand
one of the things you know if
we're looking at what a
particular price point of two
hundred thousand and what the
mortgage would be on that.
If the whole were downsized by a
small portion but with the solar
system on it the price point
back up to two hundred thousand
for the fifty I'm making up
numbers fifteen thousand for the
system but the total cost of
ownership goes down because they
don't have a hundred fifty
dollar a month electric bills
and so their monthly mortgage
plus electric bill is typically
less than it would be with the
mortgage and the electric bill
on the house without solar on
and so the the monthly
affordability is reduced
and then once the the system is
paid off.
Then the electricity is free and
you have that in perpetuity of
generating electricity and so
again the affordability issue
I'm very sensitive to but the
monthly mortgage cost cost plus
electricity is reduced over one
without the solar.
Thank you I thank you Senator
AUMENT.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for the this bill forward
this chart kind of way and and
Education of of Senator.
But.
That bill one million.
Which is tomorrow so.
Thank you for you propose that.
Mr Chairman can you just comment
sort of might come please.
Those are your Mike Lee okay.
Are you suggesting that we.
This is all for the.
Of the.
You like to do is.
Maybe Mr chair time for me to
propose an amendment but we can
discuss it you can go on what
couple of questions go ahead to
do the question it some of them
just answer if I can Mr chair so
so I was proposing that that
it's that it's an offer on the
photovoltaic but a requirement
for the electric car because I
really do think if it's between
three hundred five hundred box.
It's much cheaper to do it when
the house is being put together
and I do think the price of
these things are coming down
dramatically.
But the that's exactly right put
that thing in for thousands less
because when you add it is
expected that if you're doing.
The lady over correct hundred
Bucks.
So okay go ahead but no not that
that was going to be the
distance between the.
Electric vehicle and then I
think the the gentleman also
mentioned something about pre
wiring.
Was that for for the take
system.
I wasn't trying it was a close.
Yeah and.
Mr chair and I think it's
similar to what senator Wirth
was talking about the more that
you put into the initial
construction the lower the cost
later to retrofit and so by pre
wiring with the outlet when you
put your car on there you did
cost a whole lot more to do it
after the fact the more that you
pre wired for a photovoltaic
system that it's already built
into the walls you don't have to
run conduit outside you maintain
the integrity of walls and
everything it's cheaper to do
all of that during construction
then after the fact in that
includes putting the solar
system on you know if it's all
designed into the initial build
it's substantially cheaper than
putting it on after the fact.
So I I guess in the absence of
the system itself the wiring
what's the cost of that.
Mr chair most of that is
probably just inputting conduit
in the walls that that run from
wherever the electric boxes to
where the transformers going to
be it's relatively low cost
there is a little bit in the
construction if it's going to be
a rooftop system that is
designed for where the beams are
in other kinds of things so that
it's easy to do it without
taking all of the.
The shingles off and to get into
the main structure to mount the
system I mean there's a lot more
cost goes into it to do a
retrofit.
All right this so I guess my
question Senator work for you
contemplating just easy system
and not the wiring for the full
to take system so Mister chair
it would depend.
It seems to me that I sat down
with the contractor and
architect to design a house
they'll need to offered to put
the system in and if I say I
don't want to do it they don't
to put the conduit it's that
simple they've made the offer I
think if it's a spec house when
they're doing the whole
subdivision they'll stick the
conduit so that it's there and
then when they turn around I
mean they need to do that or
that they could not put it in
but when they turn the salads
they're going to need to they're
gonna need to offer as part of
the sale you know.
That that that photos people
take system could be installed
and so that would be you know
you.
It offered to have it installed
so I guess it would mean that
you know you have to offer
here's what it's going to cost
to put it up here if you want to
do that and and it would be more
if it wasn't if it was a hard
wired and all they're doing is
offering it so I guess it
doesn't quite frankly it doesn't
mandate that it be as I read it
it doesn't mandated that you
have to put the conduit in it's
just it's going to cost more if
you got to go into the house of
with the conduit after the fact
but that that's up to the to the
buyers to whether they want to
do or not be shipped okay
Senator Kernan so Mr chair if
Debate it's not just about the
conduit for the seller.
It's about the construction of
what that rooftops gonna need to
be able to handle the the way to
the seller is there an
additional cost for that piece
of the construction not just
installing conduit it would make
the home builder could answer
that that would be happy to have
them answer housing some of the
concerns that I've heard with
retro fitted solar systems isn't
so much the weight because the
weights relatively negligible I
mean there's a couple hundred
pounds but it's spread out over
the roof you know it's not
nearly even when we get a light
snow the amount of weight that
goes on it the problem is you've
got to go through the the
roofing material which hinders
its integrity and so you have to
be very careful about leaks as
you then tying this into the
rafter in support systems and
then I've heard from some
contractors that after fifteen
or twenty years with our heavy
winds there grabbing those
panels and moving things and
that also tends to hurt the
integrity of the roof in in a
quicker time I don't know
whether that's true that's what
I've been told by a contractor
Mr chair if the home builder
could someone from there it's so
anyone out there that can answer
my question with regard to call
while they're coming up I might
point out that they could also
retrofit and put a ground
mounted on the south side of
their house which doesn't deal
with any of that construction
side of things.
Mr Chairman grossly unqualified
and
everybody else.
We're qualified to talk to you
and.
Point some to build I don't know
if the agency are at the gym it
is still four or five deaths
were good so the latest in a
pure my initials are yes I can
say anything.
The New Mexico to the.
So I just want to clarify Mr
chair if we if we were meant to
mandate and we make it a offer
and so the houses built is
purchased by in in regard to
spot should be different for
private home and in a
subdivision I think it should be
offered for both and not
mandated for either in the in if
I buy a home in a subdivision or
I rent coming think about the
builder he's invested in the big
affordable housing project then.
Then you sell that home then
you're required to also offer to
upgrade before you can sell.
Is that in the bill.
So what the what I would say I
think what you heard Mr Thompson
state of the amendments and and.
It would say basically the
bottom of the page one all the
residents of life for twenty
twenty three shall offer X..
Install the legislative eight
one what per square foot heated
area that that's new
construction mission that agency
right right not not a resale of
things rifles that's in it's
just an offer to to install with
a cost attached so everybody
knows what they're doing with
yeah I would agree.
Mr chair what I may go ahead and
bill used houses nothing I did
go back anything you have to do
to something already constructed
or anything of that sort.
That was.
Relief efforts Senator Wirth
mentioned earlier in the
changing so fast and maybe the
state.
You will need to panels on the
because the
Ten by ten AM on the ground
I think there's some.
The more but.
you Senator make sense.
It is so so I Mr chair living a
motion on page one line twelve
delete the word include.
And replace it with offer.
And then before the word
electrical on page one line
twelve at the work require.
For the title really read
related to construction
requiring all new residential
construction to offer
photovoltaic systems.
And require electrical
receptacles that's a little but
that are you want to make sure
that the receptacles are
required and then on page two
line one delete the word have
and change it to the work offer.
What.
I consider that a neutral
differently.
US secretary okay second
symbolically.
So make sure we we have the
amendments will make sure we
because we're kind of doing this
on the fly.
I didn't get the first part I
can I can yeah I can give its on
on page one line twelve I
believe the word include cross
that out put in the work and
replace it with the work.
And then for the word electrical
at the end of the sentence right
here at the work required
required courses.
Those are the electrical but
yeah.
And then on page two line one
delete the word half and make
it.
Off of.
Okay.
The question of promotion but I
made a motion and second
amendment sick that by Senator
AUMENT.
You can call Rowe.
Senator Brandt Senator Griggs
Senator how to meal yes.
Senator Kernan yes Senator Lopez
yes senator Sanchez senator Tom
and.
Yes Senator Wirth yes Senator
Hamblen Senator Shendo yes we
have six for a do pass as
amended no for on the amendment
on the on the amendment to pass
on the.
And mission make a do pass as
amended so now we have a motion
for do pass as amended.
Thank you second by Senator
Hermio.
You can call Rowe.
Senator Brandt Senator Griggs
Senator had a meal yes.
Senator Kernan no explanation
of.
Senator Lopez yes senator
Sanchez senator Clemente yes.
Senator Wirth yes Senator
Hamblen Senator Shendo yes.
We have five yeses.
Where do pass.
On the.
One now so Mr chair it's
certainly better and
not terribly objecting to the
idea that you have to but but I
is still in just hate mandates
you know I think if people want
that they can tell their
contract before they built the
house put that in for me and so
this is certainly better and I
think it's doable but in the
morning at the Ford truck that
you're talking about because
students stop production those
just recently.
I think is when you have said
that it was in the Wall Street
journal that they said that
they're not ready yet and so I
there's something wrong with the
battery so they did stop
production one of them I'm not
sure which one but anyway we'll
move on but I
you are very good to.
What was the word you know.
Committee thank you very much
for the good discussion on both
bills I do appreciate it.
Thank you already so we of
moving on to Senate bill one
twenty one.
The phone.
to update.
should restrict.
then any question of.
So of one twenty two.
Excuse me.
This.
Thank you Mr chairman I'll be
quick similar bill that are
brought forward in twenty one
and this is to get an
appropriation to fund process
out on our K. and the northwest
Albuquerque and Bernalillo
county
we are requesting this
appropriation to fund a second
phase of the widening of us here
in our day from two lanes to
four lanes
currently we have had enough
funding from the county the city
and the capital outlay of course
from some of the website
legislators to fund this from
cutting or ten you know which is
just a little bit House golf
course to answer and then on
survey money for on to widening
as well this funding will be
used from Unser to universe and
this is for design and some
right away acquisition I to pay
for that
this is also of been requesting
capital outlay we're going to
give some more money will will
that we will need more than this
of course but that's basically
what it is this is an important
road in the area as we've seen
for redistricting a lot of the
growth in the state has been in
my district southeast and the
Sandoval county you have about
ten thousand residents that live
in Ventana ranch and that
commute
there's a lot of traffic
it's also a public safety issue
folks trying to get to that side
of town when traffic from four
to six
also this will also host
economic development out there
as well
with that Mr chairman centers I
will take any questions Hey
thank you for the committee for
questions so is anybody hears
support is Senate bill one
twenty two.
Zoom.
Anybody here in opposition of
Senate bill one twenty two.
What is it we have to.
Two people all right.
Go ahead.
If.
Thank.
Hello can you hear me yes we can
go ahead.
Hi my name's Alex Applegate and
I'm the chair of the
transportation working group of
the environmental justice caucus
and our office
opposes this bill
Transportation secretary is the
largest contributor to climate
change and doubling the size of
the rope will double the amount
of cars on the road there by
doubling the amount of damage
that it does.
As to congestion
The congestion will
return to the road even after
you double it within five to ten
years throughout the.
At the concept of.
Induced demand.
Which is a pretty much a.
Madam.
Thank you month's traffic
planners and so because of that
every.
It takes within five to ten
years for the you just returned
from what you produce this is
the man also.
We think it is a safety issue
well there are going to be multi
use trails
this plan because of the
doubling of the state of
uncertainty.
which creates the equivalent of
eight Carlin's of traffic which
is predisposing to future
pedestrian deaths.
We feel that this is unsafe and
and does not following back to
suggested I lines from the size
of the intersections.
Senator post district already
includes one of the most
dangerous and deadly roads in
the state which is course and we
would not like to see another
one of those in his district
instead we think the money
should be invested more in
transit
which is sorely lacking in the
west side about.
That's all thank you very much
thank you.
We have another one of the
women.
Hello my name's Laura early
zero.
I'm a retired city planner and I
live in Albuquerque.
And I really admire and respect
Senator co I've shared my
concerns about this request for
information with Senator early
on in the session.
my biggest concern is the issue
I know that there's a concern
that he's trying to address with
congestion.
but I do agree with the previous
speaker and as a retired city
planner I know from.
All over the country that the
concept of induced demand.
Is a very real content a very
real problem as soon as you feel
the for two lanes within a very
short time you'll have an extra
twenty to fill those two lines.
So we're not solving the traffic
problem I'm doing two more lanes
I know that's counterintuitive.
What the planters around the
country traffic planning The
Little Italy now when they are
doing traffic Planning.
And I'm also concerned because I
have been working as a volunteer
with the league of women voters
United States.
Nationally on climate change.
And one of the things we've been
doing as we've looked all around
the country to help communities
are addressing impacts of
climate change as well as a
mitigating climate change is how
to read it our communities hi.
Of the vehicle capacity to
transit.
And so I had a magic wand I
would waive it.
This I think it's a seven
million dollar appropriation
typically used for the city and
county transit system on the
west side not for the model
system.
And those are my comments thank
you.
Thank you.
With that we will go to the the
committee for questions.
Chairman Senator Lopez we do
have a tentative us.
The.
Motion for the past.
Second second may Senator
Kernan.
Raul Roco Senator Brandt Senator
Griggs Senator how to meal yes
Senator Kernan yes Senator Lopez
yes senator Sanchez senator Tom.
Yes by Google.
Senator Wirth yes Senator
Hamblen Senator Shendo yes.
We don't we have six for to pass
and one of.
Nobody said no I went to the
wrong places.
Sorry okay Senator mostly will.
yes I I agree with the lady that
says the.
That can solve congestion.
this is going to.
Think of some of the problem but
Americans are going to give up
their cars just like to not
going to give up their guns so.
The way that unfortunately.
And
unfortunately we're not this is
no way that seven million
dollars going to be transferred
to chance it even though I would
support that this is in looking
at it realistically this is not
going to happen that's not going
to happen unfortunately thank
you Mr chair thank you all right
with that in the past motion so
thank you Mr thank you our
adjourn.
Good.
