Senator.
Senator Kernan.
Look this year.
Senator sunsets.
Is just to.
Senator work there.
Hamblen.
Instead of station there.
Thank you all so would you Sir
the the Senate bill twelve.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I got the leisure
keys here with me she is a
cabinet secretary for the
economic development department
to help us answer any technical
questions Mr chairman and
members of the committee I do
have an amendment before you and
I don't know if you have a right
with you but this is the you see
before you in this one amendment
is that is a result of
collaboration and cooperation
just a shared vision among our
unions deals in our field
partners these parties work
together to look at the supply
and demand of New Mexican film
workers and came to a unified
definition that's what this was
about a definition for how to
ensure the hiring of our
residents first and foremost
here from New Mexico that's what
this ammendment in a crux yes
for the bill thank you Mr
chairman for the sake of time I
won't go into great detail
unless you ask me to.
And then we can go on to the.
Thank you do you have to move
the amendment firsters depresi.
Some of.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
okay basically I'm going to go
to the high level discussion of
what might build us here I call
it might be we tend to get a
little bit territorial on our
own bills and we were so much on
it but let me tell you that in
two thousand nineteen we we
decided we would increase the
tax credit for the film industry
to help bring in more more films
to New Mexico and more economic
development and in so it's
worked very well in bringing
more and revenues into the state
this last year alone we got
approximately eight hundred
fifty five million dollars into
the economy directly from the
film industry and they do have a
tax credit for that that we
approved in two thousand
nineteen but this is a new bill
and this bill merely expands the
tax credit by one hundred
million dollars added to the one
hundred and ten million that was
there from before however to
make it more palatable for our
budget and in our revenues we
decided we would spread out the
tax credit over ten years and we
would do ten million per year
and in that way would be such a
big impact you know in the in
into our coffers and so on and
that's really the crux of this
amongst other things that
secretary keys will talk about
as we go on thank you Mr
chairman thank you.
Thank you
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I'd
like to also energy's I have R.
W. John Clark here are director
of the New Mexico Film Office
amber dots and and our economist
for the film department change a
reef in addition we have taxed
Representative here the Senate
bill twelve as Senator Rodriguez
alluded to is a piece of
legislation that has been in the
works for a long time with a lot
of collaboration behind this
bill is an immense amount of
strategy and data and expertise
we also have in the room I out
see the teamsters SAG AFTRA
local six hundred the art
directors guild our studio
partners Netflix NBC you and
eight twenty eight we also have
above the line and also below
the line crew who specialize in
construction hair make up being
a lecture shins small businesses
that provide for the industry
studio facility operators actors
and many more we are in a unique
position in the state we are now
coordinating the amount of
students who will be coming up
through the media academy and
we're also working with our long
term productions and partners
and distribution partners and
labor to understand the
workforce needs hence the
amendment and nobody really
loves to see it amendment right
off the bat but actually this is
been an amazing amount of
collaboration on this and we're
all very supportive of it the
overall shape our the overall
team arching goals and Senate
bill twelve.
to continue to attract outside
money in record numbers into the
state as Senator Rodriguez said
eight hundred fifty five million
dollars and direct spent in FY
twenty two alone this is a
hundred and eighty five this is
a hundred and fifty five million
dollars that would not be here
otherwise we want to continue to
create thousands of great paying
jobs for New Mexicans and also
drive the steady growth and
expansion of the industry not
only in Albuquerque and Santa Fe
but really into the rural areas.
So yes perfect so I can walk you
through a little bit of the
changes that we have here the
first as Senator Rodriguez said
is to adjust our cap we are
currently projecting growth at
ten percent each year last year
we actually had to twenty
percent but we think that was a
little bit of an odd here so
therefore in order to maintain
the cap we would need to
increase it by ten million
dollars each year ask Senator
says the other major changes R.
the in twenty twenty one and
twenty two twenty two we saw a
seven fold increase in the
amount of world productions this
is because of the five percent
uplift that we gave those rural
areas but in all reality it
takes about eleven percent more
funds and budget to be able to
take a production properly out
to those rural areas and so
there is a rural increase from
five percent to ten percent
there has been some talk about
changing the roll boundary that
we talk to the administration
with the with the sponsor and
right now we really feel like
what is going on is helping the
rural areas and we like to keep
that as it is and not change
that roll up with some.
The other changes in the bill is
for the film up partner program
now these are production studios
and distribution companies eight
twenty eight Netflix NBC you who
have made a ten year commitment
to being here and we work with
it with them on a daily on a
weekly basis to see what
productions I have a are coming
when are they are coming there
is also a real shift in the
industry right now and that
shift is to to do production
specifically television series
that are much more expensive
think about the stranger things
of the world these are the
things that we watch on Netflix
so there is a real adjustment in
the industry that we need to
account for so that we can get
these big budget series to stay
here to come here and New Mexico
and that's really one of the
most important things right now
because these are the jobs that
we are going to hire our
students for apprenticeships
with these are the jobs that
give are creating really
fantastic credits and these are
the jobs that will be here for
months on end.
The other changes that we have.
These four
a television series that is over
one hundred million dollars
there is an extra five percent
uplift for that because we these
are the type of productions that
we really really want to bring
here for instance there was a
movie called Ford versus Ferrari
and that was a hundred million
dollar budget they hired more
than thirteen thousand workers
and they spent more than twenty
million dollars on local rentals
and purchases they spent more
than two point five million on
transportation including truck
rentals one point six million on
catering one point one million
anlagen and one point nine
million on hardware and lumber
like I said this is not New
Mexico money this is money from
outside of the state.
In addition to we'd really like
to support our local above the
line talent our principal
performers so currently our
resident principal performance
performers are capped at five
million per production we would
like to take those New Mexico
principal performers out of that
as and then the next change as
of the senator talked about is
in the amendment so it is really
regarding how many outside crew
are allowed to come in and still
get fifteen percent and this
will now be a negotiation
between the you the unions and
also the studios and the film
office and this is really the
first time that this kind of
conversation is happening so
we're very pleased with that.
in addition to we are going to
require productions to with the
budget over five million dollars
to give us a state ability
report and also a diversity
report we are hoping that these
new additions will just help us
capture data we're also asking
them to contribute a prop so
that we can eventually either
start a film museum somewhere
around New Mexico or at the film
school and then we also change
defender language so that we are
adding a little bit more
tightening down on some of these
vendors that were seen
potentially abusing the system
let's see and then we are also
adding in credits for not only
the Film Office for the but for
the jurisdictions we are also
allowing state buildings and it
state locations to start
charging when they have rentals
and so that is the basics of the
changes that that are here it is
currently estimated from our
department that fifteen billion
dollars in direct spend in the
state will occur from this
industry over the next ten years
we have film programs including
U. N. M. C. N. M. D. C. C. NMSU
we're working with fifteen
schools around the state to have
a core curriculum so that the
students can then do that at
their home facility go to
advanced training and then get
paid internship in internships
so the film industry wants to be
in New Mexico we have a ton of
momentum and let's keep it going
thank you we're available for
questions.
Mr Chairman I just want to make
a what I believe is a very
pivotal point thank you for that
and other penalties you've been
wonderful thank you that in that
is that basically when you look
at tax credits this is their
money they're bringing into New
Mexico for example eight hundred
fifty five million but we in
turn give them back thirty for
approximately thirty percent the
state gets to keep the other
seventy that's a pretty good
arrangement I think when in fact
we we hire which provides more
economic development hire more
employees higher wages and and
at least three big film
production industry have
committed to remain in New
Mexico for ten years so we can
count on that revenue to keep
that people hired here and more
influx into our economy thank
you Mr chairman thank you
already of the four we are.
Go to committee of let's go to
the audience anybody here in
support of Senate bill twelve.
I know we have a lot of folks
folks listed but I have a few to
I'm gonna call on Kerry would.
And here's what I am the new
a place to Mike and just for
record introduce yourself we are
really representative of yes hi
I'm Carey what I'm the national
director of government affairs
and public policy for SAG AFTRA
we represent doctors stop
performers voice over artists
we have background coverage in
this market and we assisted them
in getting protections here with
a vibrant and growing workforce
here I know many many members of
our union who have moved here to
work
and with that I am here today to
speak in support of SB twelve
with amendments sag after is
extremely supportive of state
production incentive programs
particularly related to removing
the cap a local performers and
improving the residency
requirements that were laid out.
US secretary represents over one
thousand workers in New Mexico
and that number is growing the
industry has expanded to every
corner of the state as a direct
correlation of the successful
tax incentive program in
addition the related training
programs have expanded the
workforce and created more
middle class jobs so we
appreciate the continued and
expanded support
of the program from the
legislature thank you.
You
The first cautioned.
What the phone number of jobs
are of Brian Evans.
Okay all right Sir.
In
order to extend week yep thanks.
And then the after that we would
be it that healthy.
He's online Mr okay all right.
Thank you chairman and members
of the committee my name is
Brian happens I'm the business
representative slide out to
local for eighty so we represent
a little over eighteen hundred
members we're definitely
experiencing rapid period of
growth
I also want to think he's for
being so collaborative in this
effort I feel strongly about
this bill and I think we're
doing something fairly
unprecedented here with the
amendments that's going to allow
a conversation between ourselves
the labor partners and the
productions to make sure as many
jobs are going to New Mexico to
New Mexico as possible so my
average member makes about sixty
five thousand dollars a year and
that is a good middle class
income for person living in the
state and I want to see as many
people as possible coming from
rural areas working on these
productions and and bringing
those incomes back into those
communities I think that's a
huge part of this so I'm also in
support of the the roll off
cliff parts of the bill to so
overall I think this is a great
bill with the amendments for our
economy so I'm speaking here in
support of of both the bill and
the amendments having a
favorable vote and I hope that
everyone hear will do that.
Thank you we have phones in the.
The
end of the year there we have
John John is that.
Jonathan with the greater is
their teamster member in the
audience.
Okay.
Go to Jonathan Fritz.
Thanks committee members my name
is John that I the family is not
for the city of Los crucis Dona
ana county and the city of
Anthony and I have the great
pleasure speaking with you all
today I just want to first off
thank you all for your all the
work you've been doing and if
you want to you a critical part
of this we also think keeping
the current boundaries for the
rule some incentive in place as
it ensures that only co
productions the extra cost of
transporting crude qualify for
the executive.
And what communities qualify for
the Republican in center
counterparts in the fifty
percent of our state we are
currently only getting
approximately five percent of
the state's on production and
with the added ten percent
federal up with this will be
incredibly beneficial to you
areas from the city that the all
the way up to Gallup Farmington
greatly appreciated and you all
have our supporters Center went
to thank you thank you and the
Dan Miller.
Thank you Mr chairman down the
shore representing Netflix they
are totally committed to this
bill and to the state I wanted
to provide a little background
on that Netflix started with
thirty acres here they're now
expanded up to three hundred and
thirty acres invested to date a
hundred and fifty million
dollars in extraction in New
Mexico they have eight sound
stages they are constructing for
more with plans to scope
constructing additional for
we're here we think this credits
been good for Netflix this is
the largest base of operations
from Netflix anywhere in the
world and we plan to be here for
some time thank you.
Mr chair we also have one or
other partners here from eight
twenty eight.
Thank you chairman thank you
committee toddler mom with a
tweet productions
a new New Mexican I I moved
eight two eight out here about a
year ago to Los crucis I also
called it home now
In the last six months we've
purchased a half dozen
commercial properties increases
three of which are now certified
qualified production facilities
the path for us to succeed in
Los crucis is creating jobs and
and building out the
infrastructure
to create those jobs we need to
training in the state is doing
an amazing job with that
additionally we need to compete
for the work for the film work
that everyone's been talking
about and in order to compete
for that for me to go out and
take jobs it otherwise film
elsewhere and bring them here I
need the things that are
happening in SB one to to to to
come into play and and so we're
here to support the bill and the
amendments and and just thank
everybody for the work they've
done.
Thank you.
Okay and so.
I will go to anybody in
opposition of Senate bill
twelve.
Everybody is.
Okay so now we'll go to
committee.
For questions.
The worst thank you Mr chair so
I just want to understand the.
In the amendments on page three
and this this the.
Definition of county so the
geographic just we're we're
changing it from I think this
was in the original bill to so
it's carried over from changing
the threshold is class eight
counties.
That basically have property
valuation.
In excess now of seven billion
five hundred million for for
upping that from six billion so
I think basically the only.
So this this would exclude
Bernalillo in Santa Fe County is
that correct Mr chair members of
the committee
majority floor leader worth yes
this was actually because we've
done a lot of work in Los crucis
to put infrastructure there to
work with the DAC see the
telling and community college
also with NMSU this is really
the place that is going to break
connects they have some
incredible students there and
and so yes this was in order to
accommodate that.
And so does the need for one of
the things that I think is
causes some heartburn about and
I'm gonna put on life peer Santa
Fe half here is we're calling
this a rural up left and we're
not lifting a county that's
harder than than Santa Fe Dona
county's largest county we have
in the state and I just think
the challenges because the way
we defined rural there's a whole
bunch of rural communities that
are excluded now because of this
definition so I just one of the
things it is that is that we
call it a rule of that is that
term used in the bill or that
just how we're characterizing
it.
The rural off I didn't see us
going through pretty quick Mr
chair members of the committee
let me ask my expert witnesses
over here if we actually use
that word in there but really
this bill is supposed to help
the whole rural area and in the
hole States yes no I I get that
I just think the challenges
there's some extraordinarily
rural areas that are excluded
because they're within sixty
miles of the boundary for
example Santa Fe County you've
got some super poor parts of our
state that can't qualify and yet
Los crucis is and I just think I
would just suggest that if the
maybe there's a way to re brand
how we call it because by
calling it a rural up left.
I think there's some areas that
are far more rural than than Los
crucis that are being covered
and so just one of the things
that jumps out and I know I've
had.
You know some folks in within
that.
Foundry of Santa Fe County who
are able to get the extra bond
and so feel like they're not you
know everything's either in
Santa Fe or now and I can I can
I support my support of the five
percent for Los crucis I think
it's right that were.
Expand I just want the flag that
the branding and maybe there's a
way to branded a little
differently so that it's I don't
know exactly how you do it but
the not Santa Fe in Albuquerque
and senses what is.
Thank you more responded that Mr
chairman thank you senator and
you know that was something we
played around with for a long
time in the first bill that we
passed in two thousand nineteen
in trying to figure out what
would be the proper terms and
what we call it and someone
maybe we just didn't come up
with a better term but
rest assured that our main goal
is to provide and up lifting
whatever words we can use rural
communities in the whole state
we understand they've got an
additional the film industry has
gone an additional five percent
if they fail in these what we
call rural communities according
to the we're all left left
category we're talking about
but you know Santa Fe alone for
example they got I think it was
three hundred million dollars in
that in economic up left in one
year was it one year fast
secretary in the rural areas
have only gotten fifty million
total so the purpose of this
bill is to ensure equity to see
if we can expand it more what
can we do to get more economic
development to this world areas
that otherwise don't get
anything so somehow we we work
it in and I can tell you that
like we continue to work for the
bill in two thousand nineteen to
improve things we will continue
to work Senator at and improving
more and more sometimes because
we have lots of stakeholders of
the table many times you know we
know with every piece of
legislation almost that we have
that you know we can't get
everyone's you know asks and a
lot of them just couldn't get
into the bill but it doesn't
mean they can't in the future it
just means we can continue to
work on as time comes goes by so
that we can improve it more and
more we only we have decided to
just do so much in tax credits
now and continue to monitor and
get more than fifteen to work
with the industry to to.
See how we can improve things
overall in the state thank you
Mr chair but I appreciate that
yeah thank you and I think it's
it's I was delighted to see the
Los crucis as the six.
In a small city category under
two hundred thousand six the
country Santa Fe was first I
mean that's huge and so
certainly to the extent that we
can.
Spread this around that makes
sense finally Mr chair the.
Yes so it's a hundred million
dollars but as I understand it
now it's spaced out over ten
years so just what I think is
good to just walk through I want
to make sure I understand how
that works and what happens I'm
trying to look at the FIR and
staff is a little.
It's a little challenging when I
look at the FY are to just
explain so everyone can
understand kind of what the cost
is going to be in a realize
about the finance committee but
I think that's important.
Mr chair members of the
committee
leader worth I'm actually gonna
bring up our economist Shane
Sharif to walk us through how
the economics of this will work.
Mr chair.
thank you know bring the my
little closer to your closer to
you maybe yeah.
It's not Mr chairman and members
of the committee senator yes so
it is a ten million dollar
increase to the cap every year
so right now the Catholic TRD
can actually pay out every year
is at a hundred ten million so
it would go up by ten million at
a time into it would reach two
hundred ten in ten years time
and then at that point it would
stay flat at that two hundred
ten million.
Second Senator to help so I
appreciate that somebody.
It's up.
I mean it's.
Representative courage it's a
it's not a straight recurring
number otherwise we're not
locking it in I mean it's gonna
step up until it reaches that
threshold of that stops thank
you okay thank you Mr thank you
Senator Griggs.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
secretary.
I guess and follow along with
the question.
Could you guys give me the logic
for the the team here.
Ten million dollars per year.
Why do we take fifteen
universities I used to.
No we don't have good or you
have.
For.
Information I.
The need.
You guys can kind of give me
your.
Thank you senator yes of.
Chairman members of the
committee the committee Senator
Griggs we actually for the first
time ever last year received an
FTP for the Film Office and
hired Shane as our economist and
he's been able to work for the
past year really looking at all
of our numbers and basically
what would have happened if we
don't do this is we would have
the backlog next year and that
would cause a lot of unrest and
uncertainty in the industry and
so when we looked at actually
are projected growth of ten
percent per year that is how we
came up with the ten million
dollars per year.
Here's.
Secretary of.
We believe that.
Going to be inclusive we should
at least seven years ten
percent.
And for the next change in the
based on what you've seen in the
past.
The project still needs
additional FTE.
For the for for kind of the
state and the cases are lower
body everybody decided about
twenty data for the new costs
the state
But according to Ashley shekel
and then usually.
The NMAA
The last ten years may not.
So chair Senators secretary
there.
The concerned if this is not
self supporting.
The concern you know trying to
make you pay through revenues it
would getting from somewhere
else
is maybe challenging no one that
those revenue for what they
normally are.
But
Okay all of I will go without.
And Mr chairman and senator rob
re issue maybe the the state
that that.
For each fell much about thirty
percent pay out and I would I
would speculate researcher in
center and and secretary engaged
to actually for each feel much
less than that for a.
I I don't have any feeling maybe
you pay the full thirty percent
on could you elaborate yes madam
at Mr chair members of the
committee Senator Griggs the
actual average that we pay out
is eighteen percent.
Shared services.
Action more reasonable I think
the number of we were over here
talking more sales will be with
prevention work was talking
about
the
the county should.
it looks like usually six the
sixty miles outside each each
count down.
is why the claims court.
Don't apply don't don't qualify
for the for the up with places
why we're Senator changes live.
Do that and possibly even some
of all of the Rio Rancho.
Or Sandoval County show
Is that I mean that's really not
what you're trying to do I don't
I don't I.
Shares Senator secretary.
Looks like that is what's
happening even now.
is that something we need to
look at and try to to rash B.
and
Either a shorter distance or
just using county boundaries
vacation places like you know
client quarters are not the the
biggest place in New Mexico and
you know if there's an
opportunity to benefit more.
Saying that would be a good
example of places we can all.
The state yet we're senator
Sanchez live gentleman Jack we
were efficient that the I'm
pretty sure the one point four.
Mr chair and senator and and
showed you guys talk a little
bit about that sure thank you
very much Mr chair members of
the committee Senator Griggs so
when we were working on just the
two four years ago this was but
what I out C. had recommended
with sixty miles outside of the
county line and when you look at
the amount of production that is
done in Los Alamos Rio re the
Santa in Santa Fe we actually
had four hundred thirty eight
million dollars in those regions
and actors want to come to Santa
Fe in Albuquerque and so if they
need to travel for a scene for a
different location they will
most likely go just outside of
that Albuquerque Santa Fe line
and so this is really more for
the people like in Farmington
and Roswell who are further and
it's just much more hard to get
to take your whole crew out
there for multiple days with
hotels and everything so that's
really where that initially came
from and with regards to Senator
Sanchez's
community we are starting to see
some really great productions
out there a dark wins just came
out there silt belly an
encounter and actually there was
a record four point three
million dollars that went into
that area.
Alone so that's really the
thinking mind that.
For sure federal secretary.
Don't you see that it is more
detriment to those areas to
where it's more of a.
Some good for our.
R. O. Carlsbad to to communities
I represent.
And.
Thank you thank you take
advantage of the full thirty
percent we're Senator
transmission Brandt can we maybe
take advantage of the twenty
five.
Yes Mr chair members of the
committee Senator Griggs yes for
those communities like you're
talking about Alamogordo it's a
huge commitment for those
production crews to go down
there and it roughly costs
eleven percent more
and so yes I really do believe
that this right now as it is
that we should keep it here I
think that we are doing some
really good work down the line
can we look at that after we've
captured some more data
absolutely but I really think
for those rural rural
communities that are either away
from Albuquerque and Santa Fe
this is how we're gonna help
them and the core crew bases in
Albuquerque and Santa Fe so we
really need to push them outside
of that sixty miles.
Shared from the secretary of.
We talk about that I mean I
know.
Growing units creation so if is
if ever reliable Albuquerque
sure.
The confusion Alamogordo Deming
are are more in reach
there were still years or so
the.
The motion capture place to film
and all of New Mexico.
Or.
The respect for the bush Mr
chairman and madam chair and
senator rob range.
I feel good for maternal.
And
You know I I want to show you
can take.
There's some things in there so
I don't know that I would have
taken the reproach but I think a
going to portability to move on
because I think it is very
possible.
Positive for my part of the
world and in Holbeach been
positive for other parts of the
state as well in order to we and
to we should be more active.
Statewide we're gonna have you
know discussion about whether or
not it's it's.
These are the best approach to
take action Mr chair and and and
center operations.
Check.
I'm hopeful that move forward if
we conditions.
The
You make the state Senator.
For found that actually occurred
in the the need to be after L.
H. to population to be able to.
we usually we need to be here so
thank you Mr chairman and and
thank Senator thank you senator
Senator AUMENT.
Thank you Mr chair thank you.
Center for bringing this bill
forward.
a motion this construe my
Questions is being against this.
That.
So first question is we've heard
testimony from several people at
the film industry is going
gangbusters in New Mexico so
that why do we need to increase
it and sent.
Thank you
madam Georgia and other places.
Mr chair members of the
committee Senator Tallman as
that Senator Rodriguez was just
saying this is very competitive
because Hollywood does bring a
lot of money that would not be
in New Mexico and there was one
of the things that we do it
economic development is really
try to get outside money into
the state as opposed to
circulate circulating New
Mexicans money from one person
to the other and so really when
you look at this you've got to
think this is outside money
coming in here and as you know
we just saw and as the senator
mentioned that for every dollar
they bring back we're actually
giving them eighteen cents for
that but that dollar wouldn't be
here otherwise and so we really
want to keep them and we really
want them to bring their big
series here because those are
fantastic jobs thank you Mr
thank you for that answer.
Right.
I set of bills.
The last four years I do
To
provide funding for.
For a.
Computer programming that would.
Do dynamic scoring so.
We also finally of people got
tired of hearing about this
bill.
So Mr Clarke so deputy director
was very supportive of that but
then he finally told me last
year that they were able to find
money in the federal budget for
that to provide dynamic scoring
so that that with that
programming be used to determine
whether that we're getting our
money's worth.
Mr chair members of the
committee this Senator Tallman
all actually bring up the W. to
answer that question for you.
John.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Tallman so I think we can
definitively say that the state
is getting its money from the
film tax credit because of the
work done by SB ideals Berg in
twenty twenty one we hired them
to do a pretty thorough economic
analysis of the film industry
and of the film tax credit and
they concluded that the state
receives eight dollars and forty
cents in economic activity for
every dollar that it spends in
the tax credit it also concluded
that ninety two percent of all
the filming activity that occurs
in the state would not exist
here without the phone credit so
we that you know concluded it
definitely works and it's
effective thank you for the
answer thank you Mr chairman.
Questions
thank you.
So.
The.
Someone mentioned which has been
a big shift in the industry so
my listening skills act good
could you to briefly say what's
the big shift in how does that
relate to what you're trying.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator Tom and I'll pass it on
to Alicia and then let me just
make one brief comment here may
not be directly related to that
that to your last question that
recently you may have read in
the paper and it's it was in the
in the news television news and
so on how New Mexico is number
one to recruit people and it's
one of the number one places in
the in the country and if it's a
world but remember that this
country for people would live
and would want to live and work
because of the film industry so
just wanted to mention that but
I'll pass on this to.
Mr chair sentiment.
And that's the result Mr chair
senator Tom and so there's been
a shift to really and
Going to the movie theaters I
don't know if you've seen that
or not but because of the rise
of the streamers so that's the
Netflix of the world who lose
the Amazons where we were
staying at home a lot more they
were watching movies but we're
also watching long term series
which are called mini series
with multiple episodes and we're
seeing those to just get more
and more expensive because the
big films are going like avatar
to the theaters but it is so
expensive right now to advertise
those movies for those theaters
and so you're seeing a lot more
happen in that hundred million
dollar range from the streamers.
This to.
That that page five of the F. I.
R..
The LFC emphasizes the
significance of risk to state
revenues should the credit and
use more than the above
estimated production so this is
our.
Ten million that's it can.
Those of.
Thanks for the first time for
service.
Mr chair members of the
committee senator Tom and you
want to open this are I can also
bring up taxed right.
I try don't get a stab here that
yes there is a cap for that
reason they it and then if it if
it's first come first serve
chili until that cap is just is
exhausted I guess I can call it
that's what happened last time
Mister chairman Senator in
that's the reason why we
increased it last time because
they were producing so much more
than the state had allocated
credits for so we ended up being
the whole and we we just didn't
we have to pay them and and make
them whole again there was just
so much business with the film
industry for New Mexico and you
know so we raise the cap and now
it's getting there again it's
like secretary Keyes said if we
don't do something now we're
going to be in the hall again
and the film industry continues
to to want to work here and do
more but yes the cap is a cap
thank you.
Thank you for that just shows.
It says that.
So the California the analyst's
office.
So that the costs exceeded the
budget Pennsylvania says
difficult to determine the
impact.
And that the current credit this
is not.
Expand the industry and is at
the office.
So why is it so difficult where
we get such a mixed recognize so
difficult to determine whether
we're getting from that.
Mr chair members of the
committee I actually bring up
our economists are actually John
Clark to want to come up and
explain all of these different
reports and how many we've had
this just within the state of
New Mexico.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Tallman I think the issue with
those quotes is that they're
only looking at the fiscal
impact to the state they're
looking at it as if it was a
method of taxation are we
spending more tax money than
we're getting back but that's
not the point of this the point
of this is to create good
quality jobs in the state we
want to make sure that we're
doing it in the most effective
way possible but our goal is not
and this is for economic
development and in general not
just film our goal is to improve
the well being of people and
families in New Mexico by
creating good paying jobs here
we want to make sure that we're
good stewards of taxpayer money
we want to make sure that we're
using the funds well but it's
not our goal to return more
money to the state coffers than
we're using for these programs
think of it in the same way as
we think of education of
libraries of museums these are
all really important critical
functions of state government we
don't ask do they return more
money to the state government
and the use no because the
benefit to New Mexico as a whole
is much greater than what we're
spending and that's what we're
looking at here and that's what
the study found that we get
eight dollars and forty cents
and economic return for every
dollar that the state's buttons
Mr chair saying it's an
investment and expects.
Mr chair Senator exactly thank
you the good words at all I have
Senator share this.
Your thank you again this year.
For you this bill forward.
Thank you.
Your
expert witnesses thank thank you
senator Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman cruciatus
and.
Thank you Senator Rodriguez for
bringing the bill.
Excerpt only has a great
questions I I still coming back
to the the sixty miles.
being a dead horse
but I'm gonna come back to that
again because and I'm not
worried about Rio Rancho it's
the on the metro area
you know it it can handle it but
you've got places like Cuba in
Santa Fe County that if that's
not real I don't know what is
your place looking payments
valley that's not real I don't
know what is and so I think the
boundaries to for I don't want
to have an down three outside of
the county line likes of real
Rancho we get some film building
comes up there I think we all
the way out down to our server
Sanchez is is still within sixty
miles of Bernalillo county line
and there's a lot of very rural
areas so I think I have some of
the same concerns is our work
those in that that that
boundaries just in my opinion
it's a little too far
I think some of those
communities need that economic
activity intersection really
neat places you know that I
would encourage the film
industry to go to that are all
that far outside of Santa Fe
here.
That are in Santa can
put that would fall within that
sixty mile range and I think
that the we need to encourage
those areas to get that economic
activity like the rest of yours
farmers and that he has pretty
good economic activity go I
wouldn't want to eliminate them
Los crucis.
Second largest city in the
state.
And to call that rule I have
worked on with the.
so I think we're gonna leave
that in there I think the
boundaries to be less so it can
actually pick up some of those
rural areas.
Thank you thank you senator for
them we need to make a comment
are you asking us to re well I
mean I I I'd like to the
response to that but
and I know you kind of explain
sixty miles but.
even even if you tried to drive
from here to the center of the
county line it's not all that
close Dick's while are counties
are really big.
a lot of other states have
broken up a lot more are
counties are very large Santa
Sandoval County goes forever it
seems like that the Farmington I
mean it.
You drive that way and you're
all set Farmington free get out
of Santa Fe County and yet.
At sixty miles is going to you
know it's a couple of simple
County thank you Mr chairman
thank you senator rand that's
quite a bit of discussion took
place since the last bill that
we passed on the sixty miles and
we just moved it around to
several miles and and areas and
so on finally it was agreed that
the sixty mile radius seem like
it would work and that's where
all the stakeholders finally
came to the conclusion that that
was the best fit but I'm going
to do to and for more details to
Senator I'm sorry for that
because.
Mr chair members of the
committee Senator Brandt we just
go back to the fact that most of
these productions are staying in
Albuquerque and Santa Fe and
it's a lot easier to convince
them to go out just beyond those
boundaries as it is but it's not
very it's not very easy to
convince them to go to
Farmington or Alamogordo just
because they're staying there
and it's only you know it's only
an hour outside so that's really
that's really the thinking
behind it because when you look
at the numbers for Bernalillo
McKinley Rio Arriba Sandoval
there so high compared to
Alamogordo Farmington even less
crucis so that is the idea and
also we we have infrastructure
now for the first time in Los
crucis some of these other areas
right now like the more they
will not be getting any type of
film studio infrastructure in
the next year or two I mean
they're just trying to recover
from the devastation that
happened in that area too and so
we really see that the crew in
Santa Fe the crew base is in
Albuquerque and Santa Fe so we
are really trying to give those
other much rural areas a chance
thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman thank sure
that makes sense I mean I
understand.
Note that the eleven percent
that you talked about earlier
increasing costs that makes
sense because you're you're
having to take either trailers
out there people live in or and
a lot of our rural places don't
have hotels we run into that a
lot we do interim committees
going places where like where
resources thing so
So I I I appreciate that thank
you for those things
I.
I liked Center tollens questions
thank you Sir Tolman yes good
questions on some of the
economic benefits that was a
little helpful for me I know
that every study can say
different things right we can
put things together the way we
want I understand the economic
activity it's kind of like the
spaceport all right we're we're
three it's it's supposed to be
an investment at least this is
an investment I'm not sure the
spaceport will ever be one and I
know the road runner was not one
so lease this when we do get a
return on and and so I'm I'm
kind of just kind of in limbo
right now you guys almost having
a yes on this point so because
no it's
at never supported the film tax
industry but if we're going to
support spaceport and road
runner to know where the least
at least with bill
administrative we do get a
return people get good paying
jobs and that's what we need in
New Mexico.
Thank you just so you know
senator and and Mr chair in your
in your area there was almost
twelve million dollars of US
bins just this year alone.
And I will say on stranger
things I love it.
and that is one of the that's
one of the most enjoyable shows
I think I've ever watched so get
that back to Netflix but just
keep keep those ones coming out
and my my son was in the pilot
program for late breaking bad
when he was offered a part on
the show we all thought that
show was going to go nowhere so.
So that's my experience with the
film industry.
Thank you
Just to put things in
perspective and in the nineteen
ninety eight I had a.
Opportunity to visit China so
with Luna BeiGene and we spent a
two days there in our Kenner you
us it's set in on visit rural
China so we flew can attend do
which is eleven million people
that's there's definite
China says will put things in
perspective.
The proposed.
So I just had a question I know
that in section of the I believe
you are.
The need to annual spending cap
from two million four million.
Is that of a requires and
recurrent expenditure going
forward as well as we have that
in the budget or is it is it.
The speaker that.
Mr chair members of the
committee yes this is part of
the J. type program which is
just a fantastic program and it
allows our workers to actually
To actually move from one
position to the next one up and
it has been so successful within
the film industry because we're
growing so much that this would
be two million and recurring.
An additional two place for
total of four million.
Yes Mr chair okay thank you and
so how many how many of
individuals were folks do we
support through that program in
numbers Mr chair that's a
fantastic commit and that's
fantastic question I'm gonna
look over to my experts to see
if we have that data.
But we can get back to you on
that but I know that I know it's
do we know if it's in the
hundreds or that.
Thank you thank you share.
Your name please thank you.
You.
Thank you so much
thank you so much chair members
of the committee I we will come
back to you with an exact number
but off of the top of my head is
in the hundreds every year.
This is amber my name's amber
Dodson the director of the New
Mexico film office and I do want
to note that these positions as
secretary Keyes mentioned
the whole point of this program
and then it is best in class we
have people from the film
offices in Canada all over the
world call and ask about how
this program works because it
has worked and it's a big reason
why are creating base is so
skilled and one of the best in
the nation if not the world
right now it is for New Mexico
residents only and it is all
about promoting our people from
one craft to the next and
helping them essentially go from
a job to a lifelong career.
No it's it's great you know I I
think it's a a lot happening I
know hi I'm from Amos and also
place around two so both places
Or at this stuff about twenty
minutes because it was a section
to fill in so that that was
pretty cool you know and.
In the have to be patient.
So with that I don't have
Senator Wirth.
Second one of many more pages
and see if I guess grant to
really come across the line and
vote for this bill.
I appreciate you know the.
And and and it's been it's been
super fun to watch kind of the
industry and what's happened and
it's and it's actually I mean to
see where it is now and what
we're doing and to see a room
full of folks supporting it and
hear that kind of eight dollars
and forty cents the comes in for
every dollar dynamic scoring and
that's what I just want to
emphasize I distinctly remember
in twenty twelve in the fall of
twenty twelve before we're
heading into the session in
twenty thirteen
doing that kind of talent all in
Santa Fe with all of the
industry the businesses that
were impacted by film and work
frying out to do something to
try and save the industry and
you remember twenty thirteen we
did that breaking bad built on
lots of pieces of that I
supported that decision first
session your first session but
but I can't I I did that that
made such an impression on me
because I have businesses you
know Rick the words of no
political was a kind of a at one
point this was fun as a as a
political done the film industry
is you know Hollywood Democrats
and I had a room full of
businesses and Republican
business owners going this is
the the impact of this industry
on the hotel I run on the
laundry I run on a catering
business I run and that made it
that made an extraordinary
fraction on the and to have
networks here and here and talk
about kind of us being the
epicenter of that I just it's a
good thing that we've come this
far and I think it's encouraging
I appreciate Senate race you
know you used to talk about your
I've got someone here in Santa
Fe who did a big film Alamogordo
and was telling me about one of
the whole experience being as
good as it was so again that's
why fish Senator Brandt Steve
I'm getting over the over the
line for the first time on Phil
Neville thank you Mr chair right
senator Sanchez I would.
Pass all right.
Would do best with senator.
What was senator Clemente.
Clerk cultural.
Senator Brent.
Senator thanks.
Senator had a meal.
Yes.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Lopez.
Senator Sanchez yes Senator
Thomas yes Senator Wirth yes.
When are we getting presented
were Senators
and Senator Shendo.
Senator program that two seven
yes.
In addition to yes.
We have nine nine zero to pass.
Eight three.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you.
So as I stated earlier we are
going to have a of a trip report
so Mr Garcia we're yet.
Yes.
Graduations.
Just.
it.
Come back to the rest yeah yeah
yeah we're.
About thirty thirty minutes or
thirty minutes.
So just for folks timely
purposes we're going to allow
thirty minutes for the trip
report any of presentation
questions by the committee so if
we can keep it down to get
started so I appreciate.
Garcia want to go ahead
introduce a.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Good afternoon chairman members
of the committee my name is Jim
Garcia I am the executive
director of the associated
contractors of New Mexico
Representative the heavy highway
heavy utility contractors for
New Mexico by today I have
representatives from the heavy
highway contracting community
also we have members of our
partnership in the and M. D. O.
T. senior staff with us today
today I'm going to introduce to
you all our trip report that is
going to be presented by miss
Caroline Kelly and I want to
first tell you that trip.
Representative nonprofit
organization that researches
researches evaluates and
distributes economic and
technical data on surface
transportation issues today we
have Representative trip miss
Caroline Kelly who is the
director of communications and
researcher for trip as trips
director of communications and
research Carolyn Kelly prepares
and that it's a variety of
reports on surface
transportation issues including
road bridge conditions traffic
congestion highway safety and
economic development Caroline
also coordinates trips outreach
in response to local and
national media regarding a host
of transportation related topics
with that Mr secretary members
of the committee like to
introduce miss Caroline Kelly.
Thank you Jim and then
Mr chairman and members of the
committee good afternoon and
thank you for the opportunity to
speak to this afternoon as Jim
said my name's Carolyn Kelly and
the director of communication
research for trip and also the
author of the report that we
released formally at a press
conference yesterday morning in
Albuquerque which I believe you
all now that a copy of it in
front of you what I'll do this
afternoon as cover briefly the
findings of the report before I
get to that let me first explain
a little bit about who trip is
and what we do trip just inside
is a national transportation
research nonprofit we're based
in Washington DC we prepare both
nationwide as well as state
specific reports like the one
you've got today that look at a
variety of transportation
issues.
The findings of our reports are
often cited by major news
organizations or used by
legislators like yourselves when
determining transportation
funding levels at the local
state or national level since
trip was founded more than fifty
years ago we've produced more
than six hundred reports in all
fifty states so with that let me
turn to the findings of the
report I would just title New
Mexico transportation by the
numbers meeting the state's need
for safe smooth and efficient
mobility this report is part of
trump's ongoing nationwide
public education campaign and it
evaluates road and bridge
conditions traffic congestion
highway safety economic
development and transportation
funding in statewide in New
Mexico we've also included in
the report regional breakdowns
for the state's largest urban
areas so you'll also see data
for Albuquerque Los crucis and
Santa Fe within the report.
The report also emphasizes the
need for increased
transportation investment in New
Mexico and it includes a list of
nearly six billion dollars in
transportation projects
throughout the state they
currently lack funding it to
move forward.
New Mexico's transportation
network is literally the
backbone of the state each year
it carries a hundred twenty five
billion dollars worth of goods
in and out of the state in a
services states one half million
licensed drivers as well as
those passing through after
vehicle travel in New Mexico
dropped by as much as forty one
percent in April of twenty
twenty at the beginning of the
pandemic we're now seeing
vehicle travel return to near
pre pandemic levels but because
of a lack of transportation
funding the state's drivers are
contending with roads that are
increasingly deteriorated and
congested and it lacks some of
the desirable safety features
that would like to see on them
some of the most critical
sectors of New Mexicos economy
namely the energy extraction
agriculture tourism and even
fill require a service
transportation network that is
well maintained and efficient
and safe and adequate and
sustainable source of
transportation revenue is key to
keeping the economy moving in
the right direction.
The condition and efficiency and
of the state transportation
system affects quality of life
it affects economic growth and
it has a direct financial impact
on the state's drivers in fact
according to our report New
Mexico roads and bridges that
are deteriorated and congested
and not as safe as they could be
cost drivers a total of three
billion dollars each year that's
as much as twenty nine hundred
dollars per driver in
Albuquerque area those costs
include higher vehicle operating
costs as a result of driving on
rough roads and also includes
the cost of lost time and wasted
fuel as a result of traffic
congestion and it also includes
a financial cost of traffic
crashes well those costs are
already startlingly high they're
projected to grow even higher in
the future unless the state can
provide additional funding
needed to improve the safety and
efficiency and a condition of
the transportation network in
fact as I noted the New Mexico
DOT has identified five point
seven five billion dollars in
improvement and construction
projects throughout the state
that are not currently able to
move forward because they lack
the needed funding without
additional transportation
investment these projects will
remain stranded on the drawing
board and you can find that list
in the body of the report with
projects and cost breakdowns for
each of the six highly districts
in the state.
According to the report fifty
six percent more than half of
all major roads in the state are
in poor or mediocre condition
eleven percent armchair
Commission in the remaining
thirty two percent are in good
condition David conditions on
major roads in the state's urban
areas are even more deteriorated
in Albuquerque and in Los crucis
two thirds of the road major
roads are poor me poor or
mediocre condition and here in
Santa Fe more than half of roads
are in poor or mediocre
condition based on trips
calculations driving on these
rough roads cost the state's
drivers about one point three
billion dollars each year as
much as nine hundred twenty
eight dollars per driver in some
areas these costs include
accelerated vehicle depreciation
additional maintenance costs and
increased tire wear as a result
of driving on rough roads that
are essentially beating up your
vehicle in addition to Division
payments we've also looked at
bridge conditions here in the
state and at this point five
percent of New Mexicos bridges a
total about hundred ninety nine
of the state's bridges are rated
poor or structurally deficient
that means there's significant
deterioration to some of the
major components of the bridge
now it's important to note that
these bridges are safe for
travel and they're maintained
and monitored on a regular basis
by the organizations that are
responsible for their upkeep but
many of them do need significant
repairs or even replacement some
cases.
Most bridges are designed to
last about fifty years four
major overhaul or replacement
although some advances in
technology mean that now these
days some bridges are designed
to last up to seventy five years
but that fifty year mark is
important to note that's because
here in New Mexico almost half
of the state's bridges were
built before nineteen sixty nine
many of these bridges are
reaching or have already reached
and far surpassed their intended
design life and they'll need
significant repairs or even
replacement denture report also
documents increasing congestion
on the state's roads in recent
decades the rate of travel
growth and the rate of
population growth have far
outpaced the expansion of the
transportation network as a
result the state's roads are
becoming increasingly congested
as I noted earlier after vehicle
trapped travel drop medically at
the beginning of the pandemic we
are now seeing a return to pre
pandemic levels in vehicle
travel in fact in the adult
Albuquerque area the average
driver now loses forty six hours
each year more than one full
working week each year just due
to traffic congestion here in
Santa Fe each office is about
twenty seven hours per year due
to traffic congestion but that
congestion is more than just a
headache in more than just a
nuisance for drivers just like
deteriorated roads congestion
rob's driver's of time and money
at a time when many of them can
ill afford it in fact the lost
time and wasted fuel due to
traffic congestion costs to
Mexico drivers nine hundred
million dollars each year and up
to twelve hundred dollars per
driver in some areas of the
state.
Our report also looks at traffic
safety in New Mexico and finds
of the state's traffic fatality
rate is the sixth highest in the
nation and the number of
fatalities has risen
significantly in recent years
even at the same time at that
vehicle traveled dropped more
than two thousand people lost
their lives on the state's roads
in the last five years and
roughly excuse me twenty percent
of those fatalities were
pedestrians or bicyclists trip
estimates that traffic crashes
where roadway features were
contributing factor to the
crash.
Also states drivers students its
residents eight hundred twenty
four million dollars each year
that comes in the form of lost
workplace and household
productivity property damage
medical legal costs congestion
costs and emergency services.
So despite some of the
deficiencies that we know in a
trip report I do want to
emphasize that these
deteriorated roads are not at
all a reflection of the ability
or the capabilities of the
organizations that are tasked
with maintaining them in fact
the state DOT and local
municipalities are doing a
tremendous job with the funds
that they have available but the
reality is is that the state
faces a significant and growing
transportation funding shortfall
and unless you Mexico can
increase transportation
investment many of these
critically needed projects in
the state will not move forward.
The federal infrastructure and
infrastructure this jobs act
which was signed by the
president twenty twenty one
we'll find New Mexico with an
additional three point two
billion dollars in
transportation funding from
twenty twenty two through twenty
twenty six well that initial
federal funding will be very
helpful the state will also need
to provide investment needed to
make sure that New Mexico's
transportation network is fully
funded New Mexico like other
states also faces funding
challenges due to the impact of
increasing fuel efficiency and
adoption of electric vehicles
and also because of the impact
of inflation on buying power the
revenue that's generated by New
Mexicos motor fuel tax which is
a significant source of
transportation funds is likely
to a road in the future as a
result of increasing fuel
efficiency and the use of
electric vehicles fact the
average fuel efficiency in
nationwide of U. S. vehicles is
expected to increase thirty one
percent by twenty thirty and
it'll increase fifty one percent
by twenty forty and while
electric vehicles today
Representative about five
percent of all vehicles sold
nation wide by twenty forty that
is expected to increase to sixty
percent so inflation has also
reduced the buying power of the
transportation funds that the
state does have during the
eighteen months from January
twenty twenty one through June
of twenty twenty two the Federal
Highway regions national highway
construction cost index went up
by thirty seven percent that's
the index that tracks the cost
of both labor and materials
needed for construction.
So investing the state's
transportation system could have
a significant economic impact
also in fact the design and
construction and maintenance of
transportation infrastructure
supports professionally twenty
six thousand full time jobs
across all sectors of the
economy and in key industries
like tourism retail sales
deprivations culture and
manufacturing nearly three
hundred fifty thousand full time
jobs really are completely
reliant on the state's
transportation network so
increasing investment in
Mexico's network of roads
highways and bridges is vital to
boosting the state's economy and
the quality of life of its
residents in the short term
these investments create good
jobs and long term these
transportation and investments
create lasting assets that can
last for generations it'll be
critical to New Mexico provides
adequate and sustainable funding
for transportation network to
ensure that the state's
residents and businesses have a
system of roads bridges that
it's safe smooth and efficient
thank you again for the
opportunity to share the
findings of the report and
having out to answer any
questions you might have.
Of.
Yes Jim before we the committee
for questions no no thank you
chairman for giving us the
opportunity to to have to be
here today we do have secretary
sort of what the state is senior
team as well so should you have
any specific questions about the
trip report or how we came up
with the report this this report
was made in conjunction with the
N. M. D. O. T. so those are real
numbers that you're looking at
and from the by district and
also by projects so there's a
number of this issues that are
in there and we're prepared to
answer any questions you might
have thank you chairman you.
We have a.
Questions of right Senator
Griggs.
Thank you for sharing mission
I've the nature of the question
of the report or show that
fish
the
same we have the opportunity to
attend a Energy count
confirmation in thank and we
were also at the university of
California and the university of
Calgary doing a lot of work on
the.
Pardon.
The material with you shortly
increase the longevity of of
Representative.
One of the things is the cat.
They were wrong some of these
have the oral related material
for what looks like a pasta
maker.
Usually create these little guys
are about like to be a big
call in the middle but they look
for a black posh.
And the crushing them about the
yeah I'm talking to them about.
What that would do to the
longevity of a row.
Can they believe that usually
does and the national road
creation is
lifetime and lifetime I.
I can tell you that we do that
by you obviously of the that we
know will resurface roads then
usual.
I probably the it costs more we
did.
But for sure and providers.
We're gonna have to also we I.
Where we can get longer lives
from growth.
Are we have to to look at Hallie
we.
How we transport.
On the road to where the where
are the.
Tractor in the trailer of the
tension leadership read out
differently into we're the where
in terror on road usage.
Yeah we've got and
Sure we all we have the the
years to truck traffic flow in
the United States it runs
through the heart of New Mexico
was higher with fifty four.
hi we fifty four.
The high priority.
Traffic the road engine data I.
I Federal Highway
Administration.
There we go Mr chair we spend a
lot of money working on to.
Four three right and all of our
state we do work on and for
sharing always a it's better
than it.
I wrote it all.
To transport people your call to
action.
I challenging but are now if you
go to our.
Interstate ten interstate
affirmative seeing those two
violations loaded up with truck
traffic.
Richard this is showing the
machine the interstate twenty
five loading the truck correct.
Region you're not to say that is
because a large part.
and your.
The team guys have age we have
to look at how do we have the
address of the site.
To maybe get a committee on
transportation system overall
that are are and then make it to
work in the roadway or.
Rachel.
In.
You all said that if you guys
want to be
caller the guy in Calgary I can
surely get that to you.
In vision with admiration what
see what they're doing to.
In order to to figure out how to
do that.
The reversion but will
problematic for.
And they need to they need.
We appreciate the but thank you
for your presentation at a level
that you know we can usually get
in New Mexico and I.
We're gonna have to probably
look at doing things
differently.
Sure thank you for your thank
you.
Thank you Mr chairman I connect
comment to that place thank you
chairman Senator that's some
great comments we just recently
had a paving conference in
Albuquerque and we were look at
all the different aggregate Act
rates and all the different ways
of recycling and reusing some of
our materials and I can assure
you that there's a whole lot of
new ideas that are coming in
there's a lot smarter people
that are sitting behind me they
can probably get into more
detail about that but I will
tell you that we're facing the
other concerns like by America
things like that that are making
it harder for us to get the
supplies that we need time and
to get the the good supplies
that we need to make our roads
but great comments I appreciate
that thank you senator.
Yes.
Up.
on the
For district five of the movie.
And I've of this road between of
the of the shipwreck bridge but
then the row from four ninety
one from Shiprock to the
Colorado border of any.
So these I know these are just
samples of what you guys have
done so
but I appreciate I know that the
that's been an issue I know
we've done pretty well I think
trying to fix for ninety one
from Gallup to ship rock well
there's that you know because of
those a lot of traffic that goes
up and down
from from from Chicago north and
so forth so
this is really good I think it's
late over well appreciate you
know I think it's in the.
It's a good report
I want to also thank the Mr
Silva those who really are for
asking us to present I think
this is good data good
information about what's
happening on our roads and the
numbers about because we don't
really think about the other
costs to.
individuals with those of us
that live in rural areas you
know how much would be to our
vehicles and so when we talk
about a lot of times averages
for the metro area that doesn't
apply for many of the folks that
I represent out in you know
McKinley County San Juan County
you know of parts of Santa Fe
County this committee you know
it's interesting want to always
look at these you know how much
average here you know if a
person tries in all ten twelve
thousand I usually put forty
thousand on my vehicle every
year in the.
It so those numbers sometimes
don't work for us in rural areas
but I appreciate.
this report and if there are no
other of this Senator Brandt
thank you Mr chairman and you
know.
Again we have a huge abundance
of funds this year three point
six billion dollars from oil and
gas and you know the last
several years we've had a huge
amount of money extra and I've
asked every year let's put more
into roads let's put more into
our infrastructure and every
year we decide to do something
else with it says someone's
going to come back on us we
really need to make those
investments we have these huge
surpluses make the investments
in our infrastructure on that'll
help us diversify our economy
because and you have to have a
solid infrastructure to have a
diverse economy and so these are
needs to be a five point seven
billion dollars and then here
says fifty six percent of major
roads and highways in New Mexico
or poor or mediocre condition.
That should really say at all.
Right this is where we need to
be making the investments have
the extra funds that we have.
This is where we need to the
rubber meets the road.
As we need to be fixing our
roads
Yeah I travel quite a bit and
known New Mexico's are the worst
roads but they're not the best
and I know that DOT does as much
as they can with the money that
we in the federal government
find it one of the things I
didn't realize when they pass
this federal infrastructure fund
is that it's not and a new.
three point six billion dollars
right it's
The total.
County what they were already
going to spend is three point
six billion dollars coming to
our state so I don't know
exactly what the increase is it
some but it's not like it's a
brand new three point six
billion dollars coming to us the
whole infrastructure package was
the normal that they spend plus
a little bit more so it's really
sold to us just being this huge
thing and it wasn't it was kind
of a a little bit of a cloak and
dagger thing you know to where
let's let's you don't look at
what this hand is doing why tell
you what's actually happening so
it's not as much money as we
thought it was going to be it's
not a new three point six
billion on top of what we would
normally get.
I think we what we normally get
about two billion of that.
The the referred sure that
chairman Senator secretary I'd
like to for that to secretary
Serna maybe can make some
comments about about the budget
and how it came to be.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
that's that's a point that's
been a talking point of ours if
you look at St formula funding
increases last year compared to
FY twenty four it's two percent.
Formula funding which equates to
about twelve million in formula
funding but to be sure a lot of
those new investments are coming
by way of new programs and
competitive grant.
But when we're talking about the
infrastructure funds coming from
the federal government what we
normally getting and how much of
an increase or we actually see
so again I'm I'm Mr chair
Senator this year in formula for
need equates to it's a two
percent increase that we have in
our budget it's twelve million
dollars increase.
Over the last year.
Thank you.
R. as much all right.
Senator Kernan.
Thank you very much Mr chairman.
Presentation and.
So it caught fire hi.
Why is that I guess the revenues
from the fuel tax
two things risk as cars become
more fuel efficient that's a
definition the need for gasoline
also expectations I
twenty forty four going to have
sixty percent of our cars that
the legislative offices Dr
figure out a way to make sure
that those drivers are also
share thank you.
The
solution that.
Yes please remind me what we
have done with the stark excise
taxes given that many shifted
from general fund your partner.
What's that.
Provided that the.
What that.
great question Mr chair Senator
right now what we're looking at
is
Motor vehicle excise tax twenty
one point eight six is going to
the state road fund beginning in
FY twenty two that's been that
distribution.
And we have a percentage that
also goes to the transportation
project funding the amount of
eighteen point seven five
percent currently there are two
pieces of legislation that would
increase that amount pulling all
of the distributions from the
general fund and sending it to
both those funds one is Senate
bill one eighty four which we do
a sixty forty split to Rhode
Fund and the state
transportation fund and the
other is I can't recall the
number but Representative Harper
is proposing again a fifty fifty
split taking all of the
distributions from the general
fund to those two funds.
So Mister Terry.
That would be good news for the
department to be able to kind of
begin to fill in some of these
costs that is sitting on very
important projects and as I'm
looking at this list I know that
on the staff we have events in
place to begin a lot of the ones
that I'm thinking about hiring.
But then there's some on this
list that we know we need to do
additional funding in this.
Senator.
Got Justina Mintz Revenue.
In start.
Programs we're spending more
here and there into me all of
this should be spent on on
nonrecurring projects on the
stage we have got to be.
Improve the rose.
Maybe they are not just not.
Where that
Try I live alone for pension and
I'm no legislation that revenue
we need to take advantage of it
now I guess I just get
frustrated is there anything in
house bill two of the last
couple years that the department
check the money over about that
they've done previous.
Coming over how much.
Right here for for this bill
correct chairs and re question
right now we have a total in and
what you may be referring to a
section nine general fund
appropriations about two hundred
and forty two million two
hundred and thirty two of that
would go to identified roads in
corridors anything from
maintenance to major
construction two hundred and
thirty two million.
Mr chair.
What was last year's
appropriations Mr chair Senator
I believe it was three hundred
ninety seven million if I could
get a a nod this yes
that that's correct with up to
about with the the major again
going to construction but some
other distributions for for
later maintenance supporting
equipment.
This city for the department to
contract
you know I think I just a Mister
sea this question inTaos just
the ability to fund contractors
that can actually spend the
money suppose we double what we
get from the state would have
the ability to contract that out
do we have the thank you for.
chairman members of the
committees Mr Secretary
absolutely we do contractors are
beginning to work they do work
in the areas that they kind of
live in and work and so northern
mountain constructors that are
in northern Mexico due to do a
lot of work in that area there
but we do have the workers we do
like to keep the work in New
Mexico and as it was with this
as a Carolyn mentioned earlier
we have over twenty six thousand
employees and our our goal is to
get them all working keep on
going so yes ma'am.
Mr chair one last question.
listed
Capital outlay projects state
laws that we've been asked how
to consider partnering with the
governor's the executive and now
yeah I certainly don't mind that
if if we can.
Identify those errors that
you're able to do the maybe your
properties are saying that's
what's on this with regard to
present I haven't really looked
at the list you know are there
really projects on that list
that.
Legislature's.
But then forgotten office many
toward a program Carlsbad for
number of years and that's
critical not just me that's very
important city Carlsbad but I
just wonder how we know you know
I I'm gonna get my many that I
don't want to disappoint with
the definition yes so I mean
it's just not in the I.
Yes it is before that I'm aware
of that maybe call some of you
all have to figure out.
What to do on that so madam
secretary.
Mr chair Senator no I I haven't
seen the list I but we we do in
partnership with the communities
understand that several of them
have submitted Google request
specifically for road
infrastructure many of those
often come through the duty or
go directly to municipalities
either way we find that support
as necessary to ensure that
those projects are completed on
time they have the technical
support to get them done
correctly.
Mr Chairman whatever option
because of director of
operations for the DSG thank you
for expected hi intent is even
though sometimes you can't put
it in there but but you know
what what's needed and I trust
that your department that's
what's needed it off our area so
that.
Thank you for your courage.
For the difficult okay good
thank you I don't have any
others on the list for questions
appreciate your time thank you
for The presentation just
quickly I I did Senator Kernan I
did look listen there are some
real projects interchanges and
things like that on that list
that we received today so.
Right thank you thank you
chairman thank senators thank
you Mr secretary.
Thank you already
Senator smitteez.
For.
To
Just today you know Senator
status a revolting all the
Built in in fact so we'll hear
it will take an action and then
because of the other things
happening so we see a clear fits
all in with the with the tax
back holding them hostage
okay thank you Mr chair thank
you
I think I want us those Tom
North Texas.
So thank you Mr chairman of the
committee my first ever built
before the tax committees yes
thank you good to see you all
very much this this bill I I I
believe is very simple you know
we have in our in our personal
income tax we have a what's
called a marriage.
And so you know if you're you're
you're single and then you the
people are paying their
individual tax the more they're
they're paying more tax and so
what I'm proposing is that we
just do away with that we're not
gonna favor marriages they were
disorders can be neutral on it
and not not penalize it and I
have a a very large me just a
very very large list of
statistics some not gonna list
those but just a couple of
things I think the committee may
be interested in
Shares associated with lower
rates of domestic violence and
abuse compared to co habitation
as you know we have a very low
labor participation of the
workforce in New Mexico married
fathers work more hours than
cohabiting fathers a merry men
less likely to commit crimes
kindergarten children from merry
families higher reading scores
than from Mexico having family
so the list the list goes on and
on CDC data showing better
health outcomes et cetera so I
won't continue to list those but
just the the point is that that
marriage has been shown to
really be associated with with
better outcomes for children
crime domestic abuse etcetera.
now I I I would not be
presenting this bill in front of
the committee if this was a
regressive tax and and we Tom
help me with the numbers and
this is actually a purpose to to
exchange as you can see this is
percent saving so the people
that do better are in those
lower tax brackets it doesn't
affect the in over a hundred
thousand doesn't affect as much
so it like I said if it was
regressive tax I would just say
well it's not gonna work but I
think it works you know for
everybody I think it's a good
idea and I think that's all I
have Mister.
Senator.
All right
Excuse me I will go to the
audience anybody here in support
of us an ability I.
And many of them we did have one
and that is on Mr chair part of
the song Act.
What are.
I.
All right okay of.
Anybody in opposition of Senate
bill eighty five.
Anybody else in opposition okay
all right now we'll go to the
members of the committee any.
Session so members of the
committee.
In order for us here so I.
Certainly it's an incentive for
discussion that have and I know
that it's.
The FIR.
About fifty million dollars I
think the adjustment.
And I just think one of the
things is.
You know.
Other income tax bills trying to
put in some additional brackets
into the structure I mean I
think we should look at this I
think is worth looking at the
question of how to do it in such
a way that you know you can pay
for it as for the challenge but
I appreciate it why in this
because again I do think it's
something that we always hear
about the when you see it like
this it makes a difference of
again I appreciate you.
Raymond and again I think if we.
As we look at our income tax and
and it's always struck me and I
mean I think this is so let me
just ask Miss so basically what
you did is is.
Took that the former rates that
were for primary and just put
everyone into a bracket that
doubled is that correct all the
brackets.
Yes Mr chair center what we did
is we just we have the the
single brackets and we just
multiplied by two and and and
that's all we did in and and on
that point it would look at that
chart it it's really a you know
what we we passed a memorial
unanimously the Senate said look
at trying to get rid of the
cliff effect and this is I think
it's
I don't know if it's HHS the no
is a Harvard study that showed
more upward mobility and I think
this is a win win it'll not only
gives preference to tax benefits
for these lower income people to
one of the but it's it's the the
intangible on measured you know
we have a fifty million yes but
but how how much of that
investment is actually going to
help that upward mobility and
and contribute to further you
know G. R. T. in those sorts of
things.
Mr chairman and I just just look
at this of highlights I mean
right now we've got a situation
where kind of that range between
sixteen thousand safe you know
you make sixteen thousand things
same rates for making sixteen
million now we take out a couple
years ago we put in you know
when up a percent but they're
still that huge.
Kind of a gap in the middle and
I think if you put some more
brackets and you can actually
reduced taxes for many folks
kind of in the middle right.
And I just think it's as we as
we look at putting something
together I'm certain look at
look at this and the question
becomes you know it's fifty
million boxes so how do you
figure out how to.
Maybe I can get you off I do
some adjustments on the other
side of the brackets to pay for
it what that might.
You know and I and I appreciate
what you to do about it being a
progressive fans not coming in
here and doing something that's
very regressive because I think
that I am on the same page about
thank you Mr thank you senator
Brent.
Thank you Mr thanks Senator are
just one of the things that's
always bothered me.
When I actually had income to
pay taxes on that always
bothered me was that you know
being married I have to pay more
taxes than if I was not married.
Yeah I guess I could divorce my
wife but that probably is not
the right answer for thirty
five.
probably shouldn't.
So but you know that's why do we
punish people.
For.
Being married our tax code when
they're like you said all the
statistics show all these great
benefits to society to the
family to the children and then
we have our tax code punish them
for it so so I appreciate you
bringing this and it it really
does help to be able to see it
and you'll see that it does help
actually the lowest income the
most which actually makes sense
and the yeah I think that's what
we're concerned about mostly
right now in our state is those
at the lowest income levels and
how they're being able to
survive especially.
Massive inflation environment
that we have right now our
lowest income people are
suffering the most and the so
this is a way that we can help
them helping them not have to
pay so much in taxes thank you
for this thank you.
And what else.
If not the case it will hold on
to this and we certainly
appreciate you know I think the
chart and I think you know we're
looking at or or or or tax
bracket to there's we'll see
with you know if we that is
anything else will say we're in
the bill thank you Mr chairman
I'm happy to answer questions
and amid this this was a
simulation that we did offer
publicly available data so I
think the department probably
when you have a chance you know
they can provide you with
detailed information right off
their return so it probably
within thank thank all right
thank you Mr thank you members
of the committee.
The.
Senator
Ortiz penal Senate bill one
thirteen as amended.
Scurrying around finding ways
for witness Mr chairman a good
afternoon they are a good yeah.
What what what what we for the
next one there.
Already it so thank you Mr
chairman and members of the tax
committee the equal education
opportunities scholarship is our
effort to that crafting
something that.
Would open up additional
educational opportunities for
low income and foster kids.
Well not in any way three
reducing the amount of money
available thank increasing we
think the money available for
public school children.
And we do that by creating the
scholarship funds.
People who donate to the
scholarship fund can take a tax
credit for fifty percent of with
the courage to contribute.
And and there's a limit to how
much they can they can claim in
any given year.
They can roll it over for three
years at anything including the
control over then that
scholarship fund is available to
families with children who are
in foster care.
Or who who who fall below the
free and reduced lunch standard
in the public school system.
They can also qualify for a
scholarship the maximum
scholarship is five thousand the
way the bill is is structured
the most that any anyone here
would be four hundred kids.
We we also took care to make
sure that not all four hundred
will come from Albuquerque
spread around
so the so that it the impact on
any given district wouldn't be
too great.
But because of the fact that.
A young student getting a
scholarship from this fund is
actually getting less than the
state pays and and SCG.
The negative impact on the on
the public school funds is an
increase for that district that
that's what we limited for
anyone district to hit anyone
district would not be very
great.
But for the overall system the
amount of money available for
students goes up slightly for
students.
And we we think this is a way to
make available to low income and
foster children.
the unique qualities of the some
of the or programs are qualities
our culture that some private
schools offer that would
otherwise not be available to
them.
And of the man who helped put
this together is is my expert
witness JD Bullington
and I'd like to have him explain
anything that I left out of the
bill Mr chairman.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is JD
Bullington and I wanna let you
all know I'm not representing
any client on this matter I'm
volunteering my time.
thank all of you know I've
represented the public go to for
about twelve years and I really
really am very passionate and I
take this personally I think we
can do more to help some of our
at risk you so there's two big
concepts here to keep in mind as
we discuss this.
Four hundred.
Free and reduced lunch kids or
foster children a year four
hundred foster kids were free
and reduced lunch students per
year and the Yazzie Martinez
losses.
A lot the Yazzie Martinez
lawsuit of course
Is directing the state and this
body to do as much as it can to
help at risk youth.
And senator Ortiz Pino has
decided to run this legislation
economy I and asked if I would
help do this and I'm I'm going
to do this I'm doing this on my
own time.
what we have here is a mechanism
to provide an incentive.
Not a large incentive so it's a
pilot program we don't know how
how how well this is going to
work.
But it's a pilot program to
provide an incentive to
individuals and and businesses
to donate their private money to
a nonprofit organization that
then pays.
Helps pay the tuition for a low
income student or a foster care
student to go to private school
if their current traditional
public school options not
working for them we all know the
private schools cost money.
And.
Hi unfortunately like we have
with our bail system you know if
you if you if you have money you
could bail out get out of jail
before your trial but if you
don't have money had to sit in
jail concept is very similar
here with respect to private
schools some lower income
student that option is limited
restricted to them this helps
find some means four four
hundred at risk students here
who may need that that private
school option so this is simply
a tax credit bill.
To provide an incentive for
people and companies to donate
money now we amended in the
Senate Education Committee and I
want to tell you a quick with
those amendments are we capped
at four hundred students per
year and we also limit the total
amount of the tax credit to one
million a year for individuals
and one million dollars a year
for businesses and the last
point I want to emphasize is the
point that Senator Ortiz Y. Pino
made.
Is that if you look at the FIR
we do not have dynamic scoring
in this state so they are only
scoring.
The tax credit piece which shows
up as an expense.
But when you factor in all
eleven thousand dollars per
student per year for the SCG
every student that would use the
us and leave the public school
system the state no longer has a
financial obligation or duty to
pay for that students education
because are over at a private
school.
So mathematically the way we
have structured this it is
mathematically impossible for
the state to lose money on this.
It's impossible because if you
make a ten thousand dollar
donation.
And the bill caps the
scholarship credit at five
thousand dollars.
Then your ten thousand dollars
helps pay for to students.
To go to a private school that's
a total of twenty one thousand
dollars that the state state.
On the SCG side while it only
provides a five thousand dollar
credit the state comes out ahead
on this about fifteen thousand
dollars for every ten thousand
dollars that are made in terms
of contribution so basically Mr
chairman members of the
committee that's that's the bill
we're trying to help four
hundred kids a year they don't
have access to private school
that might need it.
What one other thing that I
neglected to mention Mr chairman
and members of the committee we
do have a sunset provision on it
to five years on to give us a
chance to take a look after five
years is it working first is
anybody taking advantage of
this.
And if if they are is it working
are we are we are repaid anyway
harming the existing public
school system and if not then we
would hope they could be
renewed.
So we talk about the caps for
the district to protect them
individual test on page
reserve for oil I think it's
for.
Beginning on page ten.
From the beginning on page ten.
no no nine we we we we we wanted
to make sure that every district
the the let me put it the other
way that no single district got
got the full brunt of the impact
of this program so we make a
provision starting on the bottom
of page nine that first of small
school districts.
Those are less than one thousand
no more than nine tenths percent
and that it would amount to nine
kid no more than the most any
district would lose we nine on
the next page it's for the
slightly bigger districts a
slightly lower percentage so the
most anyone in a school district
between a thousand and four
thousand that one for one
thousand five thousand would be
forty forty students they might
lose that the most and even for
the day and then it goes up each
side's District one sixty seven
and even for APS the most APS
would get it on this with the
current enrollment would be one
sixty a hundred a hundred sixty
seven students.
Thank you all right anything
else for that Mr Hey of we go to
the audience anybody here
support of Senate bill one
thirteen as amended.
Okay what.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Ellen son
just on the executive director
of the New Mexico conference of
Catholic bishops.
the bishops in endorsed this we
come not to impose to propose we
operate a number of elementary
and middle schools in very rural
areas many on to the to the of
tribal.
Entities of we see this is an
equity bill to create some
equity and it's only four
hundred scholarships but it
gives us a window to be able to
study and see the results of for
the children that will be drawn
to this seventy percent of our
children in our schools
qualified for free or reduced
hot lunch you know the agency
that it's rich children the room
and private schools but our
Catholic schools that's not the
case with five thousand dollars
you could attend any elementary
or middle school in the Catholic
system that we have in the
diocese of Gallup we have a
number of schools that serve the
tribe's we had last week here
advocating with us of Wilhelmina
Yazzie and we hear a lot about
the Yazzie lawsuit and what
we're going to do about it but I
asked what she knew about it she
filed a lawsuit as you move your
children to a private school she
couldn't wait another hundred
years to see if that was going
to serve for children this is a
great pilot your son's it makes
you safe and we will be able to
show what are the differences
for those kids might not be for
all but for those children in
foster and a low income families
we urge you to support this
thank you.
But.
My name is Antonio Trujillo on
on the principle that same.
Okay I'm sorry my name's Antonio
Trujillo and I'm the principal
of Saint Joseph's mission school
that serves the levels of
Ackerman Laguna I am one of
those schools that serves.
Low income families are free and
reduces seventy percent seventy
percent and some of those kids
can't I we don't reject any of
the kids because that they come
and they show and are willing to
make the effort to come to our
school we'll find a way but
because of rising costs it's
getting more difficult but I'm
not the only school there St
Bonaventure's in the room that
serves the Navajo nation's
there's St Anthony's in Zunyi
that serves as soon you Pueblo
there's
St Francis assessors on the dual
say and all of our children we
have at least sixty percent.
Serving the poor and we are.
We we understand what public
schools are facing because we're
serving the same clientele the
same community and so forth so
we see this as an equity bill
but also it's also a choice I
think it we can also do for both
this is a bipartisan bill that
can work for both of us and we
don't have anything to lose
because there is a sense that
you know there's a sense that
they've worked very hard to make
sure that this can make it
possible for all of us so thank
you.
Yeah the fire.
Good afternoon.
You hear me yes I'm Terry Cole
president CEO for the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
this is a good bill SB one
thirteen six to start an effort
to find act risk you an
opportunity to attend a private
school that otherwise would be
out of their reach and to
possibly give them a life
changing experience this bill
would create an opportunity as
JD sat for four hundred
students.
And would create a new tax
incentives for businesses and
individuals to voluntarily
donate to a nonprofit
organization that will pay
tuition and expenses.
This is an idea that could
really grow over time we believe
reaching many many more students
it's an innovative idea that
deserves a chance to get off the
ground we would appreciate your
support on the bill thank.
But thank you good afternoon
Mister chair my name is Missy
Currier representing yes every
kid options and access are
important and we appreciate your
consideration and we appreciate
the Senator bringing this
forward thank you.
But chairman members of the
committee Jason Espinoza right
so this will both the New Mexico
child first network as well as
New Mexico kids can we stand in
strong support of the bill I
think Mr Sanches you know maybe
a point what are we doing for
kids now I'm there's kids that
are trapped we've had really low
proficiency scores are need
scores are the lowest in
seventeen years.
As we're working to make the
education system better we need
to also provide an option for
the students to access something
else thank you.
More.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
and members the committee my
name is Luke author with
Americans for prosperity in the
lobbies with them and we're in
support of this bill not only
does it
offer offer opportunity to up to
four hundred kids it expands you
know options for New Mexicans to
experience a better education
system that we currently have
and we are in full support and
we appreciate your time thank
you.
Eight anybody in of opposition
of Senate bill one thirteen as
amended to
have anybody else for a.
What every we have an individual
on to page just disappeared out
of the room okay all right okay
anybody in opposition.
Anybody.
Okay all right now go to
committee.
Members.
The questions Senator.
And really.
Session because we heard this
bill and education and did have
kind of really good here and
they're not really am sorry the
young people that percent of the
education on here today and I
know it's hard for them to come
and wait for that that's really
kind of.
Support because I and I
appreciate public education
often in both public as a
teacher and private schools
Catholic schools I was there for
five years so I see both sides
and.
I think I heard from you this is
not.
Students in particular like that
that go to a private school with
a very large tuition we're
talking about kind of the the
small niche in some of our areas
where we are serving students
that really do need that
specialized in different kind of
setting and I've always been one
to believe that not every child
in New Mexico fits into our
public school system and
I think that this is a great
opportunity just to see if it
works and I like the sunset on
it I liked the limitation of
students because we don't want
to impact our schools and it is
not no public schools so worried
and Office of it to fund them
during it.
Because.
I think this is such a small
effort that they should not be
boring or threatened by this I
don't think it's going to grow
into something that they should
worry about I think it is very
limited and it just gives us a
chance especially in certain
areas of the state not
particularly in my area and I
know their areas for these kids
you could just hear them their
their
pleading with us to to allow
them to do this and so I I don't
know this is not one of those
bills will go down is that
correct so we'll just hold
income city that I don't think
that public.
Help.
For certain states that really
sometimes don't get.
That's all I have to thank you.
Yes Sierra.
Thank you Mr chair thank you.
Center for bringing this bill
forward.
And for us to your.
Expert witness would donate his
time.
State side of him.
So this this.
so other schools schools that
charge less than five thousand.
So what we're doing.
Five thousand.
Mr chairman if it's alright with
I don't know the answer to that.
Senator Tallman
five thousand is the base for
all Catholic schools and they
can go from there but five
thousand is the base and that's
our base because our our
children can't afford more than
that.
Thank you for that Sir.
Obviously if four hundred times
five thousand two million
dollars so for every dollar.
That somebody donates a dollar
less of the state put in is that
correct right right I missed
some of the money do the math.
Mister chairman Senator Tallman
up that that's a great question
so there's probably an easy way
to pay your way to look at it.
So the SCG the status spending
about eleven thousand dollars
per student per year that's
around that down the save a
thousand often say it's ten
thousand dollars.
The tax credits worth fifty
percent of the donation.
And the scholarship can't be
more than five thousand dollars
so if an individual makes a ten
thousand dollar contribution to
a nonprofit they get to claim a
five thousand dollar tax credit.
But that ten thousand dollars
helps send to public school
students to a private school so
the state saves twenty thousand
dollars in SCG funding.
While it only gets head for five
thousand dollars for tax credit.
X..
Before this all I have Mister
chair.
All righty I don't have any
place else.
The question is you I had a
visit with the the folks that
were advocate for this bill let
them speak and at the end of
political Catholic school for my
entire career this price.
Course both of those schools are
are now no longer in operation
for the very same reason San
Diego mission school which was
in our village since nineteen oh
four was the only school that
was in existence and pretty much
not only Hey miss kids but all
the of Hispanic communities in
Santa C. to attend the own on a
roll of the valley came to that
school and live with our
families during the week and
then we went back home to their
families on the weekend and so
forth so from nineteen oh four
to about nineteen sixties early
sixties when the public school I
the vote was that then so for so
of course there in nineteen
ninety seven the school's stored
down and I cover that screen of
I covered of that school into a
charter school in nineteen
ninety nine for for two years we
ran as a private enterprise
private school it's hard to
raise money so when governor
Johnson was here the expanded
the charter school so we were
able to convert that to a
charter school and it's still
running to today and then of
course Saint Catherine's high
school which is a throwback the
national cemetery that senator
downs in nineteen ninety eight
and so forth so so yeah you know
I you know I and I know that the
this eight kids in our family
and
It was still too wishin my
parents chose to sending the
kids to to Catholic education
and and you appreciate you know
what we're trying to do because
we're trying to focus on those
kids that you know or no other
foster kids and and the low
income to give them a shot at it
education because I think that
provides an open door for a lot
of us I think for rural areas
and what education did for us
and we hope that this program is
successful see what.
Mr chairman.
you're you're you're the
committee's policy is to pull
right all the tax bills right
this in light of the fact that
this does actually save the
state money it doesn't there's
not across the state and it goes
to finance next would you
consider sending just went on to
finance.
Of we are going to hold a for
now I'm gonna have that
discussion and then we can come
back to that okay all right
Preciado thank you thank you
very much
The.
The.
Because it.
Okay secretary is he still.
Okay
I'm gonna put Senator Padilla
you hear.
Okay we'll go with that because
of my other co sponsor is still
in presenting the committee.
The Representative Harper so
we're gonna move on the to a
live person because for some
reason two oh nine yes two nine.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
and members of the committee.
I do have us Senate bill two oh
nine it was here in front of you
a couple years ago on a similar
matter that we did act officials
and all the way through the
legislature and signed into law
citadel to and I do have a
Lindsay boffin who is the
legislative director of
legislative and executive
affairs for the New Mexico
secretary of state's office
that's here with me as an expert
witness
I will tell you Mr chairman that
in in the effort to just
continue to drive transparency
the secretary of state has been
doing a wonderful job of of
Taking steps to to move us in
that direction and and open
basically the books and let's
make sure that we know who we're
dealing with and when your
involved in doing business with
an LLC who are they who is
behind the LFC and and why are
they doing that and if you have
some sort of an issue you need
to take care of with an LLC you
should know exactly who you're
engaged with into your dealing
with so Senate bill two nine
basically amends a section fifty
three dash nineteen dash J. it's
adding a requirement the name
and address of each member of a
limited liability corporation
be included in the articles of
organization the bill also
requires that amended articles
of organization include names
addresses each member of the
LESC that are not already
provided to the secretary of
state so we don't affect the.
Three hundred and nine I believe
thousand businesses that are
already in place but when they
go make a change or decide they
want to reconfigure read read
our amended their their their
filings they would have to
report that so we're not prepped
placing this massive burden on
the secretary of state's office
until that person comes forward
just like they would today with
any other and this affects
absolutely affects all new
filings from the date of
activation here someone just
agency brought in to talk a
little bit about the legislation
that will take some questions
whenever chair chair members of
the committee thank you for
having me here today I
appreciate the Senator bringing
this bill forward the secretary
of state's office has had a
position on this matter for a
few years now in fact there was
a bill very similar to this one
identical in fact in twenty
twenty one in which this
committee did unanimously pass
these same changes and from our
perspective what is really being
addressed here is this idea that
we cannot communicate with LLC's
once their agent a registration
of the person that gets them
started moves on from them
because that could be a third
party agent it could be an
attorney it doesn't have to be a
member with that organization so
what happens over time and and I
was just discussing with my
colleague Erica when we do
things like try to reach out to
the LLC's we often find that the
information on their paperwork
is outdated and in twenty
thirteen we tried like an
attempt to that and and and
found that we received a lot of
that communication back and be
undeliverable mail so this is
setting up a thing that exists
in every other state in this
country which is when the LFC
does a article of organization
with the secretary of state when
they form LLC they they disclose
their member.
ship so that happens everywhere
else in the United States except
for here in New Mexico into the
Senators point it is a step
towards transparency in making
that happen here.
So Mister chairman I just want
to underscore thank you very
much of this popular culture
that that we're the only state
remaining that does not do this
and so this is something that
would put us at a you know on
par with everything else going
on the transparency is just so
helpful to the consumer and so
that's what we're here for today
on this matter thank you right
okay thank you of we'll go up to
the audience anybody here
support of Senate bill two nine.
But I also committee chair okay
anybody in opposition of two
nine.
But gentleman just state your
name come up here.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Jack Burton
hi I have been a practicing
lawyer in New Mexico for a long
time I work in this area hello
we've never required the
addition of limited liability
companies and contrary to
disagree with these are nice
people but we are not the only
state that does not require list
of members
I am aware I believe that of all
of this is not last time I
checked generated knocked on.
The New Mexico.
The legal community and business
community does not want their
names and addresses of their
members disclosed and a public
record some states may require
to be disclosed but they don't
disclose a matter of public
record where they can be.
Of the subject of stalking or
worse.
This the only.
Reasons that the secretary gave
the FIR was they need to contact
the LLC.
It was that could be handled
very easily by amending the
statute to require them to amend
their articles of organization
whenever the mailing S. business
address of their principal place
of business is changed.
That can be done.
The statute does not require
that now.
That's all they need to do.
And
we would satisfy their needs to
contact the limited liability
company.
Little keep that up to date.
That's all we need to do thank
you.
You.
The.
Okay all right now go to
committee.
Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator I
I do have a couple questions and
I want to thank the gentleman
just spoke on.
that the that help me a little
bit on on some of these issues
but.
You know.
That is my question is the
secretary state planning on
posting that publicly were
everyone can see.
Senator chair Senators thank you
for the question with the way it
currently works is that if
someone were to request that
information about the LLC it
would be provided what I believe
the gentleman was speaking to
you is that in other states the
membership is required upon
formation but there are
protections for disclosure and
we're not providing Mister
chairman Senator any of those
protections for disclosure that
information is not in this bill
J. R. seven and and madam chair.
Mr Chairman sorry.
You try to change gender today.
Mr Chairman
Senator I I just I have I
struggle with that with today's
with the doxing that we see
going on around the country
someone gets mad at a particular
company or group gets mad a
particular company so they
provide that information and
then they put it all out on the
internet and all of a sudden
those people's homes are getting
shot at.
I have the same concerns with us
your information in our homes
are listed and I think we need
to deal with that I've been a
little bit surprised maybe you
and I need to talk about that I
want to order me bills Sir were
for.
One of our.
that we need to talk about
regency help fixing that because
right now yeah we just saw this
happen out for for gray goes in
right.
And so I'm I am concerned that
we're gonna do that to these
companies that have had to
reveal as I understand the
secretary state needing that
information and yes I voted for
this couple years ago but I
think the world is changed in
two years.
And if I may chair Senator I'm
I'm glad that you brought that
up certainly and other pieces of
legislation impacting our office
there are provisions being
considered including an opt in
process that would protect
public officials per person
address in response to recent
events.
And and and thank you Mr
chairman I'm sorry what was your
name again Lindsay Lindsay but
that's not being done in this
case correct and I think if that
information was protected I
wouldn't have a problem
supporting.
But I've seen what's been
happening around the country
last year and what's been
happening to business owners in
the last few years where their
information is public and there
their families are being
harassed they're being harassed
and I just think that that's
dangerous and I.
Yes there some things that need
to be public information.
The company.
The analyses board members home
addresses I just don't see that
needs to be.
And I don't like ours ever show
them.
Thank you Mr chairman and answer
I I can't support this right now
until we have some.
Some safeguards in place.
Thank you senator Wirth.
I thank you Mr chairman thank
you for being down curious in
the FIR it says that there is a
parallel build revising the
revised uniform LLC act house
bill two eighty one.
We were just made aware of that
one yes what was that bill do on
this issue go ahead have a look
at it myself but I New Mexicans
sure chair senator Wirth thank
you for the question that bill
makes additional changes to
reporting requirements and
actually is a quite a
substantial bill I think it's
two hundred sixty five pages and
certainly what it does is
require that that new reporting
requirements to put in place for
LLC's and and hopefully I think
I think the intent of the
sponsor and I'm testimony and
have been a hearing yesterday
indicated that they're hoping
that that would address LLC's
that are in active ray and that
and that because people are
required to report more often
that they that we would have a
cleaner list of active LLC's of
the State.
So I Mr chairman not sure of the
committees aware but Mr Burke.
Still doing uniform laws but
he's been a uniform law
commissioner for years I think
set set many records around the
country for the number of
uniformed bills that we pass I'm
just curious if your position
today is different than your
position on the argue review the
uniform bill and if you're okay
with uniformed L. but not with
this one or you don't like that
provision the uniforms will as
well I'm just curious.
If I may of the uniform this or
can you just because of my
previous story.
And to be clear this is not and
that other fellow.
Of Mr chair Senator Wirth the
uniform bill does not have this
provision and.
The uniform bill has another
provision has Lindsey of
polluted to the uniform bill
would require each LLC to file a
report every every three years
corporations I believe file
every two years and the report
would give their current
address.
so that would keep their
addresses up to date so he'd
always be able to contact the
ones who are active.
And
if the would weed out ones
LLC's who are inactive because
they would fly on the annual
report and the bill has a
provision in there allowing the
secretary of state after notice
to just clear the records of all
you know the maybe several
hundred thousand or more in
active LLC's so let's a clearing
the record.
Act fund tells east headed up
today updated the record for
vision for active health please.
So I guess I appreciate that I
guess my question service box
which would that provisions
dress what this.
So I.
so I spoke with the sponsor
after the hearing yesterday we
are still asking for the filing
of of membership related to LLCs
partly because our position
chair Senator is that you know
when it when you file for
corporation you do indicate at
least to folks who are
associated with that and
director and.
And the other.
Officer director an officer for
that corporation filing what we
know is that people who file for
LLCs in the state are looking
for the benefits of an LLC and
we feel like for transparency
reasons the names being
associated with those LLC should
be disclosed hello Mr chair
again having for many LCS.
Families that come in and you've
got fifteen different family
members and just I don't see
what why I mean I get what
you're trying to accomplish but
putting all of those names and
just causes me some heartburn as
well let me say this.
Putting in statute things that
go against the uniformed law
something is not gonna be looked
upon favorably in the Judiciary
Committee chair again what we're
doing we're trying to make our
laws uniformed so if you start
getting provisions that are not
uniform.
That's just a red flag Senator
I'm chair I I hear what you're
saying I guess I I am not of the
understanding and perhaps you
could clarify if that's against
uniform law I know it's not in
the other bill but I'm not sure
the testimony was that that's
not aligned with uniform long is
that what you're saying.
Sorry this is fine.
Okay sure.
Yeah that's right.
On
this provision is not in the
uniform law there's nothing like
it in the uniform law.
Thank you for law does not
require you to file a list of
the office of the members or the
managers with the secretary of
state quarters of public record
and here to support you know if
you know for commissioners
discussed this is a possibility
for being walked yes we did what
was the decision made by the in
form law commission not to list.
I think that's important
provision.
Well let me take that back they
they sent list.
If it's member if it's managed
by managers you list one Madam.
If it is managed by members.
Utilised one member.
While also Mr chairman that to
me makes a lot more sense and
again we got a managing member
that makes sense to have that
were one and that's quite
frankly that's more consistent
with corporations you've got one
director in one office or so I
mean it just would seem to me
that that might be a compromise
here versus listing all of them
which then feels like we're
creating something that is
actually detrimental with the
LFC because I do know people you
know there's reasons just as
smart as you say.
When when when when entities and
and folks are looking to create
a corporate type of entity I
mean there's advantages to both
systems and they're looking at
that I just what you don't want
to do is have.
You're you're trying to
accomplish something to
disclosure and transparency that
could actually backfire if all
the sudden.
Folks don't want to have all
fifteen members of the LLC with
their addresses in there versus
I'll go for okay we'll go set up
some type of corporation
wheeling needless to.
Well just say that respectfully
I mean they're agreeing to be
part of the LLC so so they've
agreed to do that well except Mr
chair that happens I'm saying
yeah you're right now if we pass
this law that's exactly right
they would be a great but what
I'm what worries me though is
that then you've got you could
potentially have a situation
where someone doesn't for
disclosure reasons because they
don't want to have all the names
of all the folks is closed okay
now we're going to create an S.
corporation which may not be as
beneficial you just taking away
an option and it's the exact
opposite of where we are now
this but frankly I think you've
got folks that want an LLC
because they don't have all the
folks disclose that's the
challenge it's kind of creating
a reverse potentially you.
Mister excuse me Mister chair
senator if if I can follow up on
that what this bill does in New
Mexico at the request of members
of the bar and because we've
built list on right now we take
out that provision.
About listing one member and one
chair so the president bills
does not question because of the
long standing local practice.
It may get put back at but right
now it does not even have that
just to be clear that's in the
US and the uniform version want
to cross hello.
Make sure I understand what
you're saying what I'm saying is
I told you what the.
Model version for the uniform
law commission says but the bill
that was introduced here that's
coming across doesn't have that
provision in Mr chair what
you're saying that's because the
lawyers here talk it out they
wanted in there that's correct
to say their clients no one.
It's not just the lawyers States
their clients who don't want to
be clear that the obviously a.
Thank great thank you so.
Using sure.
Okay.
No I
just want to mention Scrase
Senator X. thank you for this
thank you Mr chairman and.
Your work with understood where
corporations are.
We're now seeing that you guys
want to go beyond what it an
escort would have to do
Mr chairman and we need and and
Senator added our partnership
identified in I the
the main partner then limited
quarter show up or are they
there now.
To is this one is this
particular entity being singled
out for more disclosure and any
other of our or legal in.
We have another professional
from the secretary of state's
office here the convention from
the business services area yep
there was.
Hames things are kind of the
business services supervisor
they to my knowledge our public
information as far as
partnerships are concerned.
I did have a little bit of us.
But step away from the secretary
of state's office but I don't
believe that that has changed I
can confirm in just a few
minutes here but to my knowledge
they are public record Mr
chairman senators so two
return shared with your state
and use.
Limited partners in fifteen oh
we all show up.
Yes.
Mr chair.
Senator Griggs limit J. out
works in real life.
I talked to people who form the
stakes these limited
partnerships.
They're called an organized.
You form the state where there
are no Parker's before there are
any partners.
He checked the help you for
choose the partnership is name
this this is their address.
Here's the statutory agent and
there are no alright I'm the
organizer and I'm not a point
you file that puppy.
You get it back.
Last year.
You're supposed to file an
amended partnership.
When you have partners well.
Tell your client does what
they're supposed to do but the
client disincentive about.
I'm sorry what really works.
That sounds like that's almost
too easy facial.
Secretary St that have all of
the.
The number you do different
things with the LESC.
Well I would also tell you about
how it really works.
And.
And that.
I'd say the similar to work in
his capacity as a lawyer who's
done a lot so they'll usually
you need to build a.
Winds up to date on the state of
New Mexico well you know.
Mr chair
Senator Grange in all you could
tell the client what the law is
what the element do but you
can't you can't stand local
report the bullwhip and make up
to.
You know.
Thank you.
Senator.
For.
I have goals and LFC resulting
generation.
At.
This call.
The schools do more with your
school you are free in the are
we in for why Yemen LLC are did
I Mr surely care workers some of
the members of the LFC would
have to be
listed I probably care too much
but I can understand where the
money that I can understand
where you might more today you
did when I form the LFC and and
so I I thank you judge yeah I
think what we need to do is
probably to the other bill she
what is is there for.
Show up for.
Mr chairman shin on the table.
The.
Senator huh.
Senator huh.
No.
Senator.
Senator Lopez.
Bill.
Senator Sweetser yes.
Senator Wirth I.
Sen.
Yes.
six.
One twenty six.
You get this.
Or.
I.
Senator Shendo Senate bill one
forty six okay thank you Mr
chairman
With me here is our secretary of
The TRD.
Stephanie Schardin Clarke and
then also will be going to
shorten is Michael sponsor of
Representative Jason Harper
piece of
presented a bill in the
committee as well so hopefully
it'll work its way over here but
the Senate bill of is a TRD
department of bills it as a.
Isn't recommended tax changes
and so I'm just going to turn it
over to the secretary sort of
confuse anybody.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee again
Stephanie Schardin Clarke during
the cabinet secretariat taxed
Representative this is one of
our to HSD built before you
today.
And
I can walk you section by
section that we have and we have
an amendment one you.
We have amendments I do bring in
a photo ID with I have a okay
you are welcome to so of the
amendments or in your handbook
to get a motion on the amendment
for discussion okay.
Of course.
Yes and just the two two four
seven three six point one twenty
one correct explain the
mentalist to the amendment first
and okay.
All right so Mr chairman and
members of the committee the
amendment on this bill is is
pretty straightforward we're
thankful to the administrative
hearings office for providing us
some commentary on the bill and
so the first part of the
amendment talks about basically
allowing if the if the parties
request or consent that certain
notices can be provided by
regular mail instead of
certified mail which is
certainly in line with the the
way the world is moving and so
it it takes away the necessity
for certified mail and just get
flexibility and then the second
part of the amendment just
clarifies the the bill talks
about the existing staff to talk
about hearing officers and this
language just makes it clear
that these are hearing officers
of the administrative office not
for example a county hearing
officer or some other hearing
officer and that's the gist of
the amendment.
Some members any close to the
amendment first any questions on
the amendment.
anyone in the audience on the
amendment.
Support for opposition the
amendment yes Ryan and as of the
teacher officer administrative
hearings office I've nothing to
add I'm here to answer any
technical questions about the
amendment and of course.
Anyone on zoom on the amendment
no okay great let's go ahead
Did we have a motion the
solution center Representative
center Brandon motion second
center Lopez any objections
amendment you've got amended
bills go back on thank you.
Okay Mr chairman members of the
committee if I mail a walk you
through section by section
sections one into make a change
to the a minimum amount of
delinquent tax that the taxation
and revenue department may
assessed you can think of this
as an inflation adjustment right
now the statute says that we can
assess a minimum of twenty five
dollars in taxes due and we
would like to increase that to
fifty dollars a minimum tax do
and I'll just prevent of a few
very small dollar amount
assessments that arguably we
would spend more state resources
attempting to collect then we
would gain if we did collect
them and that will also reduce
some taxpayer burden of having
to deal with those assessments
intentionally hire counsel and
things like that so the reason
there's two sections is that
increases the minimum we then
assess to fifty but it also sets
a minimum that the taxpayer may
protest to also keep us from
receiving and dealing with
protests of that is very very
small dollar amounts next on to
section three
we are defining in statute the
application process to request a
credit from the department and
we're trying to do here is
mimicked the language that
already exists and works well
for the process to to request a
refund from the department and
and what we're trying to do here
is sort of a give and take with
the tax payers in exchange for
tax payers having to submit a
complete application for their
credit so that it's squarely
before the department before our
time to review it starts taking
we also are reducing our number
of days that were provided to
review the credit application so
where is right now we have a
hundred and eighty days to
review we would shorten that two
hundred and twenty days taking
sixty days off departments
review time because we'll have
the complete package when we
start our review so we can do
that.
next is a change in section four
to the tax fraud and tax evasion
section this basically is to
have the statute reflect new
technology that fraudsters are
are beginning to use more and
more often they're called sales
APRS a phantom where this is
basically something you could
probably plug into your cash
register whether it be software
or device that will artificially
make it look like you're
receipts were less than they
were so that when you go to file
your taxes you commit evasion
and that's it that's in the
criminal code and we're just.
Incorporate that new techno.
Code.
the rest of the bill is the
property tax code and if I can
say just sort of generally
what's dealt with here are
mostly protest rates and
remedies when your property is
centrally assessed by tax and
Representative rather than your
county assessor so when we think
about property tax assessment
most of us usually picture that
happening by county assessors
but there are some properties
typically large business
properties that crossed county
lines like for example railroads
and utilities and like that work
it centrally assessed by tax and
Rav the statute as it exists
right now tends to
treat everything like it's been
done by the county and so we're
kind of carrying out the process
to make it clear that we are
centrally assessed by tax and
Rev we have different protest
rates and remedies so in
sections five and six it has to
do with basically if if you
protest
And your and you are assessed by
tax and Rev that you're protest
goes to administrative hearings
office rather than the county
protest board it wouldn't make
sense for us to assess the
minute go back to the county
protest board section seven has
to do with a limited assets with
that means is that the tax payer
did not
report the asset for valuation
and so it's not on the property
tax rolls until taxed
Representative assesses that
it's basically making sure that
when we assess and omitted asset
that the taxpayer still has
their protest rates as if they
had
submitted the asset and then
sections eight nine finally
the yield rate that taxed Rev
has if if we receive an adverse
decision from the administrative
hearing office
and basically making it so that
in property tax basis we have
the same appeal rights as we
have it under the rest of the
tax administration act appeals
go straight to the court of
appeals rather than District
Court and working looking to
line out of the property tax
code not thank you for your
indulgence on that I know that
it's kind of complicated but
that is our.
Great thank you senator.
let's go out to the audience of
those in support of Senate bill
one forty six.
Sir just come up and take them
out the other.
Mr chair members of the
committee again my name is Brian
Fenton's and on the chief
hearing officer the
administrative hearings office I
should clarify and not in
support or against the bill in
here mainly to answer technical
questions about the hearing
process and how of some of the
changes would happen here I do
appreciate that taxed Rav
took some of my comments and
made the amendment so I am
grateful for that.
There's some policy aspects of
this bill that I can't really
discuss I'm not allowed to
engage in policy but I think
it's fair for me to be here to
talk about process and I think
overall I would say a special
port the process changes because
the clarify what mostly is
existing law and I think
clarification laws always good
to hear in process there are
some new provisions about appeal
but in effect
the way it has been working as
these cases get to the court of
appeals relatively quickly
anyway so although it looks like
a new provision it is the
reality of how the appeals have
have worked when there is a
centrally assessed
Pretty case that we that HL
heroes and we issue a decision
so I'm here to answer up will
stop talking and just here if
you have technical questions
about the process thank you
thank you.
I also support.
Anyone assume for.
Anyone in opposition.
Yeah.
Right questions from the
committee.
I'll ask one.
so curious so we're now saying
on page eight.
line ten.
Basically that's the civil
action to.
Protest on a credit claim is
filed all in Santa Fe District
Court.
And I'm just curious now.
So currently without this change
of their files in any District
Court across the state and we're
trying to consolidate those
packages Santa Fe just explain
that thank you for that.
Yeah.
You are tax policy director mark
checking into too and I wonder
if he.
Might have a.
So that the question was whether
weren't consolidating these
actions in the credit approval
to Santa Fe District Court in
our or they all already there.
Mr chair Senator I'm not.
Pardon me
and again as my name is mark
shaking tax policy director at
the taxation and revenue
department I'm afraid I don't
know the answer to that question
as it currently is
But I would imagine that that
would be a new position
provision
because jurisdiction would
generally be where the property
was located this is the the
credit claims of the credit
cards are considered then I dont
of doubt that it would be a new
provision because probably if it
affects the taxation revenue
department jurisdiction would be
of any rather would be here in
the first additional district.
So Mister chair I just.
Here.
I just look the same goes get an
answer to that is the work
because I just I just I I kind
of jumped out at me.
Mr chair and I know that we're
mimicking the statute that is
already on the books for refunds
and and making it the similar
wording applied a credit to I
agree with with mark said that.
That is probably is already
happening here but.
And I think Miss defendants and
with great okay and the other
thing on on page twelve section
I we're taking away currently
you can file a protest.
Attention on a property tax
with.
Either.
The administrative hearing
officer this for the county
assessor so which administrative
here I'm just curious I'm not
familiar with.
Filing a protest of the county
with the administrative your.
So
Senator Wirth Mr chairman
currently the protests may go
back to the county assessor even
if they're centrally assessed by
tax and rubs property tax
division and this is splitting
that out so that if you've been
assessed by tax and Rev you
would follow that the tax
protest process up through the
court of appeals.
So just so that and that's the
the new section six basically
splitting out that's kind of the
that's one that makes sense
because I I've certainly done
County protests and never gone
to a hearing officer it's always
been the county assessor so
we're just creating the two
sections that that's correct
just being split out for free
drafting purposes and
for properties that are assessed
locally by your county assessor
nothing will change about your
protest processor right.
Great.
any other questions.
What's the pleasure at the tax
the most accurate due process
Senator Kernan a second by
senator Sanchez is there any
objection to it to pass.
Seeing none you have a do pass
one two three four.
Seven eight zero
has and then from here on out
those are the ones are Senate
center our meal then let's just
let's do this let's have a roll
call.
Senator practice yes Senator
great as amended.
Senator huh.
Yes Senator Kernan.
Senator Lopez.
Senator Sanchez.
Yes Sierra yes Senator Wirth yes
Senator Shendo yes.
We have nine yeses.
So on nine zero if to pass and
next up is Senate bill one forty
seven.
All right thank you senator
committee is going to turn it
over to our secretary again it's
to go through the changes in the
various sections of the Senate
bill one forty seven thank you
Mr chair members of the
committee this is the second of
taxed right agency bills related
to tax this year and again if
it's the will the committee I'll
just take you section by section
as quickly as they can but there
is a member and thank you yes
there's amendment so we can
move.
The man.
Other than that from like to
move.
And that's in place with the
amendment first.
Mr chair again the amendment is
is that a lot of just minor
technical fixing and then
inclusion of a couple more
concepts that came up through
COVID on the bill that we
received once it was introduced
the amendment number is two two
four seven one zero dot five it
should be the version you have
all right
so the
one of the most more major
changes is that
section amendment one.
And amendment four straight
section ten in their entirety
and so in the original bill we
had a proposal that was going to
allow taxed wrote a rule to
require certain deductions to be
separately stated and there is
concern about that just when you
have to separately choose your
deductions that adds burden for
the taxpayer and all what you
know the feedback that we got
was that we feel comfortable
with with the current tax and
Rev requiring that but we're not
sure in the future that they'll
exercise discretion with that
and we said no problem let's
let's take section ten out of
the bill
amendment two and amendments.
Eleven has a new section which
has to do with testing
requirements for certified
public accountants CPA's
basically we we heard from the
CPA society that they requested
this is enough for tax
practitioners the current
section and you can see this an
amendment eleven.
This is a CPA candidate eighteen
months from the date they take
their CPA exam to pass all the
parts of the test what this
would do is give them eighteen
months from when they get their
results rather than from when
they took the test I think that
the CPA society has expressed
some concerns about delayed
getting test results may be due
to comment and so that seems
like a pretty sensible change
and we added into the bill in
this ammendment
Amendment three is just some
technical cleanup about
compliance for liquor liquor
licenses all talk a little bit
more in a moment on the main
bill about what that for about
is just technical cleanup though
amendment I is also
having to do with compliance I'm
I'm sorry of amendment eleven is
has to do with some technical
clean up related to special fuel
tax and it's language that was
in Senate bill three sixty
repealing obsolete repealed
sections of law being references
statute without that was was
good change.
amendments six and seven have to
do with excluding payments that
health care providers in New
Mexico receive through Medicaid
for the part of the federal the
federal American ski planet
rescue plan act thank you
and there's a standalone bill
excluding are pro from G. R. T.
as well and we're making the
same changes that have been made
to that bill.
Those are the major parts of the
the amendment the rest is really
just minor technical clean up.
I should note at the very end on
the last page of the amendment
again we we received really
great comments from the
administrative hearings office
amendments twelve and thirteen
are striking the repeal of
section sixty six dash four dash
three which was not intended in
our original drafting we restore
that within the amendment.
All right let's go to the
audience anyone in support on
just on the amendment first.
Interested in a.
Anyone in the audience in
opposition to the amendment.
Online anyone online on the
amendment.
Mandel fan Dave the.
Just do it on the billion yeah
we're just on the amendment I
selected Gabriele the governor
will back on the.
Us committee questions on the
amendment.
To just the one question I've
got is that in your the the arc
it's number seven I just want to
make sure I understand.
Yeah we did have a separate bill
on G. R. T. V. you're saying
this is a different.
Is this the more of that G. R.
T. bills Mr chairman senator
Wirth as amended this will now
begin I'm here to the standalone
arpa extension of the once the
arpa exclusion bill was
introduced we had conversations
with the Medicaid program that
about how the money flows
through Medicaid and it was
different than the cares Act
exclusion that's already in
statute so this will make it
technically work and making the
two bills matching information.
Okay so I just again I think
we'll have the discussion of how
we handle that given that we're
holding we've been holding
different bills and held that
bill because of the fiscal
impact yes the one time and now
we've got it built in here so we
can talk about that when we get
there but I think with by the
then we're just lining up and
that makes sense so there's no
other questions is there any
objection to the amendment first
for those in the room the
members in the room.
Seeing none Senator army are you
okay with the amendment.
Yes.
You have amended bill let's go
back on the bill thank you Mr
chair it's one of the produce
more co sponsors Representative
these are.
There's always always late you
know.
I apologize to at I enjoyed
being here thank you good to
have you here all right let's go
back through the bill thank you
Mr chairman members of the
committee so I I'll let please
stop me if you want more detail
than I'm giving but in the
interest of time offer to move
quickly through the sections
section one of the original bill
provides a statutory requirement
for taxed Rav annually to create
a tax expenditure budget this is
withdrew from language and
Senator Tallman Bill in past
years but it's a little
different but basically right
now we create the tax
expenditure report every year
just based on
more than decade old executive
orders so this would ensuring
that requirements statute.
section to it has to do it it's
technical language having to do
with how the cannabis excise
taxes distributed it doesn't
change anything about who
received the revenue or or when
or or how but we're trying to
prevent confusion inconsistency
in law.
Section three would allow tax
and Rev to share certain data
with the department of
transportation related to the
special fuel tax it's the same
information we share with them
already on the gasoline tax and
they need it for some of their
federal reporting so right now
DOT doesn't always have the
information it needs to make its
its reporting and this will
alleviate that problem.
Section four is cleanup language
to business code reporting
this goes back to house bill six
and in twenty nineteen and and
just cleaning up that reporting
code language section five
CM.
Sections of a page six for.
Start with page six.
Very well.
The substance of that is on page
seven.
Okay going on to section five
We're trying to eliminate a
duplicate process for taxpayers
where in the insurance premium
tax and this is the tax that
transitioned over to taxed
reference the superintendent of
insurance a few years ago right
now.
If an insurance premium tax
payer files an amended return
that generates a refund amount
to them they separately have to
request a refund this will allow
the amended return itself to be
the refund request and that's
the case with many of our tax
programs we're just adding
insurance premium tax to that to
save taxpayers a step.
the next part is several
sections six sixteen twenty two
and twenty five all have to do
with when licenses for various
activity are renewed for example
to have a liquor license or a
license to sell cannabis or
cigarettes
the does compliance checks with
us to make sure that the tax
payer is current with all their
tax obligations for that tax
program in G. R. T. in in all
the sections were just
standardizing the language so
that we can better automate our
compliance checks and speed them
up for those that are waiting to
have their license renewed.
section seven has to do with
clarifying a tribal member
income tax exemption it the key
change in section seven is
changing that this tribal
member.
no longer with live in the
tribal land in which they I also
work for the try but be
domiciled there and the key
about being domiciled there is
to complete conform with federal
law and make sure that our
exclusion of tribal member
income when you work for the
tribe stays in step with the
federal law.
section eight it has to do with
disclose disclose Agency which
is something that we addressed
in last year's tax package we're
making further technical changes
this is the care meeting
prevention and litigation
prevention a disclosed agent is
basically a middle person who
receives funds on behalf of
their principal and passes it on
to someone and we're we're
trying to make clear that the
pass through of that money is
not subject to tax and not
pyramid.
section nine is another section
that does provide fiscal impact
to senator Wirth comment a
moment ago as currently drafted
in the gross receipts
compensating tax act the receipt
the cigarette excise tax and
cannabis excise tax receipts
that are collected by cannabis
and in cigarette licensees are
subject to G. R. T. they're
being double taxed currently and
that was a surprise to the
cannabis licensees this year and
and we're committed to try to
remove that double taxation so
basically if this bill passes
the no longer have to pay G. R.
T. on the excise tax they
collect and send straight to the
state.
section ten has been removed in
the amended bill.
If that
section eleven expands a.
the current exemption from the
compensating tax to include
services that are used by the
government currently the
compensating Tax already exempt
tangible personal property used
by the government but not the
services and there's no
reason and tax policy to
separate those two so we just
proposed to align them.
section twelve as amended as the
our picks pollution that we
talked about previously so that
those receipts of health care
providers in New Mexico that
that received through Medicaid
from our I are no longer subject
to G. R. T..
There's a nonrecurring impact to
that.
section thirteen is is very much
technical cleanup it provides
that a certain deductions can be
substantiated with alternative
evidence such as a a contractor
invoices rather than an NTPC
it's already allowed by section
seven dash nine dash forty six
but by referencing alternative
evidence right there in the
deduction will prevent taxpayer
confusion.
section fourteen provides that
there will be no G. R. T. fund
ebook electronic book licenses
that are licensed out by public
libraries basically there's a
disparity in taxation right now
between hard copy that landed
out by libraries and evokes and
we're trying to align this to
and removed the G. R. T. on
ebook licenses which are
becoming more and more popular.
Section fifteen is the is the
mimic emir of the bill that you
considered last year allowing
tribal governments to set their
own G. R. T. right regardless of
the neighboring county G. R. T.
right it gives full sovereignty
to tribes in New Mexico to set
their G. R. T. right.
so that could result in
additional tribal G. R. T.
revenue depending on what
actions trying to maintain.
sections seventeen and twenty
five of cover together simply
repeal sections of the tax code
that are completely obsolete
happy to cover them in detail
but they're basically sections
that the eligibility has expired
and no one could ever claim and
again.
skipped over sixty.
C. six.
Come back I think sixteen eight
to order the that was the yeah
I'd.
And then section eighteen makes
clarifications to the trip tax
act it clarifies that there's
there's a credit found in the
trip tax act against the
taxpayers weight distance tax
and motor vehicle registration
fees I would clarify here that
it can't offset more than your
trip Tax do not the entirety of
those other taxes if they exceed
your trip tax liability
nineteen and twenty three are
clarifications again back to the
insurance premium tax they have
to do with a clarifying that
self procured insurance
providers are still subject to
the tax just making sure that
they are fully accounted for in
the the insurance premium tax as
it came over to tax and Rev.
Section twenty is a medical
insurance pool credit and making
it clear that although you can
use that to offset your premium
tax liability it's not
refundable and you can't carry
it forward so to the extent a
provider has a medical insurance
pool credit it's it's limited to
their premium tax liability to
offset that.
Twenty one section twenty one
moves the cannabis excise tax to
destination based sourcing just
like the G. R. T. so that the
location code that taxpayers
must use for the cannabis Tax
matches where they pay their G.
R. T. the only time this whole
matter is of cannabis products
are delivered which may happen
someone but we expect the
shifting between areas to be
fairly minor on this but what we
want to prevent is the burden on
taxpayers of paying their G. R.
T. on a destination based source
paying their cannabis Tax origin
where we expect them to probably
unfortunately make compliance
errors.
And.
That is the last section for us
is just effective dates.
let's go to the audience in
support of Senate bill one forty
seven yes miss peacock.
Yeah come on up and just pull.
Hi my name is Janet peacock and
I'm here today representing the
New Mexico municipal league and
we are in support of this bill
even out some of the changes to
have a slight negative impact on
local revenues we recognize that
the the need for them and we
want to particularly thank the
department for the provisions
that affect the local public
libraries.
Sixty S..
I
think chairman members of the
committee Jason Espinoza
research lobbyist with the New
Mexico Association for Home and
hospice care this tenants from
support and and think the
administration and the
department for including the
provision related to the R. for
exception thank you.
Anyone else in support.
Online and support.
And then you can.
Mr present day.
Yes this we could good afternoon
chairman of the board members of
the committee my name is rental
facility I am the governor for
the pueblo lack of our and we
are in full support of Senate
bill one point seven.
The mobile back and ask what
part of the agreement with the
New Mexico tax revenue
department which collects from
gross receipts taxes on
transactions that occur on our
tribal last HSD remits the
collect the taxes to the Pueblo.
We have been concerned for some
time that the tax revenue
department cannot collect the
full term tax it is not exactly
the same as a local government
area where the problem back home
lands are located why is a
concern when the state lowers G.
R. T. it also lowers the amount
of tax that can be collected on
behalf of the committee pursuant
to our cooperative agreement.
These taxes and revenue source
for New Mexico governments which
actually has a very limited
taxing opportunities at the same
time we have to provide more
services in our community where
the need is greater.
This funding streams critical
and should not be able to
unilaterally decreased Senator
Mexico.
This is there are a lot of time
in more than one county or has
even disability within it's
lance you have a state still
have a cooperative agreement
with the state.
Just the one point seven allows
practices on tax policy for tax
rates he will not time for the
time sensitive gross receipts
tax free and local option of
gross receipts tax rates imposed
by the state for political
subdivisions located within next
thirty miles of the tribe.
For these reasons so chairman we
strongly urge the committee to
give just the one forty seven of
the past thank you Ohio great
thank you governor anyone else
online and support.
Anyone in the audience and
opposition.
Anyone online in opposition.
Members of the committee.
Yes Senator current.
To secure an office thirty three
A.
This is.
to profit in.
Services.
Our state's or the state of New
Mexico.
Units or subdivision at this
week's issue I got this section
doesn't cross certain
does some examples of services.
I compensate tens.
If I may um Mr chair and Senator
Kernan deferred it more taken on
this one I think he'll be ready.
Thank you Mr chair Senator
Kernan
services will be subject to the
compensating tax would be
Services provided by someone who
isn't generally not subject to
the G. R. T. there can be other
exceptions
That's the usual one we're
compensating tax would apply and
so if someone is selling
services to one of the listed
entities here the United States
government and others and they
don't have economic or physical
nexus with New Mexico they would
not be subject to the gross
receipts tax and instead the
purchaser would the compensating
tax so that would be the the
prime circumstance where that
would apply here.
Mr chair.
Just trying to get an idea could
you give me an example because
we're talking about demi Moore
and Services so that's there are
they paying G. R. T. currently
services.
We're adding something that
we're.
This is a change of.
So give me an example of
government entities that sales
will pay compensation.
Not to pay compensation tax on
services provided to them.
Mr chair Senator I would say an
example might be someone who
lives out of state who is
providing services to a state
agency and we do see this I
think even though some of the.
All who will work on bills
during the session here are from
out of state so they don't have
sufficient listening especially
for performing the work out of
state to be subject to the gross
receipts tax and so
theoretically the states would
compensating tax on those
receipts so this bill would say
no the state no longer owes the
compensating tax so these are
the gross other compensating Tax
complements the gross receipts
tax so person is only liable for
the gross receipts tax if they
have listening what we call
nexus with the state of New
Mexico which is either
established through physical
present more through economic
listening there's a threshold of
a hundred thousand dollars
basically
So certain people who may be
providing services to the state
don't have listening they don't
do sufficient business or they
don't have a physical presence
here again here with the
internet and stuff also people
can provide services from
outside the state without to the
state without ever entering the
state and establishing physical
presence here so those people
currently do not of gross
receipts tax the state would owe
the compensating tax on those
receipts for when it receives
the product of the service
so that to this bill was
basically another compensating
tax will no longer apply and the
this is the amount of receipts
are subject to compensating tax
are generally pretty low
especially since we've just
expanded the listening
requirements for for expanded
the the scope of listening I
should say following the way
fair decision from the US
Supreme Court will in twenty
eighteen and twenty nineteen the
state of New Mexico joined
pretty much every other state in
the union and changing is
listening requirements that were
changed by the US Supreme Court
under the U. S. Commerce Clause
so there's it's a small amount
of receipts and I I just
struggle a little to come up
with an example because there
are so few but again it would be
someone who was outside of the
state didn't meet the listening
requirements providing services
to the state and the state
currently owes compensating tax
on that and this bill would
eliminate the compensating Tax.
The state tax
Senator of Mister chairman
Senator that is correct.
Also included that other federal
installations or governments.
Federal government services.
Supply
next season sort of
yes Mister chairman Senator that
is correct it's in section seven
line fourteen that language is
not changing and it says of the
use of property and services by
the United States or the state
of New Mexico or any
governmental unit or sub
subdivision agency department or
instrumentality there of so it
doesn't fly the United States
government as well Mr chair that
the a very small amount as well
or is that something that the
large we're not.
Mister chairman Senator because
of listening is established by
the hundred thousand dollar
economic threshold and that
would be subject to gross
receipts tax
I do believe it would be a small
amount because once the amounts
if someone has a contract for a
million dollars with the state
they're gonna have listening
they're gonna be subject to the
gross receipts tax.
Just curious why at.
Mr chair Senator I can does sale
bit more about the wide if you
would like.
Areas.
Senator Griggs.
Page one.
That
talk about the group.
Right.
We expect to the excise tax she
started twenty that
For.
That that show is that is that
reporting done on C. R. as long
as it is or what are the
important the tax.
It's it's.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator Griggs
We we collectively believe that
each of these excise tax
programs has down forms separate
from the the Business the gross
receipts tax forms there really
isn't anything called C. R. S.
anymore that was combined
revenue system and they're all
separated out.
The shares Station bless you for
that.
But.
Yeah see if.
The what what I'm used to wash
the dishes your for and so for
their reporting on that.
Shares one digit reporter month.
So what's the remedy here or
you're shutting this guy the
sales down.
Montoya I did she did she she
are of one five well it and if
whatever it is filed with that
that's what it looks like is
that is that not correct or
Mister Mister chairman Senator
Griggs the substantive
requirements will remain the
same which is that to renew a
license of various types whether
to liquor license or cigarette
sales or you know whatever type
of licensee might have you have
to not be a delinquent taxpayer
but what we're doing through
this bill is is making all of
the language the same throughout
different tax program so it
remains it it is currently and
it will remain the case that to
have your license renewed you
have to be up to date on your
taxes and not have any un filed
returns.
And and Mr chair Senator is the
then revenues obviously just I
correct but
So.
The disclosure as follows things
down but you're you're gonna let
alcohol beverage control no
they're going to contact a
member did file or whatever
that's that's the the projects
director that's that's what we
currently do and what will
continue to do but what will
improve as a result of of these
proposals is that the compliance
requirements in the the specific
language for each tax program
will be the same and
standardized that'll allow us to
someone automate our compliance
checks do a better back and
forth do it more quickly with
our LD and get those taxpayers
back to you know effective
business and hopefully not have
those.
timelines where they can't
operate.
And and share the senator and
secretary on on page thirty.
Talk about
All excise taxes imposed by the
state and political subdivision.
Trying to recall what excise
taxes municipalities have I just
don't
understand what actually does
what what they all.
So Mister chair and and Senator
Griggs the main taxes that right
now are not addressed by the
current language that we're
trying to make sure our excluded
from gross receipts like I
mentioned my presentation are
cigarette excise tax on cannabis
excise tax right now they're
they're being double taxed there
a couple of local excise taxes
one is the local liquor excise
tax which I believe is just
imposed and McKinley County and
then you would probably consider
the local option G. R. T. that
municipalities and counties
imposes that as well.
Share this center secretary
thanks for our I've never
heard that the local option.
Excise taxes.
All if they are they are issued
to thank you for thank you for
that thank you Mr.
I thank you Senator other
questions from the committee.
so just a couple things that I I
want to follow up on the.
On the liquor license issued on
page twenty and what under
current law.
If a licensee so if I if I owned
a liquor license and I want to
transfer it.
And I got delinquent income
taxes and my prevented from
transferring it under the
current law.
I believe under current law it
is not a it's not a Czech kind
of the licensees income tax it's
just their G. R. T. and and
liquor excise tax and that's
what it would remain here okay
so I just yeah and again it's
it's as defined in seven one
sixteen I guess I don't know
what seven one sixty but that's
basically the same.
Yeah.
Mr chairman does seven one
sixteen just provides the
definition of what a delinquent
taxpayers.
So it to and it talks about
filing requirements and payment
requirements so that's what some
one sixteen does okay so by
adding by adding in the only
with respect we're not that's
not a new limitation is just
clarifying with their okay thank
you so I do think we're gonna
have to make a decision about
you know the seven million
dollar impact to the excise.
Tax part of this bill and I will
tell you I'm a little worried
that if we send this the Senate
finance committee with a seven
million dollar impact and I
guess they could strip it there
but I think we need to think
about that I also want to
understand what's that what's
the cigarette tax portion of
this that's double tax that
we're.
Why are we fixing that.
On the X. right tax.
Well sure okay.
If we without those two tax
impact yes senator Mr chairman.
so this is the way it works
right now and there's actually a
regulation to this effect the
the states this in our code of
regulations that the G. R. T. is
imposed on the cigarette excise
tax as well so I'm afraid I
don't know the figures off the
top of my head but so you have a
hundred dollars worth of
cigarettes receipts and I
believe is the place to
cigarette wholesalers and
distributors and then there's
twenty five dollars tax on that
the G. R. T. will be imposed on
a hundred twenty five dollars
rather than just on the hundred
dollars of the underlying value
so the basically the amount of
the excise taxes being included
in the tax base for G. R. T. and
that's what the why there is
going to be a small loss of
revenue.
Are you I do not it works it
better under cannabis excise
taxes I know those numbers there
if you have a hundred dollars
worth of proceeds from selling
retail cannabis products will be
twelve dollars cannabis excise
tax and then the G. R. T. will
be imposed on a hundred twelve
dollars so if you have an eight
percent you're collecting a
percent of twelve dollars which
is ninety six cents.
So it is not a lot but it's
still something and it adds up
and it does it will add up to.
Yeah I just want to flag me
again I think there's a number
of different policy decisions in
there as well
and again I.
We just need to think about that
not just leave that box the
other one is that we did have a
bill on the on the home health
care issue and and I I'm just
you know again we held that back
it's a nonrecurring impact I
appreciate miss peacock I
appreciate you being here.
And and addressing the locus of
nine hundred thousand dollar
impact to local governments
a little bit concerned on that
one if we don't get that.
You've got an emergency clause
because of the timing on that
and some a little bit concerned
we put that into the this
package and then Representative
Harper can't at the end of the
day vote for what's in there we
don't get emergency clause on
and then that doesn't benefit
them so I do think we need to
think about that one's being in
here
and that's a nonrecurring.
Impacting we let some of the
nonrecurring what's out but I
just want black that issue and
I'm glad Senator Kernan is back
at the final thing I couldn't
help but notice is on
Destination based sourcing issue
with cannabis.
it is we get it right.
on here is section twenty one.
Section twenty one.
And so I just want to make sure
so this would basically means
that if the cannabis store in
hops delivers outside the city
limits.
In the Lee County then basically
it's going to be taxed in Lee
County not in.
Yeah hops.
I just try.
I think that's what we're doing
again I the consistency across.
Is important and but again
that's that same I just want to
flag that issue Senator Wirth
appreciate that you know the the
department never wants to set up
taxpayers to fail to all
interlinked imply correctly and
with destination based sourcing
the G. R. T. an origin based
sourcing of the cannabis tax and
all of the adult use
recreational cannabis is subject
about taxes we feel like we're
inviting taxpayers to file an
correctly pay incorrectly which
will then lead to claw backs and
we just think it's it's good tax
policy and and diminishes
taxpayer burden to have them
source the same so.
Yes absolutely Senator you know
it is we don't really know what
that affects the.
So.
It costs actually is.
with regard to campus.
This.
How much is actually to live for
actis on supplies are delivered
in.
Mr chairman and senator current
and it's happening to some
extent thank you know I've seen
in newspapers just in the last
couple months a couple
announcements I think there's
something in one of our local
papers today about someone
inTaos is going to be delivering
I think it's it's minimal right
now it could become
more you know more broadly
offered as years go by
That's why we've said it's you
know that our estimate of it is
indeterminate but it might cost
a minimal shifting between local
governments.
Thank you Mr and this is
proved a
sourcing out of focus more on
services so.
I'm not sure that can't
participate yes that that I
understand the system.
One last point if you know of
course Mister chairman Senator
Kernan due to federal law no one
could deliver across state lines
Mr chair Senator right the
state.
That also occur Senator Brandt.
Mr chairman and I think it's a
little bit interesting that we.
I and I didn't realize or
marijuana bill allowed cannabis
to be delivered either but we
don't allow alcohol to be
delivered.
So
We fix that the the the change
because I don't know that very
seriously their direction
hello there's some things I
don't know about that was
certainly some period during the
COVID was a temporary would
permanently fix that you're
Senator you're correct the rich
In places like.
In places like Alamogordo
Walmart could do with.
Places like Rio Rancho Walmart
can't deliver the use that ten
thousand square foot restriction
on building sites
that
Wish I could remember that
matter but that alcohol can can
be delivered but it's only in.
Reduced quantities shameful.
And
was horrible general Keane fiber
one and then you can see it all
the way to or from high.
Meet someone at the border but
you know maybe something and it
has on the do this bill would
maybe something on a look at
honestly the look the issue
always on alcohol was okay Mr
Carty people the door or the
carding people the door for
cannabis slides they are it
shouldn't be a problem.
Thank you.
I guess
Chairman should though I guess
and and and Representative
Fajardo is the question becomes
how do we deal with section nine
and section twelve section line
is the excise tax that's about
seven million dollar impact
that's recurring.
section twelve is the issue for
the are of funds the bill we had
before I just would like to
know.
How you want what what your
thought is on that I might have
thought.
So
Yeah so it's a chairman
committee members I I understand
the.
The.
Of the perplexing question right
I mean this is the tax cleanup
bill we are doing a few things
their policy changes here maybe
million policy changes right.
but the majority of this really
is trying to clean up.
Make more consistent.
and so to me it's really kind of
a a gray area those those two I
agree with the tax policy
portion of those to but you know
the fiscal impact right I.
Hi I get it that we like to keep
things held other or you know
maybe split these off
Yeah so I I I I. some saying up
I would defer to the the
committee I don't really have
strong preference one way or the
other on this.
Next up for this bill is Senate
finance.
Yeah there's a question and
maybe Senator Lopez I mean the
cigarette tax issue I mean
basically work taking off on.
Additional cigarette tax that's
that's part of the excise tax
fees was the policy question on
that.
of the database costs on that.
Well
there's still legislation has
been proposed as regards to
cigarette taxes to
I think quite frankly it would
be interesting discussion to
have
amongst the tobacco settlement
folks to just because of our
push forward and what we're
doing the guards to health as we
were looking at this that this
poses an interesting.
Yeah and and chairman and
senator I just clarify what what
we're think we're talking about
here.
What we're saying is right now.
When you tax cigarette the and I
don't think so as not to be on
the cell of the good not on how
much extra tax you put on the
good.
I understand that it's just.
Processing.
This is where we go get with the
intent of the bill is trying to
do.
I think.
There's a just.
S. R..
Maybe you could use that to help
we would suggest that we wrap up
the that we send it out with the
committee set up and get this
ammendment wrapped in as we do
in Judiciary don't hold up at
all but I think we definitely so
it comes out clean otherwise
trying to track this with this
up with amendment it just gets
really messy to do that and be
much cleaner bill we got
sections sections taken out and
things tweaked but I think the
choices you could set it as is
you could take out section nine
which is the seven million
dollar impact and move it with
the other.
You know nonrecurring park up
issue that we debated that we
keep that in the clean up bill
which I think is a much better
chance of getting emergency
costs or you could take out both
of those and then send it with
no with no impact just as a pure
cleanup bill also meet those the
choices.
Tions.
Right so it's clean.
And so the question is we saw
that do we we.
Which is the hard part because
it's nonrecurring.
And small.
The secretary.
Personally.
Well that.
So is to move forward.
With a substitute correct.
And then leave them in there for
now is that.
The second season.
And then.
See we would finance but as with
that.
So that's does anyone else.
Any other members relations or
do we well worth point were
ready for a motion so.
Senator Brandt so Mr chairman I
I just want to catch up to the
suggestion is taking amendments
role then to us
So we would need to do I do not
pass on Senate Bill.
One forty seven.
To pass on.
Committee substitute for Senate
bill one forty seven.
Correct that's correct and then
what we would do is just.
Get that cleaned up up stairs
and will reported out as this
with the amendment bills and
that is correct it's just
cleaning products which is a lot
easier than having it come with
separate amendment on to it yeah
Senator if.
And the Mr chair and senator but
if but if we.
Reporting a bill out of this we
really haven't seen.
And that this not that I don't
think they're going to do with
the share of the British as a.
As a process.
Issues should we bring it back.
Here again and then report.
So that's certainly an option
and we haven't really done that
since committee I will tell you
in Senate Judiciary we do this
almost.
Most of bills that come out are
done this way amendments are
made and then we wrap them all
up everyone takes a look at it
we just report it out so we
don't slow it down but it's
certainly we when we were back
we're back on Saturday so we
could we could do it that way if
you want to do that I don't want
to hold up so much but I I think
it's got too much there's too
much to.
It would just be better if we
just spent five minutes or
that we can really.
Senate.
Gonna go tomorrow.
Representative birthday sure.
The one section at a.
Yeah we mended so so basically
just if it's a difference of of
of of a day is either getting
report out Friday or on on
Monday the way we build itself I
mean again I think if if if yeah
what what we're fine with that
and so I I think that's the you
know and and again if anyone.
I think the question becomes we
can have a discussion now and
then maybe we keep talking to
thank the other issue is whether
anyone does want to pull out any
of the sections.
And we we need to have that
discussion center lotus and Mr
chair what about removing
section nine.
The Xbox.
The taxation on this is that the
that's a secret piece right on
the the taxation.
With us or well
I I really respect the will of
the committee Mr chair and and
Senator Lopez and we primarily
brought this forward because
of the communication that we had
after the go live date of the
cannabis excise tax it was not
the intent of the cannabis
excise tax act to pyramid these
receipts and when the question
came to the department for
analysis we found that there was
really no way that we could
under current statutes not
subject them to the double
taxation that we couldn't do
this by rule the legislative
change was required and so you
know because it wasn't the
intent of the cannabis excise
tax act when it was enacted you
know we had not scored this
increase in revenue
we set about to try to fix that
for the industry we did not hear
from cigarette excise tax payers
that you this this double
taxation has been the case in
their tax program for.
Very long time and I'm surprised
that we didn't hear from them
before but it seems fair to fix
for both.
Well Mr chairman of.
It's a concern but you know I'm
willing to go along with the
Sanchez if they're willing to
chance it and just see what what
happens in finance so I I'll
just noted my.
My concern on section nine.
It's oh one more thing I'd be
curious to know what how much
money we talking about on the
cigarette and if no one's ever
brought that issue up what I I
again how much money we talk
about this the cannabis B.
certainly has been a discussion
and could this be drafted so
that was just campus absolutely
and Senator Wirth on chairman
the initial version of this that
we drafted was just targeting
cannabis excise tax and we could
listed by name rather than list
all excise taxes.
So that would be something that
we could fold into substitute
upon the committee's direction.
So from that yes Senator so but
other additions are impacted and
the number one.
pages this time.
Policy thank you please.
In the group's already listed.
Section nine.
So.
On page thirty Mister chairman
Senator Kernan you can see in
the the language on twenty nine
to twenty one and on.
C..
The group so we're in a section
that basically gross receipts
excludes it used to say New
Mexico gross receipts tax so in
other words you don't have to
pay gross receipts tax on your
gross receipts tax it excludes
the governmental gross receipts
tax and the least vehicle gross
receipts tax so they're already
some carve outs and and it would
be easy enough to just.
Change the section that's add
the the language that's added to
just referenced the cannabis
excise tax instead of all excise
taxes.
On the other.
There's a three million dollar
local government impact to this
I was adding together but it's
four point three to the state
and three million.
The local government self I mean
I would feel more comfortable
that was just cannabis since
that that was the focus.
I and that's.
That's me.
I I disagree if that was the
original
Go back to that building so I
just think let's let's go ahead
I mean look at this you probably
take a vote on this so that they
have absolute direction and I
want to bring back a sob and you
know want to go a different
direction so Senator Lopez you
wanna make a motion to that
effect some of.
State the motion.
At work Rick with regards to
section nine is just removing a
reference to the
To the cigarette tax as you had
mentioned a secretary is struck
and cannabis.
Present except.
A thirty doesn't actually six
six.
And of so basically on the
strike yeah page thirty it's
just all excise taxes and you
would change that I think to say
simply all excise taxes imposed
on cannabis products or
something to that effect you got
up in the I think I don't think
Mr chair I think I'd be a little
be would read New Mexico gross
receipts tax governmental gross
receipts tax leased vehicle
gross receipts tax and cannabis
excise tax access to okay very
good.
The state you will remove that
will strike the.
It strikes all the New England
area.
Okay just adding cannabis to the
list that's already in statute.
I think that expensive so
Chairman of a that's the will
look on this this will happen.
I just a.
I just want to say I think it's
a bad tax policy and of course I
don't participate in any sin
taxes so I'm not to hear
advocating for them
Don't participate anything that
is considered us and by us and
tax but I I really think
principles of good tax policy
here that we are neutral that we
don't treat very similar things
different please.
Right and what would be saying
here is we're okay with.
smoking cannabis but with you
know with the cigarettes well
that's bad right and I just.
Good tax policy doesn't make
those decisions just as we don't
double tax stuff.
So all the sure that Mr
Chairman.
I guess the question to Senator
Lopez as a proposed amendment Mr
chair is not a friendly
amendment hearing from your
clothes plus.
Tax policy issue as well as the
middle.
Yeah we just have the committee
take a vote yes to the.
Thanks committee take the boat
zero.
I would so move.
We've got a motion yes I'll
second the motion let's go ahead
and call the roll on the motion.
Senator no.
Senator Griggs now Senator how
to me up.
Yes.
Senator Kernan number.
Senator Lopez yes.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator Tallman.
No.
Senator Wirth yes.
Senator Shendo no.
Okay so that motion fails
so basically I think we're not
gonna take a motion now this we
went to the latter so we but we
know where we are it's it's the
bill's going to go out like it
is the amendment wrapped into is
so it's cleaned up and we get a
chance to look at it and we'll
see what Senate finance.
Does with that piece and again I
just think the the concern is
there's a whole bunch of stuff
in here that needs to happen and
I will tell you I don't think
Senate finance has a seven
million dollar number scored in
in the in the obscene Center for
the as a member scores on a
little worried about that versus
putting that provision into the
omnibus bill which is our other
option so I just think as it
moves forward you may need to.
Consider that as the backup
alternative so that you can get
this through but I do think I
think it's important for the
home health care folks to hear
this this with the with that
provision in this bill and the
cleanup I think there's a good
chance it gets the emergency
clause and we we deal with this
other piece which I think is
something that.
Is a nonrecurring issue that
needs to be addressed.
All right thank you for Senator
Shendo.
Representative Harper good to
see you direction it is seven
can't.
Yeah just to just to be yes we
can just of it just to be clear
so the the the the motion failed
so it'll now be it'll be as is
just wrapped up in a committees
All right all right thank you
thank you.
Senator.
Yeah.
And.
Good.
Senator Campos thank you very
much thank you very much Mr
chairman I am here with Senator
Campos Y. no we'll have a couple
comments here momentarily I'll
just a introduce the.
Effort today this is the
wildlife of Sir wildfire
recovery act since we were doing
is to to clarify allowing people
who suffered property damage or
personal injury due to the
wildfire due to a wildfire to
recover economic and non
economic damages and attorney's
fees the bill does create
definitions for who may be
entitled to to recovery The
lawsuits etcetera and what will
be a kid what will be
part of those losses that can be
named those include damage to
real property personal property
loss timber other natural
resources costs incurred during
evacuation and living expenses
things that the family may incur
during these these hard times
for the family's loss of use of
damage damage real or personal
property loss of business and
personal income other economic
losses they would have to be
presented individually Mr chair
of the of the park for folks
reviewing would have to take a
look at them non economic
damages for emotional distress
and personal injuries
Economic and non economic
damages for heirs of a person is
killed by the wildfire because
we we that could potentially
happen there attorney's fees and
expenses and so Mr chairman I I
I do know that you take a look
at the legislation on the final
page you do have and that of the
effective applicability date
excuse me of January one two
thousand twenty two oh we are
prepared to to discuss you know
what what what that is and why
it was called out on that date
and
That's basically what the let's
start there and I know Center
conference has a couple of
words.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
of course members of the
committee as we all know and in
particularly in the case of the
wildfires that we're talking
about this occurred about April
the six then within that three
lives were lost those basically
were due to the floods that came
after if you will the wildfires
within the area that again that
we're we're discussing to the
individuals that continue to
deal with this issue there is
about three hundred forty one
thousand four and seventy one
acres that were burned this is
the largest of fire and
destruction U. S. history along
with that the US Forest Service
has claimed the responsibility
for it the fires themselves took
place about twelve miles
northwest of Las Vegas and then
there at the base of hermits
peak also in the Pecos
wilderness and as we have dealt
with this we there was about
nine hundred three homes that
were lost eighty five homes that
were damaged and along with that
as we talk about the other
emotional stress we talk about
the
In my opinion again the major
issue that will be there with us
for quite some time we're
dealing with water contamination
we're talking about future
floods we're talking about if
you will the on going damages in
a in a very proper state area
and so within that in trying to
help the people of this area to
make if you will what they have
lost good at least to some
extent because we're definitely
not going to be able to replace
if you will the longstanding
homesteads or passed on from
generation to generation of the
whole issue again is how do we
help people recovered to at
least again some extent within
the the fires in the flooded
areas that we're speaking about
so that Mr chair of course
members of the committee and
senator by the I defer back to
you in case there is a point
that you wish to make it this
time thank you Senator Campos so
just you know doing other
continue level set here so other
states actually contemplated
this is well Mr chairman the
state of California as we know
they have dealt with this year
after year for for over in a
couple of decades here so we do
a line a lot of what we're
trying to do here that to what
happened but has done been
already done in California which
will be very helpful in terms of
understanding is because they
have to go through this year
after year for many to many
years
you did hear little over nine
hundred homes affected we have
had three deaths from mudslides
following the fire so there's a
lot going on here if you take a
look at what transpired in Los
Alamos you know what Google
Decatur but over a decade ago
had this been in place Mr
chairman I think those families
within the been able to resolve
their issues a lot faster
you are going to hear things
today related to utilities and
their concerns you will hear
from a couple folks in in that
area I just want to make it
clear that the way that we
decide.
In this legislation they will be
able to through a claims to fame
or through right recovery
they'll be able to recover the
things that they're going to
need to in order to keep them
that those organizations whole
setting that's that's
essentially where we're at I do
have David how to me here as our
expert witness on the matter and
then on the legislation David.
Yes.
I.
Mr chair members of the
committee David how to me I've
been a lawyer New Mexico for
twenty nine years handling cases
on behalf of folks you get sued
and folks who claim damages
happy to address any of the
questions that the committee can
have I think the senators have
spoken on in terms of the need
of this legislation I think the
publicity surrounding this
legislation is known to the
committee but these are not
simple legal issues and I'll do
my best to try to explain any
questions that the committee has
regarding why do we need to do
this why do we do need to do it
now and what it might mean for
the folks that were suffered the
losses the folks who would be
responsible for the losses with
respect to the hermit peat fire
and the folks who might be
responsible for losses up in
future fires thank you.
Right.
That Senator sites are open
extent all right thank you I
will go out to the audience
anybody in your support of
Senate bill two sixty eight.
Anybody else in the you can the
alarm to.
They will also.
Purses can.
Hello my name is can you hear me
yes.
My name is the battery is born
here in Las Vegas New Mexico I'm
here representing the concerns
suggesting that some in your
county and myself and my family
hi rise and support Senate bill
two sixty eight because the
people here in northern New
Mexico are suffering is
historically a parent to all of
us that whenever somebody is
awarded anything any kind of
windfall monetarily that
everybody tries to take a piece
of the pie.
And so this bill we are actually
I levy someone that because
specifically in section five B.
where is your entitled to
reasonable costs of current
contracted attorney's fees and
expenses the person who was
awarded the morning when I have
to.
Eight are the attorney's fees.
Which can get quite expensive.
Or out in the section five B..
Which said they should not be
required to pay state income tax
which would be another hit for
the people who would suffer
irreparable damage there is
being there's a lot of people
that I talk to on a regular
basis here in northern New
Mexico that have lost everything
and we want to try to help them
as much as possible because we
can never as Mr concourses
stated we can never compete
compensate them for when we have
lost in these largest disaster
in New Mexico eastern.
So I thank you for your time our
state claim courage for the
honorable senators present to
support this bill which oversees
counties families were affected
by this on want to disaster
we're not casualties on.
Right now which are utilities
are rising and it's difficult
are virtually impossible to even
secure our homeowner's insurance
right now and so we would like
to try to pass this bill I hope
that you guys will consider
passing this bill so that we he
can in the San Juan.
The loss of these that these
people have record thank you for
your time thank you.
Negative individual and Bret
Health.
Here.
But yes thank you up share and
and members of the committee
this is is Representative Phelps
I'm an attorney at a Las Vegas
New Mexico representing a whole
lot of people that have suffered
through this I also resided
Moran was was personally
affected myself we just ask you
to to support this to to support
this bill and thank you for your
time and and thank you for the
work of senators Padilla and
Campos bring this legislation
for force but we would just ask
for your support of the bill
thank you.
Do anybody in opposition of
Senate bill two sixty eight.
But.
Good evening chairman members of
the committee my name's Edward
Rougemont and I'm a registered
lobbyist with New Mexico rural
electric cooperative
association.
And we spoke to both Sanchez
this morning about this bill
Senator Campos did say.
You can smile when you come into
my office.
And he broke the ice he really
did we had a few laughs and we
shared a few smiles.
And so.
In all seriousness you know I
grew up in in Packers New Mexico
that's my backyard and the
Packers wilderness
burned up as well.
And I remember driving into
packages of fire was creeping
over into the bull creek area
and into the Pecos valley when
the monsoon seasons kicked in
early so so I get it.
this is a tough discussion to
have no doubt.
We as a utility provide a
service and that service is
electricity to our members and
more San Miguel and we
sympathize with all the folks
that lost something and I mean
nobody knows what that feels
like until it happens to you.
It appears intent of this bill
is to allow utilities to recover
damages however the risk of a
cooperative being sued is of
greater concern so that's what
really concerns us.
They put our New Mexico operate
is at risk in their operations
liability and ensure ability.
There are no garden guardrails
around recovery including non
economic damages a bill like
this could severely impact
financially a cooperative and
limit our insure ability making
our members our ratepayers to
pay for those rising costs it
gives anyone the opportunity to
sue anyone for intentionally or
negligently starting along the
fire but it does not identify
who makes that determination I
would assume the cords but
having said all that
respectfully we propose is bill
willing to work with the Sanchez
in trying to work of something
out in the language and so thank
you for your time.
Thank.
Good evening chairman Shendo
members of the committee Carlos
was there with the Public
Service Company New Mexico.
Now we we have been in talks to
with Sanchez Senator Padilla on
our concerns and really the main
concern is some have languages
and who can be be compensated by
any kind of harm and that's
mainly and home section for.
In the other concern too is the
retroactive date of January
first you know twenty twenty two
because ways states it's on or
after so that that those are
some concerns and that's really
just what we wanted voice
tonight thank you thank you.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Brent Moore
I'm a registered lobbyist for
the American property casualty
insurers association and we were
standing respectful opposition
to the bill tonight I would
start by saying we're definitely
sympathetic to the folks who
suffer through the fire there's
no question that they've
suffered a big loss but when we
turn to the bill there are some
specific concerns that we have
the first that I would point to
is on page two of the bill when
you look to the definition of
wildfire it includes fire that
is intentionally started by a
person for insurers the question
comes in our mind is how does
that affect situations where
you're dealing with arson how
does that inter relate to how
would we resolve those and deal
with those that's a significant
question for us on claims and in
acts of fraud.
The other concern that I would
point to is the did the date at
which this piece of legislation
going to affect and I would
noting the F. I. R. the the
analysis of the New Mexico
Attorney General it says when
there is.
When there is an of an effect on
substance of liability for duty
as a result of a retroactive law
the U. S. Supreme Court held
that the presumption eight held
a presumption against
retroactivity should be applied
when you're dealing with
situations of retroactivity
though should be it should be
carefully addressed by
legislative body we have
significant concerns about this
piece of legislation thank you.
Representative.
anybody also.
Opposition opposition
okay thank you know the
committee
Question Senator X..
Thank you Mr chair so for
somebody is carrying a bill
dealing with this fire
This is this is an interesting
piece of legislation the the
bill that I've got deals with
specifically prescriber.
This is way the way more
broadband.
dish dish bill talks about
intentionally or negligently and
I then the wall yes Sir David
this medical gently is defined
but I I don't know that and I
don't have brought that that is.
We talk about food damage Friel
property that the higher amount
of the actual cost to restore.
Four the demand in the yeah the
value called but while for the
reduction in that vehicle.
The replacement value and I
don't know where you turn didn't
have you determined some of
those whether Mr chairman and
senator David if you're again or
I can easily find other The New.
Through court action.
on page three we talk about
other economic losses Mr chair
Senators.
yes we also talk about
reasonable fear for personal
safety and and Mr chair Senators
we talk about in the way I
remember it's been awhile since
I've been in Judiciary but words
like reasonable are.
Are are you will turn.
It I don't know that we will
argue that term in this
particular instance looks to me
like.
We have we have set up in this
bill a great opportunity for.
Colleges of action class action
class action primarily and
you'll have.
Mr chair Senator.
They have lawyers coming from
all over.
When they want to file class
action from the may have one
from New York City for show but
right now right now Mr chair
Senators if you do a prescriber.
In the prescriber each out of
control and you're a portion.
Who is it licensed to do
prescribe on.
Your subject to double damage
whatever double damages are that
that is what you subject to if
you do that this thing it looks
like the media for utility has a
a downed power line.
caused by.
it it looks like it looks like
we're getting pretty broad is
all and and Mr chairman and
senator I mean I think.
Listen I was in there I was in
Las Vegas I was listening to
people I did what I could in
that in that bill that I
introduced to make sure these
things don't happen again
But I think we've we've gotten
big and I don't know that we
need to get so big I think we
need to bring it back in and
figure out ways we can be more
precise infallible we allow
people to have.
Compensation for the tremendous
losses many of these people live
in court shows Mr chair Senator
that's that's my comments about
the bill that's yeah I I here
what these guys are state and
but I also just I do see how
hard this is going to be
getting.
Other than you know.
It's a only a lot of lawyers
love it is all part of the show
thank you Mr and thank you
senator thank you Mr chairman
and and thank you senator eyes
all of which would add that this
Preciado the analysis
I think that it affects so many
people for the it has to be
brought because we don't know
what all nine hundred three of
those families have had to deal
with and so instead of creating
the very narrow lane in a narrow
very near a way to do this we we
should allow for families to
come forward with whatever
whatever happened and they
didn't know that this is going
to happen to them they they they
just all of a sudden it it to to
just devastated so many people
we'll have our expert make a few
comments as well.
Is it this is on yes Mr chair
Senator.
Mr chair Senator Griggs
you and I have discussed the the
term negligent for for many many
years and and that's.
The in in and that is actually
the it's it's it's a broad term
but it's the term that is used
in tort law throughout the
United States of America in
every courthouse in New Mexico
whether state courthouse for
federal courthouse in its
defined as ordinary care under
the circumstances so your
example of a downed power line
that would only expose the
utility or the responsible party
for that power line if that
power line was downed because of
negligence and a breach of
ordinary chair in so how is that
proof that's typically prove
with expert witnesses in the
utility industry that would come
to a courthouse be qualified by
the judge and give testimony as
to whether some conduct by the
utility or the responsible party
was below the standard of care
was on reasonable under the
circumstances that's what the
courts
in the common long have imposed
as a a duty on businesses and
citizens to the extent to of
this legislative body has
codified a cause of causes of
action using the term negligence
have agreed to use that as the
standard so it is a
a fairly narrow standard in so
far as it is known in it is
developed and it is a defined
and to the extent of whoever
Paul bring such a claim is
required to prove that has the
burden of proof on that a
defendant need not prove
anything the plaintiff has to
prove it and so in order for the
plaintiff to prove that somebody
negligently or intentionally
started a fire that caused
damage that to prove two things
first have to prove that the
breach that the standard of care
was breached in that that breach
was actually a because of the
damage claim to and then of
course the the the order this
bill seeks to clarify what day.
Image is can be claimed the
federal lawsuits that
specifically New Mexico law will
set what the compensation is for
the injured party and so what
this does is it try it tries to
clarify that so that the courts
if necessary down the road from
most likely be a federal court
would understand what the log
New Mexico is with respect to
what compensation should be
available to a victim of
negligence or intentional
conduct in this in this
particular context context.
Share centered and in the case
of your tribe or.
We're the the revenue to double
that.
The.
Question that.
Well the the the the federal law
to I'm sorry Mr chair so Senator
Griggs the federal law did take
that into consideration I think
the sections thirty dash thirty
two dashed for and I think this
provides a remedy outside of
that under under well
established law you have
something called election of
remedies you have to choose your
remedy
That law specifically exempts
prescribed burns in this
particular case this was a
prescribed burn I think that
long anticipated that most
prescribed burns would not be
done so negligently I think in
this case the U. S. force
department is already
essentially stipulated that that
without what they did was
negligent so that's actually
that that actually begs the
question of why a law like this
was necessary because of thirty
dash thirty two dash four did
not answer the question
specifically of what happens
when an negligent prescribed
burn takes place in the in the
matter such as this and so what
it does is when FEMA says
Clemente you're only going to be
allowed to be compensated under
New Mexico law well there's a
big there's a lot of doughnut
holes with respect to these
kinds of claims because this was
a historic on president claim
although the make bright claims
down to your neck of the woods I
think predated this in folks
down there suffered this would
also address you know future
future fires such as the mid
bright claim.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you Senator Tallman.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you senator for bringing
this up go forward.
So what we're it's it's a.
So we'll be simple how is you
to call the fire.
The.
Mr chair Senator Tallman
There are experts here and they
could speak to their own
activities but just from my own
experience in in understanding
how this would happen
there for instance there are
things called hazard trees out
in the forest I've actually
litigated those claims in a
reasonably prudent utility
company needs to make sure that
there are not hazard trees that
might fall cut a utility line
and start a fire utilities
routinely do routine maintenance
on utility lines so that there
are no hazards pose with with
defective lines or close
not opened circuits things like
that and again that would all be
defined in court as to their
negligence would have to be
proved up with an expert witness
in that area who would come in a
utility experts and would say
for instance this was a hazard
tree that should have been
remediated or this was a line
that had not been maintained to
prop properly there were there
was an open circuit or this fire
was started at this section of
of of the poor or for the line
so we'll be any number of those
circumstances I do believe there
was a fire in southern New
Mexico that was started by a
hazard tree that had not been
remediated or had not been taken
down that fell and cut a line
not precipitated the fire so we
wouldn't necessarily in
Albuquerque you and I center
chairman center there are a lot
of densely populated areas in
Albuquerque so a lot of folks
are going to see what Mr item
you just described in the area
where I live half my district is
very rural I regularly call PNM
and say you need to get out to
you know gun club road you know
you've got a tree a tree that's
about to knock over one year
lines if I didn't do that or
nobody to that the likelihood is
that that could be part of the
start of a pretty massive fire.
Thank you for that answer.
Mr says is it would have to have
a camera on every of call to
determine.
Take take take a.
Well all the gentleman there was
has is treated by doctors the
fires prove it.
Mr chair Senator Tallman again
the idea of of suing a utility
for negligence in this context
is not a new idea that exist in
the common law what wilderness
negligence or utility negligence
exist so this bill does not seek
to create or impose any new
liabilities on behalf of
utilities or landowners or
anyone who might start a fire
but again anybody was accused of
creating damage has to be of
proved liable based upon
satisfaction of the burden of
proof which is a negative.
Sen.
It is the federal government
wouldn't cover a plan like this.
If they started Mister chairman
Senator if they are the reason
in this is we do believe that
was the reason for this scenario
than the that you could go to
FEMA and file claims against
female you could right well yes
and Mr chair Senator Tallman of
that that is where it is are the
or certain although that is part
and parcel of this whole of this
whole this whole bill
had I guess had Congress not
stepped up and created the
hermit pizza Act all these
claimants would of had to have
filed a lawsuit against the U.
S. forestry department and the
federal tort claims act alleging
that they negligently started
the fire and they would have to
prove that negligence with
experts that have to approve the
damages so those causes of
action already exist against the
federal government the it's it's
the the US force department.
In this case through the through
the act the federal government
is essentially assumed liability
in has
utilize FEMA as the claims
handler to handle the three
point nine billion dollars a
dollar catered to compensate for
the losses so this is a remedies
this is a remedies Act in the
theme up about the FEMA in the
in the hermit peaks Act the
federal act that was ultimately
signed into law if there's a
specific section that says New
Mexico law will ultimately set
what the compensatory damages
for the claimants are in because
there are these donut holes as
to what exactly New Mexico law
is for cut in compensation and
it and in this context that's
the purpose of this bill it
doesn't create as a Mr one of
the lobbyist for the insurance
companies above the Mr Moore
said he cited a Supreme Court
case that Supreme Court case is
not applicable here because it
is this creates no new duty at
all these duties already exists
the U. S. forestry department is
already it knowledge that it
actually creates no new remedies
it just clarifies what remedies
are available in this context.
Thank you secretary service this
bill will.
Find the.
Compensation to claims that the
federal government will want to.
The knowledge.
No up Mr chair Senator Tom and
I'm sorry I I I I I I'd love to
think that notes exact opposite
would be the what this does is
it it just clarifies based upon
the act itself that says the
debt the compensatory damages
shall be set by New Mexico law
this body being having the
authority to set what New Mexico
law is this bill seeks to ask
this body to do that to set to
set specifically what the law is
for these victims damages the
federal government in this
context is already assumed
liability through the creation
of the hermit peak so not
settlement funds but
compensatory Fund it's going to
be it's going to be handled by
FEMA as essentially a claims
administer administrator the
process is a claimant fills out
for our gives notice it has a
hundred eighty days to go
through the claims process the
mobile say what are your damages
after this bill is hopefully
passed.
A claim it through the you know
with the assistance of a lawyer
or not assistance of a lawyer
will be able to use this act say
here are my damages not
everybody will have the same
damages but at least this
clarifies what their damages are
because the federal government
has already assume
responsibility to compensate for
those damages but is looking to
New Mexico to set what specific
categories of damages it should
compensate.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Senator the answer so how did
you come up with four point four
million dollars from the almost
impossible to come up with.
Sorry Mr chairman what he
referred to in the FIR yes four
point four is the the tax
potential tax liability that
that the
tax loss to the state so that
that's what that number is.
That is if that's not the number
that would be for each
individual what whatever took
place on each individual
property tax loss of.
Before the end of the gentleman
that.
What's an estimate.
Mr Chairman.
All.
Mr chair thank.
Senator Kernan.
Thank you
Just.
Trying get the big picture seven
Mexico already has two people to
I also need to recover damages I
think I hear you saying is that
they don't have holes in New
Mexico law does not allow for
these individuals to be paid
what.
The federal government should
this case because it doesn't
cover the same things Mexico law
that you have to make sure that
everything's rather than maybe.
That was thank you you want to
complete I think you should come
sit down with us and all.
You're absolutely right you're
absolutely.
These are setting if if one of
the electric coops in the line
of State Farm ten houses
it's proven that it's that.
Then that.
We're not talking about that
we're talking about increasing
coverage makes up an insurance
company you know you kind of
pick and choose what coverage
what we're just saying Mexico
Mexico law this legislation this
clarifies what.
Yes Mr chair I Mexico will
nervous and we don't want anyone
to losing the.
Details of any nervous so when
we talk about the federal
government that is that you
actually have to agree to pass.
With the federal tort claims act
I don't think they have to.
Rep Dave Trott wedding there and
say yes we will have otherwise
you can't really talk point
with.
Well.
Yes Representative Mr chair
Senator Kernan
I guess on the the they've
assumed liability and on their
utilizing FEMA as the claims
has.
Now
if if there's a disagreement
ultimately with the way FEMA
processes the claim.
Then.
That claim to federal court
under the federal tort claims
act and then of course the judge
would adjudicate whether they've
satisfied their burden at
different levels and ultimately
I guess against the federal
court the the gets the federal
government you don't get a jury
Chilton the judge would decide
what the damages are based upon
existing New Mexico law
which does not which does not
currently include all of this
but would if this law is passed
Mr chair and so.
Certainly the federal government
should pay for pre pay.
The job thing.
What the process is that that's
the south point concerns me and
we talked about California law.
I.
Probably you know if you want to
get.
I support don't ever referenced.
You know what happened PTA
basically start shutting off
electricity because it will be
sent.
And I think that's what's going
to happen pretty quickly in New
Mexico if we increase this cost.
Both of the insurance companies
and for the utilities to have
their membership will be one I
mean it's not a company PTA.
Members that are getting in
this.
Second.
This is probably something way
beyond my ability to really
grasp that that didn't worry
about the consequences in rural
New Mexico with our co ops and
it absolutely shut down that you
could anyway I suppose but I
don't know I just listed on
these particular things that are
covered in New Mexico law is
broad and
I don't know that I'm just not
more because this is far from.
Rigs will read one question on
some of the questions she talked
about we're we're talking about
right now that the federal
government has issued liability.
Initiation.
If we pass this why would they
ever say their lives thank you.
Well Mr chair Senator Griggs
there was nothing that really
compelled them to say they were
liable on in in this instance
other than the facts and I've
litigated against the federal
government on forced claims in
federal court they defended it
vigorously and they can pick and
choose that but I think in
future fire cases I guess the
the the facts will always
governed the response and in
this case the facts were so
overwhelmingly
condemning that they did step up
and I don't know if you get all
that much credit I was told my
son Tomasz but when I caught him
with his foot hand in the cookie
jar was little too late for him
to apologize but they have they
have stepped up and they've
asked essentially by saying that
the compensatory damages will be
set by New Mexico law they beg
the question that this bill
answers.
Question Mr chair and and guys
is that I mean obviously
discussions that's not
sufficient date needs to be
more.
Laid out like we laid in this
bill.
Yes Mr chair Senator Griggs yes
because I I don't know whether
we're fortunate we're not
fortunate but we've never had
fires on the magnitude of the
California fires we've had fires
before we certainly the Los
Alamos experience kind of
educated us but this was a shock
to the system
and there's anticipation that
there will be more fires in the
future so this will also set up
the not only it'll it'll put
folks on notice as to what their
exposure will be in the future
should they negligently or
intentionally set a fire.
Shared connection I think you're
right the washing for the
federal government to do decide
to give all the New Mexico back.
And hold better deal so thank
you mission.
we have Senator meals on soon as
a question.
Thank you Mr chairman just
thinking about our rural
electric coops would premiums be
increased with this bill and I'm
thinking about ratepayers right
is that.
That confidential pull down to
ratepayers and I'm gonna use Rio
Arriba county as an example.
Excuse me.
Rio Arriba county residents have
talked about having an issue a
nap right to have increased
slightly and so with this
increase the premium which with
that cascaded down to the
ratepayers have to pay for those
insurance premiums that might
increase with this bill.
Mister chairman Senator so it
conceivably could for a period
of time while the recovering
these right to.
Yeah Mr chair Senator Hotmail
that that would be that would be
true regardless of this bill and
I'd I don't know I suppose the
folks who are in the insurance
industry might say that as a
result of this as a result of
the RMIT peat fire itself
insurance companies might have
taken a new look at the risk of
forest fires in New Mexico it is
known to insurance company that
there is a risk of the business
of providing electricity and
utilities a fire risk now that
now they know the magnitude of
loss that can result from
negligence and the that starts
fires so regardless of this bill
there's nothing that will stop
insurance companies based upon
the fact that the federal
government has set aside three
point nine billion dollars to
compensate for three hundred
sixty four thousand acres of
loss eight hundred homes three
lives there's nothing that stops
the right now insurance
companies from adjusting their
premiums based upon future
anticipated risk that's always
going to be the case
that's true of of of all
liability and all insurance
company uh insurance companies
it's true in health care it's
true an automobile insurance is
true and
on homeowners insurance in so I
I don't think that this bill
necessarily alters that scenario
because I do think that the
hermit peaks fire has informed
insurance companies that they
face significant risk when one
of their insurance negligently
starts a fire and I think this
bill doesn't change that reality
for those insurance companies.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
thank you senator thank you Mr
out of your.
If.
Senator Wirth on thank you Mr
justice to questions so for.
You know future fire.
Were you don't have the federal
government that you're defending
the purpose because better
government stepped off.
Future fire.
You're still going to have to
prove that it was intentionally
or negligently set for this
district.
Mr chair Senator Wirth
absolutely and
I know I know you're a lawyer
and I know you're fortunate to
not litigate but you're involved
in some litigation and you know
that the plaintiff always has
the burden of proof even in
negligence cases certainly an
intentional conduct ace it's
even harder to prove intentional
conduct but with respect to
future cases B. as a landowner
be at a construction company be
a developing company or utility
that starts the fire the only
way they are ultimately
responsible for any of the
damage is set forth in this bill
is that the plaintiff proves
most likely with expert
witnesses that they were
negligent.
Once that happens.
Under the statute you're
entitled to recover this list of
damages but you're still going
to have to go in and put on a
case play out under your.
Category what want to fight what
those damages look like is that
Mr chair Senator Wirth and that
is one of the other
aspects of this case is that
these are not simple claims it
is it it's not simple for a
landowner to just tell female
what the value of their three or
four hundred year old homestead
or property was what the value
of their cattle was with the
value of their livestock was
with the value of their alfalfa
fields would be or the loss of
those fields that's going to
have to be done with the experts
or the destruction of their
water rights in their irrigation
rights that's going to have to
be done with hydrologist and one
of the aspects of this bill is
that it allows a party to get
recovery of those costs because
those are very expensive it's
very expensive to hire those
kinds of experts who can come in
in itemize the actual damages
but again a defendant doesn't
have to pay a dollar to anybody
until a either proved liable and
be that that liability
actually cause damages in so a
jury or a judge would have to
conclude most like the flight
likely through expert testimony
that the damages have been
proved.
Mr chair I think that's a really
important point what you're.
Doing here as chairman I was
mentioned by the gentleman from
up north I mean the the
attorney's fee piece of this
trying to figure that part out
the income tax piece of that
that's part of this bill I mean
I'm looking at page three you
know the wildfire damage to a
person you know subsection the
someone's kids.
you're obviously you're gonna
have to go in and value that
person's life the same way you
would now in a situation once
you prove liability the question
becomes how do you value that
and that's going to be.
I just don't see that as.
Really different from what
you're doing right now it's just
you're you're leveling the
playing field here and and
helping folks.
By laying out the specific
categories of damages that
they're going to go in and click
into once they get over there
are they still got approved that
there was negligence or
intentional act costing M. am I
getting that correct Mr chair
Senator Wirth
absolutely again each element of
damage has to be proved by a
preponderance of the evidence
with qualified testimony in
again there's a whole there's a
myriad of damages that are
caused by fire I of these forest
fires whether it's irrigation
water access value of livestock
value of land value of farming
that can only be prove now the
psychological damages are are
likewise proved with expert
testimony folks who can come in
and talk about what it means to
lose a home built by your
grandfather's grandfather that
has been in your family for
hundreds of years what it's what
it means to lose an orchard of I
think years ago I think the
whole Dixon orchard was wiped
out as a result of a rotation
caused by the Los Alamos fire
what it would mean to lose a
general not generation multi
generation apple orchard again
all of that would be done with
expert witness at significant
cost I guess it's not a minor
point but to pick nits with the
taxation component all of those
professionals would be be paying
taxes on their services so
there's a a net of positive
test.
Mr chair so I I do I do look
forward to the attorney
general's input what if we go to
the Judiciary Committee on the
January first twenty twenty to
date the retroactive date so I
will be interested to hear the
arguments on both sides of that
issue
and again I don't want to turn
this into you know the judiciary
we appreciate the that's all I
have Mister thank you Senator
Kernan thank you Mr Chairman
office did so I have question.
is that this is the sponsor.
Not.
The bill if you.
section here on fifty.
With the state or federal.
I guess Fuchsian federal
governments federal if you sent
to delegate I'm sending
something in state.
This place for that currently.
Yeah we're that far.
Close I think it's very
important and I think that some.
Markets.
Good bill if you would consider
that would you all consider that
don't look at them okay.
Representative sure is gonna
vote for the bill Senator so I.
Thank you very much.
Thank you include to.
Sarah but yes the Sanchez this
is a mechanism for okay.
Mexico says yes and I I feel
comfortable with that.
We'll see how that last we need
to issue.
But I think it's important
consider.
As you know fire down.
Should be tried there you know
if there's a lawsuit projects
were down.
Just consider that as.
Your bill's.
That's all I have okay thank you
senator.
I have a question I know that
the Sanchez and for thank you.
So.
Our current law doesn't allow
all of these things.
It's unclear is what is not
clear M. and there is some
expansion of what we're to make
sure that we cover current date
so someone just so when this
fire for at current law exists
now we're adding to it how does
that work if we're gonna at
these other divisional.
Remedies to our current law.
After the fact.
Of
course.
Yep Mr chairman members of the
committee this goes exactly to
the heart of what senator Wirth
race which is the retroactivity
question.
We look forward to I think a the
a if this bill moves on a robust
discussion with the chairman of
the next committee and the
members of that committee but
I'm happy to discuss that with
you and I'd like to try to not
like to adjust to not updated
with your just gonna try to have
a memory try to clarify with you
the the retroactivity question
turns on whether there is a
creation of a new duty or a new
claim in this bill does not
create any new duties there's
there's always duties on behalf
of the for service to not
negligently start fires there's
always duties on utilities
there's always duties on.
So that's the first bucket we're
not creating any new claims so
that that takes away that that
concern about retroactivity
because I think the law is
fairly clear if you creating new
duty it cannot be retroactive so
then the next question is does
it create any new claims no it
just clarifies what claims New
Mexico tort law includes all of
these types of damages against
folks already however in the
context of a forest fire it's
not abundantly clear whether
they've ever been used in other
states and all try not to use
that state to the west of us
that one senator has warned us
not to use they just happen to
have more experience from forest
fires so in both statute in in
their common law they have
clarified in a similar manner
that a claimant or a victim can
get these types of damages so
that addresses the second
component all of the of the
retroactivity the constitution
itself of New Mexico speaks to
retroactivity but it also says
it cannot apply to a pending
case in these are not actually
pending cases because there's
not actualization that would be
if there was a lawsuit already
in play in the legislature
changed the rules while that
lawsuit was pending that's not
happening here because we're not
changing duty and we're not
changing or creating any new
remedies all the remedies that
are in this bill already exist
in New Mexico tort law.
Appreciate that clarification
thank you for that of you know
this is hard because you know
with the less conscious fire you
know of our portal so for you
know our force area are hunting
area for one of our societies is
no longer there so this issue
how do you how do you you know.
Monetize the value of that.
As part of something initiation
is something that our generation
are will never see the force in
the same way again.
And that's really hard and on
and so forth so we spent a lot
we spent a lot of money on
attorneys in on on the damages
so that the costs of the timber
to costs of this society to the
forest.
It's incredible and and and so
forth so this stand and it's a
tough losses luckily we didn't
have any residents to live in
that area of but what for but
for going on the fact that you
know that you know it's it's
it's support part of our or our
religious way of life in our
community and so forth so I
understand that so I don't have
any more folks in question so
what is the pleasure of the
committee.
Of the two passed no record.
The number of.
That system over.
Twenty said.
Do passed all right that's two
different I'm not so sure.
So
her way no act Center were to go
to the rest of the program.
Yes this debate on the.
Just a second what is that.
So we have a motion for no
Representative with the second.
All.
It was the second.
Okay so close to the debate over
the bill with so again I.
I mean again the question is I
think we should I will I make a
motion to for it to pass on this
bill but again.
That how you handle there's an
existing motion for no rack I
guess you have to take that both
first
Okay so but the role of the
first motion hang on he's okay
are you gonna reconsider differs
and.
That will make it for the past
okay so you would draw under
motion is okay so we're gonna
motion so we'll go with the
best.
Local growth.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Griggs.
No region.
Senator had a meal.
Yes.
Senator Kernan no no need to
explain about the prospect that
then.
Senator Lopez.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator Tolman yes.
Senator Wirth yes.
Senator Hamblen six excuse
Senator Shendo a yes.
We have five yeses and three
knows.
Senator virtually wrote.
Thank you for sure gentleman you
guys understand I think
everybody understands how
concerned we all are about the
issue.
That's not really it just.
That we're talking about talking
about remedies that.
To the expanded in scope
tremendously and so I'm hopeful
that you should the worst right
there she goes to Judiciary
there for the rate on a.
You guys find out how best to
make you make it work because
of people up there they suffered
there's no getting around that
in show where we need to be.
We can support.
But we also need to support the
people that provide the services
to all as well should be
somebody other for sure.
So thank you Mr.
And thank you and I think I
think basically there's some
really good.
And I'm serious issue and I
think so many times when we have
major roles.
Product here I think that and I
don't think that's fair I think
it needs to be.
People.
If there can their peers and I'm
serious about.
That.
That's.
Anytime we talk about.
Senator expert.
Compensation for staff.
I think I so.
We're good friends now I just
cut off electricity three seven
during that fire in
which is the right thing to say
that.
Is
appears that you did for the
vote.
Thank you.
All rights reserved.
