The time we are going to do a
hard stop at 8 o'clock, if not
sooner.
Uh, we are going to hear Senate
Bill 302, Senate Bill 303,
Senate Bill 327.
Senate Bill 100 and Senate Bill
355, uh, from Senator Wirth will
be the last one. The remaining
bills on that agenda just in
case you're keeping score, those
will be rolled to Tuesday.
Um, and, uh, and Senate Bill
413, that will be rolled to a
later date per the request of
the sponsor. So, um, Senator
Paul, I don't know if you want
to start or if you want to
finish eating and have senator
Tobiasson.
Go quickly
Go for it.
Well, we should take the roll.
Sugar, sugar levels are down. So
if you will, Rebecca, please
take the role. Senator Figueroa.
Here, Senator had a meal.
Senator O'Malley is excused
Senator Paul.
Senator Ramos is excused.
Senator Sanchez
Senator Sheer, Senator Wirth.
Yeah
Senator Bergmann's, Senator
Hamblin.
We have a quorum.
We have a quorum, so let's
We have a forum, so let's get
this done.
Go for it, center Paul. Thanks.
members, sorry.
Um
Before you tonight we've got SB
302, the gaming control uh board
access background checks, uh, in
light of trying to be uh short,
I'm gonna hold off on
duplicating what might be said
by my experts joining me this
evening, I've got Pat Garrett,
uh, who's the chair of the
gaming control. I've got Terry
McGaha, who is the acting
executive director and then we
also have Angela Armstrong who's
legal counsel. So all of them
take it away, give a little more
explanation on the bill.
You need a man, Madam Chair and
Sanders.
Um
Senator Paultu I'm trying to get
hammed the acting executive
director for the New Mexico
Gaming Control Board.
Senate Bill 302.
Uh, basically if you look at the
header information will have two
components that I'll, I'll
explain to you during my
presentation.
Um, one being, uh, requiring
background investigation of
contractors seeking unescorted
access to to a gaming
facilities.
And, and the other uh.
Part of that that goes goes in
line with conducting backgrounds
is, is requiring applicants for.
Um
Be on raffleur the big on raffle
Act to to obtain background
investigations.
And the the other component of
that is is changing times for,
uh, the time, term periods of
some of our uh.
Classifications for licenses
that being those individuals.
Who are required to have a
finding of suitability and for
work permits.
From 1 year to 3 year terms.
I'll go into further detail.
OK, before you do, um, Senator
Paul, if I remember correctly,
it's coming back to me now that
302 was better to explain or 303
is, is better to go first and
explain 302, is that, am I
remembering that correctly?
Or does it matter? All right, go
ahead. My, my apologies. Keep
going.
Sit at Bill 302 is largely a
formality that needs to be
codified into law to bring New
Mexico into compliance with the
Federal Department of Justice
requirements.
Approximately 22 years ago, the
Federal Department of Justice
audited or or audit identify the
findings stating that in New
Mexico Gaming Control Board.
Lacked a clear
Statutory basis for assessing
criminal history information for
contractors.
And for Bingo and raffle
applicants.
Although the rules created by
the agency.
We're conducting backgrounds of
contractors and Bingo and raffle
applicants were in place. The
rules were found to be
insufficient to meet.
Federal DOJ requirements for
assessing criminal history
information.
That's needed to complete
background checks.
Um, the Federal Department of
Justice mandates that access to
criminal history information
must be explicitly explicitly
rooted in state law.
That that applies to all
regulatory agencies, um.
Like herself who issue licenses
for these, these type of things.
Without the statutory authority,
the New Mexico Gaming Control
Board's ability to conduct
thorough background
investigations on gaming related
individuals and entities.
Uh, including contractors and be
on raffle applicants it'd be
restricted in the future.
And I totally anticipate you may
have other agencies come before
you ask for the same thing we're
asking for today, which is to
get us in compliance with the
deal federal DOJ requirements.
And so this portion of of Senate
bill Seal to simply codifies
existing practices in the law.
And to correct a GOG audit
finding and to ensure that we
have continued access to the
necessary criminal history data.
For all the relevant parties,
including contractors and bingo
and Raffle applicants.
And this bill does not change in
any way how we do backgrounds.
heard
How backgrounds are conducted
but rather provides a legal
frame framework required to make
remain in compliance.
The other portion of Senate Bill
302.
Uh, addressing the the terms,
the period of term for uh.
Individuals required.
To
Be license or.
a finding of suitability to be
licensed for the gaming control
board as well as all the
individuals who work in the game
industry they're required to
have permits that were.
For for the gaming control
board, um.
Our mission here is to change
the term currently they're
required to get annual renewals
of those those licenses.
And I request as part of this
bill is that to be changed to 3
year.
Term limits instead.
And the reason being is um.
You know, the industry standard
and a lot of these individuals,
especially the individuals who
obtained findings of suitability
working every jurisdiction gave
me jurisdiction in the country
and even some are international.
And the and the standard.
Uh, in the industry for for
licenses this this sort is 3
years this will put us in
compliance with that 3 year
industry standard as well.
And that's the same for for for
permits.
You see across the country.
So, and most of these
individuals or a lot of these
individuals, especially the ones
who obtained findings of
suitability like I said, work in
multiple jurisdictions across
the country and even uh so with
the 3 year period the game
control board, uh, can strike a
balance between providing
adequate time to operate.
And ensuring ongoing compliance
with the state's gaming
regulations.
Shorter and nearer cycles create
unnecessary burdens for us as
well as the licensees.
And these are complex
investigations, the background
investigations the applications
multi-juris applications that
are completed for these
individuals.
It's quite burdensome. There's
multiple pages, 20 or so pages
of of questions.
And requires a significant
amount of time to complete.
And Curly, they're having to do
that every year our licensees
are as well as my staff has to
actually go through all this
paperwork, conduct the
backgrounds annually and what
we're finding is that's pro
that's not necessary.
We think 3 years the industry
standard would be be the best
uh.
Proposition for that.
And isn't that now with
technology in place, once an
individual's criminal history is
run and licensed by us.
We have the ability to.
Um
If that individual obtains or is
charged in a crime after we
license them.
was arrested and that
information is entered into the
National Criminal Information
Center.
We have the ability that system
will actually notify us now that
this person who's licensed by
you now has an additional
criminal criminal arrest.
That
Uh
So given those factors is no
longer we we suspected or we
think it's no longer needed to
be able to or required to annual
background checks on these
individuals.
We take 3 years, which is
industry standard would be would
be the better.
For the licensees as well as
well as the agency.
And so with that I'll
it open for any questions.
All right, thank you so much.
So, do you want your others to
say very, very, very brief
statements, or do you want to go
ahead and go to the audience.
You're good, Madam Chair members
know, uh, executive director
Magaha has covered everything
for us. Thank you though.
Thank you so much, and you were
shaking your head. You're like,
no way.
Right. All right, so just by
show of hands, I'm gonna go to
audience uh just by show of
hands, is there anybody in the
audience that is in support of
this legislation.
Seeing none, anybody in the
audience in opposition.
OK, for the record, none. Uh,
anybody online?
Nobody online. All right. So now
I'm gonna go to the committee.
Are there any questions from the
committee, Senator Figueroa,
Madam Mo a pass from Senator
Figueroa. Second from Senator
Scherer.
Anybody in opposition to the
DuPass?
If not, please show all in
attendance and support.
of that.
All righty.
Super speedy. I think that was a
10 minute bill.
Senator Paul, you're on on uh
number 3, 303.
Thanks, Madam Chair, committee
members, uh, the next bill
before you is Senate Bill 303
gaming machine standards. Again,
I'm gonna turn it over to uh
Terry, uh just a quick overview
of what the bill is and we'll
stand for any questions.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, City Bill 303
proposes that New Mexico no
longer default to the gaming
standards established by Nevada.
Or New Jersey.
Recognizing that our state's
gaming industry has matured over
the past 25 years.
And now operates under well
developed independent regulatory
framework.
When gaming in New Mexico was
established in New Mexico.
It was logical to look to to
Nevada and to New Jer New
Jersey, two of the longest
standing gaming jurisdictions
for guidance.
When it was in her infancy.
However, New Mexico's gaming
industry has evolved
significantly since then.
With regular regulations and
operational structures unique,
uniquely tailored to our state.
New Mexico gaming environment
differs in critical ways from
other states.
Make it essential that we hear
to our own regulatory framework
rather than continue to fall
standards developed from
fundamentally different markets.
By moving away from New Jersey
bought in New Jersey, New Mexico
affirms its ability to regulate
gaming based on its own well
established principles and
regulations, and this
legislation reflects the state's
independence and overseeing its
gaming industry.
While ensuring that regulations
align with the realities of our
market.
Senate Bill 303 strengthens New
Mexico's ability to govern its
gaming industry in a manner that
best serves its its businesses
regulatory agencies and the
public.
And I have examples if anyone is
interested in how it differs but
with that I'll open it up for
questions.
Thank you so much. You're
reading the room.
Thank you so much. um, and, and
certainly the committee can
provide that. Um, again, uh,
we'll go to the audience and
thank you very much for your
brevity. I appreciate it.
Anybody in the audience in
support of this legislation.
Recording none. Anybody in
opposition?
Recording no, anybody online?
None. All right, we go to the
committee.
Senator Figueroa.
Madam Chair and
Sponsor.
I'm gonna move, uh.
See if you're amenable to an
amendment.
On page 2.
Line 24 at the end of the line,
adding the words New Mexico.
This was recommended by the
Department of Justice and their
analysis, where you're saying
meet the standards and
specifications set by state law,
they suggest we um clarify which
date you refer to and at the
words New Mexico in front of
state.
Again, that's bottom of page
two.
End of line 24.
Senator Figueroa, um, line 24 or
line 25.
Or you said end of 24 after the
word by, or you could say at the
beginning of line 25, but before
the word state.
Insert New Mexico.
How does that, that's a friendly
amendment. Uh, OK.
All right, you move the
amendment?
OK. Is there a discussion on the
amendment?
No discussion.
Is there any opposition to the
amendment?
All right, we've added New
Mexico clarifying what state
we're in.
Thank you, Senator Figueroa. Any
other comments or questions from
the committee?
Man
We have a, we have a due pass on
Senate Bill 303 as amended from
Senator Bergmans.
Second from Senator Scherer.
Anybody in opposition of the Du
Pass motion.
See none
Let's show all those in favor,
all those in attendance in favor
of that.
Way to go. 2 bills and 15
minutes, Senator Paul.
Right on. Thank you very much.
Yeah, updating statutes is a
good thing. Senator Jaramilo,
you're next. Oh.
And I do want to note that um
Rebecca had noticed uh earlier
when we were still on the floor
that there were
About 10 people in the audience
who are in support of this
legislation, um, but they are,
I, I believe, on their way home
back to Espanola, um, and so.
Slowly, slowly, and lowly.
So, uh, Senator Jaramillo, if
you will, please Senate Bill
327. Madam Chair, I'm both the
expert witness. Oh, I should
have had a walk,
but it's it.
So Madam Chair members of the
committee with this bill does is
would establish a specialty
plate which would be the
lowrider capital of the world.
As you know, I always say a
proud native son of the
beautiful Espanilla Valley,
which is the lowrider capital of
the world, and this would
highlight the contributions to
the lowrider community in the
state of New Mexico and
recognize them as a form of art
that's rolling in streets from
north, south, east and west and
with that I stand for questions.
All right, thank you once again.
We, we did have, unless there
are any folks here in the
audience who are in support of
this.
Thank you, Sky.
Anybody in opposition?
Thank you, Sky. No, I'm kidding.
I'm kidding. Is there anybody
online, David?
OK. All right. Any questions
from the committee?
Thank you. I just want to thank
Senatormio again for
Recognizing
Cultural moments that's been
happening and bringing it here,
I think it's just super, super
cool, so.
and
And, and just really quick, um,
Senator Jaramillo has been doing
interviews on this because this
has brought quite a bit of
attention to the state of New
Mexico.
Um, and Senator Jarami, will you
please share with the committee
what you said to the uh the
reporter when they asked why I
was on that bell, please.
Sure that would make the
lowrider the official vehicle of
New Mexico. When the reporter
asked me why I would have
somebody from Las Cruces signed
on the bill. I said, why
wouldn't I? She attendsachanga's
and putscito in her hair, so
she's the perfect representation
to help us get that bill passed.
Thank you, Senator Janamilo.
That is why um that, that is why
I'm trying to.
No, that's not the right song,
so I'm gonna just go ahead and
stop that.
I was trying to give you some
walk-off music. There we go.
make that music.
Senator Ber needs to do pass. Do
we have a second?
Second from Senator Sheer with a
little background music
right at this time of night,
we're all getting there anyway.
Uh, anybody in opposition of the
DuPass motion.
See none, let's go ahead and
show all in uh attendance and
favor.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee on behalf of the
beautiful Espanilla Deli. Thank
you. Thank you so much.
We have Senate Bill 100 from
Senator Tobiasson. Come on up.
Of course I want to do, like,
the Price is Right. They'll come
on down.
But
We can go ahead and forego that.
We try to have some sense of
decorum here.
Hi, Madam Chair, I would like to
request that everyone take out
their phones.
And either open their camera or
their video.
And maybe hold it up, I don't
know.
You don't want to see like the
flashlight like at a concert?
No, no.
Wa.
I would like some walk-up music.
Actually, yes, please. I'll wait
for the walk up music.
Well, how about if we have walk
away music so that we can move,
move ahead. Yeah, Leo will pick
a
Senator Jaramillo my last visit.
Oh
There you go.
I love the consistency of the
scene of the fan.
Do you have your phone, madam
She is, uh, Senator Harmy I have
his watch my fan probably just
died. So for context for those
of you who may not have she's on
fire.
Ha
Fantasy
there we go. OK, this is on
we go. Thank you for, uh, at
this point, we're getting a
little slap happy, which is kind
of par for the course given our
day. So Senator Tobiasson,
thank you very much of the
committee, I'm honored to
introduce Senate Bill 100, which
updates the statutory debt limit
for the Albuquerque Metropolitan
Arroyo flood Control Authority
or AMAFCA. This authority was
created in 1963 to protect life
and property in the greater
Albuquerque area by managing
flood control infrastructure.
The
last time the debt limit was
adjusted was in 2007 with
unanimous support. Since then,
rising costs and inflation have
impacted Amafka's ability to
keep pace with critical
infrastructure needs. Currently,
amaska's debt limit is set at
$80 million a figure that no
longer reflects the financial
realities of today, adjusted for
inflation, that amount would be
approximately $125 million.
Senate Bill 100 proposes raising
the debt limit to 120 million to
ensure AAFA can continue to.
flood control projects without
increasing the tax burden on
residents. Importantly, the
board of directors has not
raised the millage rate for debt
repayment in 25 years,
demonstrating their commitment
to fiscal responsibility.
This is important for anybody
living in Bernalillo County, but
particularly for my district
where there are a high number of
homes in the flood plain. The
west side and South Valley of
Albuquerque are also impacted,
and without the necessary
funding critical flood control
projects could be delayed,
putting homes, businesses, and
infrastructure at risk. This
bill does not introduce any new
taxes or increased rates. It
simply allows Amasa to keep up
with rising costs and continue
protecting the Albuquerque area
from flooding. I urge my
colleagues.
to support this responsible and
necessary update.
Great, thank you. Do you want to
go ahead and introduce your
expert if you want to make a
brief statement. This is my
expert Kevin.
Trout, Madam Chair, members of
the committee, my name is Kevin
Troutman. I'm the executive
director of AMAFCA to be brief
and reiterate what Senator Bison
said that the purpose of this
bill is to not increase taxes
but allow the board of directors
to seek uh a potential larger,
uh,
Uh, bond issuance from the
voters, again, it will require
voter approval to move in that
direction and it just alters the
way we finance our our uh bonds.
All right, great, thank you so
much.
No, we go to the audience,
anybody? I have a feeling I'm
going to go ahead and know who's
who's in support of this. I show
of hands. Thank you, Sky.
Anybody else? I figured as much.
Anybody in opposition of this
bill?
So record shows we had 2 in
support, nobody in opposition
here in the room. Anybody
online?
Not online for the record. All
right? Now we're going to go
ahead and go to the committee.
Any questions or comments from
the committee.
Senator Figueroa.
Madam Chair and sponsor and
expert, is there any reason we
don't index this to the CPI so
we don't have to come back every
few years and change this
number.
Um
Madam Chasen her Figuerova, the
reason for the original
legislation back in 1963 was
tied to our predecessor and the
way that that was uh
The, the debt repayment was
going to be assessed, which, uh,
without going into the detail of
the, the riot that ensued in the
50s to that uh
Uh, action this.
Allows there to be a check.
Um, tying it back to the CPI.
would operate some freedoms, but
AAFCA is not needed that in the
past and doesn't seek it
currently.
Thanks, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator Figueroa. Any
other questions or comments from
the committee?
We have a due pass and northern,
we have a DuP pass from Senator
Sheer, 2 from Senator Figueroa.
Anybody in opposition to the Du
Pas motion.
Seen none. Let's go ahead and.
Register all in attendance and
support.
Thank you. Congratulations,
Senator.
All right. Lastly, Senator.
And again, a reminder that
Senate Bill 5 350, 351, 138.
370 and 378 will all be bumped
to Tuesday.
If there's anybody in their
right mind watching this on the
webcast tonight. Um, you will
see that that's going to be on
Tuesday.
You'd need to check with the
Senate sponsor on that one. that
they're the ones who requested
that that bill.
The um help. So I would check
with Senator Pinto.
Yeah, um, you can check with her
and and we're gonna be in
contact.
All right, Senator Wirth.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair and
members, uh, Senate Bill 355 is
a much-needed um
proposal to codify a 2013
executive order, uh, dealing
with management and oversight of
capital outlay.
Uh, this was done in 2013 by
executive order.
Uh, by Governor Martinez, so
when she did it, we had a whole
group of senators, I think
Senator Cervantes in his first
year, Senator Pain, Senator
Morales, uh, asked for an
attorney general opinion, uh,
Gary King came back and said the
executive order was
unconstitutional. Basically, it
was putting in place a whole set
of oversight and guidance uh for
when capital outlay could be
held back if audits were not
done.
Um, and so,
No one ever took that to court
and that executive order, here
we are, uh.
12 years later and it's still
there. I think there's a real
question of whether one
governor's executive order
continues to the next
administration. The bottom line
though is that we need to do
something in statute and that's
what this proposes to do is to
codify the oversight this bill
enacts the public finance
accountability Act, uh, and
basically sets those criteria
for capital Alley or other
special appropriations based on
compliance with the act and it
goes through.
What local governments have to
do with audits and what happens
when there's not an audit and a
different.
Requirements that the local
government needs to comply with
in order to have that money
released. Uh, this has been a
huge issue for the city of Santa
Fe, uh, which has
On a yeoman's effort of catching
up on audits and I, Emily Oster
is here is the finance director
from the city of Santa Fe. I
really appreciate her being
here. Uh, the challenge is, even
though they're completely caught
up.
This executive order is so
weighted to the executive, uh,
that basically the executive can
Really do pretty much what they
want to do in terms of
Transferring the disbursement of
that capital outlay back to the
local entity.
So we're trying to put some
guardrails in place. That's what
this bill does. I will say we
attempted to get everyone in a
room to do it. I didn't quite
get there, so this is, this is a
proposal that certainly will
continue to discuss with DFA and
the state auditor as it moves
forward, uh, Mark Valdez is from
our staff and he was
instrumental in the meetings and
helping drafting this. Miss
Osters here. We can get into all
the specifics if you would like.
Uh, but that's generally what
we're doing with this pill.
Great, thank you so much,
Senator Worth.
Um, so now going to the
audiences or anybody in this
large, large group of people,
uh, in support of this
legislation, I think it's all
staff. OK, except it's up to
you, you.
Thank you. You're welcome to
come on up.
And uh anybody in opposition?
See none anybody online?
OK, so nobody online for the
record as well.
And why don't we go ahead and go
to the committee?
You want it, you're welcome to
go ahead and speak. Thank you,
Madam Chair. My name is Emily
Oster. I'm the finance director
for the city of Santa Fe, and I
stand in support of Senate Bill
355.
just as a fun fact, I believe
Miss Oster was working at DFA.
When this executive order was
originally put in place. So she
has done the full cycle and and
was very helpful in a little
working group and coming up with
this.
Great. Thank you, Senator Worth.
I do have somebody, we do have
somebody online, Nat Dean.
You have raised your hand. Uh,
we'll give you a minute.
to go ahead and speak.
So, Nat, we are, uh, Nat, we are
registering your presence here
in opposition.
If you can let us know that is
correct.
All right, so
In support, OK, that.
All right. So we've got 2 people
in support. So now, thank you
very much for speaking. Now
going to the committee.
Any questions or comments from
Seriously?
OK. I always have to check.
I think you and I should get
shirts that say, are you
serious?
Mo do pass from Senator Sher, we
have.
Two questions beforehand we'll
hold that, we'll put you on hold
and then we'll, Senator
Figueroa.
You're gonna get t-shirts that
say shut up Figueroa pretty
soon. Um, you're just going to
teach me to look over there
before I actually move on that.
So thank you, Madam Chair and
sponsor page 3.
Um, section 2A, right? If a
grantee is most recently
completed audit um documents
material weakness or deficiency,
the grantee shall prepare
prepare a plan. Doesn't the
executive order as it stands
right now require the grantee in
that case to remedy something.
And this weakens it in the sense
that they don't have to remedy,
they just have to make a plan to
remedy.
So, Madam Chair, I think there's
no question that this puts in
place the opportunity for the
local government.
Uh, to explain why they need to
move forward and what they're
moving forward. So yes, I think
you can make the argument that
this is not as
Punitive as the current
executive order which basically
just says you, you're stuck. And
I think that's what we
experience at the city of Santa
Fe.
There was a backlog. They were
working hard and diligently to
catch up.
And we're actually submitting
and we're catching up, but
because of, because of how
strict.
The current executive order
language was
Everything just remained frozen,
even though they're and and to
this day, they're fully caught
up and they're still being held
back.
Based on the language in that.
So that's the reason that we're
trying to give them a chance to
put together a plan and in a
situation like our city where we
have been blessed to have
someone like Miss Oster, who has
just done an incredible job to
catch up. I mean, this is a post
COVID, a whole
Auditing system needed to be
rebuilt from the ground up. We
had, you know, stuff being done
on paper. And so she's done
that, she's caught it all the
way up.
And yet they're still being held
up. So I just think it's
important to
Give the grantee a chance to
that plan in place and then.
Madam Chair and and sponsor and
please add this into your
answer, then who's got the
responsibility to make sure that
the plan is completed, that they
are caught up like Santa Fe is
so admirably done, who's gonna
be responsible for making sure
that happens.
Um, if
If the money can move forward
with just the plan being done.
Um, Madam Chair, Senator
Figueroa, regarding your first
question, they've actually, once
the action plan is put in place,
they have two of fiscal years to
remedy all of those uh
significant um
Um
Deficiencies or material
weaknesses.
And, and if they cannot uh get
those remedy, then they have to
um
A fiscal agent has to be
appointed.
To, to manage the money and
that's kind of what's happening
at this time with the city of
Santa Fe, even though they did
catch up on their audits.
So, uh, that's the time frame
that they have to, to remedy
those uh.
Those findings. Thanks, Madam
Chair, that was my only
question.
Thank you so much, Senator
Figueroa. Any other questions
before I go back to Senator
Sheriff for his DuPass motion.
Right, see, do we have a second?
Second from Senator Jaramillo.
Anybody in opposition of the
DuPass motion.
See none, if you will, please
register that all those present
are in the affirmative of the Du
Past motion.
Thank you Madam Chair.
Thank you very much. All right.
Thank you, everybody. Uh, I
think this is our shortest
meeting yet, and we had 5 bills
ripped through, uh, in about 30
minutes. So 6 minutes a piece.
Yes. Thank you very much. We
will be meeting again on
Tuesday. We'll have an ambitious
agenda, uh, as well. I would
like to thank Marla Schultz
along with Charlie Marquez,
Vince Martinez, and Scott
Scanlon. They're the ones who
provided dinner for us tonight.
If you haven't eaten yet, make
sure you eat. Um, and if you'd
