Recognizing the existing PTO
programs second we could we
could support paid time off
program that balance the needs
of both employers and employees
unfortunately we don't believe
SB twenty does that the reason
amendments approved the bill but
for us to support a bill in must
accommodate small businesses and
provide preemption of local laws
so we are not creating a
patchwork of different benefit
programs around the state you
hear people say today that so
much for business this session
that they should be grateful and
that is not a big burden well we
appreciate the recovery built
very much passed to help
mitigate some of the impacts of
the pandemic remember when you
hear those comments that
according to Harvard
university's track the recovery
dot org website New Mexico it's
thirty six point five percent
fewer small businesses operating
today than it did in January
twenty twenty and the ones that
are operating are operating at a
greatly reduced capacity often
twenty five percent these are
very challenging times thank you
next up we have Stuart rose.
Im service the the founder of
the by Science Center the fact
by networking investments
working small companies New
Mexico is massively over
regulated according to George
Mason University.
Regulations on businesses in our
neighboring state hours on over
sixty four thousand two thousand
eighteen Mexico already has a
hundred twenty five thousand
that's one of the primary
reasons why we're viewed as a
business unfriendly state our
taxes aren't the problem the
problem is or regulations my
messages we this is been delayed
for a year there's no reason to
pass it right now now wait
another year to do with them.
Thank you next we have JD
Bullington.
I'm here for J. D. Mr Chairman.
Thank you Mr chairman I'm Terry
called president CEO of the
greater Albuquerque chamber of
commerce we didn't clear our
chamber supports a statewide
policy on mandatory leave so
long as is reasonable and
accommodating to small employers
this bill is not mandatory the
policy should be there except
small businesses state fifteen
employees are less are simply
provides a tax credit to
employers also a mandatory leave
policy should preempt more
onerous local ordinances why so
that we have one statewide
policy.
Patchwork of different
regulations there are two easy
changes that can be made to this
bill today right now and it.
Maybe we support the bill.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you.
We have Carla Sonntag's.
Yes Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Allison
Smith reg registered lobbyist
for the New Mexico groundwater
Association house bill twenty
trees all businesses the same
whether the businesses small or
large I have heard this
legislature time and time again
agree that small business is the
lifeblood of our economy however
this act as written places a
larger burden on the small
businesses who do not have HR
departments to rely on who now
miss retroactively providing
creases and paid leave to
employees on their payroll or
face costly fines we ask that
you please
keep
legislation and let all
stakeholders work together with
the Sanchez during the interim
to mitigate any unintended
consequences and to find a
solution that is fair to all
concerned we respectfully oppose
this legislation as currently
drafted thank you for your time.
Thank you
we have.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee to near of our
registered lobbyists for New
Mexico farm and livestock bureau
on behalf of the twenty thousand
member families I represent
statewide here I respectfully
oppose house bill twenty the
bill places extreme financial
burden on our state's
agricultural producers and
businesses many of who are
already struggling not only due
to the pandemic but also because
we're price takers we support
policies that are beneficial to
the business environment in New
Mexico and house bill twenty is
not that we do not believe that
the timing of this legislation
is appropriate considering the
state.
And the fact that many of our
businesses are struggling just
to remain viable our producers
offer bonuses and others
incentives always should be cut
to accommodate for these
additional requirements further
we have concerns with increases
in fines penalties mentioned in
the bill the lack of
appropriations the increase for
potential lawsuits and the
massive increase in workload at
the department of workforce
solutions thank you.
Thank you very much.
We have four.
And then we went there and then
I am immigrants owners who.
The patient that I just went to
only twenty nine my ninety to
one month we see our employees
affect for me there for my
business offered to my employees
the benefit thank you Sir and
that the business come up for by
passing these we are the most
affect that would be my corpsman
abilities that have them well
the benefits that we already
offer a group PPO up to hundred
sixty hours per year have the
Sunday.
Bank holiday sampler locate we
cannot sustain State Farm all in
the current budget will reveal
for in addition my husband and I
have absolutely and open another
location.
We do with them any more my
ninety day Walmart but because
the hospital wait this
legislature's creating be the
finances for the semester we
have decided not to open the
other location we need jobs
these legislation he's scored a
game your creation but we were
on the fact.
Thank you.
We have Walter Bradley.
Mr Chairman yes vice chair yes
so I am getting several notices
that the
the interpreting services aren't
that aren't functioning is there
someone that we have from
technical assistance can take a
look at that.
it is our I. T. I'm not is it R.
T. is that our IT of are you
working.
I noticed that it's working now
okay thank you Representative I
just received a couple of text
that I was getting a lot of
messages to so now I just got
confirmation that it's working
now thank you for your
appreciate it thank you so we'll
continue.
Continuing on.
Walter Bradley.
You Mr chairman members of the
committee I currently represent
the very farmers of America and
that we stand strongly opposed
to this bill as it's currently
written it's not fair it doesn't
cover all of the employees in
the in the state of New Mexico
first of all that exempts all
the state employees and I have a
daughter who's a substitute
teacher she's not going to get
sick.
And the the school system was
full of the of those kind of
situations on top of everything
else it's in this bill you've
got a thousand dollar penalty
for a.
and bookkeeping.
The ability to sue without
filing a an administrative
complaint there's no nothing
there this great lawyers bill
because winter lose the employer
ends up paying the the law fees
for these of of thousand dollar
of penalties so I don't want
belabor the point but I I would
love the opportunity to sit with
the sponsor in the other room
since it's been a bill of the
institution it's.
The date of a employment thank
you next up we have called yes.
Stand opposed to house bill
twenty.
This bill has room for
improvement to help small
businesses but this one has a
lot of flaws to it.
We need to exempt small
businesses without the resources
to manage the bill in addition
to a number of small business
will fall victim to violations
and fines because of the ALAC
bility in HR professional
management.
In addition state employees are
omitted from this.
So it does not help New Mexicans
that work for the state and
somewhere fashion says yes
substitute teachers and
ministers Spence
state employees working in
senior facilities I'm you
employees.
So this bill is not good enough
for.
Businesses if it's not good
enough for the state of New
Mexico every state employees
should be covered as well and
again so.
Thank you we now have a few
moments to go to those did not
register if you wish to speak in
on the rostrum health twenty
please raise your hands now.
Randy that.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is ready for a
I'm register of this for the New
Mexico association of realtors
we believe that there should be
more consideration for smaller
businesses including
consideration for how those
small businesses would be able
to afford a liability imposed by
the automatic supplemental
eighty hours of COVID nineteen
paid leave which doesn't require
proof that the employee actually
had COVID nineteen or any member
of their family had COVID
nineteen thirty second thank you
so much for your time today.
Thank you next we have the
ability.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Shendo members of the committee
my name is bill Lee I
Representative Patel McKinley
County chamber of commerce and
I'm also a small business owner
today my small business and
countless others in our
community been decimated my
business loan senior year over
year loss over ninety percent
and while I think the
legislative bodies for their
hard work in their help provided
during the session that eighty
short term and the devastating
effect of bills like H. B.
twenty will go on in perpetuity
with that said we are not
against of of paid sick leave
but unfortunately HB twenty.
Work HB twenty is exempted state
and federal employees because
according to the sponsor these
employees usually have benefits
equal to or greater than what
the bill provides if this is
true then the state and federal
should also have to provide
evidence that all employees
receive the benefits mandated in
the bill Mr chairman members of
the committee I respectfully
request that until there are
exemptions added that will be
fair to all by accommodating are
small businesses and and the the
are their employees that you
please vote no one H. B. twenty
thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you next.
Chairman members of the
committee Jason Espinoza state
director with the Navajo
national federation of
independent the voices if
independent business the with
the small business you know we
stand as strong opposition of
the legislation for many of the
reasons stated before one thing
I just want to point out is you
know for a small business that
has fifty employees and we
assume that the average pay is
twelve dollars an hour which
will be the minimum wage by
twenty twenty three the
liability or cost would be
thirty eight thousand dollars a
year on and whether or not those
employees choose it's going to
be.
The liability on their balance
Book I'm so it is a real concern
and without any exemptions for
small businesses stated before
we have to continue to stand in
strong opposition to this
legislation thank you.
Thank you next up we have.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee hi my name is
Carla Kugler and with associated
builders and contractors we
stand against HB twenty as it's
currently written up for many of
the reasons stated before this
bill is overly burdensome and
likely to have the largest
detrimental impact to our small
businesses even with the
amendments this bill doesn't
really clear up all concerns
with current PTO policies and we
advocate for time during the
interim for both business and
advocates to come up with a
policy that would work thanks.
Thank you.
Yes my name is Garcia to Baca
thank you of chairman members of
the committee of Albuquerque
Hispano chamber representative
here I agree with everybody that
is spoken so far but I want to
just a couple of things we talk
about and equities that was
brought up earlier by a
proponent but I think sponsor
talk about inequity you can have
a small business of five people
yet you exempt local government.
Seriously that's a huge inequity
the small businesses have been
punished all year long through
no fault of their own this is
even more there is no worse
activities that we could be
doing right now then to discover
to discourage entrepreneurs then
this bill we want the thoughtful
approach we're willing to work
but it had to be there has to be
scared of the game for everybody
there has to be skilled again
state has the help the employers
out help in the please help we
need to have preemption thank
you very much.
Thank you finally we have
Representative Carolyn Wilkins.
I didn't think it would through.
okay thank you.
That concludes public comment at
this time.
For
for those are speaking against
now we will go to those who
stood to speak in favor
beginning with Jamie Sanchez.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee my name
is Jamie passes Sanchez I'm the
Santa Fe city councilor
representing district for today
I'm here both of the local
official as well as the public
health professional to speak in
strong support of HB twenty on
February tenth the Santa Fe city
council adopted a resolution
supporting adoption of a paid
sick leave act at the New Mexico
legislature legislature while
the need to guarantee these
protections to workers has been
I've been in for quite some time
the pandemic has really late
there the need to make sure that
we are taking action now no
parent should have to choose
between.
I'll defer paying rents and no
worker should have to choose
between avoiding spreading
insignis to their coworkers and
our wider community and their
economic security I understand
the delay in implementation to
help businesses that have been
impacted by the pandemic and I
do support that however we are
still in this pandemic and I do
want to urged the legislature
and governor to identify
alternative solutions to ensure
paid sick leave to workers
impacted by COVID nineteen and
insert businesses take full
advantage of the federal dollars
available for that purpose thank
you so much for the Sanchez and
thank you to.
Thank you very much next up we
have Simone de la Garza.
That is.
A lot of that is that the one is
plan your luck on me one hundred
students thank you I know that
is that what and on that on that
apple it's just that I don't
know what I mean it is immutable
list we do not do any of them is
yes you are because I'm also
part yes we know that the fact.
I am interested in to say this
but I mean if that's the I see
on my this gonna see that and
maybe this needs to get in on
the impenetrable really.
What about
you the.
Here's within this not quite
adequate.
Many of them have been able to
help young that we are.
That is in.
The middle class and you get
that a mass in
funding.
Yes yes yes.
What it is yeah the.
As a leading.
Requests and and we.
One eight.
dispositivo.
Thank you very much.
Next we have built to order.
Good afternoon Mister chair
members of the committee of Bill
Jordan with New Mexico voices
for children this is not just an
issue of economic fairness and
racial equity it's also a public
health issue since those who go
to work sick or a threat to the
rest of us and those parents who
have to send their kids to
school sick because they can't
take the day off to stay home
with them or putting other
school children at risk.
We urge your support for this
important legislation thank you.
Thank you very much next up we
had it is with great.
Yes yes.
What.
When.
The staff yes.
So
that's the only.
You.
What if they say that you know
he's like I don't.
Thank you say seven years even
when Santa Fe.
The end that is needs I can't.
Yes.
The second one the other this I
think that those Daniel you know
what the name of the infants and
made up of apples I
think that in most of the state
that are that are hiding federal
follow me mode level Iglesias.
Yes
yes it is.
He said that the what are the
main bait that you put on the
quote that I have a high.
With the May Day bank.
We have federal they can we
check the average you know how
up what
is yes
yeah they see it on a provided
quality he said it was the diva
to.
That
You'll see more revenue.
What's the best they called me
your.
I hope you said yes.
Yeah.
By those you also but they
need any topical yes I'm fed up
I I will.
The weapon used was a simple
question Mr for make up and
feeling that is still growing
and then you also whether this
is because double Mr Bozell but
we are not that I am.
Thank you for having a The
Simpsons Development Bank thank
you the new look employee the F.
one of the loan yeah that but it
also yeah but I look at that
awful to this appointment that
may.
The most joy most public economy
I'm and thank.
The local level okay.
But we thought of that.
How we have to pull it up no.
But I'm not going to be this
Representative will you part of
the debate the disposal will
maybe people would look at that
and you know that just because
that CVS also you know we had
almost any less than a fees to
the up and coming up on Google
he's.
We can we have a single on the
PC.
What what what okay you are also
BC I listen make those
boys but I
mean that.
I
of the no make people put this
amenity still possible.
What is.
The name of that going to mean
that you he's someone that is on
a specific level it is but I'll
probably thought also almost
almost which.
Apple UNICEF request.
Yes yes I am familiar.
Coming into the house is so the
ones that take and taken into
this is funding was ended honest
as I looked up with a phone in
the yeah I mean that most of
them we just put this C.
initiative eighteen but I get
that but you'll need to Senator
no I'm include things in excess
of the S. by us but employment
opportunities.
Thank you we will now go to
animal you doll.
Is
can simply say that leaving once
the user is not the end of the
road it is only the beginning in
a very long during the healing
as an individual who needs
ongoing physical treatments for
my neck and back injuries
inflicted by my ex husband I can
honestly say that I've had to
skip countless treatments as a
result of having no paid sick
leave.
As a result I'm in pain daily
and have been since Mexico's
been strangled me unconscious
over ten years ago as a single
parent such as myself are often
faced with the choice of going
to work or not getting paid to
stay home to care for sick
children there's been times.
Read written about work because
I just put my son first and
remain home with him when he was
sick as a past employer of mine
refuse to allow even unpaid days
off.
Essential workers to face
repeated exposure to COVID
nineteen have a high chance of
contracting the illness so they
have an auto immune disease like
are you they're having to wait a
license options before every
single shift COVID nineteen did
not create these issues it
simply amplifies them.
Thank you very much next up we
have Greg Frazier and
conscience.
Should I chairman members of the
committee thank you for your
service.
I'm honored to be the president
of UFCW grocery workers forty
five hundred in New Mexico sick
pay is long overdue in New
Mexico and we need one now the
business coalition is not caught
off guard they have had years to
prepare for this and they always
say that wrong bills always the
wrong time but failed to fix the
problem recent polling shows
that seventy four percent of New
Mexicans believe the employer
should provide sick pay why
because customers including you
and I feel that the contagious
worker stays home.
Instead of working sick it'll
lead to a healthier workplace
and help your community grocery
workers not feeling well have a
choice to make work sick or lose
one fifth of their weekly wage
workers deserve the opportunity
to earn sick pay just like
executive management this is
long overdue and cannot wait
another year essential workers
are forced to work secretary to
cut pay we ask you to please
both support of HB twenty
healthy workplace Act thank you.
Thank you next up we have bill
mccamley.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is bill
mccamley on the secretary of the
New Mexico department of
workforce solutions and I rise
in support of house bill twenty
in on behalf of the governor's
administration if there is if
there are two things that the
pandemic has revealed to us it
is the eight importance of our
essential workers that are out
there on the front lines every
day the grocery store workers to
mechanics the folks working in
construction we value them we
think that what they do is
actually vital and their health
is important to us the number
two it is also build it is also
reveal how no one should have to
go to work sick that's really
really bad for the workers
themselves and it's bad for all
of us that are their friends and
neighbors in the community to
interact with them we also feel
that with the year delay that
not only helps the business
community adjust to what will be
coming down the pipe but will
allow our department to properly
plan training our workers to
enforce it and also ask for
additional support in next
year's budget so we.
Thank you next up we have gene
hammering.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Jane hammer
I'm a volunteer at the gate with
a a RP New Mexico paid sick
leave is a priority for us this
year to make any workers in New
Mexico do not have paid sick
leave this causes them to choose
between working sector losing
wages or perhaps their job
because they choose to care for
themselves or their family
members according to an a a RP
study from twenty sixteen the
average care givers Spence eight
thousand six hundred sixteen
dollars of income.
Losing weight just compounds
their hardship we ask you to
join us in supporting New
Mexico's working family
caregivers with a do pass by the
thank you.
Thank you.
Vince Alvarado.
Chairman and members of the
committee my name is Vince
Alvarado president of the New
Mexico federation of labor
AFL-CIO and business manager of
smart local forty nine I stand
in strong support of H. B.
twenty this bill is for the
protection of all New Mexicans I
thank the sponsors for all their
hard work in this measure Mr
chairman and members of the
committee I heard you for a do
pass on HB plenty thank you for
your time.
Thank you next we have the call
although no binge.
Chairman members of the
committee my name's Nikolayevich
and the secretary of the beauty
way foundation a leader with
Albuquerque interfaith a sixteen
dues paying member organization
as well as disabled veteran of
ally F. two thousand four house
bill twenty is not only for
workers this bill protects the
general welfare of the public
like me a disabled veteran with
respiratory conditions in
addition the indigenous
populations that are most
mortally affected by COVID are
visually exposed to embody much
of the essential workforce in
many of our rural communities
thirty second Albuquerque
interfaith believes this bill is
a moral document protecting our
most vulnerable are essential
workforce the disabled community
elderly caretakers rural workers
and many marginalized
populations I would advocate for
New Mexico need protection
please vote yes on house bill
twenty thank you.
Thank you next up we have Karen
what long.
Chairman members of the
committee can walk with the
national association of social
workers New Mexico chapter we
stand in strong support of HB
twenty this bill begins to
address the essential workers
who do not receive strictly
because their employers classify
them as part time workers is
important when people are sick
they stay home and get better
studies have shown that are sick
leave employees are more loyal
several years ago we had the
teachers are human bill now I
like to call this the essential
workers are human bills are
effective thank you for your
time and we hope that you
support this bill.
Thank you Max we have
Representative and Carolyn
Wilkins and this is the final
comment.
Thank you chairman committee
members I'm a minister in Los
crucis and supporting New Mexico
Axiall and I I just want to
speak in honoring what is being
done now for paid sick leave it
is imperative that we consider
people the central and speak to
them.
At from a place of honoring what
they do they helped us have food
on the table well they've helped
us to.
Be nurtured in hospitals.
And this is imperative that we
step back and support them in
being paid so that they're not
inflicting.
A sickness and injury on others
when they come to work ill or
not able to support family
members.
Is there a sense so let's treat
them as such this is a bill that
makes sense and I implore you
to.
Thank you very much that
concludes public comment right
twenty.
Thank you now.
Representative
You had an amendment to the bill
right out Mr chair yes there are
two amendments would you like me
to read the to own up to the
number of each one.
Yes and we can put on the screen
as well too I think there.
Great thank you I'm the first
one is to to wait excuse me two
two zero six eight eight point
one.
Chairman I will move
I will move amendment at two two
zero six eight eight dot one for
purposes of discussion only
thank you thank you senator so
Mister chair I I don't have the
amendments and I think
I can't read my own screen.
they're gonna have to go through
the amendments very very slowly
and and I'm gonna mark up the
bill is a dude so when you start
with just go slow because I'm in
Martinsville.
I don't have the equipment.
All right.
Senator Kernan I sent you those
amendments.
Earlier this when you requested
them did you not get the.
Senator Kernan we can't hear
you.
I can't get them if I'm on this
in and it came in an email so I
do not have the okay just wanted
to make sure do you want me to
run them up to you that would be
helpful something because I
can't print them if I'm on the
Senate okay got it thanks for.
Mr chairman I move the amendment
for purposes of discussion maybe
the Representative can up
there's.
Brought them I have a okay maybe
the Representative can start
with the description.
Thank you thank you Mr chair and
you have a speedy assistance.
first amendment is is pretty
straightforward it's on page six
of the bill.
And what it does is it removes a
floor amendment that had
provided that of cruel of sick
leave would start the leader of
the effective date of the act or
sixty days after commencement of
the employees employment this
this amendment strikes the
leader of or the effective date
of the healthy workplace Act
sixtieth day and and instead
just says
Thank it adds leader of the to
date so it's the leader of the
either when the act is a becomes
effective or the employment date
of the employee and I hope I was
clear because I know I fumble
that.
And this is done in recognition
that the bill allows for
short term employees and so on
in the sixty day waiting period
could have an impact on on short
term and temporary employees and
I would also note it was done
before we change the effective
date of the act to July one
twenty twenty two.
Okay.
Any any questions the on the
amendment.
The committee members so I think
I have a Senator Padilla and
then sent to her email thank you
Mr chairman I'm gonna reserve my
questions and comments at the
moment for the bills.
Already Senator Hotmail chairman
did likewise with with my
comments thank you all right.
J. any opposition to the
amendment.
The nun we have the first
amendment.
Food production of amendment
number one two two zero six
eight eight not one.
Okay so that there's no
opposition of that amendment has
been accepted so you have a.
That meant.
Representative thank you the
second amendment is
the number is point two two zero
seven eight three one.
And what this ammendment does it
describes how the twelve months
Accrual period could be defined
and it gives latitude to the
employer to base the twelve
month period on a calendar year
a fixed twelve months leave here
or a one that that starts with
the employees date of employment
is called the rolling twelve
month period and I would note Mr
chair and committee yes this is
this follows the formatting and
the lead of the FMLA the federal
family and medical leave act and
it would allow employers who are
required to follow the family
medical leave act to have the
defining the and the twelve
month period in the same way
they do for FMLA.
It's I view it as a technical
cleanup amendment Mr chair.
So Mister chairman I would move
for purposes discussion of the
member number two number two two
zero six seven eight I'm sorry
two two zero six seven seventy
three one.
Correct.
This okay so thank you Senator
I'm sorry Mr chairman I did it
wrong that would be two two zero
seven eight three dot one point
of discussion.
Thank you.
Any of questions on the
amendment from the members of
the committee.
I assume that hands up for
Padilla and harmless for the
bill itself Mr chairman I move
adoption of the amendment number
two okay so we have a most of
all of the amendment any
opposition to the motion.
The non motion adopted so now
we're.
We're we're back in the bill.
Representative.
Mr chair thank you for allowing
us to present and we're happy to
hear
answer questions from the
committee and yourself of course
thank you I have a Senator
Padilla.
And then Senator Hotmail.
Okay thank you Mr chairman and I
just want to make it clear for
the record I I think this
happened.
I would prefer thank you
Secretary McAnally see still
available and and with us Mr
Chairman.
I.
Senator I'm here thank you Mr
chairman thank you Mr secretary
to make sure what you said that
the administration is fully in I
need to use the term full but is
the endorsement by the governor
are you carrying that
endorsement by the governor
publicly at this point Mr
Senator yes I said that both
that the previous committee
meeting as well as this one so
the answer to that is yes we
really feel that with that year
delay it will not only help the
the business folks get ready but
it it's a big deal for our
department to make sure that we
have the time necessary to plan
and do this correctly so the
answer to that Mr chair Senator
with the year delay is yes thank
you Mr chairman Mr secretary so
that I'll go one step further
than so if the bill were to pass
in the current state I realize
we just.
Important to amendments to it
did with the governor signed
this bill.
Mr chair Senator with the year
delay the answer is yes.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Mr secretary just want to get
that on the record thank you
you know I think that probably
have more of a COVID rather than
than questions for the sponsor I
know that they if you take a
look at the credit shown on the
screen there.
You can't really see it all the
things that have happened to
this bill and and and and
Sanchez I've been right where
you're at when we created the
early childhood education and
care department when we did the
hunger free student all rights
to big pieces I was able to get
that since I've been here I
probably had a whole page with
the things that happened that
bill along the way to the
legislature so thank you for
your hard work.
I keep hearing over and over
well gosh we need additional in
many that the way we need to
study the some interim and I've
said this a couple of times
during the session and and and I
I I'm a business owner myself
I've been a business owner for a
very long time and and you know
just if if we study things to
that they just never quite get
done and so I think that this is
been you know a long time in the
coming in so I'm just you know I
I feel like you you don't want
to it and and I really wish
everybody could just be happy
with everything I told our
leader last night privately
owned to say publicly that I
feel like I've had to make more
decisions in this session.
And I've had to in the nine
years that I've been here now
and I've been up at night
worried about all of them every
single one of them and it's been
very stressful on all about so I
just want to let the folks thank
you madam watching this
discussion today know that these
are not easy decisions this is a
really big piece of legislation.
And I just want to acknowledge
that
You know as a business owner one
of the things I look at is
you know deployed service
action.
If you look at any study out
there
usually it's not Hey that's at
the top of that list which you
would just wake up naturally
thinking it is paid in terms of
what makes an employee this one
is typically M. I. A..
Yeah my respected ladies work do
I have future growth
opportunities
my listens to.
Can I do I have budget employee
benefits as part of my work
package here that that make it
livable for me to work here and
take care of my family and
things of that nature.
Hey usually comes in it's
important but it's not you know
what the top of the list but
budget in in health care and
things that nature and all these
other things really are
so I I I just want to make that
that mention I I plan to support
this initiative I plan to
continue supporting it.
You know I I have a business
that contracts it it has
a lot of employees at different
times in different times are
pretty lean are steady state is
about two thirds of our employee
base one third is is usually
seasonal
from the holidays into the first
part of the year and during the
financial eight seasons.
And
When employees are well they
they they use you heard a little
while ago by some of the folks
you know yes funding and support
they make other employees sick
mantises can be a knock out
punch for a business.
when they're not well they quit
there isn't to health care great
way to get health care there
some time off to make themselves
better they have to quit they
have to go on to do something
else I was very impressed with
some of the comments that were
made today again I wish we could
make everybody happy all the
time but it's it's just you know
does always work out that way.
I'll just zone in in my comments
Mr chairman and and Sanchez when
a business has employees that
are well they quit and then and
then the cost of trying to find
replacements are the cost of
training those replacements the
cost of of not having the
longevity in the rules so that
the folks really truly you know
you can hire the people you can
train in one way but it takes
time in the position for them to
actually get really good at what
they're doing and so when
someone walks out the door after
two years or one year or five
years because you know that just
wasn't whatever that's not good
for business either then there's
a cost associated with that so
there's a way to balance that
there's a cost to benefit ratio.
as a business owner I really
just want to things I want
higher quality for my products
and services I wont lower
liability for my products and
services and the way that I get
that is to have employees and
stay with me for a very long
time.
And the way that I get that is
taking care of the people.
I mean my my business I think a
lot of people know what I for
some people you know what I do
when I handle millions and
millions of customer
interactions every year I can't
handle all of those myself if I
don't take your my employees and
I don't take your of their help
and and and help them with that
they're not going to be there to
handle all those millions and
billions of interactions for me
and and that's I see this is an
opportunity in a way to do that
I wish we did have to be
legislated I wish it'd have to
be that way but for whatever
reason you know we're we're in
this to committee when that
happens
So I just I want to make that
statement center there's a lot
of very emotional committee on
this particular bill and
different we're working for us
right now we would have to do
this but it's not working for us
right now so we need to try
something I'm not someone who's
a fan of just sitting around and
hoping that things get better
things change or whatever I
think that that that we need to
take this seriously so my
comments didn't I probably
offended everybody on both sides
of this issue and I said what I
just did but I I don't I didn't
mean that what I meant to to let
you know is this is the
perspective of a business owner
here to and and that's how I see
it I see take care those
employees as the most important
critical thing I can do so that
my business days with a good
reputation and and continues to
handle all the things that we
have to get done and I'm so
happy to hear that the governor
will sign this bill in its
current condition I think that
needed to be said I think that
was super important to other
legislators were paying
attention to this and and
important to the to the to the
all state so thank you Mr
chairman I might ask with more
questions later but I didn't
have any for the Sanchez I just
want to thank them for the work
that they're doing.
Thank you.
Thank you Senator I have a
Senator how to me then Senator
Hamblen thank you Mr chairman
and thank you representatives
and I want to apologize for not
having my camera on my internet
isn't the isn't a strong today
so I need to keep the cap off so
that I don't freeze up and so
Representative so I was thinking
and and reading and given that
taxes and other states are
opening up and I'm repealing the
restrictions including some with
mask wearing a red that public
health officials are predicting
that there could be a fourth
wave including in neighboring
states like New Mexico now with
the amendment pushing your house
bill backed by fifteen months.
Until the pandemic at.
When the majority of us are
vaccinated and we reached heard
of unity not representative
maybe Representative Rubio what
can be done and is there a plan
to ensure frontline workers have
the resources they need to
protect themselves and the
public in the meantime.
Mr chair and Senator.
Employees need to be following
the public health orders and our
businesses need to be following
up public health orders that I
something I think that's
critical for ensuring that
the workforce stay safe the
public stay safe and people have
confidence enough to so that
they wish to frequent businesses
I'm not sure if I answered your
question directly I do not know
if there's any additional
federal aid I know there are
some aid programs out there that
may be coming down our way that
may help I'm not clear as to
what those are just yet and I'll
be happy to defer to my
colleague if she wishes to
supplement my answer if it if
that is if the chair is okay
with that.
I'm thanks represented Mr chair
I I I think to address your
question in addition to what
Representative Chandler has
mentioned Center had a meal is
that.
From what I understand from from
what the president just signed
this last week New Mexico it is
in a position to receive
a significant amount of money
federal funds to be able to
address a lot of different
issues specifically related to
to small businesses I I will
state and that I mean delaying
implementation of what was
originally supposed to help
address COVID.
Was a significant concession and
and I won't speak for
Representative Chandler but for
myself I mean we came into the
and this is to to the point that
Senator by the I mentioned we
came into the session with two
separate bills and we've we drew
it down to this one bill and we
believe that a lot of the
evolution that I mentioned in my
opening remarks
Was there's there's just a lot
of work that has been done to
try to address all sides of the
issue and and and for me to lane
was a significant concession and
so.
I think we with Senator funding
from the the administration
coming down from Congress
I have every intention of of
figuring out what mechanisms
might exist later on to help
address issues related to
workers for the next fourteen
months I know through my work
with housing and and
Representative.
I know that you've been part of
some of those conversations is
that we have worked over the
past year to try to get the
administration to utilize
federal funding specifically
from from the cares Act to go to
UCB need funding to go to
housing and to let to
specifically to let
to to tenants and to landlords I
think the same can be said
around this issue of the part of
money so I guess that what we're
calling them which is the the
federal funding that can really
help to support workers who
contract the virus within the
year and for whose employers
don't pay sick leave I think
that federal funding can be used
for that and so we have to be
very creative because our public
health really does depend on
that.
K. Senator heart of millions to
have the floor.
Thank you sorry and thank you
Representative and so
Representative I think that
you're talking maybe about the
American rescue plan the.
The president just signed and
earlier this summer when we
talked about housing and how
that was affected I'm hopeful
that this American rescue plan
can then help the affected
workers within these fifteen
months until HB twenty goes into
effect is that what you're
saying Representative.
Mr chair and Senator I I think
the our point position as we're
hopeful that there will be
monies available I have not seen
an analysis of how those monies
are going to be laid out.
Okay thank you and then it just
Mr Chairman just a couple of of
stories I've heard so many
people from my district reach
out to.
Me asking for this bill to pass
I've heard from members of the
immigrant community who are
single mothers who had to take
time off during the COVID who
are now struggling and how
they're going to make ends meet
who are selling off their
personal belongings to ensure
that they can pay the rent or
keep the light on I've heard
from people in the Espanola
valley some who.
Three people working in a
household with a father who gets
COVID and then all three workers
are then home for fourteen days
and are struggling and how
they're going to put food on the
table to ensure that their young
ones are fat and so I'm getting
so many calls of people who are
asking us to look into this
legislation because.
They really want sick leave and
I and I see both sides of the
story and I'm thankful to both
of you who have brought this up
and as a chief of staff I know
that our greatest asset as
employers are is our workforce
and I'm thankful for this bill
and with that Mr Chairman I have
no no other questions.
Thank you Senator Hamblen.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative Chandler Rubio
for for bringing this forward I
do have some questions but first
just a a committee you know
especially Representative Rubio
you know I walk a very difficult
line in this discussion as the
CEO of the green chamber we talk
specifically about supporting
local businesses and we know in
continue both to believe that
they're the backbone of our
community you know the employees
of the majority of our small
businesses are family Rubio you
and I know a number of
businesses that that their
family and I want to take care
of each other and I recognize
the concerns and costs I'm the
door to provide more coverage to
their employees that that
business owners have but I also
know that the affordable Care
Act isn't helpful for small
businesses it's very out of
reach for many small businesses
to be able to use that to
provide for their employees.
But I do have the confidence
based on the actions that have
been taken place in the Senate
and the house and the various
funds will be available
statewide nationally that I feel
confident that this will not be
the detriment that it's been
representatives today you know
we've we've heard some very
powerful experiences today and
and since last year you know the
appreciation and respect for
those deemed essential of
grocery store employees the
servers plumbers electricians
these are people that I've
interacted with yes I want out
as little as possible to prevent
the spread of COVID take care
bye community I still feel this
bill is an investment by
businesses and their employees
this is about employee retain
ability it's about providing
alternatives to health care it
is about doing the right thing
and and you know I'm I'm
flipping back and forth on my
screen using alt tab so I can
look at the bill and one of
things that that if either
Representative Chandler
Representative Rubio you can
addresses you know and and maybe
Representative Rubio because you
and I've both been connected in
various circles for a long time
is that I'm and I'll tell G.
beach thank you person I'm not
lesbian and and for many years
my family wasn't recognized by
law and even though we have
legal marriage now not all LGBTQ
families look the same for
example many LGBTQ youth are
kicked out of forced to develop
their own families of people who
love us for who we are despite
no legal biological
relationships and so I'm
wondering if you can identify
how family is defined in this
bill and help LGBTQ families
which come in all shapes and
configurations will be per
protected by this bill so either
one or the experts I would
appreciate that thank you Mr
chair.
Mr chair and Senator the term
family is it
Is very broad intentionally so.
And it would include
Any number of types of
relationships biological or not
adopted foster children step
children legal ward
grandparents and I'm not and our
partners spouses domestic
partners and I think number
seven is of most interest I
think to everyone here is an
individual whose close
association with the employee or
the employee's spouse or
domestic partner is the
equivalent of a family
relationship and that was done
out of recognition that we have.
define family in many different
ways and it respects the
individual's definition of whom
they consider to be their
family.
Thank you Representative
chairman Mr chair I don't know
if Representative Rubio wants to
add to that or if you know
Representative Rubio you and I
both have the same concern about
our neighboring state of Texas.
And other restrictions that have
been lifted and so I am
concerned about.
Just having those protections
because I I don't feel that our
neighboring states where my mom
lives is doing everything that
we can to make sure that people
are safe and especially those
folks who still have to work on
a day to day basis so I do
appreciate you bringing this
forward and and I appreciate the
the steps that both of you have
taken to make sure that the that
we protect people who are are
doing the hard work so thank you
Mr chair thank you thank you
senator haven't Senator Hickey.
Thank you Mr chair and fellow
senators and representatives
thank you for bringing this bill
I was just checking in with my
staff to see to get an up to the
minute and it's it's I've lived
on the east foothills in
Albuquerque so the district to
those from
fairly well to do our through
middle class and and
not to use classes people who
are definitely impacted by this
and I'm definitely getting very
very at the.
Email and calls
from my constituents to support
this bill on the other hand I'm
definitely hearing from small
business owners are that this is
going to be very difficult so I
know this is I know this is a
top bill I and
but I as I as I worked through
that and talked with some people
and I'm.
Really kind of developing the
perspective of what my career
has been and one of the
questions I have in that regard
yes with this bill allow in
individual if if it were passed
and signed by the governor to
take time off are you giving
that they have to creating the
hours to go and see see
health care in port if they are
if they're not feeling well
would with this bill help cover
that.
Mr chair and senator absolutely
that is definitely something
that would be covered okay.
Okay well I I guess one of the
things that I'd like to point
out to folks is that in the our
recent
of relief act the rescue Act
excuse me
there is forty billion dollars
that is going into the exchanges
now that money will not per se
assess small businesses with
premiums are rather it this this
would subsidies for individuals
right here is the dramatic
impact that are I think people
are going to begin to know and
understand is the health plans
start to market this this new
infusion of funds are there the
subsidies which are certainly
have here for those below two
hundred fifty percent are also
going to be very strong up to
four hundred percent and beyond
so let me give you an example
right now and individual at age
fifty five with a.
And okay the silver plan is
paying unfortunately about
eleven hundred dollars for a
monthly payment.
The subsidy support for that
individual.
Is going to
Lower that fee to about four
hundred fifty dollars that's
pretty amazing.
And I understand and again this
is still being worked out as the
the plan offerings are being
adjusted that there are even
some gold plans that in this of
maybe more younger people that
will have no pre
that's how strong the subsidies
is going to be so my point is I
I think people who
that now this is going to be
much more affordable and it's
important in that individuals
are will be able to see the
medical care and seeking the
medical care
they're the most most people go
most visits or or one of the
leading causes of visits are
offering lower respiratory
disease the flu a call
and most of the time it's it's a
viral costs
and once in a while it might be
bacterial disease usually viral
and also GI and what is the
treatment for that
Grant.
Lots of fluids.
In aspirin Tylenol or ibuprofen
but the bad rest is critical the
longer the individual puts off
address the higher the risk
particularly upper lower
respiratory that this will turn
into an ammonia or a bacterial
infection which will get them
even secretary.
And also
they will become much less
productive and they will also
I'm not going home when they
first get symptoms are get
seen yep yep by
they will infect others with the
same virus and call them and see
this every season this year not
because while wearing a mask but
here's the point
this the ability to seek medical
assistance whether it's you
telemedicine or visit
is going to be critical but a
lot of people feel they're
afraid to take that time off
with this bill but well
financially of the with this
bill there will be coverage the
other thing I want to point out
for small employers
having worked on the exchange
many small employers would help
their employees the individual
by putting up to three four
hundred dollars that they could
use to purchase together on the
exchange and now because the
costs in the exchange for the
individual so heavily subsidized
they will have the ability I
believe to then get insurance
yes share get better faster and
actually enhance appropriate
productivity of the small bills
this so I I hope that you all
can follow my logic here and the
end of the day
you know I I am a lot of people
say oh Dr Hickey he's all about
healthcare
I yes but I run businesses most
of my life large hospital
systems and so forth and the
As I as I as I look at this I go
you know I'm I'm very empathetic
to the business people about
losing the person or or having
to pay for some time but you
know as you if you look at in
terms of dynamic scoring in our
O. line it's going to help small
businesses particularly if there
can be insurance and so at the
end of the day as I look at this
both in from common sense which
you know is a physician I can do
now R. for me I would be doing
harm if I were not to support
this bill and so my apologies
two of the top part of my
district but I have to I have to
follow my all of you know our
and stand in support of this
bill and thank you for bringing
that for.
And I you this job.
Thank you I have a thank you
thank you thank you Senator
Kernan.
Thank you Mr chair and
certainly have.
Have some questions I haven't
heard from any questions this
afternoon out I guess everybody
understands this bill what
better than I do and and so
I do have some questions and and
at I apologize if I don't have
the amendments if I talk about
something that's been amended
out or change just just correct
me so I welcome that but I'm on
page three and I'm looking at
definitions on page three do.
And and maybe these definitions
are are ready in statute maybe
under person act or I don't know
where they not do that can you
define what a seasonal.
The employee.
How do you define seasonal
employee.
Mr chair and and I guess
Representative Chandler are you
either one of you have a have a
business at.
Are you small business ownership
business owners whichever one of
you could.
Could err I mean excuse me
Mister chair and Senator I'm
retired I don't I'm I I work
full time for the legislature
pretty much
Have a of a law practice prior
to my retirement and private
work for thank you you know what
you would know what a seasonal
employee yes and so somebody
tell me what the definition Mr
chair of the seasonal employee.
Mr chair and senator if I could
ask Mr use to take that one on.
Go ahead.
Senator Hamblen thank you very
much for the question the.
Kernan Senator Kernan I
apologize all right I don't get
to that other national make sure
you know the second question.
I got confused there for a
second I apologize you know
probably the bill defines
employee broadly and it defines
it in a fashion that is
consistent with New Mexico law
the language in there that says
it includes individuals
including temporary and seasonal
employees is meant for purpose
is to make clear that includes
essentially all employees in the
private sector that said there
is no specific definition of the
word or the phrase seasonal
employee but the the definition
of employee is intended to be
very includes.
So so Mister chair and and US
disputes Act yes that that just
pretty much think it captures
everybody in the state of New
Mexico that doesn't work the
state of New Mexico so if you
work for the state you're not
brought into this bill and if
you work anywhere else in New
Mexico at you would be captured
by the term employee at in this
bill is that correct.
Sure sure sure sure Shendo
Senator Kernan that is correct
the reason public employees were
not included in the proposed
bill as they have a dramatically
different steam and and I'm sure
you probably know but as sick
leave is at treated more as a
ineffective commodity they can
buy and sell sick leave and they
can they can get paid for on
retirement this bill is intended
not to interfere with that
system so so Mister chair I
think I would I would I would
disagree with that somewhat I
think in some for instance
school teachers depends on the
district you work and and and I
know in Albuquerque you leave
employment in use or.
Right off the stateLee they pay
you for it and that's that not
done in most districts so so you
don't really get to you don't
get a benefit if you don't use
it and so I think Stickley
policies very certainly across
state government and among
school districts so I don't
think it's all the same and I
think at every district probably
has around policy with regard
that ending on whether they are
Representative thank you madam
chair sure that makes a
difference as well though so let
me give you an example I have to
have a gentleman his most money
five requests and
he comes every other week thanks
Amanda twenty minutes because I
don't have a very big Mr and so
tell me what my responsibility
would be with regard to the to
the gentleman did most requests
every other week.
Mr chairman and and senator out
that person's an independent
contractor and would not be
entitled to sick leave I think
under New Mexico law.
So so an independent contractor
whether it's the whether that
person is mowing my yard or
doing a little bit of
maintenance even at my office
because I'm a small business
owner and sometimes my
maintenance man needs a little
bit of help so we we just got
another gentleman to come in and
we pay him just kind of on a
contract basis so so that
individual would not be pulled
into this correct.
I believe that's correct Mr
chair and
I think it's really important
you know because as I'm reading
some of the analysis of that I
got the impression that
Pretty much.
Pretty much those people are
included so you're telling me
anyone that I've contract with
so if I have a small business
and I decided that rather than
hiring employees to work for me
I can just contract with that.
Some other person or company to
come in and do my maintenance
and I would be responsible for
sick leave for that individual.
Mr chair and Senator if the
arrangement meets the definition
of independent contractor and
that's defined in common law of
the state of New Mexico then you
would not need to afford that
person sick leave so what we
where can I find that because
it's not in your bill and I
think it's really important for
people to understand exactly is
captured in this and who is not
I mean I don't have that
definition from to make could
could someone provided the legal
definition for independent
contractor.
Because I think that's going to
I think that's going to take out
a lot of people maybe you wish
were in here.
Mr speaker I do have a
definition of independent
contractor that's well
well informed in the loss to
give me a moment I have a pile
of papers that I'm working at
on you need Mr.
Yes yeah this is really
important not only to me.
Because I want to make sure I
don't break the law on gate city
so.
And
I will read the definition Mr
chair and etcetera but I also
point out that the department of
workforce solution is charged
with developing regulations in
support of this bill of this act
and I have no doubt that that
that definition will be included
it within those staff within the
rulemaking okay so we're gonna
have rulemaking after I make a
decision on whether to vote for
this or not and so I'm not going
to know these included until
after the bill passes and
workforce solutions develops
rules regulations to define some
of the people that may or may
not be included.
Mr chair out that's not what I
said madam center what I said
was there is a well established
definition law which I'm happy
to read to you okay your chair
and and I also supplemented that
answer by noting that workforce
solutions would also be issuing
right rules and regulations
which I would expect would it
memorialize and make clear for
employers who are following
those rules what they need to do
and how they do it okay well I'm
ready I'm gonna jot this down
thank you very and what I'm
quoting from because I think it
is indicator that's well
established law is is rules
under the New Mexico uniformed
jury instructions which is our
rules that could judges rely on
when they're instructing juries
as to what how how the law
should be followed and in the
contract is one who agrees to do
certain work where the person
who engages the contractor may
direct the result to be
accomplished but does not have
the right to control the manner
in which in which the details of
the work are to be performed.
Okay so madam Mr chair and that
would basically make it
impossible I mean I that
wouldn't work for for an
employee employer to say okay
I'm not gonna have employees
anymore I'm just introduce a
contractor so that that would
not work for my business so that
that helps me understand a
little bit more about who this
included so on a temporary basis
Mr chair defined borders that
define what just temporary basis
mean with regard to people that
might work for me.
Mr chair and Senator I believe
that it would be how you define
what areas but I would happily
defer to Mr use two yeah Sir
okay thank you very much Mr
chair thank you.
Mr chair at Senator Kernan just
it affectively at Representative
answers correct it's an employee
who you hire for a defined but
limited duration of time
employees as I'm sure you know
our employees it will generally
in the state of New Mexico and
are hired for indefinite times
temporary employees in contrast
are employees that are hired for
a short but definite duration.
Mr chair and misdeeds would you
tell me what that duration I
mean do we have that.
Do we have a six time that would
mean that there.
Mr.
Mr chair Senator Kernan I you
cut out so part of your your
question repeated please I will
thank you very much Mr chair so
I'm just trying to figure out a
temporary employee.
Would be someone who
Nine works for you for three
months and then not work for you
for awhile and maybe come back
and work for you.
I'm still confused because we're
gonna have to know who these
people are are we're we're going
to be in violation of the law so
help me at the state a little
bit more about temporary because
I still don't know what that
means according to this
legislation Mr chair and
Senator.
If we accept that all employees
are covered by this bill I'm not
sure
What we're happy to discuss with
you who is temporary and is part
time and what not but the bottom
line is all employees are
covered by the bill and that
language was just too into it
was intended to make sure
everyone understood that all
employees whether I'm.
An employer chooses to call them
temporary part time or seasonal
they are covered.
Mr chair and representative I
think I just heard you say that
the the gentleman that comes and
mows my yard because he's not
covered I mean so give me some
examples of people that are not
covered you say housekeepers are
covered but not your people
right.
Madam chair Mr chair and madam
Senator I don't believe I said
the the get the lawn mower was
an employee I believe I said
under the scenario that you
presented that person was an
independent contractor so if an
individual working for an
employer meets the definition of
employee that person would be
eligible for earned sick leave.
Thank you Mr chairman I hate to
keep.
Pressing on this but I I just
feel that on I'm just not
finding out.
You know if they're contractors
and it's it's the man who does
my yard is considered a
contractor he's also seasonal
any works for me and you're
saying everyone who works.
Is considered.
An employee I just And
impeached.
Mr chair Senator Kernan I did
not say everyone who works for
you is necessarily an employee
if the individual meets the
definition of an independent
contractor you would not be
responsible for affording them
I'm sick leave under this act.
Is independent contractor in the
definitions of the the act.
Mr speaker
Senator it's in three locations
Representative in the bill.
Can you tell me where Mr chair
and senator.
You know I I founded in
On page three line sixteen and
there's a reference to an
independent contractor and again
I don't want to speak with a
representative is if you want me
to representatives I'm happy to
have a lot of experience in this
area.
Madam chair I don't know where
every location in the bill is
and I don't have my bill okay
sort of auto search so if the
Senator knows where all three
locations are Mr chair in center
I'm happy to have them point
those out that would be great
thank you just one there's
three.
Justin Mr chair.
Thank.
Not a definition.
Okay
Page ten line I.
Their references as I mentioned
before there are references
Mister chairman Senator Kernan
and then also references twenty
two line eight but as the
representative stated previously
it's a well defined.
In New Mexico statutes the term
independent contractor I did
want to jump in here let's to
representatives want to be too I
have a follow up to
Representative Senator Kernan if
it's alright with the two of
you.
I'm Mr chair and Center I'm
perfectly happy you're you're
you're providing great
additional information so so
Mister chairman Senator Kernan
in your example of of the lawn
work who do you rate you pay a
company that pays the worker or
do you pay the worker directly.
The worker directly and you only
pay them to perform a project
from time to time and at
different times.
Yes that that is a clear
definition of with those two
points that's a clear definition
of an independent contractor and
based on the way this is
documented I don't believe that
individual would be eligible if
at any point you're paying a
company to perform the work.
Maybe you have a company that
you pay the claim as housekeeper
or what have you or you pay a
company to come in your office
to do work.
then you're paying a company and
it's a company's responsibility
to meet the requirements of this
legislation out
very very well and and and I'm
not going to go any further into
that because I do think I think
that those are some things that
as you read the analysis from my
perspective it does raise
questions and and and I will
tell you if you break yes back
in the back of the bill you're
held accountable at a pretty
high high level so I just wanted
to make sure on that I'm and I
know we heard from.
Secretary mccamley who I think I
would just tell you has done a
an incredible job during this
pandemic and I can't say enough
about the work he has done some
work a little bit about how he's
going to and this additional
work I'm to what he's doing now
because I just don't know how he
can do anymore than what he's
doing so I wonder if there is
this is an appropriation that
will go to the department of
workforce solutions to assist
him and adding on to the
responsibilities that he's going
to have with regard to this and
if you think that's something
obviously think it's something
you can do because he stood in
support of the bill but I I do
worry about that in and so would
there be an additional cost
to that department.
Mr chair and representative.
Mr chair and Senator there is
not an appropriation in this
bill I believe secretary
mccamley referenced including
such an appropriation next year
in his budget okay
That that's good thank you and
and Mr chair thank I think
that's appropriate I thank you
certainly gonna need some some
help there
So we talked a little bit about
state employees and they're not
included but but which is let me
just ask you this question so as
an employee if if I give
employees at two week paid
vacation and then I give them a
one week paid sick leave.
Is there any but but what the
bill says I really need to give
them at the end of the day for
the year probably two weeks of
sickly correct to meet the
threshold of making sure one
hour for every hour that works
with total about forty hours at
the end of the year which that's
about a week of.
I have paid sick leave so.
Is does that sound right that
there are probably need to give
two weeks of paid sick leave.
Rather than just one if I'm an
employer.
Mr chair and Senator Kernan no
the employer is required to
offer sixty four hours up to
sixty four hours of earned paid
sick leave per year.
Not two weeks I believe that
comes out to about a week and a
half Mr chairman and senator
okay okay so that okay.
That all right and
Is is anything in the bill
retroactive in other words.
Is it begins when this thing
starts then where we are at that
point it's going forward we're
not going to anything backwards
so works he held accountable for
not following this law
retroactively correct up Mr
chair Senator that's correct let
me just just one more question
so so the the one in it the one
and a half weeks if I'm already
getting one week do I just need
to add a half a week or do I
need to add one and a half weeks
on to my one week I'm already
doing.
I'm.
Mr chair Senator it depends on
what the provisions of your what
you're calling vacation but what
other employers sometimes called
paid time off and that is
something that we addressed at
the request of the business
community if you are if your
quote vacation and be used for
either vacation or for sick
leave yes that sick leave
comports with the act you will
not need to add anything
additional if if that makes
sense that does make sense and I
think that's helpful in that was
an amendment Mr chair is that
correct that you added to that
opportunity to be flexible with
the PTO and right okay well that
makes chair Senator yes that
makes sense okay well that's a
that's all right hand in you
know as a business owner I think
I'm already complying so I want
to make sure we were going to be
adding on to put you know I feel
like is is fair and and earned
in.
Thank you surveyed I I don't
have many employees that I'm I
can see that I guess I was just
mostly worried about the people
that you kind of employee for
short periods of time and just
wondering how that's going to
affect so many people that may
not even know that they fall
under this act and find out
three years later that someone
sponsored against them so I
think it's really important to
be really clear about
definitions really clear about
that who is captured in this and
then contract people are just
hope that need to know who that
really is going forward me make
sure I don't have any more
questions for a very.
So we're already we're still
under the federal comment
mandate so so what small
businesses and all businesses
are now still under the
with the federal government has
put in place with regard to sick
leave is that correct until what
point.
Mr chair Senator I'm not frankly
competent to answer what federal
laws required I don't know if if
others on the the our any of our
either of our two experts hasn't
have information on that
Representative.
She has experience in our Mr
chair Senator that federal
mandate expired at the end of
last year federal tax credits
and then you to be available for
employers who choose to provide
COVID Lee through the end of
September.
Thank you that was what I was
getting at in in did not have
prices so thank you for that
that's all I have Mister.
Thank you Senator Kernan are
Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative it's good to see
in this committee again.
Is any of does this apply
especially on the amendment on
the additional leave.
those that applied to the state.
For schools any of the
government.
Mr chair Senator this bill in
its entirety does not apply to
Public employers it implies to
private employers.
Mr Chairman representative can
you explain what the thinking
was behind putting more onerous
requirements on private
employers then we do on public
employers.
Mr chair and senator up I'm not
sure I eat necessarily agree
with the characterization that
it's more onerous
many public employers have very
generous sick leave PTO and
others similar type policy so I
think it would have to be on a
case by case basis before you
one could say it's more onerous
Mr chair and senator.
Mr Chairman representative is
more onerous in law they're
doing that on their own or
through collective bargaining
agreements but we are requiring
a law the private employers do
this we're not requiring a lot
of the public employers do this
so the law is putting a more
stringent more onerous
requirement upon public one
private employers and they are
the state itself.
So yes you're right some.
Good borders probably have a
more generous.
Leave policy but not all.
So this wouldn't apply to any of
our cities this when applied are
counties the employee public
workers.
Mr chair Senator that's correct.
I'm just trying to figure out
what the reasoning was behind
that.
Mr chair and senator I think I I
gave you the reasoning that we
were operating from and that is
a large number of very large
number of public employers
provide benefit packages
As good as or similar to this.
Appreciate it I guess what would
disagreement there because we're
requiring this into law I don't
understand why we've written it
out for.
You know the the government.
we've basically given the
government a waiver.
Again some cities may provide
more some cities may find less
I've no idea have a look at
every cities leave program but
especially when you're talking
about
it appears to me that this the
section on page thirteen that
was amended in looks like Senate
health public affairs committee.
one of my favorite committees of
the more generous earned sick
leave policy looks like if you
are already giving up pretty
good Leafs policy now you've got
to add to it in my reading that
correctly.
Mr chair and senator it was
amended to make clear that
employers with paid time off
policies that meet the
requirements of the this act do
not have to add any additional
time off for their employees.
Okay so what if what if the.
Lawyer.
Gives.
Three weeks of regularly.
but doesn't have a sickly.
Because basically saying it's
flux Lee we have some players
say you get three weeks time off
whether it's for recreation or
whether it's for sec those that
meet the requirements of this
law.
Sixty four hours of those three
weeks I with the act then the
employer would not need to
supplement or change their PTO
policies Mr chair and senator.
Sixty four hours complied I'm
sorry I'm not fully following
one to our meeting there give
employees three weeks off every
year.
Do I need to add more to their.
Time off in do I have to specify
it is sickly.
Mr chair and senator I'm sorry I
wasn't clear the law requires
sixty four hours of sick leave
that complies with the
requirements of the act so if
the employer that you're
speaking of senator and chair
allows sixty four hours of those
three weeks that comply that are
that are compliant will not need
to change their policies and so
I hope I answered your question
I'm sorry is insurance out Mr
Chairman representative I'm
really not trying to be
difficult here I'm trying to
figure out if I if it is an
employer still allowed to do the
like the the flex Lee where they
can say we're your Lee is gonna
be however you need to use our
were you want to use as long as
sixty four hour they give them
sixty four hours they comply
with this.
The cell was given three weeks
that's four sixty four hours.
Mr chair Senator test if it's
flex time that can be used for
any reason and.
Yes it would comply with this
act Mr chair and senator okay
thank you sorry
I think that's probably what
you're going to see most
employers do is there any change
all their leave to just leave
and I'll call flex Lee so we
would take it up as I heard sick
leave or as indication time.
then that way they don't have to
give both.
So that's.
That's probably one of the
things that we've done in this.
I am conspiring it still bothers
me that we are applying this to
ourselves it's kind of like with
the Legislature want everyone
else to follow the open meetings
act with us.
we also we always give ourselves
a waiver it's kind of like the
federal government did under the
affordable Care Act.
We're they made a flight to
everyone but the federal
government
and so when my children turn
eighteen they lost their health
care because it didn't apply to
the.
Part of defense
of and so it that's one of the
reasons that really rubs me the
wrong way.
is because I've looked that and
we're we're basically saying
well everyone has to comply with
this except government.
will just give the government a
way for I guess because we're
concerned that it might cost us
money and we don't want to have
a fiscal impact from the US so
therefore we don't want to apply
to us that's the only reason I
can think that we wouldn't want
to in law whether it.
You know there's no reason you
would right exclusion if you
were afraid it would pick up
somebody's because you had to
write out.
The the government.
So.
It I think it's something that a
look at maybe I'll work on that
for the floor
making sure that the the state.
Our public workers have to
comply with this you can always
go beyond this right and if I'm
a employer whether it's public
or private I can give more that
sixty four hours of leave
correct.
Mr chair Senator absolutely so
we're not saying you have to
give sixty four hours and that's
all you can get of so if if the
government side is the public
side already meets this
threshold.
Then why we want to run away for
for.
It doesn't make any sense to me
what we're doing it that way I I
I am concerned also about the
the language in here on.
The
The supplemental leave during a
public health emergency.
you know.
Well first of all we've only had
one of these where it's been
done this way we've had other
public health emergencies the
last hundred years but we've
only had one where we've had a
governor shut down everything
for here.
So whether you like what the
governor did on this or not this
is the first time we've ever had
this happened in our history.
So but what we've seen in this
is that we've almost put well it
probably put.
At least twenty percent of the
businesses in the state will go
out of business permanently
because of the US and now we're
gonna put another requirements
on the on top of what they've
already planned for because when
you're doing leave in your your
your building that into your
numbers when Senator Padilla
this is a contract for a company
he's building and all the
benefits of all of his
employers and employees into
that contract that's the way you
do so we change these things
that people are just going to go
back and the next time they do a
contract they're gonna say Hey
lost changed our state we're
gonna modify this so they're
going to reset it at the new
number that's that's the way
it's done when the store is
figuring out what their margin
needs to be and still figuring
out what they have to price
everything at.
There is going to take all this
into account know what that what
might end up doing is.
Bring some inflation to pricing
it probably won't be much
that added to some other things
we may see some installations
this year we may see some of
inflation our pricing we were
packed some of sorry are but the
government wrote out groceries
and gas so that the characters
inflation.
But I guess so that's you know
that's the way the deal with
that but when you throw in this
additional requirement.
For additional eighty hours.
That they can't plan for how is
an employer supposed to be able
to make that happen without is
just sending more lawyers and
bankruptcy.
Mr chair and and senator the
emergency provision I I'm sure
you'll know is quite narrow and
specific and as you've pointed
out this is the first time we've
had such an event but moving
forward I think we recognize
that there are potential for
these kinds of them that events
again and I think we would all
agree if someone is ill due to
exposure in in some sort of
pandemic type situation we would
not want them going into work
and we would want them staying
home.
Yes I I think that we would
agree with that Mr Chairman
Representative that we don't
want them going in to work in
exposing others to whatever the
illnesses I guess the question
is since the employer doesn't
get to declare whether there's
an emergency or not who should
pay for that.
and putting that burden on the
employer I mean I I mean I'm
glad it wasn't on the lawyers in
this one and I can tell you a
lot of employers.
Took out loans did everything
they could to actually already
do this for their employees.
But not everyone was able to.
We put this on top of them or
have put this on top of them
this time we lost even more
business than we have lost and
so I I think this is a big
mistake having this in here for
the once in a hundred year.
Thing that might happen now you
know I live in Rio Rancho New we
always talk about the ones a
hundred year floods and then we
had to in ten years.
And so you know that sometimes
happens you know the odds still
me that's not gonna happen it
for another hundred years odds
meaning it's not likely but it
could happen next year.
or we could just have a
government that decided this is
a good way to control the people
and so they make it happen next
year who knows what's going to
happen.
so you know that part really
concerns me I don't think
employers of anyway planning for
that if they try to the we're
gonna excuse the price gouging
so so we're your bill really
concerns me I appreciate you
answer my questions I think we
need to consider
not giving this waiver to the
public side and I will take a
look at that between here in the
floor thank you.
Thank you.
I don't believe we have any more
questions a couple of questions
that I had have been answered
maybe a of Representative I know
that of I think this whole sick
leave annual leave things have
kind of evolved so.
Maybe somebody I know what back
in the day when I first started
working was annual leave and
sick leave and now it's PTO can
someone this kinda maybe provide
some guidance on what what all
of those pieces means.
Mr chair I will do my best I
used to practice in the area of
employment law and employment
benefits so I have a kind of a
pretty good handle on it
there was a period of time when
most employers offered vacation
and sick leave and about twenty
years ago or so the trend was
amongst employers to offer
something they called paid time
off and paid time off
for the war
I don't know if you want to call
generous but for the more sort
of sophisticated employers they
would simply say you get twenty
days a year or fifteen days a
year it's called paid time off
you can use that time for sick
leave or any other kind of leads
that you would like to use it
for a vacation I don't know
volunteering in Africa Medical
the excursion or whatever you
could use it for whatever you
like and that I think is
probably fairly common these
days in terms of how employers
operate and so what our bill
does is we understand that many
employers have those kinds of
policies and to the extent those
policies comply with the this
sick leave act those employers
will be deemed compliant and I
hope I answered your question Mr
chair I I believe so so so so
one is to assume that under the
PTO plan.
That is accounting for sick
leave for any kind of thing so
it's really up to the employee.
Just to take time off without
telling deployed you what
they're doing.
That one of the patient will to
go on you know whatever.
Correct so long as there are no
restrictions within the PTO
policy that would affect that
are out of compliance with this
act Mr Mr chair okay so so as
long as if somebody had a P. T.
O. that was more generous than
the sixty four hours.
Then they would be in compliance
with this act.
Mr chair most cases yes.
All right thank you all righty I
don't see any more of.
The committee member additional
what is a pleasure of the
committee could you pass
most welcome Senator Padilla.
Okay well
A tag team of Hamblen and how to
meal.
Senator Hamblen.
Second yes Mr chair thank you
okay we'll have of late can you
please take grow please.
Yes is this on the bill are on
the amendment of the bill as
amended bill as amended twice so
yes we are on the bill.
Sh Senator Brandt no.
Senator Griggs.
Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Hickey yes Senator how to meal
yes Senator Kernan.
No senator Sanchez.
Senator Tallman he was gonna
vote by phone.
Okay go ahead Cadena I'll try to
call in because I.
Of the Senator Wirth yes Senator
Padilla yes.
And Senator Shendo.
Yes.
Okay we've got six to three
without Senator comments will
but I know he wanted to vote.
Mr Chairman on the floor we are.
Yes he's not answering so we're
fine okay.
It was in the affirmative and
and three in the negative and
two excused.
Okay Representative.
Thank you so much Mr chairman
thank you committee members for
the good discussion we really
appreciate it thank you.
Thank you.
So now we'll move on to the
house bill.
sixty eight we have a
Representative Ferrary.
Yes Sir thank you.
Okay great.
Up.
Mr chairman we moved in the last
hour red and Marc towel.
A yes go ahead get started will
government.
Okay Mr Chairman
of the house bill sixty is a
piece of legislation to limit
Kirk starting.
Curbs starting there's two
different types of curbs stoning
one is are you currently of a
licensed dealer.
But I would be in my place of
business is my home so I take my
cars out I put him on the street
corner and I sell.
And that's.
One and the other one in the
most troubling one is our.
In you're gonna hear about when
we say this once you sell more
than four cars within a year the
current law is you must become a
licensed dealer we're not
changing that that's referenced
in here that's already law the
other curbs stoning and the most
troubling one is the person who
goes out and I come to you and I
by your car and I say don't feel
in.
Who is the purchaser and don't
fill in the price just give me
the paper work now I take your
car and I put it out on the
corner and I go ahead nice sell
it into the new seller I now go
ahead and put in their name as
the buyer like they bought it
from the original person and the
dollar amount.
When that happens.
R. I am now circumvented the
women law that the Attorney
General has for car dealers and
I'm not registered as a car
dealer.
The other thing that we see a
lot of is
totaled or
she wanted a you know a flood
damaged car that is been also
totaled we provide those on the
corners like this.
And I don't know if my other
experts are in if they have
anything else to add or not.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee this is a nationality
to and I'm registered lobbyists
for an independent auto dealers
and I think I'm an interest of
time on Mr chairman and members
the representative has covered
the bill.
Okay.
Thank you.
Mr Chairman
R. I. C. Martell's here but this
is an industry bill from the
auto dealers and the used car
dealers with that will stand for
questions okay thank you
Representative Rehm at this time
we'll go to the public.
For House Bills do first will go
to the members who registered to
speak in opposition beginning
with nineteen banks.
Hello thank you for Mr chairman
and honorable members of the
committee thank you so much for
allowing me to speak on this my
name is Nate banks I'm
registered lobbyist with
Americans for prosperity New
Mexico if you Mexico supports
consumer driven reforms the
state dealer protection laws
which reduce competition
increased costs and create
unnecessary red tape HB sixty
would limit the location where
motor vehicle may be offered for
sale with looting failed vehicle
by non owner who is not a motor
deal motor vehicle dealer thank
dealer protection laws which
limit who how and where vehicle
old are the ultimate
manifestation of cronyism
rewarding politically preferred
retailers in a manner that
negatively affects all consumers
report US department justice
antitrust division I studies
suggesting that mandatory dealer
franchising and restrictions on
the ability of non dealers to
sell directly or build to order
for consumers as an increased
cost to the end in ticket the
Maketa Center George Mason
University of the catalog have
catalog the ways in which state
auto franchise regulation.
Thank you next up we have Karen
health.
There are any other members of
the public who wish to speak in
opposition to house bill sixty
at this time please raise your
hand.
And with that we will go to
those who wish to speak in favor
if there are any members of the
public and wish to speak in
favor of house bill sixty please
raise your hand now.
Thank you very.
Public comment.
A great so now we'll go to the
committee for for any questions.
Senator Griggs.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
Representative good to see you
haven't seen your late all the
session wonder why but
Representative this in no way
affects these fairgrounds sales
that dealers may want to you
don't want to have and you know
we do it quite often in our
border with the the card
including get together and
sometimes have sales with all
brands at at the fairgrounds and
they would still be able to do
that under this bill is that
correct.
Mr chairman and senator GRID GS.
Okay thank you Mr chair and
thank you Representative.
I don't see any questions from
the committee so what is a
pleasure.
It's.
I move to pass most would you
pass by Senator Griggs second by
Hermio how to meal so late
please step to grow.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen yes Senator Hickey.
Yes.
Senator how to meal.
Senator Kernan yes.
Senator Sanchez yes.
Senator Tallman.
Senator Wirth.
Senator Padilla yes we go back
and see if I can find Brandt
Senator Brandt.
He.
Senator Clemente.
Senator Wirth.
Senator Shendo yes.
A.
Eight in the affirmative S. and
three excuse.
There you have a do pass the
Representative Rehm back you.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
and committee members.
Thank you no move on to of
Senate bill three oh six we have
a Senator Campos on.
If not we'll move to of house
bill two seventy.
Mr Chairman.
good afternoon the woman alright
how are you today will do well.
Go ahead.
Thank you Mr chairman good
afternoon our committee house
bill two seventy this is a bill
about changing the motor vehicle
code as it pertains to a Thomas
vehicles are in the in New
Mexico currently in the
department of transportation
gives permission to various
companies to use our roadways
for testing are clearly part of
this is the way of the future
therefore we need to update our
motor vehicle called Mr chairman
and committee basically this
bill under section one through
five defines terms used in the
provisions of the bill things
like automated driving systems a
Thomas commercial motor vehicle
a Thomas motor vehicle operator
a Thomas motor vehicle testing
driver assisted Khatoon dynamic
driving task and so forth and
then
Mr chairman and committee then
you get a and to the other
sections of this bill on
out operators are supposed to
report accidents of section
five.
section seven requires persons
wanting to test our New Mexico
Public row roadways of direction
on how they work with DOTA.
And then set there and then the
last part of this bill requires
a Thomas vehicles to meet
federal safety standards Mr
chairman and committee this bill
as a result of a Senate memorial
that was actually co sponsored
by Senator Padilla and senator
that's all us.
And there was funding put toward
this a state report Mr chairman
and committee was prepared and
we've just taken that
information which was I believe
an excellent report and take it
to taking it to this next step
which is now piece of
legislation I do have some of
subject matter experts today
with me Mr chairman if we could
please just allow Charles or I
don't I don't see Jerry on but
if they could please just say a
few words.
Okay thank you of Charles are
you on yes Sir I am can you hear
me fine Mr chair.
Yes again.
Very good this Mr chair and
fellow committee members are
this chair are excuse me this
bill really just kind of
reinforces and
This solidifies some of the
relationships that exist that
are currently in place by the
department transportation
department of public safety.
And working with the autonomous
vehicle community we currently
have always Thomas vehicle
testing on the roadways today
and that is as Mr chair and.
Madam.
Not sure for the.
the bill itself will allow for
the D. O. T. to be made aware
and share information on the
testing that is going on on the
roadways to allow for I think a
more advantageous and hopefully
bring in the community of
economists vehicle testers
within the state which would
have not only a great impact to
improving transportation
efficiencies and transportation
safety but also allow for
potential great economic
benefits.
Mr Chairman representative final
comment before we go to
questions just like I just like
to say there's been a very large
workgroup involved with the
development of this bill both
both the private sector and
public sector some of them may
be on this meeting them today so
we stand for questions.
Okay the thank you madam chair a
I believe you have a a
substitute me up an amendment
correct.
Mr chairman we are withdrawing
that amendment we thought we
needed it but we don't need that
amendment today we may have a
second amendment I know Senator
Padilla may be discussing out
but we had one that was sent
earlier that it.
All of Senator Padilla talk
about the one we had agreed to
okay all right because I was two
two zero seven six seven point
one that was submitted so the
red line that one.
Yes Mr chairman we're
withdrawing that one that was
one that was sent to your office
today this morning that's fine
so at this time of before we go
you to the committee for
questions so it's and we'll go
to the public.
Our house bill seven we will go
directly to the public for those
who wish to speak in opposition
to the bill and wish to speak in
opposition please raise your
hands now.
And without seeing no hands we
will go to those who wish to
speak in favor beginning with
more complex are.
Just one time.
Good afternoon everyone.
Yes.
So the
members of the committee for
having this year's afternoon I
chose Montana and I have the
pleasure of representing which
email as a state policy manager
Mexico we were on the striving
technology company with a
mission to make a statement easy
for people and things where
they're going to start offices
will self driving project in two
thousand nine which invokes on
building the world's supposed
experienced driver to improve
the world access to mobility
while saving thousands of lives
now lost due to traffic crashes
driver powers label one second
fully autonomous commercial
service as well as we will be
our trucking local during that I
believe the way what are we
you talking saber stronger and
more efficient and bringing this
technology Mexico make it safe
and easy for people and things
around the state Representative
Lundstrom for leadership on the
technology legislation we want
to continue working with our and
our staff to ensure that New
Mexico remains a leading state
protested Hanisee able heavy
duty trucking technology.
Thank you.
If there are any other members
of the public who wish to speak
in support of house number
two seventy please raise your
hands now.
Thank you very much that
concludes public comment.
Thank you know we'll go to
committee Senator Padilla thank
you Mr chairman and I just want
to.
Mexico ditto whatever you want
to say then the international
super sensation rockstar
chairman of our house
appropriations and finance
committee Representative
Lundstrom a lot of work has been
done ahead of time on this thing
I think it's in very good shape
if anyone's ever seen the movie
the aviator
you know but the character in
the movie talks about the way
the future the way the future to
with your this is the way of the
future and New Mexico really
does have an opportunity here to
be way ahead of everybody else
on this thing so I'm really
excited about it got a lot of
work myself in the series I
think I think we're in pretty
good shape there I did have
amendments that I talk to the
sponsor about previously I spoke
to chairwoman Lundstrom I didn't
have an opportunity to talk to
representative Garcia yet about
it I don't know that you'll have
a real big issue with it either
but it's real simple on page
fifteen.
Are going to be one twenty five
for the effective date the
Department of transportation and
Representative Lundstrom and I
agreed that we should probably
move that there were we will
move that effective date so we
would strike online twenty five
July first twenty twenty two
in an instant Lujan insert their
of January first two thousand
twenty three and then keep the
period and that's that would be
the amended Mr Chairman just
gives the DOT one additional
year to get all this together
because there is going to be
some some some real technical
work that has to be done here.
Is that something that you still
want to speak to representative
Garcia before you propose this
are you proposing amendment
right now I'm I'm a proposing
the amendment and and you're
welcome to go obviously to the
Sanchez I make sure that they're
comfortable with it right
Representative of the so
friendly amendment unfriendly
amendment hostile moment.
Thank you Mr Mr chairman you
know I'm willing to do with the
the department needs and of the
department has suggested that
they needed another year of
Charles can just throw show us a
thumbs up.
That that's important but I
certainly I certainly have no
problem with that.
Mr chairman if I may.
Yes good good Representative
you're on Representative thank
you thank you Mr chairman and
I'm willing so I'm a little bit
late today I don't have a
problem with the equipment
needed because it is going to be
a timely process store and give
everybody a little bit better
time to get everything right we
need to get it right the first
time thank you Mr chairman.
Appreciate that so I Mr chairman
we also got a thumbs up for Mr
Valdez also okay all right good
somebody's working with this
great okay there we go already
with that of I don't see any of.
The friendly of.
No opposition to to to the
member proposed amendments so
of.
You have an amended bill.
All this back on to the bill.
Thank you Mr chairman all state
is again we're going to we have
this huge opportunity to move
ourselves ahead of a a line of
the rest of the states on this
again a lot of work done ahead
of time I see our colleagues in
the Senate coming in out of the
meeting so I just wanna let them
know that I've spent a lot of
time on this as well and it's
it's something that is very well
thought out and I feel very
comfortable with where we're
going thank you.
Great.
All righty I don't see any other
hands up.
From committee members so what
is the budget will be due
process.
Yes one second one second Mr
chair members second lane please
because of cultural.
Can I ask a question Senator
first who that's laying.
Go ahead I just need to know am
I going to get a copy of that
amendment that Senator Padilla
is talking about we do it in the
committee so I don't know.
How to put it on the bill when I
report it we do we just change
the date on on I would I will
show you which page okay that's
fine thank you Senator Brandt.
Yes.
Senator Griggs.
Senator Hamblen yes.
Senator Hickey yes Senator how
to meal yes Senator Kernan.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator Tallman.
Senator Wirth yes yes Senator
Griggs.
Yes.
Senator Kernan.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator Tallman.
Senator Padilla yes and Senator
Shendo yes.
Okay you have.
Yes
in the affirmative and three
excuse.
Thank you have a to pass a
Representative dot com.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
and committee thank you thank
you all right we'll move right
along to the.
Senate bill four fourteen
senator Sanchez.
Mr chair you there sorry yes we
are looking back and forth from
one committee to the.
So the next okay we're good go
ahead overall my bill yes we are
going to introduce a bill.
Okay Mister chair up today I
bring us in the bill for
fourteen this is
The fellowship for minors this
would be for
Starting the age like when you
can when you get your driver's
license enable start driving.
Now we have a British ships for.
you know like a to me it
eighteen years of age and older
and starting that but this would
be focusing on kids in school
and this also have where
Businesses would be able to
bring these kids on for getting
credits.
Whether at school.
that is what also go into a
summer program as well for
It's in each of business would
have to be approved by workforce
solutions and once they get
approved and they get their
stuff than they would be able to
bring these kids on whether it's
in the I. T. field depending on
what community there in a
butcher shop auto mechanics
Construction any kind of
businesses in your local town
that you want to see as a
vocational trade for maybe a
career you would be able to
participate in this.
with that Mr chair I stand for
questions or comments from the
public.
We have any expert witnesses
anybody that you have that the.
But no service.
That that's fine this time we'll
go to the public.
Our public comment percent room
for one more we will go directly
to the public relations here
today if you wish to speak in
support of Senate bill four one
four please raise your hands
down.
John.
Mr chairman members of the
committee good evening my name
is John Thompson actually I rise
today is a member of the public
I think this is a fantastic
piece of legislation Mr chairman
and we need to encourage more
programs like this throughout
our school system I have two
kids attending the public school
system in out in Albuquerque now
these are the exact kind of
programs you need to start
introducing our programs as
alternatives for kids that that
lead to good paying jobs the
they can start early on my I Mr
chairman so thank you to Senator
Sanchez to ring in the bill and
I hope you all nice to me thank
you.
Thank you very much my apologies
if you wish to speak in
opposition to Senate bill four
one four please raise your hands
now.
Okay and if we have any more
members of the public which we
speak and support Senate bill
four one four please raise your
hand.
And seeing no hands back public
comment at this time thank you.
Okay great so we'll go to the
committee Senator Hamblen.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator Sanchez for bringing
this forward I think this is a
great idea especially when we
talk about apprenticeships in
what we consider kind of you
know the the the trades of H.
back and plumbing and electrical
and the it and you know that
these jobs have a higher return
on investment and they're also
higher pain so I'm a big fan of
supporting these in addition to
people going to college so I'm
what areas do you see your
touched on a little bit of a but
what areas do you see like
different different trades that
this would be able to this bill
would be able to help support
especially with young people.
Mr chair Senator how much for
bringing thanks for bringing
that question the way I see it
is like every every all local
business every community is
different and ours we have meat
cutters we have construction of
HVAC like you mentioned and this
would be where the kids would be
able to go off campus and
workman's comp would be able to
support that so it's a tractor
for the business owner to want
to bring these young you on
before there's nothing been done
like this before and that the
issue is I think is on the
workman's comp but with this and
working with workman's comp so
and workforce solutions we can
bring this forward and they keep
the business open to be
attractive for the business to
bring these kids on and they'll
be able at sixteen seventeen
eighteen
you know get into these careers
like I was saying in our local
business I mean if you want to
be a rancher I guess if there
was a business at a ranch in
thing and they got approved with
workforce solutions that could
do this it could be a law office
it could be an insurance office
it could be any trades any
vocational trade or other
business that you know wanted to
get involved in this.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator Sanchez now this is
something that will apply all
over the state because I'm
thinking of like southern New
Mexico and especially with
opportunities to get into the
work force and with there being
at a larger demands now for a
lot of these jobs at the
apprenticeships would cover that
this would be a great
opportunity for job creation.
Mr chair Senator yes it's that
cross the state of New Mexico.
Fantastic thank you Mr chair
thank you senator Sanchez
transfer my questions that's all
thank you I Senator Brandt and
Senator Padilla.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Sanchez appreciate you bringing
this bill
So.
Is working so.
Three expensive portion of
hiring someone is that the.
The the reason for the eighty
percent.
Yes it is and what happens is
when you don't have when your
mind goes up and you don't have
you know that somebody's that's
been working there and doesn't
have a history of not being like
an accent or something your
workman's comp rate can go up so
if we can get workman's comp.
On board with this and I we've
been working together with on
it makes it really.
seasonable for the businesses to
get involved in this and bring
that you saw.
And Mr chairman
Sir with that then helped
develop that young worker maybe
to stay with that company
continue to work with them once
they become adults and and get
some certificates and licenses
to do that kind of work around
the state.
Mr chair Senator yes this would
you know if you have somebody
come your business for three
years or four years and got that
investment and so the goal is to
keep on there or move them up
you know somewhere else but yes
that's exactly correct Mr
chairman Senator thank you.
Mister chairman Senator sounds
like a very reasonable piece of
legislation drugs for.
A great so Senator Padilla.
Thank you Mr chairman and I just
wanted knowledge center requests
here cut I think it looks good
Mr Chairman on on I I really
like this piece of legislation
senator Sanchez I guess I'm I'm
just curious why we need this
that you know again why do we
need this to be in line I hear
these these things are you know
I I participated in several of
them over the years but my
business what what we need to
some long exactly.
Thank you for bringing that Mr
chair Senator thanks for the
question it's not been in law
and it's it's been harder to
get.
Of.
The workers comp involved in
youth we don't have anything in
use right now everything is
eighteen and up.
If a company is participating in
this
I'm glad I'm glad they are but
there's not many companies that
are participating it because the
risk they have to take.
Mr chair Senator okay I guess I
didn't hear the part about the
work Rippon's column or the
other what about insurances and
all those things to do are we
doing things in this bill to
make all that
Feasible for the business to
participate.
The Mr chair Senator Padilla the
biggest thing is workman's comp
it's not really a general
liability.
So that's what we we've been
working with them and workforce
solutions to put these together.
So Mister chairman Senator
Sanchez who coordinates this
then you're somebody that's
going to be regionally
responsible is this the school
district who's coordinating all
this.
Mr chair Senator good question
yes the schools I've talked of
many schools and you know
everyone was on board
there is appropriation of twenty
thousand dollars.
Four that will be to work for
solutions to help them with this
They already do.
Apprenticeships right now but
it's only for eighteen and up
there's not for use so this
would be able to just your cemex
for funding so they can start
use one and have the money to
put on the staff or whatever
they need to do to get involved
the schools of the businesses
for the paperwork part of it Mr
chair Senator.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator Sanchez I I think that's
kind of where I'm a little.
The reserve on this bill just
because it seems like it'll turn
into a spaghetti bowl of who's
doing what who's on first who's
coordinating it what are the
requirements.
how's it you know.
How do we ensure that the thing
is handled or managed
consistently.
I'm gonna lose a little bit more
I like the concept I like the
idea I think we do a lot of this
with our business partnerships
with the school districts like
this that I participated in many
of these hello Senator and with
the some of the business you
representative or the
Association to do some of these
as well I would just you know
I'm a little bit more thank you
Mr chairman thank you Majority
Leader Mr chair Senator what
would Padilla you know that this
bill might need some work and I
would like to see a move forward
but it you know in amendments
or.
Some words verbiage change or
something I I I'm open to all
that Mr chair Senator and Mr
works go Mr Chairman I'm sorry
before the leader goes I just
for the Torrance reader did.
Did this go through the
education committees at all
Senator.
Mr Mr chair Senator this the
first committee it goes next.
Okay current thank you.
Majority Leader.
I thank you Mr chairman thank
you senator Sanchez I think it
it goes from here to Senate
finance and that's a second stop
and I in my questions may kind
of tie into that I'm looking at
the bill on page two.
line five paragraphs State so
this creates a requirement that
the division provide financial
assistance in the amount of
eighty percent of the cost of
workers compensation insurance
for a minor apprenticed to an
employer complies the
application confirmation
procedures so I I guess my
question isn't it and it ties
into.
You know Center Hamlin was
talking about in Santo I you've
experienced the apprenticeship I
certainly have I mean I got a
feeling this could be a huge
demand for this.
And I and this is creating a
requirement that the state pay
for it so I guess I'd like to
get a sense Center Sanches.
You know.
What what do you think the
demand for something like this
would be
that's question one second
question I also I'm I'm trying
to figure out the eighty percent
why would we do eighty percent
want to do a hundred percent if
we're gonna do this.
Mr chair a.
Peter Wirth updated percent all
the states not paying for the
work and workman's comp
the insurance workman's comp so.
The business would have to pay
some but we want to make it.
You know we're businesses will
get involved on it so if the
number on the workers comp site
is higher than the number on the
business side it's more feasible
for more businesses to get
involved.
And those numbers are Mr chair
Senator those numbers could be
changed over some numbers with
talking to some of the
professionals that they gave me
like I said this bill could use
some work at all if you think.
Yeah Mister chair I think I'm
I'm just curious because this.
The way I read this is the
workforce solutions department
which is a state agency.
It shall provide financial
assistance in the amount of
eighty percent of the cost of
the insurance.
So is it isn't that this is in
the state in a fact I mean
obviously workforce solutions
going to come to us and say.
You know we had a thousand
applications this is what what
eighty percent of the cost was
and I just so I'm just trying to
figure out here because I know
there's a two hundred thousand
dollars appropriation and I
think certainly for the for the
cost of the agency to administer
the program.
My guess is that's probably
realistic but I just I'm just
reading this that this is kind
of a mandate on the state to do
this which again are.
I mean this is in the committee
to get into that but I just
think that's going to be a issue
you know moving forward to the
finance committee because I'm
just I'm curious what secretary
mccamley would say about that
and what that might cost us I
guess what I'm trying to figure
out maybe and I'm not understand
right expanding this correct so
you can certainly correct me if
you think I've got it wrong.
Mr chair of.
Senator I'm looking into that
now I don't have an extra with
the witness with me but this is
the way I was asked to write
this and I I spoke with the.
Secretary.
Mrs may thank you Sir.
Workforce solutions mccamley and
we can't yes Sir so and we went
to work comp and so.
I guess so this time.
Let me let me just ask you how
they wrote it like this why the
religious right yeah no no I'm
and I'm interested to let me
just ask you this Mr chair and
senator Sanchez so secretary
mccamley is aware of this bill
and has has reviewed this
language and is that what I'm
hearing you say.
Yes yes I I had one call Mr
chair Senator had a long
conversation with them and then
we will to build and
I followed up with
he said to follow up with
workers comp and so this is are
we Secretary workman's comp so
those are.
We kind of came to this.
Worded but I see what you're I
highlighted it now and I I'm
gonna pass go back over and see
why it was put this way.
Okay well I mean I appreciate
not Mr chair said I think there
would have to be more
appropriation and you're like
you're saying.
Yeah I think that's right I
think this does create a
responsibility so.
You know again I think we have a
situation where there's a
there's a good concept but I
think it probably needs to be
flushed out a little more and so
you know all I also like center
to do it will continue to kind
of listen here and figure out
what makes the most sense you
know given we've got six days
left in the session we're kind
of running into that into that
time frame and with I'm one of
those things you know rather
than you know I'm I'm just gonna
throw out here an option would
be to try and get this fixed now
in this committee understanding
probably that you know this bill
will make it all the way through
versus if we move it forward to
Senate finance then it's just
probably gonna sit there because
it doesn't have the funding and
so again I think this is one of
those what what happens you know
oftentimes unity something and
and it takes takes some sessions
to shape it and get it get it
fixed so I I just really
appreciate the concept though
because I think what you're on
to something really important
here and so that's that's the
extent of my questions thank you
Mr chair thank you Senator
Padilla for second time.
Thank you Mr chairman to
speaking how shy I am ask all
the questions I need to center
such as I I agree with the with
the the Majority Leader I think
it's an incredible wonderful
idea you can really help us I
just there seems to be a heck of
a lot more planning that has to
go in here before we can.
Move this through the
legislature so was the two
hundred thousand Mr chairman and
senator was that for the design
development of this program or
was this for the actual
administration because I I'm all
look it up right now but I don't
have that in my stack of bills
that were left on my desk today.
Was the two hundred thousand
exactly for.
Mr chair Senator that was to go
through workforce solutions
department and I'm reading here
in the FY are.
This is a chairman bill which I
got the bill in front of me the
way it reads is that.
Of subsequent find.
You know expenditure for fiscal
year two thousand twenty two and
subsequent fiscal years to
provide workers compensation
insurance assistance to
employers of minor apprentices
well it sounds like this money
Mr you could provide that
assistance for the insurance.
So Mr chairman and senator
Sanchez does the program already
existed some fashion that now
that we've got that clarity from
the chairman thank you Mr
chairman is it already exists
and this is for that one purpose
that because I I have to say
also that that's not going to be
anywhere near the money that's
going to be needed to get this
this work this
This done.
Date Mr chair Senator that's
what they came up with how many
people I guess would be involved
in.
I just I don't know if that
means how many businesses are
going to get involved but.
That's the way I'm reading it to
how you just read I'd stop by
the fire the fire this year
that's your question this does
not exist it is all okay this is
for minors under eighteen from
sixteen to eighteen.
And then after that you have to
going to a different partnership
so this would be getting miners
ready to go into another a
friend you know to further their
friendship.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator and I don't know Mr it's
alright with you was or anybody
from workforce solutions on this
on this bill on this but a
program that wants to speak up
here a little bit.
I want to help Senator lift
December this committee but I'm
I'm a I'm with the the leader we
probably need a little you know
for a lot more work on it before
we do that I was trying to call
the secretary on cell phone but
he was not answering so I tried
to calm also Mr chair once the
leader was talking you must be
in a couple committees I I would
like to see it stay here just
and get some work done on it get
some of these answers I just
think that the dollar
appropriation is a little late
in the game because of where we
are with the budget and I don't
think it's anywhere close to I
don't I don't have to be a
mathematician so that's nowhere
close to what's going to be
needed for the workmen's
compensation portion and I'd
like to hear from the department
on why they they want or how
they want to do this thing thank
you Mr thank you senator.
All right thank you so we'll go
to a Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman and and so
I'd like to point out a couple
things first of all
Mr it's it's only up to two.
For employer so that's going to
keep your costs down quite a bit
it's not like they can hire
twenty or thirty you know for
every employer probably not
gonna have a lot of employers
are going to be involved a few
but not not a huge number to
start with the specialty.
I I don't know I'm paperwork I
haven't paid workman's comp as
an employer in a long long time
and I know it's very dependent
upon the work the type of work
that you're doing
so are and I don't know if there
would be any kind of special
rates or higher rates that they
would charge for
miners although we do have a lot
of legal requirements of what
miners can do what they can't do
so that might actually help with
some of that.
but certainly if you have any
idea what the workman's comp
would run for you know let's say
minimum wage employee
Story out.
Mr chairman and senator bring
type attention it's going to be
all over the place depending
what you said on the work on the
age of the employee primarily on
a couple other things too
you know you're looking at maybe
forty dollars for a plan to.
You know who knows how many
employees work in the company
will bring the rate down but I
just did some you know some real
quick let's just say you know
two hundred thousand dollars and
and we're looking at an average
say babies sixty five over three
thousand participants with that
that this could potentially help
you know to to make happen for
them but I'm with the leader
this is going to be a very
popular program this might be
for the first year three
thousand going from zero to
three thousand participants
that's a then I'd be a very
successful year I don't think
anyone else would complain about
that except that the money would
be there
you know we can always you know.
Just like we do with the
With the film credit where we
say up to.
The two thousand until the two
hundred thousand this is spent
maybe finance can play without a
little bit to make sure that
there's not a liability left
there but I would be surprised
if the first year.
If you had that three thousand
people.
Now it wouldn't surprise me if
within three or four years were
hidden that were coming back to
this talk about how successful
this is been and how much it has
helped and that we need to put
more money into it to to fund
more students
but you know you have it and our
largest areas of the city you
know of the state sorry within
our metro areas you're not
talking a lot of employers that
are going to do this especially
to start with the first year I
think it'll grow in popularity
very quickly
but if workforce solutions was
consulted and they believe that
this was the right amount to get
started for the first year and
I'm comfortable with that amount
now finance may not be.
Comfortable with the other that
they may not be comfortable with
any amount at this point in the
game but as a policy decision I
don't I don't see that it's a
problem I think it's a really
good idea to help the students
have this opportunity so anyway
that's all I have Mister.
Thank you Senator Hamblen second
time thank you Mr chairman thank
you senator Sanchez again and I
think it's very evident that
there's a lot of excitement
about this opportunity
you know I don't know where this
bill will go and if it will be
able to reach our floor but what
I would like to do is propose
that maybe you and I work on
this because there's the Bridge
of Southern New Mexico the
really has a lot of incredible
data about apprenticeships in
about individuals going into
these fields for apprenticeships
are beneficial and you know and
and you know after the session
what we can do is connect and
and see how we can make this to
where maybe what we can try and
do is prove Senator Brandt wrong
and get three thousand people
right out of the gate
you know if if I I I'd be up for
that if you would be so if it
doesn't make it through this I
would like to put that offer out
there just because I do think it
has some incredible potential
and it's just really working out
kind of some of the Kinks and
and connecting with more people
besides just that department of
workforce solutions because I
think there are many
organizations around the state
that I've had the the wonderful
pleasure of working with that
really they can help enhance
this and really shape it into
something that would just bolt
out of the gates and I think
impact a lot of people and
that's really so more of a
committee and slight question Mr
chair so thank you very much and
thank you again Senator Sanchez.
Thank you Sir sciences
researcher and you know other
sixty five hundred businesses
Senator Padilla in New Mexico in
the smaller industry business
upright.
Working as we got to in our one
that's thirteen thousand I don't
know if we would get all sixty
five hundred to I would be a may
I I would say that you know home
run but.
I think we got a thousand people
districts for all the school
districts and stuff you know
I'd be amazed but I appreciate
all your comments and thank you
and you know if you have any up
I love to work with you on
anything to.
Mr chair Senator Padilla.
Thank you Senator Padilla yeah
just.
I love these types of programs I
love this type of stuff by the
way were to call the judge to a
Sanchez.
It's your program but but you
know yes I yeah I want to work
with you long Senator Hamblen I
think this is a really good good
concept and what have you and
I'm with Senator Brandt I mean
if the if workforce solutions
brought this to M. S. two
hundred thousand get a Roland
and they they must of had have
some date on that I wish we
could hear from them today
I'd still like to maybe keep the
thing here for maybe a couple
we're gonna meet again right Mr
chairman yes we are yeah and
then I'm also interested in what
the folks over in the edge which
I serve on the Education
Committee also I don't know what
what maybe we should have maybe
gone through there but I don't
know this will be tied to the
schools
Yes I mean I just think it's a
really good idea I just think it
needs a little more work that's
all.
Okay thank you so yeah I know I
think it's a great concept just
thinking about you know we we we
also talked about the youth
corps program that we have that
are you know the point high
school kids are working on the
forest and and working on trails
and so forth and I'm very
interested because I know that
we have a lot of business in a
metro areas but a lot of my
schools in my district in rural
areas yeah I know their students
out there that will love
apprentices but we don't have a
whole lot of businesses you know
and how do we Sentifi is or what
transportation whatever's on the
students so there's a lot more I
think there are a lot of
potential for this program to
really make an impact statewide
and not just in the metro areas
where you have businesses and so
forth so I know there's a lot of
the.
That
I also like to work on this
because we also have a lot of
for tribal employers that may
one is to some programs within
it all on the reservations
because we do pay us tribes into
the workmen's compensation
insurance as well and so I I
think there's a lot of potential
for this project across the
state so with that what what is
the pleasure of the committee
that well on that one I guess I
would move a no racks and I mean
Mr chairman that way I would
just move in and okay all right
we have a no record motion so
all lately several.
Senator Brandt yes.
Senator Griggs.
Yes.
Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Hickey yes Senator how to meal
that that's.
Senator Kernan yes.
Senator Sanchez.
Yes Senator Tallman is still in
the other committee senator
Wirth no.
Senator Padilla yes Senator
Shendo yes.
Okay you got.
Nine affirmative votes one
negative and one excuse.
Do you have a no REC.
Senate finance Senator sentence.
Mr chair committee thank you
guys.
All right we'll move on to
House Bill three oh three.
Representative Cook are you
available.
I'm here Mr Chairman what Mr
chairman I have here with me
also an expert Jimmy Bates.
Go ahead introduce a bill thank
you Mr chairman and.
Members of the committee house
bill three oh three admins that
trade practice statute in the
liquor control act to include
all licensees regulated by the
department of alcohol alcohol
beverage control Mr chairman I'd
like to pass it off to my
experts who can explain the
three tier system this bill.
Thank you go ahead.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members all begin with a brief
description of what leveraged
distribution structure in New
Mexico.
We like most other states
operate a three tiered system
here one being the suppliers
thank the Budweiser Jack Daniels
hello one.
Who are the wholesalers at the
meets another also partners and
the third tier our our retailers
in the bar and liquor store.
Currently.
Our law in regards to the
receipt of inducement.
Only applies to tier one and
two.
House Bill three oh three bring
the third tier Wigan stole this
thing fake practice thank you
insuring that we all play by the
same set of rules with that I
would stand for any question.
Okay all right this time will to
the public.
Our house bill three three we
will begin those wishes begin
opposition you wish we can on
this house bill three oh three
please raise your hands now
Allison Smith.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee my name
is Allison Smith speaking on
behalf of The New Mexico
restaurant association with all
due respect to the sponsor to Mr
rates we stand in gentle
opposition to this piece of
legislation we really don't see
the need for the slide this
legislation we feel it is a
solution in search of a problem
but we do have one request that
we would like to make an that
would be if we could possibly
adding knowingly standard into
this piece of legislation that
that could capture accidental
are any any accidental
solicitation that could come
about and so with that we stand
the gentle opposition thank you
so.
Thank you very much are there
any other members of the public
relations begin opposition to
House Bill Murray to re.
But that we go to those who wish
to speak in favor we have an
admirable beverage.
John Thompson.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee good evening John
Thompson reddish of this for for
admiral beverage corporation
amongst others as was described
Mr chairman members of the
committee this this bill simply
includes all of licensees that
are that are regulated by the
alcoholic beverages control
commission within the same trade
practice standards Mr chairman
we believe it's it's a common
sense bill and and we would ask
you to pass it and thank you for
your time.
Thank you very much.
Seeing no other hands that could
lead COVID at this time thank
you.
Thank you so now we'll go to the
committee for questions.
Members of the committee.
I don't see any hands so
earlier.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr chair
so I just so so Representative
Cook just walk me through I
wanna make sure I understand
exactly.
What's happening here and and
why the restaurants would have.
Inject I guess that gentle
opposition which an interesting
term just just just let me know
kind of exactly what you're
trying to do and and why would
the restaurant association not
want you to do that.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator I don't I thank you I I
don't really know the nuances of
the industry so Mister Bates
could take that question.
No good deed on mute.
Did you hear me Mr Bates hi
areas yes.
Okay thank you Mr chairman and
senator Wirth.
I guess the gentle opposition
because if I were if I were a
retailer currently it's not
against the law for them to
receive.
Something that it's illegal for
me to give them so I guess if
the fire and not sure I may want
to continue to receive those
kinds of things not now the way
it happens is a few instances
could occur retailer may ask for
that help because it's not
against the law at this time for
them to receive those
inducements but these and that
doesn't talk about little things
were still allowed to give the
coasters glassware.
Audio umbrellas all those things
are perfectly fine the
restrictions the old aren't fine
is when we start talking about
big ticket items given away a
cat box for the draft beer or
the package court for the
package there these high dollar
items when given to a retailer
the typically would result in
the exclusion of another poll
are being able to participate or
compete in that business so far
to give you the cat box and say
look I'll give this to you know
maybe it's a fifteen hundred
dollar cut box or maybe it's a
five thousand dollar cut box
sale provided to you but I want
you to want to sell my product
now the reason our people do
that are for various reasons one
they're they're they're going
against all of our our our
company policy in the breaking
state and federal law when they
do it but occasionally they get
caught up they'll be asked by
the a friend of theirs within
the business to help me out
maybe they don't want to lose
that relationship maybe they
want to make it better and they
make a bad decision when they
Kate when they do our employees
are jeopardizing their jobs and
we are also at risk of our
licenses being suspended or are
facing fines and so we just feel
that there's a big gap that
exists by not holding all three
appears to the same standard
when I really believe it we were
all held to the same standards
one the request to go away to
this will no longer be a
challenge that we're faced with
in the industry hope that.
Yeah I know that that does help
Mister chair I appreciate the
answer and just.
Just one final thing we've off
on spent more time on liquor
this session and in seventeen
years that I can remember maybe
but on the right committees
until now but we also passed you
know the most substantive liquor
reform in forty years
nothing in this bill's going to
affect or change what we did in
that law online correct on that.
Mr chairman senator Wirth you're
absolutely correct on that okay
great thank you Mr chair thank
you Senator Padilla.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
and the leader actually asked my
question the second the second
line of questioning on the this
is touch anything related to HB
two fifty five and I got my
answer there so I don't know you
do have other hands up Senator.
Okay thank you Senator Hamblen.
Mr chair Senator Representative
Cook money is is just a really
simple question and just to make
sure is it just that you want to
be able to park provide as much
swag as everybody else when it
comes down to promoting.
Your product.
Mr chair and senator Hammond
no in in regards to public
sector what we typically call
swag is legal those are those
are point of sale items are
branded items such as last part
that those are legal will
continue doing that and that
that benefits us not budget our
retail partners what we're
wanting to do is have the
retailers be held to the same
standard.
Regarding these inducement items
so I guess a simple last would
be if it's illegal for me to
give it to you and it should be
illegal for you to receive it
that's our asked at thank you Mr
chair representative Mr Bates.
Thank you thank you I don't see
any of Senator Griggs.
Thank you Mr chairman and
one of the most famous famous
trials that impacted New Mexico
history was a trial secretary of
the interior Albert fall and
Albert fall which convicted you
of taking a bribe.
The gentleman that supposedly
gave it a gentleman by the name
of Edward dole Haiti wishing
where oil.
Which equated giving a brought.
So that's the teapot dome
scandal just in case anybody
wants to you don't have a little
bit of history there are we're
we're we're talking about this
but the Mr chairman and and
Representative so what is the
penalty
for for this position.
You know if if you if you take
this step what what is the
family that these are retailers
we facing.
Mr chairman and senator thank
you for the question I know that
you had us that several days ago
and I.
got with Mister Bates and
apparently and never got back
with you on the answer so I'll
take this back over him for
better answer.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator.
Andrew a host of record New
Mexico apple beverage control
would have to direction excuse
me discretion to assess those
penalties he's told me likely
for first time offenses this
would result in
a suspension of the license or
more likely a fine up to ten
thousand dollars and it wouldn't
just be the retailer would be
any parties involved so if we
were doing at a Primera B.
provide along with that retailer
or whatever parties are involved
that action what will be held
equally accountable.
Okay so thank you Mr chairman
and and Representative witness
so both of you could receive the
same ten thousand dollar fine.
Mr chairman and senator Greg
that is correct.
thank you Mr chairman and and
thank you a representative that
could be a a real reason why the
the restaurant association might
be approached but anyway thank
you very much.
Okay thank you of I don't see a
the hands up so what is a
pleasure the committee.
Mr chairman I would move to pass
Senator Brandt the second by
Senator Griggs lane can you
please call role.
Senator Brandt yes Senator
Griggs yes Senator Hamblen now.
Yes.
Did you say yes yes.
Yes is.
This is a deja vu moment or what
Senator how to meal yes.
Senator Kernan.
Yes senator Sanchez.
Yes.
Still in his other committee
Senator Wirth yes.
Senator Padilla yes Senator
Shendo yes you have ten in the
affirmative one in excuse.
Thank you have a do pass thank
you Mr chairman thank you Mr
chairman and members appreciate
it thank you sold all to the
house bill two thirty.
The end of the line are you
available.
I don't see that the.
House bill sixty seven.
Wrong.
Mr chair Senator Kernan here I I
have been asked to introduced
the bill and then I believe I
have Dr Scrase secretary Scrase
available or someone from his
staff to answer questions if
that's permissible that's fine
is this for house bill sixty
seven.
Yes it is okay go ahead Senator.
So basically house bill sixty
seven establishes a primary care
council at and it's my
understanding as I look through
the information that they're
going to develop the council did
in New Mexico Human Services
Department and if I'm I hope Dr
Scrase is on on line I see his
name so if you.
I can turn it over to him right
now thank you.
Thank you very much Mr chair
Senator Kernan we're pleased to
be here today in respective for
your time already keep this
really really brief but we can
answer any questions you like
this legislation began actually
two years ago House.
Mission Human Services
Department to develop of
graduate medical education
program
to expand training for primary
care and psychiatry.
Are predicated on this idea of
having a council we're actually
to the point that out with the
strategic planning growing this
program.
Are you.
Up if you're not talking to a
previous mute your resume
appreciate that go ahead Dr
Scrase.
Expanding in graduate.
I know to take care of a
hundred.
Mexico.
Every year this we all agree to
primary care council looks at
not just expanding training all
the other things that we need to
do is a state record.
The chain.
And psychiatrists and so this
will serve a council it will
help us to focus more on rural
New Mexico and ensuring that
people have here there this is
done through the Human Services
department because the Medicaid
program currently insures forty
three percent of the state so as
the largest insurer we can
create proper incentives to
expand primary care as well and
our number one priority in
Medicaid is ensuring access to
services for our members and so
we're not excluding other
specialties are just getting
started with primary care here
and a little bit more psychiatry
and the this council would pull
in other agencies and
professional groups across the
entire state work expand health
care services for all not just
for Medicaid would drive early
interventions decrease
expenditures and improve health
care outcomes we have with us
today and another expert Rick
Madden who will speak briefly
normally we have brought as many
as twenty five.
People to speak up for the L.
and today our doctor then we'll
just summarize the end but
they've given as well as he
talk a little bit more about
primary care thank you very much
Mr chairman thank you Senator
Kernan for occuring this bill on
this committee today.
Thank you Mr chair Senator
Shendo and senator current.
This bill came from a gathering
of primary care physicians
clinicians of all kinds family
physicians nurse practitioners
and physicians' assistants.
Interested in how we can find
primary care to New Mexico in a
better way and I'm one of those
clinicians my name is Dr Rick
Madden I've been practicing and
continue to practice family
medicine for well over three
decades in the land.
I've seen a primary care
benefits my patients every day
we help our patients daily with
prevention.
There are two chronic illnesses
COVID nineteen illnesses help
them to recover at home or seek
care when needed to answer the
questions about the disease is
spread vaccination and all the
other things we do.
Strong primary care basically
been shown worldwide to be
associated with high value
improve access to care and
equity through decreased
emergency department use
decreased inpatient hospital use
we better use of hospital
resources.
Increased patient satisfaction.
Increased use of preventive
services better referrals to
specialists that is more
appropriate referrals.
Intervention of chronic diseases
and better management of those
diseases.
I know we can improve primary
care New Mexico to help our
patients communities and our
health care systems we need more
information to do that we need
to put our heads together to
come up with solutions.
Primary care council will help
us do that.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator current.
Thank you Mr chair I think we're
ready to go to the public and
then questions to go to public
at this point.
For house bill sixty seven first
we will go with those opposed
here in the if there are any
members of the public here in
room who wishes to composition
please raise your hand.
Seeing no hands we will now go
to those who wish to speak in
favor of beginning when those
who registered in advance first
off we have Nick last quarter.
It's.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee my name
is Nicholas court of a and I'm
an attorney at the New Mexico
Center along poverty with the
center stand in strong support
of HB sixty seven primary care
is a critical component of our
health care system to the
relationships built on the
preventive care provided primary
care helps our community stay
healthy and is particularly cost
effective in doing so.
Especially during this pandemic
our state needs leaders were
laser focused on making sure
primary care in our state most
effectively serve need most.
By setting whether and to what
extent are states patients
access primary care this council
would be able to craft
recommendations they can improve
the delivery of one of our most
important and cost effective
health.
Students systems of health care.
Thank you and I urge.
Excuse me.
Thank you and I urge a do pass
on H. B. sixty seven.
Thank you next up we have sherry
docks and.
Mr chair and members of the
committee my name is sherry
Johnson and I am a volunteer
advocate for a a RP New Mexico
as a retired nurse I recognize
the importance of primary care
providers to our of our state
and to the health care system
my own primary care provider has
identified serious health
conditions involve myself and my
husband and prevented potential
deadly consequences by helping
us get appropriate care or
surgery we need this vital
healthcare providers in our
state
in our rural areas a a RP thanks
Representative are Armstrong and
Senator Kernan for bringing this
bill forward and we urge your
support for house bill sixty
seven thank you.
Thank you.
We have Linda Siegel who.
Is there any more members of the
public wish to speak in support
of house bill sixty seven please
raise your hand.
Thank you very much that
concludes public comment at this
time.
A great now go to committee of
questions from the committee.
Dr Hickey.
Senator Hickey and then Senator
Padilla.
Thank you Mr chair and the
Senator Kernan for bringing this
bill to the for primary care is
my will house New Mexico on all
afternoon sure you know the
reason I came back to New Mexico
to
take on the grant to build the
co ops in from its inception it
was to put together primary care
based teams and to grow them in
New Mexico having this our group
to study and I was honored to be
we read by them on various
observations
I have just a couple of brief
questions
one of Dr Scrase.
Is it it's my impression that
could you confirm that not only
will it look to how do we
resolve the
void of over five hundred
primary care physicians let
alone nurse practitioners and
behavioral health in the state
but will this also look at team
based care with care managers
community health workers and the
like.
Mr chair yeah we're surgeon Dr
Scrase.
Sorry thank you very much
senator Graham Mr chair Senator
spinning in Hickey great
question I think it will be up
to the group to really figure
out what are those key
components to allow us to I have
and grow and attract and retain
primary care physicians in the
discussions in the primary care
physician or this model of team
based care is one of the ones
that's been demonstrated
nationally to improve
satisfaction and retention I am
a primary care doctor I in
geriatrics we have been
intensively involved in team
based care for many years it's
the way our practice actually
works and it's very very
satisfying to have a whole team
of people caring for chronically
ill sick elderly people and so
what I will leave it up to the
council to establish those
priorities Senator Hickey and
and and Mr chair it's my belief
the that one the if identified
regarding team based care is
likely to rock arise to one of
the main strategic goals of the
group.
Thank you Senator Kernan Mr
chair and Dr Scrase one last
question we also have a
significant shortage in the
state of what I call non
procedural
slash cognitive base medical
specialist and knowledge is
knowledges faxes disease and so
on Mike this Council also be
able to look at how we can
increase our numbers perhaps
increasing residencies at UNM in
those areas because residents
tend to stay more so than
medical students where they were
trying it's with that again that
would be a possibility of this
task force to look at that as
well.
And that's for Dr Scrase up
through Senator Kernan.
Senator Wirth with your
permission I'll just proceed on
the questions please go ahead
thank I know you got another
commitment also up Mr chair
Senator earned Center Hickey
another great question I think
one of the things that
inevitably will be dealt with in
terms of attracting retaining
our primary care physicians is
reimbursement and typically
Medicaid in particular is not
paid by differentials across
specialties but rather for
certain ranges of codes in
different ways couple years ago
we significantly increased
payment rates for those as you
call them cognitive codes those
sort of spending time face to
face with patients and so would
be my hope that even though it's
not within the scope of the
description of this council
those kind of payment
interventions that will
inevitably follow over the
coming years and put at least
you got a value based
reimbursement quality based
reimbursement would also benefit
those folks who mainly spend
time face to face with patients
are primary care physicians
thanks.
Thank you Dr Scrase and Senator
Kernan and I will finish just
with a couple of quick
observations
one is that the company IBM
about ten years ago required
every employee and their
beneficiaries to have a name to
primary care physician they were
getting care and the special the
area they had to go out and find
a primary care who is in charge
of that coordination their
health care costs after the
first year of implementation
their health care costs by over
ten percent in and is held and
that's the value in terms of
economics but that ten percent
decrement also reflects much
better health of those
individuals and today I've been
digging into the our rescue act
and just as again you look at
the mental health side which is
fundamental I think that there
is a total of about thirteen
million coming to substance
abuse and behavioral health
through the rescue act to New
Mexico and I hope that the
council will take that into
consideration and think of ways
to spend it wisely and
effectively and I thank you for
the opportunity Senator Kernan
to be able to ask questions and
comments no you and Mister chair
and drive space for your time.
Thank you Senator Hickey of
Senator Padilla.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator Mr secretary I just real
quick
let's drive it yes the couple
once I wanted to is this a new
concept I mean has this been
successfully them somewhere else
and we tried this here in New
Mexico.
Place Dr Scrase how are you.
Okay sorry just had a need there
Mr chair Center video at and
Senator Kernan you know other
states to begin to take a look
at their expenditures related to
primary care Colorado and I
believe I other states have had
very good experience taking a
look at this and looking at that
percentage of that spanned at
Justin in the beginning stages
of quantifying that and then
finding ways to improve that
expand that up pursuant to drive
Hickey Senator he's comments
about ten percent reductions in
cost sometimes when you can get
people assigned a primary care
physician so the efforts are
sort of early in other states
but they're organized enabled by
legislation in most cases and I
think that
while other states have come at
this from a purely fiscal
perspective I think that will be
one of the components of the
council will certainly look into
we've already worked on
expanding training as I
mentioned that I think about I
thought think about all those
other major initiatives so we
might do one could imagine rural
medical school loan forgiveness
I think there's a bill actually
currently and not in the session
on that and a lot about you know
even stress reduction or
programs to support primary care
physicians nurse practitioners
and other so we're trying to
find the best in all states but
we're really looking for a long
term solution to our primary
care shortage it isn't simply a
financial our approach that
other states have taken so so
the answers partly yes mainly
financial but once that
quantification occurs other
states are beginning also to
look at ways to expand primary
care.
Thank you understood thank you
doctors Senator Dr Scrase and on
the US stress reduction if you
can start the study here in this
round building where I'm working
right now really good thank you
Mr chairman.
Thank you
Senator Hickey were second time.
You are muted.
Maybe in late in the day thank
you Mr chairman Senator Kernan
and L. Senators
the the the reason I came back
to New Mexico is to try and
build something like this the
team based care would have
actually would be in primary
care clinics unfortunately with
all the.
The goal regulations out of CMS
we were not able to initially
get that off the ground but it's
been fascinating to watch all
the large insurers all of a
sudden waking up Blue Cross of
Florida is now heavily investing
in primary care clinics optim
United that has a multi
specialty clinic here but wants
to do more primary care and then
there are many entrepreneurial
start ups up throughout the
country that focus on primary
care team based care and knowing
them as I do and those insurance
companies if they didn't think
they were going to get better
health and that's a better
return they never would have
done that kind of investment so
this is the wave of the future
and but I I think it's much
better that we're doing it as a
state of New as any particular
company so we can set a good
staff thank you.
Thank you I don't see any other
hands up so what is a place.
What excuse me just one minute
we have questions Mr chair would
be okay if doctor then let's
just make sure he doesn't have
anything else in closing before
we go turns out so Dr med is
still long I would give him a
chance just to say a final word.
Thank you Senator Kernan and Mr
chair I I just concur with that
what secretary Scrase said in I
think that raising the level of
quality raises the value of
health care both decrease costs
higher quality in that actually
floats all the boats that help
specialist at all hospitals that
helps patients and communities
so I think this is what we're
after.
Thank you very much for
I think we're finished
Mr chair thank you so it's a
pleasure the committee.
I so move that do pass
Representative motion by Senator
Hickey
I had a meal by Senator hundred
meal so lane please to.
To grow.
Brandt.
Senator Griggs.
Senator Hamblen yes.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Hotmail yes Senator Kernan yes
senator Sanchez.
Senator Tallman.
Senator Wirth yes.
Senator Griggs.
Senator Padilla.
Yes.
Senator Shendo yes.
Seven in the affirmative one
negative and three excuse.
With Senator currently have a
due pass.
I will let the representative
know thank you thank you so I
believe a Representative a the
light is back on so
Representative are you on I hope
so Mr chairman.
Armstrong.
you were having phone troubles
so welcome it.
See you again yeah I'm getting
older I'm not so good with
technology are you ready for me
to present Mr Chairman with the
bill a house bill to thirty.
Yes Sir Mr chairman members the
committee Kirsten Johnson is
should be an expert as well she
can come up if they can let her
in are very briefly I know
you've got a full agenda this
does really two things was it
are the fines property
management and there's a
definition of section but more
important from my perspective it
makes it easier for people to
apply for the real estate
recovery fund this would be
people who are financially
harmed by fraudulent actions of.
Judgment group we will state
brokers I do not do this area of
law I want to be clear about
that I I do in connection with
showing where some familiar with
these kinds of accounts of the
bar has a trust account for
fraudulent activities lawyers
and quite frankly what I love
about
this bill is is it streamlines
the process in a way that I wish
we did for the bar to make it
easier for people to apply and
increases the amount that can be
recovered for single claim to
fifty thousand dollars in there
some other changes and I don't
know Mr Johnson's on what why
at.
I'm here if you can hear me.
Yes go ahead.
Yes thank you Mr chair I think
you representative Ely for
sponsoring this all and thank
you to the members of the
committee for listening to me my
name is Kristen Johnson I'm a
real estate commissioner and
have been on the commission for
the last six years six or seven
years and this bill is brought
forward as an amendment to an
act that already exists which is
called the real estate recovery
act respond recovery fund act
the purpose of the fund is to
try to protect people from
licensee if they've been damaged
by a licensee and they have been
able to through no other Avenue
provide any kind of resolution
this fund allows them to apply
for up to fifty thousand dollars
per claim and it's it's a way
that the commission would really
like to see as as our our
mission is to protect the public
and this is this gives us the
ability formerly the fund was
very hard to access I am the
limits were very low so I would
really appreciate the support of
this committee it's something
that the real estate commission
has worked very hard to to bring
forward as a way to protect the
people which is which is our
purpose to protect people from
the real estate licensees and I
would be happy to answer any
questions you may.
Mr chairman members of the
committee we will stand for
questions but I do want it noted
that I was able to vote which on
the floor walls how can be so
proud moment for me thank you Mr
chairman.
on your journal.
If you will a public at this
point Mr chair Mr chair Senator
Wirth.
By Senator Wirth here.
It's Senator Wirth Mister chair
I just there there's an
amendment that I have on this
bill I think you're gonna have a
whole bunch of opposition to
this bill.
L. as rafted.
because it kind of pulls in some
owners associations into the
definitions and I've met on
amendment to take those out
which I believe the
representative considers a
friendly amendments and so I
think what what would make sense
is just put this ammendment on
right up front and that might
address take away a whole bunch
of public opposition to the bill
so I just wanted to suggest that
and and Representative Eli is
that a correct representation
that this very short amendment
is is a friendly amendment Mr
chairman and leader yeah ouch I
just wasn't sure when it was
going to be presented but it is
a friendly amendment thank you
Mr chairman and leader I
appreciate that okay Majority
Leader go ahead present the
amendment thank you Mr chair
it's point two two zero five
four nine point two if we can
put that up and I move that for
discussion.
Senator Wirth could you repeat
the number please.
Mr chairman and misrepresents
point two two zero five four
nine point two.
They're they're scattered in
right now.
Okay basically what this let me
just explain what it does are in
the definition of property
management.
On page five wind to.
But the words or owners
association was added into that
and so this would strike the
words owners association on page
five line to the bill and then
on page five line eight.
There is a specific definition
of what's not property
management and this would add in
for the management of a
condominium or homeowners
association on page five line
eight after the work owner so
it's just to make sure that it's
clear that this isn't trying to
get to association management
and include a whole new category
regulations so that's what
that's what this ammendment does
and I just I want to.
Discuss that up front because I
do think that will affect the
testimony in this bill.
Okay great.
So with that.
and it's a friendly amendment
so of to the committee is any
opposition to this amendment.
Senator use of a repeat that
again trying to fall on the bill
okay on has been spending.
We're going to explain it again
the I I don't believe they have
the right documents so I'll go
ahead yes okay.
So on page five line one.
Strike at the end of page five
one word the word for word.
And then on page five line to
strike owners association okay.
That takes it out there and I'm
page five line eight.
After the word owner in search
quote or the management of a
condominium or homeowners
association and what that would
do is specifically take that out
of the definition of property
management it's being regular
thank you.
Okay so
Any opposition to the amendment.
Russian women.
The no opposition
The amendment is accepted so
okay thank you we're we're back
in the bill thank you Mr chair
so we'll go now to the public.
Our house bill thirty we will
begin with those wishing to
speak in opposition if there's
anybody here in a room with us
wishing to speak in opposition
to house bill two thirty please
raise your hand.
We will go to those who
registered in advance to speak
in favor beginning Vicki Sears.
Thank you chairman of the
committee I just want to a thank
you for considering the bill as
amended I I am with a A. M.
which is of it our homeowners
association management company
so thank you so much for your
time.
Thank you very much.
John Krueger.
Mr chairman members I also work
for a large community
association management company
called the socio and as senator
Wirth explained I would have had
significant objections to the
expansion of who would be
required to be licensed broker
under this bill so with that
Committee amendment thank you to
both Senator Wirth and
Representative the life for
accepting that in as amended I
now support the bill.
Thank you very much.
Members of the public wishing to
speak in support house bill two
thirty eight rigs.
Thank you.
Comment on this time.
Yes.
Hello.
Yeah this is Stephen I am what
is the.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Steven
I uh the CEO of the New Mexico
association of realtors and we
do stand in support of house
bill two thirty thank you.
Thank you.
Okay great
The.
Okay so now we're back on the
committee for a questions of.
I don't see any hands on over
you pass or motion for two
passed by Senator Padilla.
Second.
Thank you Mr chair by Senator
Hamblen lane please of coral.
Senator Brandt.
Yes.
Senator Griggs.
Yes.
Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Hickey yes Senator how to meal
yes Senator Kernan yes senator
Sanchez yes.
Senator common.
Senator Wirth yes Senator
Padilla yes in addition to yes.
So you have tend to the
affirmative and one excuse.
You have a do pass
Representative Eli thank you Mr
chairman thank you members the
committee with.
Will move to the house bill
fifty four.
Representative Romero are you
on.
I see her.
Mr Chairman so I'm helping her
on the Senate side I don't know
for expert witnesses are here
for expert witnesses are here
when when it comfortable in.
And I see Linda Trujillo is here
I believe she's going to help us
today and those Alicia to
finally settle so if they don't
mind I can start off and and and
Representative Romero
representatives here.
Okay great already so go ahead
Representative introduce a house
thank you for thank you forgive
me I was just on a call not
knowing how quickly that was
gonna move thank you Mr chair
thank everyone on house bill
fifty four this of course on
behalf of the licensing and
regulation Department update our
vase barbering cosmetologists
Act basically bringing up our
rules to a modern day
understanding of the
qualifications that we're
looking for in order to be able
to get folks licensed of course
secretary at to for it the
server was here in support also
on ensuring that while we're
able to work through our
criminal justice system to get
folks trained in these areas
that they have a means to
actually get the license as well
so they're here to and answer
any technical questions we look
forward to any discussion today
thank you Mr chair okay thank
you of Representative so we'll
go to the public.
Our house bill fifty four we go
directly to the public for those
wishing to speak in opposition
anyways to speak in opposition
please raise your hand now.
Seeing hands raise we have
cabinet secretary Alicia just
wanted sero.
Here to speak in favor.
Do you.
Mr chair apologies I think we
registered in favor but I'm I'm
testifying at two and be
available to answer any
questions.
Okay all right there any members
of the public wish to speak in
favor of the bill please raise
your hand.
Thank you very much.
Public comment.
The committee Senator Kernan.
Thank you very much and I'm Mr
chair I'm not sure I just want
to ask a question while I have
the secretary while I have that
a sponsor on regarding
cosmetology as similar to the R.
L. D. a couple weeks ago at the
request of constituent I never
got a response but it it it's
kind of about licensure he is a
licensed barber but that he's
not sure if there is restriction
for him you know how we have
food trucks that go all over the
place and their license you he
would like to take a barber
truck and go out into the oil
field to provide services out
into the oil field and I'm just
wondering if that's permissible
currently and if that could be
part of kind of what you're
doing to eliminate some of the
roadblocks for those that
cosmetologists and barbers I
don't know where to turn because
I did send a letter and I didn't
get a response if maybe you all
could help me figure out how to
get an answer that are could
help get that done that's all I
have thank you Mr if I could
respond Mr chairman this bill.
What.
Just in their removing go ahead
the.
Thank you.
Chairman thank you Mr chairman
Senator Kernan I have not seen
that letter I will check into
that tomorrow you
if I don't if I can't track that
down I will definitely give you
a call and and try to find out
what the issue is I believe that
in order to do that they just
have to happen establishment
license and indicate that they
were in the Stallis man on the
move so we can work that are
lined thank you for bringing
that to my attention well thank
you I'll resend it I have I'll
have to find it rescinded
because it's been awhile but
I'll get that to you and and he
would be very happy to be able
to do that and I think it would
help that the man that work out
there and don't have time to
come in and take care of those
kinds of things so thank you
appreciate it you're welcome
Senator.
Senator your hands up so you
have a question or.
Senator current okay all righty.
I don't see any other questions
Senator how to meal and Senator
Brandt so what I wanted to
comment on is this law will also
ensure that those who have been
incarcerated than who pick up a
trade of barbering or
cosmetology well behind bars can
them come out and start to use
this to get a license currently.
These men and women who pick up
this trade can't get a license
and so what we're asking people
to.
Move their lives in a positive
direction to find employment and
to become productive members of
society this slop right now the
last prohibits them from getting
a license this would remove that
barrier it.
To ensure that we set them up
for success so after Brandt I'd
be happy to ask for the past.
Other questions Mr chairman want
to bring.
Thank you just gonna follow Sir
currents leave in.
I've got some secretary some
letters to secretary as well as
wonder if you could get a
response for may not to you but
another secretary I was trying
to figure out how this works to
get a response from some of the
secretaries thank you.
chairman Senator I'm always
happy to provide an answer for
you.
Mr chairman if I could just also
once again so I really like
senator rand set new hair cut.
From one of those bills.
Okay all righty of we do have a
due pass motion by Senator how
to be able to have a second
second second by Senator Kernan
okay Lang please come to grow.
Senator Brandt yes.
Senator Griggs.
Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Hickey.
Yes Senator how to meal yes
Senator Kernan.
Yes Senator census yes Senator
Tallman.
Senator Wirth.
Senator Padilla yes Senator
Shendo yes.
You have nine in the affirmative
and to.
Thank you Mr chair appreciate it
thank you so we'll move on to a
Senate bill two ninety four.
Senator Stefanics are you on.
Senator a.
Committees on.
Swoop to pass bill one sixty
eight yes.
At good evening Mr chairman and
members of the committee is now
evening.
I thank you so much.
With.
House Bill one sixty eight is an
agency requests bill from the
department of homeland security
and emergency management.
That applies and adopts the
national flood insurance
program's minimum building
standards that any future
buildings funded with state
dollars that are built with in
special flood hazard areas this
bill does not apply to private
buildings to state funded
buildings already constructed
Norwood and Norwood apply in the
future to buildings that are
already fall under local flood
plain regulations this bill is
really just meant to cover those
instances where local
regulations do not apply or
outside of an existing local
slipping Authority of this bill
will help maintain in New
Mexico's compliance with the
national flood insurance program
through FEMA that program is
really really important it
provides subsidized flood
insurance to communities all
around the state in return for
that community adopting minimum
building standards inside
special flood hazard areas so
what this bill does is it brings
a state standards into
compliance so that the state can
remain eligible for national
flood insurance if we don't do
the best of the state and all
the local communities that have
that insurance risk losing
eligibility and potentially
other types of federal
assistance if there is a flood
event Mr chairman members I have
to expert witnesses from the
department of homeland security
and emergency management there
Mr Matthew Steckel in Florida
hatch on and we stand for
questions.
This time of we will go to the
public.
Our house bill one sixty eight
we will begin with those were
wishing to speak in opposition
if you wish to speak in
opposition to one sixty eight
please raise your hands now.
Seeing.
Those wishing to speak in favor
if you wish to speak in favor of
the bill first have beyond Ortiz
where time.
Hello Mr chairman and members of
the committee thank you so much
for your time today my name is
Bianca or tease worth time and I
am the cabinet secretary for
homeland security and emergency
management and of course this is
an agency bills that we do stand
in strong support of that thank
you Representative Ortez for
caring at Representative Ortez
a.
An important now sh speaking
very of eloquently about how the
US the new house bill will
action this new measure will
help.
Sorry my daughter.
We.
I'm gonna have to stop I
apologize.
Thank you very much there's
anybody else wishes to speak in
support of house bill one sixty
eighty please raise your hand.
Thank you.
Public comment time.
Okay will I go to the.
The committee for questions.
And we don't see any Mr chairman
without all of you pass it with
the best possible Senator
Padilla.
Second.
That are worth a second.
Second by Senator Wirth lane
please of to grow Senator
Brandt.
Senator Griggs.
Yes.
Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Hickey.
Senator huh.
Sara yes okay Senator Hickey
thank you Senator have a meal
yes.
Senator Kernan.
No.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator common.
Senator Wirth yes Senator
Padilla yes Senator Shendo.
Yes in the affirmative to nose
and to excuse.
Over the past.
Thank you.
So if you Senator Stefanics is
not on yet I read her bill and
and and.
Based on how it goes I I'll take
a I'll take a swing at it and
and if you'd like what okay very
good well we all carry this one
anyway but thank you Mr chairman
and the members of the committee
Ms doing this presenters depends
essentially it's a small change
the B. we charge for marriage
licenses from twenty five
dollars to fifty dollars
together additional twenty five
dollars would be remitted to the
state treasurer monthly for
deposit into the fund for county
clerks for the other services
that they offer the effective
date would be July first twenty
twenty one so if be coming right
back up it's literally a after
page deal here and it's simply a
change to that one see they have
to modernize the speed and
change this in.
Are a very very long time so
it's expected to to generate a
couple dollars for the county
clerk's with other things that
they do thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you the.
Senator so we'll go to the
public.
Percent.
Just to speak in opposition
please raise your hand.
Percent.
Was being in favor.
Thank you very much.
Okay so
We will go to committee for
questions I don't see any hands
on with your parents or do
passed by Senator Padilla to
have a second.
Second the motion.
Thank please take all rules are.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Griggs.
Yes.
Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Hickey yes Senator how to meal
yes Senator Kernan.
Senator Kernan.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator Tallman.
Senator Wirth yes Senator
Padilla yes Senator Shendo yes.
We've got one two three four
five seven in the affirmative no
none in the negative and four
excused.
Are what turn Mr chairman thank.
Well that so are Senate health
bill two forty eight is
Representative Chandler back on.
If not we'll go to a house bill
two forty five that's the bill
that the ranking member and I I
thought was a concurrent so
Is it to forty five or two
thirty five to forty five to
forty five Representative Lewis
is bill only to the distribution
system.
Senator Kernan.
Mr chair we on two forty five or
two thirty five it'll be two
forty five is the bill that
Senator Kernan of and I review
and that we were going to put
that on consent was supposed to
be the last one but it goes with
a up top so.
Well I'll go ahead and.
The motion for the password.
Second that motion on two forty
five.
Okay of any opposition to the
motion.
I see none of the pass on house
bill two forty five.
So we'll go to of.
Well two thirty five now do we
have Representative Lujan.
Okay of if we don't have any of
those Representative on.
Then the we'll go ahead and
conclude our our our meeting for
this afternoon a little bit of
something to eat and we'll see
you back on the floor in the.
Well forty five to an hour.
Thank you committee members we
are adjourned thank you Mr chair
thank you for that thank you.
