But we've also had a preliminary
meeting with the house, Uh, tax
chair and vice chair, So we'll
probably continue to work with
them as well to make sure that
communicating and so forth, so
we'll see how this all plays
out.
We have several pieces of
legislation that already been
assigned. And so my hope is that
Tuesday
That we will start. I have some
personal
Things that in cultural things
that are happening or in our
village, so it will still be
gone next week. Monday through
Thursday, your patients
There's enough
Cultural way of life. Carry my
first the, uh, taking care of
the committee. So so
Be nice to your Ah, thank you.
So, uh, What's that? Yes, Yeah.
Yeah, that's probably
So are there any additional
comments? Peter, I know that you
have some discussion. And maybe
if you could just kind of just
two things one. I think it would
be secretary. That's right. I
have to note Okay. They there I
had a chance to do their
different pieces are included.
Careful Senator Branch think
that would be helpful, So I
think we probably should reach
out to her. And then the other
thing I just wanted to
The flag that the vice chair of
the House tax
Last year. I think we'll
remember.
We had done our part of the
package. The House had done its
part of the path and so we had
talked about the amendments
going to look like the
conference committee like we
were last session again because
that will again just throw those
two things.
Okay. Thank you, Madam Chair and
you know, I want you guys to
know that we're gonna be the
We can things that we did last.
Personally, This is going to be
my last
Legislative, Indian and cultural
affairs
Then there someday and visit
your National park in Senate. So
what's your house number?
Yeah.
Mhm.
So anything else from together,
so just read it pretty much.
What we've done before in terms
of the committee.
Any further comments from many
committee members.
Hearing. None will return and
then, uh
But sure we'll make the
announcement on Tuesday and what
bills will be hearing Tuesday
afternoon, Okay?
