The card.
so.
Is there.
We.
To Senator.
The.
Help us.
The.
Our.
Tax and secretary.
State.
Once the water flows.
The.
We.
The.
We've got everybody.
The.
Committee.
We are our first the.
Senator tax verification of the.
This is a.
we'll get started
so where is
the
Hello of the productions of.
The.
We'll do is we'll discover
with one of for that
committee members is users since
the district Representative in
New World for.
Thank you.
Mr chair.
Thanks.
Thank you Mr Bill hotels in the
centers Senator Katie portion of
the north east side this is.
Thirty here on this committee
says.
Very important committee doing
the.
The the purpose of this
committee I look forward to
today's discussion thank you Mr
chair.
Good afternoon Mister chair I'm
state senator Leo how to meal
representing Senate district
five which includes Los Alamos
Rio Arriba Sandoval and Santa Fe
counties and just a fun fact if
you can Mr chair if I may madam
DOT is here and they hold a
special place in my heart
because it's the first agency
bill and first bill I carried
that was passed the senator so
and M. D. O. T. hold a special
place in my heart because of
that and because my god brother
is the cabinet secretaries.
Thank you Mr chair.
thank you Mr chair Peter Wirth
Senator twenty five in Santa Fe
and we do have a tradition in
the state Senate speaking of
first built on as the Majority
Leader when any member passes
their first bill all we get it
the vote tally sheet frame
themselves Senator Hermio so I'm
sure got that build up on his
wall the funny thing about my
first bill in the Senate it was
a bill that involved animals
which is always challenging
anytime you carry a bill like
that and I've got it framed on
my wall the vote was forty two
one the one vote being the
Senate Majority Leader Michael
Sanchez.
hello everybody my name is Kerri
Hamlin and I am the senator for
district thirty eight in
beautiful southern New Mexico
honor to serve as vice chair of
this committee in my day job I
run the Los crucis green chamber
of commerce and we talk about
the importance of locally owned
businesses protecting our air
land and water in creating
sustainable communities so it's
very much an honor to be here on
this committee today thank you
very much thank you.
Senator Griggs.
Thank you Mr chairman station
Ron Griggs I represent Senate
district thirty four which
covers the southern part of the
Terrel County the eastern or
western part of any County and
our roads are certainly an
important part of of our part of
the world.
Discount on you guys to fix some
of so thank you Mr chair.
Shares in the.
Enjoyed having dinner with you
last night.
Sir were you messed you.
I I'm just surprise you still
remember as long as you've been
here the first bill in the past.
Well and you know you work there
either so hello everyone out
just just need Peter I have a
state of calling each other out
this year I don't know what it
is yesterday but I'm Senator
Brandt from Senate district
forty which is the town of Joe
Sandoval County so I I don't I'm
not fortunate like everyone else
almost everyone else but bunch
of different counties but
actually it's very nice to have
a small.
Concise district
Appreciate the work that the
FTEs done a five fifty let's
leave it alone for at least a
few weeks
maybe at least till the end of
session I really like to not see
more comes on that road for
awhile
and we we have some other issues
we need to be dealing with the
my district so four working with
you on those and the.
Yeah we just got a lot of
infrastructure needs to take
care of our state hopefully.
With the the.
The vast amount of extra income
that the oil and gas is being
provided for us this year maybe
we can take a look at some of
that infrastructure thank you.
Thank you Mr chair my name is
Gail Kerns for District Court.
Transportation district to.
I always appreciate everything
that you all have done for
years.
certainly if present provides
for us look forward to
completing a couple of those
projects that I really do
appreciate that district to
Devin said the cemex of Mexico.
The.
Chairman members of the
committee and everyone present
Linda Lopez Senator district
eleven which is the southwest
quadrant of Bernalillo county
and I look forward to a very
invigorating interesting
committee hearing series of
committee hearings the session
thank you.
To.
For whatever reason doctors
legal so back up
good afternoon the committee
one.
Okay this is those are you on
the cast of state senator of an
Shendo Representative Senator
twenty four days well of my
district encompasses portions of
Santa Fe counties
members has.
Order to.
this committee's work
of those surveyed more issues
again this morning so that the
and we do our best to.
yeah and so forth so before I go
on to the.
The rest of the our our
committee staff
or or secretary of this
the roll call.
Right here Senator Kernan.
Senator Lopez.
Scientists.
Or.
At Sierra.
Senator work here.
State senator.
Senator here Senator.
Your.
That the.
Our staff.
What do you guys need to this is
a.
Good afternoon everyone linings
for them to use the secretary
for the Senate yes business and
transportation.
this is my first year on.
and this would be a new players
the house three years of prior
to that I said the state
government for.
K. C. R..
Hi mark health Clinton I'm sure
some of you reported me for this
is a thirty year concession
second here on the Senate side
very happy to be here.
Four million faces healthcare
returning.
the the do with our attendance
this is.
Senate have
George Shendo under fifty so
you're.
And I will be Senators Senator.
The parents or we will hi there
and I'll be happy to the COVID.
By training
for
hired from the city's Santa Fe
also.
New Mexico and all of this
twenty years of service.
Hello everyone I'm back to
Jackie collection I retired from
taxation revenue at twenty
ninety.
I work at a house for the past
three years this to his major
analysts and wonders facts
Committee and.
Chairman of the committee please
don't mind receiving fallen on
recent transplant to Senate the
waivers for the New Mexico or
hello.
The state attorney and over and
allow Phil I plans.
My first session.
Senator axon I am ready for this
licensed CPA.
Whether they are or more during
the session.
I think that's it for our our
Committee staff and then now I
will turn it over to my vice
chair to kind of go over some of
for the public and folks
interested in the over testimony
will resume so Senator and with
thank you Mr chair and so this
is just a procedural things that
we would like those of you in
the audience and those of you on
soon or who are watching the
webcast just know that the
webcast is a minute delay so if
you are testifying yes zoom you
might want to go ahead and
listen to the committee V. is
assumed rather than on the
webcast please remember that the
protocol for public testimony as
to go through the chair for
example Mr chairman committee or
madam chair and committee also
please state your name if you
are representing an organization
or group what we will do is we
will first here whenever we're
hearing testimony on a bill is
listen to people who are here in
the room forced
with in person testimony and
then we will go to those of us
who are on zoom if there's
somebody in the room or on zoom
that needs extra combinations to
speak because of different
abilities just please let us
know or let this you Mr now we
do ask that you please pay
attention to what bills being
discussed if you're watching the
webcast again know that there's
a minute delay we will ask for
those of you in favor of the
bill to raise your hands by
using the reaction icon at the
bottom of your screen if you are
on zoom at that person obviously
we will ask for you to raise
your hand those in favor of will
be provided the list of those
folks who are in favor and
opposed on zoom will be provided
to either the chair or myself
will call on you well you you as
you are is your name is called
and follow the same those in
opposition we do ask that
especially if there are bills
that have all lot of folks who
are wanting to testify be
respectful of the time limit
that has been set by the chair
or the vice chair this is done
so so that everyone can have
equal time to present their
testimony and if you go over
time we really the touch off
here in person or we will cut
you off funds and we do want to
be respectful of everybody's
time and again we do thank you
for your participation.
The committee meeting and the
and we will start with the rest
of our agenda thank you Mr chair
thank you Mr.
Turn over to a well we're
looking for use.
House items I wanted to run past
the community
I.
The program is for you see your
agent as prior to the the times
in the last year we said
everything is fine for now that
to hand deliver hard talking to.
And I'm wondering if you have a
preference for Charlie for their
very always.
For more and the electron.
Representative.
Mr chair I can let you know if
if if we're having one of these
set aside for us here in the
committee meeting I would hate
to waste all that paper I can
look it up like chronically I've
for for that and if I need to
print it out I can go ahead and
print it out I would I would.
If we're having it here I don't
know if they when we needed
again.
Is that right.
I'm sorry.
Are set as long as it sent to my
secretary.
Yes I'm okay if you send it to
me and they're going to see it
okay if you send it to my
secretary please all of you
secretaries far online
distribution just to we see that
at the same time you develop
complex so I've already had some
trouble.
Is.
If you.
Yes
now says that all.
Funds that.
So.
The
new sectors.
That way I I.
Those are all.
For the.
Thank you very much.
This is on.
So that
This is a some other procedures
for our community
All of this must be submitted to
Twenty four hours prior to the
the here in the sense of the
council of that rule by the.
All of that twenty four hours
our little.
May the lord santus and co.
You know workers for a revisit
that will start on the the.
But that so that we will and.
Those are grants are.
Representative.
Gentleman that appreciate that
and just make sure was the actor
angles
both sides the.
our analysts of the.
**** yes the and the.
Also news for somebody CLR to
changes in the state as a
committee members who are that
will still be able to do that.
Yes the financial one the eighty
five for that we the for our
this.
That needs to be looked at.
This is a small of course this
a draft rules the representative
shall revert to a free job
Yes.
Yes.
The NMAA.
Those are the okay other
questions
Well Senator services.
Is this.
For the.
So with that that takes care of
the organizational piece of
thank you all of.
Thank you all for a.
For being here and then we the
the only agenda item that we
have a today is a presentation
by the New Mexico department
transportation security concern
and we were if you would like to
bring or support to.
So it's a.
Thank you for for being here.
That's it thank you Mr chair
Pleasure to be here I have to
say I think you know my working
governments is the first
organizational committee meeting
I've ever been to which I
appreciate because now that we
have the background of all of
your staff will be trying to
recruit them over between the
lawyers the hydrogen at the CPA
I mean.
The the the forecasting we need
all these people to do so all of
my cards for you all in case
you're looking for work after
February March.
If I if I may Mister chair if
it's okay we need to take some
time as you all know I've been
working with agency for up since
July and you may already know
also that my background isn't as
a high we construction guy so I
I relied heavily on a group of
individuals many of whom are
represented here as senior
managers for the agency if it's
okay I'd like to be able to love
and introduce themselves and
just the divisions they oversee
obviously if you ask me tricky
moderately tricky question with
upon but mostly because are the
experts in rural please go ahead
please.
Mr chair from committee chairman
is expected rectify we
appropriations whether you're
looking.
Mr chair representative Jerry
Valdez planning data management
research facilities capital
investments as well as special
projects thank you for.
Representative you Mr chairman
is trendy little I am the
interim deputy secretary
recently moved up here
previously was a district
engineer down endemic for ten
years thank you.
George foster here.
We go on operations of the
cities counties all entities and
try to levels also.
Actor Mr chair committee members
my name is a John R. on the
highway operations division
during.
Good afternoon Mr chairman
members the committee wanted
Franklin Garcia on the Google
director oversee our aviation
transit and rail traffic safety
and our ports of entry and I
want to say thank you again of
Mr chair for your willingness to
carry one or due to the.
Mr chair members of the
committee then we can talk chief
engineer and beauty program for
structure.
But for the latest project
state.
Great.
That covers us all to my right
is dollar month's notice RAC
director and and she'll she'll
to pick upright leave off just
want to provide you all with the
general overview on my
understanding of course is that
many of you have had.
A lot of familiar to the
department of transportation
which is wonderful there was a a
lot of new not new remembers and
house transportation this
morning so I was able to provide
a high level overview if you'll
indulge me will do the same
because
we're just providing an overview
and so we thought we kind of do
a repeat of our legislative
finance committee you know
presentation which which we
delivered I think in December of
last year but just kind of
highlight a little bit about
what our logic is behind that
and and then we'll dive into a
little how are funding is and
how we amass our funding from
various revenue sources in taxes
throughout the state and
essentially our reliance over
the last few years on general
fund appropriations by way of
house bill to see specifically
section nine funding so as many
of you may know that major state
road fund revenue sources for
the department of transportation
includes gasoline tax we
distance special fuel vehicle
registration fees and so
fortunately through that process
the department transportation to
a few years ago ran
predominantly on those revenue
transfers combined with FHWA
funding or federal participation
funding right upwards of or
above a million dollars to the
department transportation and so
what's occurred fortunately and
because of healthy revenue
projections and healthy budget
position for the state of New
Mexico a few years ago the the
legislature has really been
generous in providing the
department of transportation
general fund support primarily
for construction maintenance
equipment and and some other
special projects through section
nine of house bill two and so
most recently last year for
example the agency received
about three hundred and seventy
four million dollars of general
fund appropriations through
section nine two hundred forty
million of which we put through
in construction in addition to
that we've been fortunate to
receive our per funding for
construction.
Objects specific ones named in
that appropriation will give you
a little bit of an update on how
we're doing in getting that
funding spent down because we
have some sunsets that that we
have to be concerned with
we also of course have come to
understand the LFC rack for
section nine funding in in the
current session for FY twenty
four which is at about a hundred
and ninety seven million so
about half of what we received
last year we're going to provide
you with the REC of that of
course precedes the LFC racks
that we don't want you to feel
as though we're worlds apart on
purpose but we were swinging for
the fence like most agencies
were given the projections so
it's closer to about eight
hundred million are over eight
hundred million dollars but what
we're really looking to do with
our recommendation of course is
identify projects in each
district that our priority based
on a number of factors but
primarily driver safety there's
no question that as we move
through the presentation with Mr
canton a little bit you'll see
that the districts are working
on large projects that have been
you know that been on the radar
for a long time and projects
that really to address safety
related issues and so you're
likely all familiar with the
state transportation improvement
plan our state which will refer
to regularly and so this step is
you all are aware guides our
work as an agency those projects
on the inner years we must
remain fiscally constrained
before we can put shovels in the
ground on those projects and
those in the outer years
essentially we can move through
design and planning of those
projects but until we get the
funding ready to complete the
entire project and we don't get
him started and there in lies
the difficulty for us what we
essentially do with our ask to
the legislature is here the
projects and how much it would
cost to get them off the shelf
if we when we receive a reduced
amount of those projects are or
that finding what we essentially
do is identify projects we can
do and projects we can do
because we can't do any of them
partially right.
So we're hopeful to work with
you all in on the house side to
ensure that the funding that we
do reset at least right will
give us some perspective on
projects we can actually
complete in their entirety so
that we can address those
concerns so without further ado
I'll turn it over to to Mallory
and she can provide you an
overview of the various funding
sources and.
Answer any questions of course.
Chair members you often have a
presentation in front of you.
If you want to turn over to page
one I will be going over our FY
twenty four budget request focus
your attention on column B. we
requested two hundred and two
point seven million dollars in
person services and employee
benefits three five hundred
seventy three point three
million dollars a contractual
services four hundred and seven
point eight million dollars and
other costs which include our
debt service payment field
supplies.
IBM what we pay utilities out of
there for a total budget request
of one point one eight three
point eight billion dollars this
is a thirty four point six
million dollar decrease of from
our FY twenty three operating
budget.
So what makes up our budget our
budget is made up of five
hundred forty five point two
million dollars of state road
fund revenue ninety six point
three million dollars of
restricted revenue eight point
three million dollars for for
public transfer in from TRD in
DFA for the point of entry at
five hundred thirty four million
dollars of federal funds this
budget request does not have any
general fund appropriation as it
sets okay one bit some of the
major differences between the FY
twenty four requests in FY
twenty three operating budget is
our state ran revenue increased
by thirteen point one million
dollars R. restricted revenue
increased by five point two
million dollars and our federal
funds increased by twelve point
seven million dollars we also
eliminated sixty five point six
million dollars of state road
fund and restrictive roe fund
balance so if you want to look
on calling State line number
twenty nine that money came from
the state road fund like savings
account innocent we do go
through a you need process with
the DFA and LESC and we
negotiate our budget now during
the session so this money will
more than likely be put back
into our budget we're thinking
about fifteen million rented
rather than the sixty million.
On the next page.
This is founded house bill two
section line section line is
strictly identified for the
department transportation since
two thousand nineteen we have
received a general funds for
specific projects of it gives
you an overview of how much we
receive we receive per year and
there's also bill description so
for example in twenty nineteen
we received two hundred fifty
million then the pandemic it and
we have to reverse some of that
back so we have a hundred
seventy five million it shows
how much we've been covered
forty point eight million we've
expensed a hundred seventeen
million and we have a seventeen
point one million remaining and
this is all related to
construction projects if you go
down to our says lots of twenty
twenty one S. S. that is the arc
of funding that we got and that
covers ten million dollars for
each based TV stations ten
million dollars for aviation
projects ten million dollars for
beautification and a hundred and
forty two point five million
dollars for construction
projects.
If you guys would like more in
detail what maybe what projects
make up these laws I can
definitely provide that to you
okay.
On the next page.
We just clearly wanted to
identify out of the hundred and
forty two point five million
dollars the department received
of our for fund we have listed
at six projects one or six
projects that we have used the
one forty two point five four.
And that Mr chair I stand for
any questions.
Thank.
Right Mr chairman Mr content
comes one of the things I want
to point out understanding that
because you agencies been so on
reliant on general fund
appropriations we are looking
especially the session to
understand how we can increase
revenue over a period of time
right other than general fund so
what are some of our legislative
priorities for the current
session including small
increased vehicle registration
fees which would in turn be
increased distributions to the
DOT interests Revenue upwards of
about twenty four million
dollars includes motorcycle
registration fees increased
distant crease distributions to
the aviation Fund effect double
the distributions to the
aviation plan so we know as
fortunate we've been over the
last few years given you know
the job that you the health of
the general fund that we also
need to do that in a more
sustainable way so we are
looking at some of those items
the however is very being
mindful that they all result in
increases to New Mexicans right
from the New Mexico
registrations to move to fuel
tax.
Thanks to Chris of Mr chair
members of the committee of will
just a flip the page there will
start with them our project
proposals fiscal year twenty
twenty five is a basically
alright ask for section nine and
house bill two the first of the
first slide there's just table
contents
we for the page again this kind
of goes in more detail what are
ask is number one department
transportation is asking for a
six hundred fifty nine point
five million for acquisition of
rights of way planning design
and construction and about other
state or federal funds for
projects appropriations made in
the section may be used for the
following projects so we
basically have a list of twelve
projects there to produce
stripped that the D. ease
identified as their major
priorities within their
respective districts district
one identified a New Mexico to
thirteen which is down south at
some connectivity between I. ten
and the the the stuff
translucent trend the trend
Johnson Johnson highway
connection there and that's and
to put major part is the the
length of the corridor as well
as a committee I the interchange
with the New Mexico for all four
district two has a couple of
priorities along Mexico thirty
one and the U. S. three eighty
District three probably our
highest purpose stayed within
government Comanche and then the
real brother bridge district
four has identified some issues
some risk from critical bridges
that they identified along I.
forty
district five has I twenty five
all of you is driven into Santa
Fe between us a real sense of
what that will know how badly I
twenty five needs some love so
that's that's where their
priorities and and of course US
five fifty northwest Colorado
and then finally District of
excuse me district six of the I.
forty bridges and district force
priority was a much to one four
which is on the best of to
compare area where we get a lot
of D. toward semi traffic on
getting on one of four which
really doing some damage to
those bridges so that's one of
the major
priorities for them as well as
about twenty past the final
project for that to complete the
the reconstruction of the road
on bass
and then finally we're asking
for a hundred twenty million in
additional funding to for any
successful requests we make at
for end of year federal of
funding redistribution
oftentimes other duties are able
to utilize all the authorized
federal funding that they were
given enough particularly
federal fiscal year so FHWA will
then go and redistribute those
funds to states that have been
eight successful and how
projects the shovel ready and
can go up to let so that's the
the the ask for the match there
we're asking for another eighty
million dollars for the dollar
transportation project fund top
of the recurring revenue that we
receive through excise tax us to
help our local partners with
their priority projects and and
really help them attack with the
need session with price
escalations of missing the last
couple years resting for another
hundred forty two million for
our districts for maintenance
needs but our pavement
preservation needs and and
various maintenance things that
we need throughout the
throughout the DOT and then.
Lastly eight million dollars for
equipment purchase for a total
of about eight hundred eighty
nine point five million
the next slide is of really goes
a little bit into detail for the
vast majority investment project
priorities for each district
identifying existing funds that
are allocated currently funds
that we are going after and the
highlighted column is the actual
funding got me that we have
couple of projects all point out
of Montgomery County we've we
were unsuccessful in getting the
make a grant for that so the ask
was reflective of that so we're
asking for one hundred forty
million latest estimate came in
with about seventy five percent
certainty of about two hundred
million of course that's adored
would work to design build
projects that we have in the
state again those to our
priorities because you want to
really take advantage of of the
opportunity designed built gives
us with with some innovation and
and and some contractor
Technical innovative designs
that they might come up with so
we've shortlisted both of those
projects and we're ready to go
out to our of peas in July
assuming we get to the request
appropriations but we have some
other options to make those old
those are two priority projects
we're still hopeful that we're
gonna get the bridge investment
program project grant for Rio
Bravo so so we're you know these
this of these us might might
change a little bit but but
ultimately we we have all these
projects in various stages of
development if you look at the
notes there you'll see some
notes the process and projects
are in phase HB that's really
where we're not planning phases
of the of the prop project
development process summer in
various stages of final design
thirty sixty or ninety percent
and others and then we have a
one or two their shelf ready and
be ready to go out this the this
coming fiscal year so
The next to the following slides
really going to to some.
Individual project details
showing Mason the the same
information that the previous
slide so with the addition of a
map to kind of show you where
this project is in in the in the
area of New Mexico so I can go
into detail with off on that
really I think it's just more of
just giving you guys an idea of
where we're at and and just
highlighting again the funding
scenario that we're looking at
so with that Mr chair members
committee I I like to stand for
any questions.
The the thank you a.
Can we just get a specific
questions about this project
what.
To.
I'm looking at the map on where
thirty one and one twenty eight
debt inception.
Is that the blue at the prospect
of that said Kelly
even is that come in to table
and
is it in thirty one it's
something.
Those will again Mr chair
Alaska.
The transfer the call.
You Mr chair Senator I'll get
you that information you know
when we get out of committee
meeting and get the information
for you all with.
District engineer has been very
helpful.
To get that wrapped around
prospect because currently all
the trucks going straight
through current spending we've
been working on that lived for
some time and I'm just wondering
where it comes in
down here on thirty.
That would be.
Thank.
Thank you Mr chair this morning
about the status of the.
They're change rebuild the
jobless twenty five.
In Albuquerque.
Of Madam chair of Sierra
currently that priorities of
district three our government
Comanche Rio Bravo and gets in
that order and then state search
of where we are not we are going
to issue an RFP for for the S.
curve that will have with that
will incorporate that
entertainers interchange we
anticipate that will come out
this year so you know with what
you know again that's the
that'll be of the early stages
that might potentially be
another design build or even the
if the if the timing works out
one of our for C. M. D. C.
projects but we're still
probably about five to ten years
away from getting to a
point where review of design.
I come with the community and
and the the of our brokerage
yes.
As a good approve that we live
the frontage road three lanes by
Presbyterian Hospital.
Close the shut down exit yes.
Thank you.
Secretary I know that the.
on page seven where we have the
district priorities to each and
so forth.
So I I know that the the hi we
for I pass the worst part of the
I think Senator for section nine
House Bill to last year is that
still in the house bill two
section nine and I know that
it's I know that the high we the
I. forty folks or priority.
The so I just curious if it is
these projects that are listed
here as a priority are all
within of the section nine of
house bill two.
Mr chair let Mr content to give
an update on that that's right
so I think there's kind of
With that we've talked a little
bit about the double edged sword
with listing the projects
specifically within section nine
right and that is if it's
limiting to say just these
projects and we go and we
receive federal funding for
example for one of those
projects and we have that
funding now available to re
director of the project we'd
like language that gives the
flexibility to do that if if on
the other hand the projects are
listed in there's a lot of
latitude with how the sum of six
hundred million dollars for
example could be used then
there's also there's often times
debate right about which
projects around the state you
know become major priorities
based on a number of factors
from economic development to
safety so we typically will
happen is or historically would
have been a section I'm would
list projects that the funding
may be used for providing some
latitude and then the agency
would prioritize them and in
some instances not all of the
projects would be would would be
ill are funded so that's correct
that we understand that that by
pass on New Mexico for was
including one of the projects I
believe what the agency did was
they submitted a federal grant
for that project which we we
weren't able to receive and so
what we're working on now is a
strategy so if we do submit for
another grant for that project
is funding the difference
between the maximum award of
that grant and the total cost of
the project which is estimated
at.
Some of the eighty million
eighty million dollars.
Okay all right if you have a
side.
We could do that we're going to
get a better idea what's going
on with them okay we appreciate
that.
Senator till one.
Thank you Mr chair this.
Can go back to page for you shut
down to the airport.
Over you need to be a little bit
more quick center going.
The stuff.
Okay forget ten million dollars
for the unification
I.
Arresters are.
Let's say they won't win the
awards.
It
is is this for rest areas of.
What.
Mr chair Senator so yeah Mr
Stewart will talk a little bit
about that strategies it this is
separate appropriation for any
work that we're going to be
doing on rest areas specifically
for litter pick up and so we
were working a few angles of
course through contractor
support and and working with
our maintenance agreements are
staff for doing that pick up and
then certainly were
reintroducing a partnership with
with corrections of that so that
we can work that as well even as
recently as my discussions with
the association counties talking
to them about partnerships with
their correctional facilities to
help in that regard also but on
that Mr for the a talk a little
bit about you know how how we
hope to improve on on that
specifically thank you Secretary
Mr chair and senator Clemente we
did receive ten million last
year of our before we school we
called unification so we did is
we embarked on a major that are
pick up statewide unlike the
secretary mentioned we use our
own forces we developed a
statewide price agreement for of
contractors support home we saw
some other of contractors which
is just contract issues we for
just labor and we brought some
folks on board six per district
and we actually got some
additional boots on the ground
right we supported that and then
let the secretary mentioned we
are working with corrections to
include inmate labor clean up as
well so we have a lot of
band with if you want to come to
litter pick up we did slow down
obviously now during the winter
we want to have folks on the on
the side of the house were
cleaning store actually you know
you know trying to water through
snow or whatever the case may be
listen to spring heads we will
get back on the litter pick up
we're about we're a hundred
percent obviously programs over
two thirds encumbered or about
half we spent of the ten million
sort of we had a good summer we
had a good year of litter pick
up and beautification
so we're doing real good in that
area we also did receive in our
hospital to twenty million for
rest areas on one of the things
we did I think one of the things
that you all access to do is go
back and take a look.
Okay arresters in that if they
were functioning at a certain
level then maybe it's time to
tear him down and start all over
again and that's exactly we did
with the rattlesnake rest area
was which is just east of
Albuquerque headed towards
Moriarty all right miss wasn't
really you know poor it was in
disrepair so we do is we still
we developed an RFP we brought
on a obviously but.
Architect talking about but
construction because that is not
our forte obviously also we're
working through that process
revisions both want east and
westbound brand you we're hoping
to work with tourism to bring
that New Mexico true I to that
to that facility we just
completed a brand new rest area
district to sort of because rest
areas we're really doing a lot
of that money you begin is not
really our forties we've been
working with a lot of
contractors in the political
world I'm so we're bringing a
lot of your commuter type
approach is really dividing low
flow toilets low flow faucets
paint we're really trying to do
a good job and cleaning them up
I mean they're not going to be
you know brand new
but they are going to be clean
and to maintain.
Us lots of looking at you know
if we don't support with the so
that's our goal we're working
towards it we've got a lot of
work but there's a lot more to
do to better investors for sure
center.
Thank thank you Mr thank you for
your.
Information.
The effect further explanation
of the ten million dollars so
are present.
The infrastructure bill is
signed in November of twenty one
by.
It was.
Shares of Tom and David and I
apologize there then and then
you all of kind of give you that
often used for or the funding
was going to go so we did
receive a ten million in the
kitchen cooks are present if so
construction bill was signed in
November twenty one yes the
American rescue gonna get over
two billion dollars from that.
Bill so how much.
Of that is in the pipeline.
Mr chair Senator I think I think
we may be talking about is the
bipartisan infrastructure law
that separate so you have the B.
I. L. so the art of funding was
essentially the federal Merican
rescue plan Act funding that
came on the hinges of the
economic downturn that bonding
came to the state and then the
legislature appropriate correct.
What's the status of the two
point three billion you get from
the.
Twenty one infrastructure bill.
From the Mr chair Senator the by
person infrastructure correct so
what essentially happens right
is and of course this was agree
schooling for me is every
administration of course
presents infrastructure funding
right in the bill that it calls
its own for this administration
it's the bipartisan
infrastructure right and so that
essentially sustains our federal
funding and so although it's
kind of commercialize right as
all new funding that would
present you know two point plus
billion of new funding for road
infrastructure it really is just
replacing the previous bill
under previous administrations
so what we anticipate in terms
of overall funding in the
upcoming year relative to last
as a two percent increase to our
federal funding.
Yeah you're right half of that.
Have for that the.
Twenty one and your bill was
just a reappropriation crackles
I really have a trillion dollars
in new money the other half was
pre authorization of things
thank you thank you.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Senator are you Mr chair I just
I think the New Mexico
department of transportation for
the work you helped us with the
lots of damages to state roads
that happened as an effect of
the wildfires of Monaco and you
stepped in to help those of us
in rural northern New Mexico so
thank you so much for that and
then just one last comment Mr
Chairman is all the working with
Jerry Valdez I reached out to
him and with Rick by the there's
a number of New Mexicans who
don't understand the amount of
work it takes to keep motorists
safe during inclement weather.
And so what I did is I reached
out to Ricky and I asked if I
could volunteer to work with and
M. D. O. T. for one evening to
do an overnight shift on on
ensuring that roads are kept
maintained and kept clean from
snow and ice and they've agreed
to allow me to come along with
that so I'll be doing a ride
along with them during the next
door which might be this week
and so I'm excited to sign the
waiver and I'm gonna be doing
Facebook live posts on showing
the NM DOT employees do a lot of
them live in my district to give
the respect they deserve on what
they do to keep all of us safe
so I challenge each of you to go
into your district and work with
Adam D. O. T. and volunteer to
be an employee for the day and
so be careful Senator where they
just might be asked to leave the
Senate and join the and M. D. O.
T. as a permanent employee.
Thank you Mr chair and you
should be paid.
And I will say that Mr chair
that the thirty five page of
waiver of liability is you know
it through so here we look for.
That are just asked me to review
that so we've got.
So this is.
Is to thank you for thank you Mr
chairman Mr Secretary you know
the race is a really good
question about safety on the
roads during inclement weather
and I'm one of those that I
always look at the the campus
before I get out.
There's a store and their
cameras everywhere except in
southeast New Mexico we have no
cameras where I didn't really or
any of Chavis county in one area
that I think it would be really
helpful would be either the
Tatum area if you're heading
from taken to Rossell there's
always a lot of weather in that
area whether it's a yes or
whether it's at like today they
just a thought I don't have
expensive they are but she would
be helpful to have just
something down there from where
we're getting on the road and
that anyway I think you all of
you know talking about to the
point of entry and and we don't
have a rest area it's just a
portable trained coming in from
seminal and they have really
kept that clean and I've I
called once and I said if you
don't take care of those weeds
I'm not going to stop.
And they did and they can just
separates it looks really nice
as you come in from from the
sets the first thing you say
seven project that they're
keeping up with that so that's
what we.
Right.
Great.
Okay yeah and I want to thank
the O. T. for the replacement of
the bridge by hema springs and
you know how we for its and a
construction over last few years
and for the complete notes much
cleaner term the folks you know
we got a lot of traffic this
summer and that the family came
as mount areas and I think that
also is part of the hi we
bypassed.
We talk about traffic safety in
this particular case we're
talking about community safety
because the road goes right to
the heart of our village and.
And I I just can't believe the
amount of traffic you know over
the last few years now that
we're really trying to promote
outdoor program and a miss Mount
Airy is.
No Albuquerque Rio Rancho
specter playground and system of
traffic that that we see of two
of you know of so we need to
really working to bypass to get
that successful community safety
so that we need to school around
we're about you know a lot of
things that we're worried about
right now either been damaged we
in fact this past few years you
know folks we have in the I
think our tribal police officers
stopped and phone that this guy
was a felon and start a run to
the election and it is just
these things that we never
really had to counter in our
county and safety of our kids if
you are children used to explain
our bill is now things you know
we have to think about things
and so forth so but I appreciate
all the work that the anti does
the show will do just want to
get passengers you can just be a
of you know hang around the mill
rate around the usual and start
shows.
I
hope you enjoy the.
Let me know.
Thank you all so thank thank you
secretary thank you for all your
staff that you do one for job
George with the government
relations tribal relations
appreciate all the work that
you're doing on behalf of the
tribes as well so there's a lot
and and rules are very important
and so I I think as we talk
about economic development you
know new opportunities
you know this leveraging the
resources that we've got to make
sure that this that our people
and our visitors are safe on the
road to the Pacific school so
again appreciate securing all
your stuff I believe this it for
a committee today unless of
social workers for Thursday
training I'm not sure if you're
aware of this two o'clock
Thursday afternoon so
either side.
We we did the tough discussed
that I did send a email to
sergeant at arms telling her
that we already had our one
thirty meeting scheduled for
Thursday I have not gotten a
response I put this agenda out
yesterday before we got the
email that I just.
Sure I think we may be common in
at one thirty and taking a
little break in the coming on
the backside because this is the
training that passed.
Away.
It's one of those things that.
We can talk I just want to lag
that issue okay well you know
yeah we're deceptively weird if
we get done on the floor session
sooner that we make it started
to loosen and then ride.
Also I work around for earlier
rounds comes right out of the
deal with that so we'll make it
work one of the things that
issues okay I think.
This is to say so so the
committee will be meeting on
Tuesdays and Thursdays.
You know so that were received
two thirds.
