Senator Lopez is excused,
Senator Sanchez
Senator Smitty's
Excused, Senator Tallman.
Senator Wirth is excuse Senator
Hamblin Senator Shindo
have six present for a quorum.
Great. Alright. Welcome to get
started. Uh,
Mhm.
But
All right, Bill 114.
Senator Tollman.
Attention.
Go ahead, Senator Good
afternoon, chairman and members
of the committee.
Senate bills.
4114. It can be explained in one
set, which is for those
employees.
Who do not participate in Social
Security.
And therefore do not qualify for
Social Security payments.
Their retirement income from
public employee
Employer pensions, eggs.
Examples from
Personal income tax, So I have
people that have come to me.
We do not receive
Social Security.
But they do receive a public
pension.
Most of the people I've talked
to her teachers.
And so they
You wanted me to run a bill that
would exempt
There.
Pension.
Public pension from
First someone come tax and I do
have an exemption Do have an
amendment.
That was
Recommended by the attorney
general.
That should be before you.
That
Amendment is that it would
include
Public employments and the
federal government, a state
public subdivision of a state or
instrumentality of a state.
Or a political subdivision of a
state.
That was the attorney general's
recommendations.
But
Are distinguished
No drafters.
Simplified it.
Bye.
The amendment that you have
before us, which is just as you
can see on Page two line 23
After is insert the federal
government or
So that's simply includes
The federal government because,
according to the attorney
general, there was a
There was a Supreme Court.
Decision. That is why there are
recommending that we, uh
Approved this amendment.
Okay. Alrighty. Thank you,
Senator. I'm gonna have, uh, my
vice chair. Um
Move the amendment.
So so.
And you know, on the on Senate
Bill 114 but move for discussion
of the amendment.
You were just doing the We're
not doing it in the amendment
amendment for discussions,
Moving Amendment just move the
amendment. The amendment. Thank
you. All right. Thank you. Check
it after the second thing minute
motion to move the amendment
Second Senator Gregg's any
opposition to the motion?
You know?
Okay, Senator. So is that it on
the explanation?
Oh, since you asked, I had one
more thing.
That is
Uh, according to the
Ls.
See
Or somebody in state government
is this would cost about two.
Yeah.
Mr Chairman,
I think I think the bill without
the amendment calls for
Amendment Kash to show it's a
total of ship. You're right.
That's what I meant. Thank you
for that correction.
Great. Okay. All right, so
We'll go to the audience.
Anybody here in support of
Senate Bill 114.
Gentlemen, come up and take the
mic.
Uh, we stand in solidarity with
our, uh, support.
Thank you.
Anybody in opposition.
Everybody even
Okay, thank you. So we'll go to
committee for questions.
72 Greeks.
Mr Chairman, I moved to pass.
Second
Most important pass by Senator
Gregg, second by Senator Hamlin.
It's called the Road
Brown. Excuse
Senator Gregg's Yes.
Senator had Emilio.
Excused.
Senator Lopez. Yes, Senator
Sanchez? Yes, Senator Smitty's
is excused.
Senator Tallman.
Yes, Senator Wirth is excused,
Senator Hamblin.
Senator Shindo Yes.
We have six yeses past editor 60
0. So thank you, Mr Chairman.
Thank you. Members of the
committee Q Center Bill 1 79 7
for Hickey.
They are.
Go ahead, Senator.
Thank you, Mr Chair and
Committee. I'm coming before you
today to bring a bill that we
brought last year. Didn't make
it through the session. But as I
recall, it was
Passed unanimously. Uh
This is a bill that's called
Life and Health Insurance
Guarantee Act changes.
And the bill essentially pause
HMOs into the guarantee fund and
they would have to pay into it.
Um, previously HMOs when when
this bill was crafted, uh, a
number of years ago were left
out. Um, And a few years ago,
there actually was an H. M O,
who had a cyber attack on their
bank account lost all their
money. They were, uh
Going out of business and a lot
of physicians and hospitals
ended up not being paid, and
it's unfortunate that that they
were not other HMOs in the find
that at that time, But this bill
essentially goes towards that
and then looking at the whole
actor, a number of cleanup
changes that need to be made and
I'll just read the introduction
here, too, and then I'm going to
pass it over to
My expert witness, Mike Batt,
who runs the fund. Um the
protects like the act protects
life and health insurance
policyholders if the insurer
becomes insolvent, expands
membership into HMOs. As I said,
uh, changes the method for
assessing long term care
insurance solvency is increases
the number of directors
ADDS rate, increase Your powers
and repeals an H. M o section
regarding replacement coverage
for insolvency, and that is
essentially the bill and I'll
ask my expert witness if he
wants to add any other brief.
Mr Chairman, Um, our our
association with introduce
yourself just for the record
books are listening. Appreciate
Thank you.
Mr Chairman. My name is Mike
that I'm the administrator for
the New Mexico Life Insurance
Guarantee Association.
Um, our association was
Formed as a result of an act of
the legislature that initially
was passed in 1975.
Um, that act was based on a
model law that was developed by
the National Association of
Insurance Commissioners.
And, uh, since that time
The National Association of
Insurance Commissioners has
modified and updated that
statute or that model act.
A number of times.
The last time we amended our
Life and Health Insurance
Guarantee Association was in
2000 and
This. This bill? That's before
you brings it up to current
standards, and it'll be
consistent with the guarantee
Association laws of the other
states. 41 states have adopted
the most recent changes to the
law, and we're one of the
stragglers and we need to get up
today. When will you know I
would assist the committee?
Thank you. Anybody here
supportive Senate Bill 179.
Okay, folks, if you guys can
And up to testify.
Mr Chairman, Members of the
committee
read more. I'm a registered
labor of this bill, and I will
tell you this bill is a good
thing because what it does in
case of an insolvency of a
company. The other companies get
together and cover the
commitments that this bill
expands the reach of who is
included with you.
This year again. As Mr Moore
stated, this is a very important
consumers are pleased to be able
to participate in
Thank you. Thank you.
Anybody online turned it off.
Anybody in opposition of Senate
Bill 179.
Opposition online. Okay, well to
the committee, any questions
from many members, Senator
Lopez. Thank you. Mr Chairman.
This is just a comment. Um, we
talk about long or was it long
term health insurance life
insurance anyway, Mr Chairs as
some of us are growing older.
Um this really becomes very
relevant and then having to deal
with family members, um
This is just
This is the right thing to do.
We know we did last year, but it
just, um I think comes more into
focus. As personally as I'm
dealing with some more folks who
are of losing some money that
they've
You know, invested in supposedly
take care of themselves. So
It's just a new world. Thank
you.
Anybody else. Motion for Do pass
by Senator Hamlin, second by
Senator Sanchez
It's called Roe.
Senator Brandt excused Senator
Gregg's Yes, Senator had a meal,
Senator Lopez. Yes, Senator
Sanchez.
Senator Schmid's is excused.
Senator Tallman.
Is excused Senator Worth
Sweet Senator Hamblin.
Senator Sando. Yes, we have six.
Yes.
Thank you fast. If you can
remain there, we'll go jump
right into Senate Bill 72 tricky
You thank you. Mr Chair and
Committee. I presented this bill
to you about 10 days ago,
Essentially, what this bill does
is put a tax and wholesale cost.
For e cigarettes, E liquids and
at 44% and a, um 50 Cent tax on
cartridges. I won't go through
all the reasons why the dramatic
increase in babying Vaping
leading to cigarettes,
cigarettes and vaping leading to
other addictions, etcetera,
etcetera, but very significant
bill.
And what we know from other
states, particularly having
studied the decrease in smoking
in youth is that the higher the
cost to hire the tax, the less
uptake by youth, and we really
do want to keep use from
starting Vaping it. It's a very
young age where they don't have
all of their judgment, but it's
a pretty cool thing to do. Um,
nicotine teaches them to
It teaches them to use an
external substance for stress
reduction as well as to kind of
be in what have you but again as
I mentioned last time, it can
expand the craving pathways. And
so that's the rationale. Uh,
there are other nicotine
products out there they were in
last year's bill.
But to really not complicated
and just really focus on Vaping,
we're just doing the Vaping
What's new here today? Mr
Chairman is the distribution of
the revenues and, um you can
find that and just starting on
the first page of the bill, it
might sound a little confusing
but essentially what it does is
the following. It's estimated
that there will be 30.
This isn't a substitute bill,
right? Um
Yes, sir. I'm sorry. I forgot
to okay. So do not need to take
a motion to do not pass.
Thank you for it. No, no, you go
ahead for discussion purposes at
the moment.
Alright. Alright. Okay. Good.
Alright, so go ahead and explain
what's in the substitute.
Thank you, Mr Chair. This
substitute the substitute deals
with the distribution of funds
the first year 50% of that $13.2
million would go to the fund as
described later in the bills,
The Department of Health in
COMBINATION with H H E, D and P
E D to do campaigns for
prevention and education.
For ages, 25 and under, um, of
the other 50% will go to the
General fund and that
significant and the reason is
that the Department of Health
and the other departments have
already had some pretty
significant difficulty in
spending money. They do have
their slowly getting it
straightened out. But it was
thought rather than just kind of
have the money end up sitting
there Remainder for the first
year should go.
To the General fund for other
potential purposes. In the
second year, there will be about
14 plus million dollars that
year. 80% would go to the fund.
Uh
And the rest would go to the
state and the third year which
would be about $16 million.
Excuse me.
Hopefully, I have said millions
would go to the fund completely.
But then after that, um the fund
that I think I presented to you,
Uh, Tobacco fund is not a
reserve that will be generating
substantially more interested by
that time with the way that fund
works when the interest and
earnings
Outpaced the contribution by the
tobacco companies there should
hopefully be sufficient money to
cover this and so from then on
this tax going up to roughly $20
million would simply guarded.
Thank you, Um
You know, we we had they and we
both had think opposition and
proponents speak on this 110
days ago, so we won't do that
again, so we'll just go ahead if
there are any other additional
questions from the committee
members.
On Senate Bill 72.
Senator Lopez.
Mr Chairman. Just want to say
thank you. Dear Senator Hickey
for carrying this. This is a
discussion that we've had for
many years on the
Tobacco oversight. Tobacco
revenue over Thank you, Senator.
Thank you.
Any other questions. Members of
the committee None Pleasure, Mr
Kass. Motion for Do pass by
Senator Lopez second by Senator
Hearty Meal.
Called the road
Senator Brandt excused, Senator
Griggs. No.
Senator had a meal.
Senator Lopez. Yes, Senator
Sanchez.
Senator Schmitt is
No. Explain my boat.
Senator Tommen.
Senator worth
Yes, Senator Hamblin? Yes.
Senator Shindo Yes.
We have six yeses and three nose
for a do pass. Thank you,
Senator. Swedish. Explain your
vote. Thank you, Mr Chair, Sam
Reasons we discussed this last
time. I just find this and then
we have different opinion.
That's fine, very supportive of
the other reserve fund. Bill.
Absolutely.
I'd rather just ban Vaping, but
I find this to be a regressive
tax. That is against the poor.
Um
And you know that's that's my my
biggest problem with it. Thank
you.
Thank you to pass.
6 to 3. Thank you.
Hmm.
Seriously. Ones always is here.
I don't see him.
Senator Stein born, uh
Senator Hamlin to 36.
Mr Chair and Committee. Thank
you so much. Senate Bill 236 is
a fix.
Two Senate Bill 251 from last
year If I can just give you a
brief summary about what Senate
Bill 251 was
That enabled local jurisdictions
to collect up to 75% of the
incremental city, county and
state property and gross revenue
taxes for an entire metropolitan
redevelopment area for 20 years.
This was the bill that passed
the Senate with unanimous 42 to
0 votes. Senator Brandt and
former Senator Cornyn were co
sponsors of this bill. Uh, they
were very excited about it, and
it was some great conversations
on the floor.
The reason why we are bringing
this fixed today is because when
tax and revenue and we do have
representatives from text and
reference revenue, including the
secretary when they attempted to
implement the MRA from last
year, they brought attention
that we actually need to gather
a year's worth of G R T in order
to assess that amount.
And so this is putting that into
statute, and so this change will
fix those concerns, allow tax
and revenue to implement the
requirements of the original
bill, and I'll talk quickly
about how this bill will help
address the problem. What it
does is it clarifies that cities
that are working on MREs to on
those projects that they can
identify Emre boundaries and
just a reminder
Municipalities. What they do is
they put out a survey they have
community talks, community
conversations.
An example in Las Cruces. We
have L. Paseo Boulevard, which
is an area that has been deemed
experiencing blight.
So many of our communities have
those areas of streets that are
really shop and go not shop and
stop.
And so on El Paseo, the city
Economic Development Department
established that area as an M.
Razon. Then they have
conversations with not only the
business owners, but the
residents and people who go
there to find out what they want
to do to improve that area.
With those improvements that 75%
of the incremental city, county
and state property and gross
revenue taxes go back in for
economic development for that
area.
So this is keeping money local.
This is letting the local folks
decide how they use that money
to make those improvements. And
we know that every community in
new Mexico is different. Their
needs are different. What this
does is this gives local control
to that that economic
advancement and so it clarifies
that those cities that are
working on Maheras that they can
identify those boundaries and
then notify tax and revenue.
Allows tax and revenue to set up
a supporting code. And that was
the big challenge was having
that code because each community
is different and in order for
them to make sure that they can
gather that one year data. They
have to have those codes in
place. Um, and then they can
collect that for 12 months to
determine the G R T payments in
the area.
And then once they determine the
baseline grt, they can start
collecting and distributing the
grt increment dedicated to the
MRA. And then finally, it
clarifies how tax and revenue is
supposed to distribute the money
to local government. The thing
that is a comfort for me
As although that we're working
on moving this one year down the
road is that local entities can
already start gathering the
local taxes to start on those
because, as I expressed with the
secretary, we have two projects
ready to go, and so we want to
start moving on those. So that's
the conversation that we've been
able to have with tax and
revenue and we're very excited
about being able to move
forward.
I do have Larry Haran, who is
the person who's been helping me
with this project. We worked on
this last year and then also we
have Secretary Chardon Clark, if
you need to ask any questions
and for that, But I, um I'm I'm
ready for questions.
Thank you. Mr Chairman. Also, I
would say is is the language in
this for the fix? We worked in
conjunction with tax and rev So
we appreciate their help in
coming up with the fixed So it
work. And so this really is a
technical cleanup. Thank you.
Already so we'll go out to the
audience. Anybody here? Support
of Senate Bill 236.
Let's go.
I don't I don't believe the mic
is on.
The word show up on the screen,
and it's on.
That's your script, Read it
verbatim.
Uh, district. There it is, and
we very much support the bill.
We support this fix, and we
appreciate the senator and the
secretary for working together.
Thank you. Thank you. Okay.
Anybody in opposition of Center
Bill to 36.
Great. Okay, we'll go to the
committee for questions.
Committee members know
Mr Chairman, Pleasure to pass
before do pass by Senator Lopez
second by Senator Arthur Meal.
He's called Roe.
Senator Brandt excused Senator
Gregg's Yes, Senator. How do you
feel? Senator Lopez? Yes,
Senator Sanchez.
Senator Smitty's
Senator Tallman.
Senator Worth? Yes, Senator
Hamblin.
Senator sh Endo.
Yes, we have nine yeses in zero
knows for do Pass pass. Thank
you, Mr Chair. Thank you.
Committee.
Sitcom.
Oh,
Thank you, Mr Chair and members
of the
Distinguished committee.
This is a memorial.
Two.
Urge Congress to pass
HR.
4052
To create the National
infrastructure Bank, which will
go a long ways.
In upgrading United States
infrastructure.
Um
We used to be the envy of the
world 30 40 50 years ago.
No longer true. We fallen way
behind the rest of the night's
rest of the world.
In our infrastructure. I've been
to China twice. Last 20 years
I've been to Europe.
They come back, United States
looks like a third world country
if we can't move goods and
People faster. We're not going
to be competitive.
Um in the world.
In Europe. They spend 5% of
their GMP on
Infrastructure. China spends 8%
United States spends 2.5
In other words, CHINA Spence
Three times more United States
and Europe. Spence
Uh, twice as much.
And I was in the last time I was
in China was almost 1520 years
ago, they were just beginning.
To build high speed rail Now
they've got 25,000 miles of high
speed rail. Europe's got 15,000
miles of high speed rail. We got
We got nothing.
So
The 30% of the roads.
In the United States are
designated as in pork.
Condition.
Some of you may remember it. The
Biden
Infrastructure bill that was he
signed and November 21.
And there were 13 categories.
major categories in that bill.
New Mexico is only getting, um
Money in about five or six of
those categories. One of the
major categories is high speed
rail.
I've seen a map where the first
high speed rail, western
Mississippi would go through New
Mexico.
We're getting no money for high
speed rail.
Estimates range from 2 to $3
billion in order to provide
broadband for everybody in New
Mexico.
And we're only getting on 20th
1/30 of what we need.
You know, every once in a while
you're reading the paper is New
Mexico is getting a $1 million
grant from the Feds for
Broadband. That's just a
trickle.
Of what we need.
Water infrastructure. Some of
you remember that the state
engineer quit.
And December 22. Nd publicly
stated he didn't have the money
that he needed in order to do
the job for water
infrastructure.
At that time, he claimed. We
need $2 billion for water
infrastructure.
And we're only getting 350
million.
Then the infrastructure Bill 16.
Of what we need.
Electric grid. We have the
second sunny estate, the fifth
windiest state. We're getting
zero.
For electric grid. My friend on
the left can talk a little bit
more about that. And, um
Interestingly enough, 74 cents
of every dollar we're getting is
gonna go for roads and bridges.
You can make a good argument
that that's not our greatest
need.
So I asked my good friend, the
lobbyists in Washington who was
very, very knowledgeable about I
said, Why is that? He says
That's because the auto
manufacturers and the highway
contractors have an inordinate
amount of influence.
So the beauty of this program
thing if you don't remember
anything about what I said
today.
Please remember that this
program which would believe it
or not?
Was first used by Alexander
Hamilton's after the
Revolutionary War to reconstruct
America.
And this program has no
We'll create no debt will not
create any new taxes.
And, uh,
Have a expert
Online who was associated with
the International Monetary Fund.
We can go in a little more
detail on that.
So what? What one sentence or
less You monetize.
Of Treasury bonds.
And then they send us
Money out as low cost loans.
So that's one of the best
examples of how we
How this works. The Tennessee
Valley Authority
Under the new deal, you know it
was just large swaths of America
that they weren't didn't have
electricity. So they
Appalachian.
Received electricity and the
thirties.
And it was a tremendous economic
boom and they were able to pay
back this debt within a few
years.
I have a list here from the New
Mexico Chamber of Commerce
listening
The 10 most important issues
that site selectors look at
number one is infrastructure.
Incidentally, Number two is
skilled labor number three is
high labor costs Number four is
quality of life like education.
number five is construction
costs and you get you have to
get all the way down to number
six before they talk about
taxes.
It was five more things that are
a lot more important.
Other than taxes, infrastructure
being number one.
So
Um
And about half the states now
have passed similar resolutions
that you have before you.
Today.
And, um
There's a handout that I
Also as mentioned in the
memorial that all the
organizations national
organizations throughout the
country that have
Endorse this bills, and I'd like
to turn it over to my good
friend, Mark Strand.
Who will introduce himself.
Thank you. Thank you, Chairman.
Thank you. Senators for having
me my name is Mark Strand.
Sorry.
I am a journeyman lineman that
have worked on the power grid
for 30 years. Is it still too
loud? Sorry. Is that better? A
little bit.
Thank you guys.
Ah, sorry, Joshua.
I have worked on the power grid
for their over 30 years Now I've
done everything from street
lights all the way up to bare
handing 5000 votes. There is no
experience like it when you get
up on top of that wire in a
stainless steel suit and grab
ahold of it. It is something
that you just have got to
experience once in your life. It
is an amazing view. The reason
I'm support of this bill is this
is one way we have
To fund our power grid. The load
that we are looking at putting
on our power grid is just
tremendous support. Green
energy. I think it is amazing
advancement. I look at the new
vehicles coming out. I look at
the way we're the future is
headed.
And the one thing we've got to
be careful with is we've got to
make sure that grid follows it.
We've got to make sure that the
supply is there that we can beef
it up and get it to where it
needs to go. This is a way to
get those resources out there on
that grid and that he can handle
the load that we are expecting
it to do in the future, And that
is the main reason I am
supporting this.
The other thing is in my field.
We don't get a second chance.
You make a mistake. Your life is
over.
This promotes apprenticeships to
where we can actually have the
proper training and everything
else to know that we're doing
our job safely.
And this promotes that that is
so important in my field.
It is.
We don't get a second chance.
The other thing it does is it
promotes by America.
Everything that we do. We need
to make sure that our dollars
stay right here at home that we
support our workers and that we
support our livelihood, and that
is the other thing that really
supports. So thank you so much.
I know.
Thank you.
So this time we'll go out to the
audience.
Anybody here in support of
Senate Joint Memorial number one
Anybody online?
Okay?
Okay?
Alrighty. So this time we got to
the audience anybody here in
opposition to the joint Memorial
number one
Oh, was it on questions? What
was that?
Okay, so all right, go ahead.
Thank you, Mr Chairman, Members
of the committee Carter Bundy
with asked me, um
We do think the senator for
focusing on infrastructure We do
need infrastructure.
Unfortunately, this bill not
only allows for but actually
gives preference for public
private partnerships That is at
um section 205 d one J. And I
want to read explicitly from it,
because, um
There was some contention about
whether this is actually in the
bill in the previous committee.
In cases where infrastructure is
publicly or privately owned, a
preference for projects that
leverage federal state, local
and private financing.
And, of course, remember
The whole point of this is that
the federal government isn't
funding this stuff right now, So
that's really not what this is
about, Um, the leverage private
financing, including public
private partnerships or were
companies can show that
additional capital could not be
obtained from commercial
sources.
We absolutely want
More people working. We
absolutely want modernization of
our infrastructure. There are
hundreds of billions of dollars
in hedge funds and Wall Street
waiting to acquire
Or established 75, or 99 year
leases on public infrastructure.
That means our what do utilities
or sewer and wastewater
utilities are? Roads are parking
And Mr Chairman, if I may just
quickly give you one example.
But there are a lot of these,
and I think I've emailed most of
them to the entire committee.
Um, the city of Chicago.
With as sophisticated lawyers as
there are in this country.
I was approached by a Morgan
Stanley consortium. Morgan
Stanley, the investment bank in
New York City.
I was approached by a consortium
and said, Hey, we know that
you're struggling with your
parking. We know you need
revenue.
We will pay you $2 billion
For a 75 year lease of your
36,000 parking meters.
$2 billion a lot of money, even
for a big place like Chicago. So
Chicago said, sure.
Chicago's attorneys as bright as
they were.
Didn't catch that every time
they have a parade or a street
festival, and those of you have
been lucky enough to be in
Chicago in the summer. Know that
there are 20 or 30 of them every
single weekend.
City of Chicago has already to
check to Morgan Stanley.
For the lost revenue for those
meters.
Every single handicapped spot.
City of Chicago. Rates check to
Morgan Stanley every month for
that lost me to revenue.
They made back their money in
the 1st 10 years, and now it's a
75 year lease.
We absolutely need to improve
our infrastructure and one of
the things I'm hopeful about,
and I shared with you and with
Senator Tollman and with his
expert, the possibility of doing
an amendment.
That would urge Congress to
support infrastructure but not
list a specific bill because
this is a central part of this
bill that it not only allows,
but encourages.
These big dollar entities to
take over our public
infrastructure. We would love to
see something because we have so
much shared common ground here.
That urges Congress to support
infrastructure.
Without listening this specific
bill, which has this, we think
deeply fatal flaw, So I hope
that that will be something that
gets considered. Um we do
support infrastructure, but with
that we urge your opposition
unless and until we can have
that kind of amendment, Thank
you.
Thank you.
Excuse me.
Thank you, Mr Chairman,
Committee members. My name is
Douglas. Mikel John. I'm a
registered lobbyist for
conservation voters. New Mexico,
Uh, like eco, um what Carter
Bundy said about section 205 P
building his pending in Congress
that this memorial would
Ah support and CART conservation
voters. Uh, specific concern
relates to the ability of
members of the public to
participate in decision making
about facilities that affect
them, like sewage treatment
plants, water treatment plants,
other, um
Plants that have a direct impact
on the residents of communities
where they're located. If those
types of facilities are owned
and operated by the public, um
public government, then members
of the public can find out
what's going on with those
facilities.
Through means such as the Open
meetings Act, the inspection of
Public Records Act and
ultimately through elections
because they can elect the
people who oversee those plants.
If those plants are in private
hands, the ability of the public
to participate and to influence
what's happening at those
plants.
Doesn't exist.
And for that reason with do
respect to the sponsor. We heard
you to vote. Uh, not to pass
this this particular memorial.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Nelson oppositional.
Alright, um, go to committee for
questions.
Sure.
Both red and blue.
Obvious that one on those
grounds
Anybody who knows me knows that
needed
Infrastructure. Congress is
going to pass
away Congress and increase taxes
to the tune of trillions of
dollars.
Experts are telling us that we
need the
By a trillion dollars for what
we need.
So we participated in the
writing of the expert distinct
President. We have her on,
please. We'll go ahead sometime.
Okay, go ahead.
You can specifically addressed
the whole public private
partnership. That would be
great.
I believe you're muted. I don't
know if it's on your end or
through here.
Me too. Um
Uh, man, we do Want to make sure
that your points get heard, but
we are having some audio issues,
apparently on our end because we
are seeing
You what you are seeing on your
end, but it's not coming through
volume wise.
So if you'd like.
I can read what you say, because
I can see the words up on the
screen.
Do you? Do You prefer particular
accent
or
It's entirely up to you.
Okay? No, no accent.
Alright if you'd like to. Yes,
Wait. I think we got you now.
Okay. Okay. Oh, great. Thank
you. I just want to reiterate
that this bill is the only way
to get infrastructure into New
Mexico. It's the only way I
tracked budgets for a living.
Uh, what I've looked at at the
with the federal budget is they
will never increase the spending
to bring all these projects in
that New Mexico co needs that is
enhancement of your grid. New
water supplies? Uh, schools,
hospitals.
Roads, bridges, all of those
things which the state needs
this budget, this national
infrastructure bank works off
budget tops up and finances in a
big way. Everything that new
Mexico needs and it will not be
done by any other means now as
to the question of public
private partnerships, we are
working earnestly to change the
language in the bill to ensure
and prohibit that no loans from
the N I B will give given to any
project.
Act that privatizes public
infrastructure that includes
roads, no toll roads that
includes, um any publicly owned
water utilities. That kind of
thing we know we and and we
agree with the negative impacts
when public infrastructure which
is a monopoly, is privatized by
the private sector, and even you
have problems in the freight
rail industry as well for that
reason, so that part of the bill
will absolutely be changed in
the next mark up.
And, uh, what I would point out
to you is that this is the only
game in town to get much needed.
Infrastructure and to New
Mexico. Thank you very much.
Thank you.
Okay. Alright questions from the
committee senator words. So I
guess the question is Senator
Tom and expert basically just
acknowledge that
Federal bill. Do you disagree
with that? It sounds like
there's a language in there that
she's trying to change.
Okay, So here's the question, do
you? I mean,
I'm trying to see if there's a
way to fix this.
Ah, and I'm I'm curious. Let me
just let me just propose
something. I mean, if we took
out the references to the
specific bill
In other words, the references
to H H R. 504052. In other
words.
Just type of that tickly. I'll
do the title and then you could
You could take this out if you
in the tight at the title
symptoms that urging the United
States to create a national
infrastructure bank to finance
urgently needed infrastructure
products projects.
And then and then in the bill
itself if you took out on page
three line, 21 if you took out
that paragraph
The paragraph at the top of Page
four on line one.
So, basically what you're asking
in the memorial is that that
The Congress create a national
infrastructure bank to finance
Needed infrastructure projects
without being specific about a
bill that's not in front of us
that obviously is creating some
issues.
Because it's got the public
private.
Inside of it.
Well, I just want to see if
that's something you're willing
to do it. I don't know. Let me
ask this, Uh did Did Mr Bundy
give you any suggested language?
Okay?
So so I guess. Let me let me let
me just ask this to Mr Carter
Still here. Okay, Um
Because it just seems to me if
you took out the specific
reference to this bill, you
accomplished what you're trying
to accomplish without getting
down this
Down this kind of wormhole.
I'm willing to. So I'm willing
to walk through it if you're
interested in considering it.
So So here's what I would
suggest we do. Uh yeah.
Keep keeping a piece of paper
out here on
Page one.
Line 11 into Oh, yes. Sorry, So
Okay?
Starting, just delete.
Uh, to pass our 4052 comma.
The
And if you may be the best thing
we should do. You've got the
bill right there and then and in
line 12 Delete National
Infrastructure Bank Act.
Commerce. So what it would say
is
A joint memorial, urging the
United States to create a
national infrastructure bank to
finance urgently needed
infrastructure projects.
United States Congress correct
so that that would fix the title
page three line 21, I would
delete that lines. 21 through 25
Just delete that, whereas clause
On Page four. Line one through
three. Just delete that, whereas
clause
And then on Page five, line
three.
Delete.
All on line three.
So it read now, therefore be it
resolved by the Legislature, the
United States, Mexico, the
United States Congress be urged
to create a national
infrastructure so again that
that that would be a way to it
wouldn't specifically referenced
federal piece of legislation
that apparently has language is
problematic.
But you may not want to do that,
and that's fine.
I'm not get too close center.
Peter Worse. I appreciate your
your
You're suggesting in this one
part of the issue was is this
infrastructure bank clearly lays
out stuff that is important to
us. Like the apprenticeship
program it has in there that it
promotes an apprenticeship
program it promotes by America.
It promotes all the things that
we stand behind. If you
eliminate that, then you're
looking at they might create a
different book bank.
That doesn't have that all in
there. Does that make sense? It
scares me to think that you
might create a bank that doesn't
do at least an apprenticeship
program to teach me how to go up
and work on those lines. If you
just promote people to go out
and work on the lines at the end
of the day, someone's gonna get
killed. 43 people in the stadium
in Mexico were killed last year
on the job.
And I don't want to see that
ever again. I want to make sure
that we move forward and that
people that are doing my job
have the right training.
And have the right knowledge
behind it, because if they don't
I don't wanna see the
consequences of that. Does that
make sense? Mr. Chairman? It
makes total sense. Thank you.
100% behind what you're saying
the problem is, the bill also
has language that creates P
threes.
And so I really have a problem
with that. I've always voted
against those P three bills.
It's of super slippery slope.
And so what's happened is you've
got a whole bunch of good things
that you like. And then there's
some things in the federal
legislation. You don't like.
And so it's putting us in a
place where I mean, I'll tell
you if I have to vote on this.
I'm not going to support it.
Because of that issue.
But I think I could support it.
But then it wouldn't have the
specific reference and you're
right that would be paid
basically in the converse to go
create the national
infrastructure bank, and they're
gonna do what Congress does.
They're going to debate all
those issues. Whatever they put
in there, so it I just I was
throwing this out and Senator
Tom and you can decide what you
want to do.
It's the biggest decision to
make today.
I don't know.
And I'm happy to yield any other
members. Yeah, there's meetings.
I would urge just I know we
can't change what the House
resolution is, but I think on a
national infrastructure bill,
it's gonna be pretty bipartisan,
you know, and just
realistically, it's not even if
it went through the Congress and
the right two years snippet it.
It was going to die in the
Senate if he doesn't have great
bipartisanship and
So just a note on that. I want
to know about the municipal bond
market. I mean, our cities
having trouble getting liquid
like liquidity Right now, it
seems like the municipal bond
market be pretty pretty good as
far as cities if they want to
fund a project. I'm sure there's
someone out there to fund it.
Well.
They aren't
So they said. They were way
behind. As I've said, we're
right.
Experts are saying we need $5
trillion
And
The only way
Cities in the states and
counties don't want to increase
their taxes and increase their
right there dead.
This is this is the perfect
solution.
So if they were
Answer your question. If they
wanted to do that would have
they would have done it by now.
Mm.
Well, I I think, Mr Sharon
Center. I guess I'm just not
Not convinced. I mean it's the
mechanism of which they funded.
It is I think that you're
exactly right. But I don't know
if it's the fact that they just
can't borrow money. I think
people would be willing to
borrow the money. I'm not saying
it's good or bad for the city.
I'm just saying a bank All the
bank is doing is it's gonna be a
little
What? Just be low cost.
Extremely low cost loans they
can't get. Now I see Mr Chair
Center. Okay. Thank you. I I get
you there. I just think the
other, I think problem that we
see in New Mexico with our
infrastructure. Yes, we would
like to say housing we want to,
like expand.
Housing infrastructure, But we
also have a lot of hard time
just maintaining our existing
infrastructure. And and that's
you. You mentioned the word
crumbling. Well, I want to think
about this in this way for to
have a good return from this
bank. It's going to get a good
return. If you're getting more
like newer expansion of
services, and they're going to
get
Municipalities gonna do better.
And then they're gonna be able
to pay that loan back with
interest right? But if it's just
to fix a crumbling
infrastructure and just kind of
get back to where they were, I'm
concerned that the cities will
not see the return on investment
and have trouble
Repaying those loans. If that's
really the state of the city's
if it's just to kind of help
them as they're as they're
treading water to just help them
maintain a lot of studies here
are insolvent in the United
States, and I just have some
concerns. And then finally and
and we are going to agree in
this we are because I love
infrastructure. I see that as
one of the primary functions of
Of government really?
Infrastructure and public
safety, So I've heard you talk a
lot about GDP, and I'm glad you
do because I don't think we talk
enough about our state GDP in
our national GDP in committees.
Um, But you mentioned that we're
not spending enough on G B. I
would like to spend more
national GDP on infrastructure.
I would like to spend more state
GDP on infrastructure if I had
it my way.
Um, but the you know
The piece of the pie.
Right. We get 100 100%.
And what's taking up a huge
piece of the pie, And I know you
know the answer to this because
you've talked about it quite a
bit. It's healthcare Healthcare
is the most rapidly expanding.
Uh, you know, GDP we spend the
highest in the world. I've
learned all this from you,
Senator Thomann. We have an
outlier. Seven. What 17% now.
What did you just do? Not 1919.
Thank you. You're I know you're
on top of this 19% highest in
the world.
That's our infrastructure right
there if we could bring that
down to like 11 10%
Then the rest of that, or at
least a big chunk of it could go
to infrastructure. So I'm I am.
Uh, I respectfully vote against
it, but I think
If we want to do better in
infrastructure.
We've got to become healthier as
a nation. We're very, very sick.
We're spending tons of money on
health care.
Instead of infrastructure, and I
think that's really one of the
root cause problems. Thank you.
When we have our
Qinghai authorities mixed up
during the Depression. They
didn't have any trouble paying
these loans back.
Think about it. The Senate's
even like I said the Tennessee
Valley Authority electrified all
the Appalachian. You can imagine
what
What? What it did for economic
development, and it
So you were able to actually pay
these loans back within a few
years because it was such a boom
their economy and created jobs
and and new taxes, Mr Chair
Center, But I think a lot of
that was new expansion. I mean,
I've one of my favorite places
in the world is Kings Canyon
National Park, and those trails
were built. I believe by the C
C. C. These are new new things.
But if our infrastructure is
crumbling, we're gonna and a lot
of this is going to go towards
kind of existing things or
tuning things up. I just once
again I just Where's the return
on the investment? I just I'm
not sure it's going to really go
that the financing
infrastructure, I think like I
said, I think that's why more of
our economic
Activity has to go toward this
and not necessarily just just
having a bank, but
Anyway. Talk about new things
High speed rail.
Can you imagine how valuable the
properties are going to be where
you build high speed stations?
Yeah, I like that, like the
electric electric could go
through the chair, Please, Mr
Chair.
They let you in the chair, Go to
the chair.
You guys want to have your own
debate in the hallway? You guys
can do that.
Mr. I'll enter that I and I'm so
far away. I'm like way on the
corner here, So I've got to turn
90 degrees and Mr Chair Center.
I like that. I do like that very
much. I noticed that you've been
sort of turning further left and
left every coming around coming
around, right? So, okay, so,
Senator
Is that question? Is that it?
Okay. All right, Senator Greeks.
Thank you, Mr Chair and and
sugar Tom and I I'm actually not
I don't know why we're doing
this.
I mean, we're just, uh
especially close. We could write
a letter.
From a committee that would say
the committee supports it.
They should joint memorial. I
suppose, saying that kids
because it really accomplishes
Congress is we've heard Won't go
from Senator Worth Congress is
going to do what Congress is
going to do.
Whatever whatever we do, and I
can see in this in this
memorial. Frankly, I can see you
go to go to page five. And you
could just say of
It is hereby resolve by the
Legislature of New Mexico that
we should
You know, support legislation to
create a national infrastructure
bank. I mean, all this other
stuff.
Is just stop. It's fluff. It
doesn't really do anything.
If you want to send a letter,
Senator, I think I know you
could send the letter
matter of fact
factor of five senators,
including myself that have sent
letters this week to Congress on
this issue, I guess.
MS Chair senator when I When I
look at this, and I don't know.
I mean, we're talking, we could
start bringing in P threes and
different things. And you know,
we've been in
We've been supportive, pretty
much of peace, re type
approaches to get some things
done. This is a unique approach
to me and I can I can look at it
as kind of magic money in some
ways and
But it ain't May. It may
genuinely be the slickest thing
that's ever that's over
happened But I don't know how
I don't really know how I'm
gonna gonna support
This memorial. I think you did
they personal, Mr. Chair and
center debate. Do they need
something from us or we just
doing it because we feel like
When it's the right thing for
the Legislature to do well, Mr
Chair and senator because it
depends on what you mean by the
word need
Um, they
Like I said, there's been about
roughly have to state
legislatures have, uh,
Enacted similar memorials in
some states. They call them
resolutions.
Um
Certainly would welcome the
The resolution, but obviously,
uh, whether we do this or not, I
guess isn't gonna make
The difference whether they
Go ahead with this or not.
But I certainly would certainly
welcome
Welcome the passage of this
memorial.
But to answer your question, I
guess it's not
It's not gonna be the defining
factor in whether or not this
Um, but it's not. It's not being
required by Congress. Congress
didn't No, You didn't say they
want something from everybody.
Mr Chair and Senator that's
correct.
Okay. Okay. Okay. Show show.
Thank you, Mr Chair, and thank
you. Thank you, Senator. I mean,
I know this thing can be a whole
lot shorter and a whole lot
different if foreign walk
through that, But I'm I'm not
ready to go.
Traction through it right now,
So thank you, Mr. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Griggs. I
guess the question Senator
Tallman is whether you want to
incorporate the amendments
suggested by Senator Worth and
it's
That's the case. Then I think,
uh,
Well that passes this committee.
Otherwise, I don't think it
would be unfriendly amendment.
I've been told not to change it.
I mean, we we don't
Okay. Don't pass resolutions
telling Congress to change make
them were telling them.
Although I am
100% confident.
That they are gonna end this
bill to make it more specific
regarding the tpp question.
Okay, Senator Hamlin.
Thank you, Mr Chair, and I think
you know I'll, uh and I feel
safe enough to to share with
just what's been discussed is
that we all get
That we need infrastructure. I
mean, there's that's just kind
of like, Oh, welcome to the
party because we've known this
for years. Um, you know, and I
think in terms of the
apprenticeship, strong supporter
of the future in terms of our
employment pool and our economic
development, and I can hear the
passion in your voice about
wanting to make sure people are
safe and I don't think there's
any disagreement on that.
Um I do have an issue with the
with the idea of the P three s,
and I think that that's going to
keep me from supporting it. But
I do like the idea that Senator
Griggs had I'm more than happy
to write a letter to Congress
and to our congressional
leaders saying, We want you to
do this, But make this amendment
because this is this is
problematic for, um are
different communities when we
have these P threes. Come in
These hedge funds come in, and
then we're locked out of those
for decades.
And I think that's what we're
all kind of a little worried
about is that we're losing local
control by something like Morgan
Stanley or something coming in
and and being a part of that
infrastructure bank
Um so I commit to you here
writing the letter on my
letterhead to Congresswoman
Ledger Fernandez Congressman
Vasquez any of our senators to
move on this? But with that
stipulation of removing that
information from the original
bill that is in Congress. So, Mr
Chair and Senator, I can
Sure my letter with you. You
don't have to draft
Southern Hamlet.
Senator had a meal.
Share your letter with me as
well. Alright. So what is the
pleasure of the I don't have
anybody else? Um
Questions was the pleasure of
the committee.
Moved to table that's non
debatable. So
He's called real. Senator Brandt
excused Senator Gregg's
Senator had a meal.
Senator Lopez. Yes, Senator
Sanchez.
Senator Schmitt is
Senator Tallman.
Senator work.
Senator Hamblin.
Yes.
Senator Shindo.
Yes.
We have seven. Yes, Senator
Tollman. I'll be more than happy
to champion that letter with our
other colleagues for you. Excuse
me.
Yeah, We still love you, too,
Mr. Mr. Chairman, Gonzalez is
tied up in finance and asked if
I okay? Go ahead. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Romeo, So we
all move on to the Senate Bill
144.
Thank you, Mr Chairman, So this
bill is being presented on
behalf of Senator Gonzalez and
this is the local D Wi Program
Bill and so the mission of the
local D W Y bureau is to reduce
the incidents of D wi
alcoholism, alcohol abuse and
alcohol related domestic
violence.
The local government division is
designed to administer and
evaluate the funds by ensuring
they are expended for the status
statute rule and guidelines. The
program receives funding from
45% of the liquor excise task.
In fiscal year. 25 attacks and
Rep Department estimates that
the LD Wi Grand fun will receive
$22.8 million.
Let it build 144 increases the
administration fee for the
L D w I grant program, which
will result in all left a
positions being funded and
filled to allow for adequate
support and oversight to all 33
counties, DW programs and
support for the statewide DW, a
Grant council.
The last time the administration
budget was increased was in 20
in 2003, actually, the local D
W a program revenue was
increased from $11 million in
2003 to the estimated 22.8
million in FY 25.
Administrative budget increase
does not impact the General fund
and joining me today, who would
like to see a few words is my
expert witness, Julie Fernandez.
Yeah.
Go ahead. Good afternoon, Mr Mr
Chair and Committee members. My
name is Julie Fernandez. I am
the bureau chief at the local
government Division Department.
Sorry, local government
division.
Bureau. Sorry Wi Bureau at, um,
the local government division
across the streets, and I'm here
because, um
We have not had an increase in
our administrative costs as
stated in statute.
Um, since 2003 and I'm having
difficulty I cannot feel some
vacant positions that I have
right now. Due to that
limitation in statute of
administrative costs, So I'm
asking for an increase to for
not just for now, but don't go
forward for the next several
years, Um, by the increase that
we're requesting in this bill
Hmm. Thank you. Anything more
senator or a meal?
That's it. Okay, well, let's
we'll go to the audience.
Anybody here in support of
Senate Bill 144.
Anybody in line with sport.
Um, no. Mr Chairman, Okay.
Yeah. Anybody in opposition of
Senate Bill one.
Okay?
Go ahead.
Go ahead J. D.
Thank you. Mr Chairman. This is
JD Bullington, speaking on
behalf of the Greater
Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce
In support of this legislation,
the Mexico continues to take top
spots on the wrong list.
Like for D wi rates.
Alcohol related death and
pedestrian death to break these
cycles. We need to invest in
programs that fight Wi and
substance use disorder, and this
bill will make sure our local DW
I grant program can distribute
sufficient resources to our
local programs where they're
needed, and we thank the sponsor
for bringing this bill forward.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Go ahead.
Good evening, chairman and
committee members. My name is
Kelly Livingston. I am the
current L D Wi Grand Council
chair and also a D wi director
out of Lee County also want to
speak in support of this bill.
Um, this is very important to
provide sufficient funding for
program oversight. And I thank
you for your time.
Thank you.
At this time going to committee.
Questions from the committee.
Motion for do Do we have a
question, Senator worth just one
question, so this money so we're
increasing the money that's
going to the fee.
Does that mean we're decreasing
the total pool of money that's
going for all the services.
Mr Chair Senator worth that
would be correct. Um, it will
reduce the amount that goes into
the distribution formula. By
that same dollar amount. Did you
have a question?
Uh, I guess my question and if
that is the correct answer, so
that's it me that there's gonna
be less money going to support
programs.
If the Ministry of Cost is going
to go up.
Mr Chair. Yes. And no. Um yes,
in that the distribution formula
will be be reduced by that
amount every year. The even
though we only received 45% of
the tax that is collected. It
goes up every year, so that will
be diminished over time. Plus,
there is monies available.
For, Um sorry,
Senator.
Um, plus, there's money is
available in the fund balance
that can be added to grants. Um,
so there is other monies
available for the programs to
support the services that they
provide. Okay. I appreciate
that. Thank you.
With that, Linda, Do you have a
question for cherishes
seconding? Secondly, McCain even
say that to a 2nd 2nd Alright,
we have emotion for do pass by
Senator Hamlin and second by
Senator Lopez.
We're called robe.
Senator Brandt is excused.
Senator Grace Yes, Senator had a
meal. Yes.
Senator Lopez.
Yes, Senator Sanchez.
Senator Schmid's
Senator Tallman. Yes, Senator
Worth voting? No.
What does he say? Voting no.
Senator Worth voting now.
Senator Hamlin.
Senator Shindo Yes.
We have
Eight yeses and one note Or do
you ever do pass? Thank you,
senator. Great work. All you
have to do is just appeared.
Mr Chairman. Alrighty. I think
the final bill on her list is,
uh
Senate Bill 146, Senator Stein
born right here.
The other is
I'm sorry. 0.3 0.3. Okay,
Exactly. Alright, so committee
The committee said that you had
before you really does several
things. Number one.
Yeah. Go ahead and take the
emotion. First Chairman. I asked
Fred do not pass on Senator
Memorial 10 about 146, Bill 146
and a do pass on the committee
sub for Senate Bill 146.
Or discussion purposes.
Great. Thank you position to the
motion.
None.
What Senator explain the
substitute bill.
People in rural areas.
Who do not who rural hospitals
do not accept all the insurance.
Provided on the exchange, so we
sought to kind of get it that
We have a similar problem where
we have uninsured per people in
rural areas, where the only
provider
Of a life saving medical
treatment.
Um
Which can be that hospital.
Um, are not providing.
Affordable payment options to
people, forcing them to delay
not get treatment at all, and
sadly possibly die, Um, in my
community in Las Cruces,
And where we have nothing but
private hospitals. Unlike
Albuquerque and Santa Fe, where
you have nonprofit providers, we
have people who literally have
cancer. Maybe only one radiation
provider. There's there told
uninsured. This will be
thousands of dollars. They can't
get treatment. It's a really sad
situation or people who have may
have an affordable health plan
on the exchange and
They can't also get healthcare
by that provider because that
hospital doesn't accept it. So
this bill kind of seeks to deal
with those issues.
And
Um, I will tell you Mr Chair
Committee. There is a tweet to
this bill that I'm waiting from
upstairs. But we can move
forward with this. I know Time
is late, but, um
We'll talk about it, and I can
tell you what the tweak is, too,
that we're still waiting on.
That would change this a little
bit. But let's talk about what
you have here in the summer. I
know it gets complicated.
We moved this up.
Okay, So what it does. I mean, I
can walk you through the bill.
Um
Walking through unpaid volunteer
legislature. Gotta love it.
But I do have the opposite
superintendent of insurance here
who can explain kind of the
technical things in this bill,
So we have a sub because
We have more technical language
in the sub
That the opposite superintendent
of insurance dealt with some of
the issues that were in the fire
on the original bill.
And also some healthcare
procurement Experts, um, have
reviewed the bill. And so this
amendment kind of they helped
provide some guidance on as
well. So the language and the
sub kind of gets it a little
more technical. But if you look
at the first part if you go to
page two
Um, it says it basically a
county hospital, county owned
hospital or contracting
hospital, which is a hospital
that contracts with
Local government to provide
services must must have a
contract with a managed care
organization, which is a
Medicaid provider.
Or that if they they must accept
patients. Uh, if if they're you
know, dealing with a patient who
is in a non contracted health
plan from the exchange.
Um
Then they have to still take
that insurance, but they pay it
out on a on a specific
Uh, kind of a rate here and I
would have the opposite
superintendent of insurance.
Explain that and what that does
is it basically says, Hey, we're
going to accept Medicaid.
Um
Or we're going to. We are going
to accept your insurance and
we're going to pay it out on a
specific rate. That was
something the hospitals wanted
as well. They want they
They're like, Hey, if we're
going to be forced to take
insurance, we need to have a
certainty or a floor of what
We're getting paid so that we're
not
Taking it in the shorts. That's
reasonable kind of a premise. So
this bill kind of now has that
linguine six on the sub page
two.
The second. Part of this bill,
though, is that if you are
dealing with an uninsured
patient
Then you number one are required
to kind of go over their
financial ability to pay or
guide them to programs that can
assist and number to provide
them with an affordable payment
plan.
In the amount not covered.
Um, by financial assistance that
may be out there.
Now That's the part that we're
waiting on an amendment to
change it back to the original
bill, the original bill said.
If you're the only provider of a
life saving treatment.
And you're dealing with an
uninsured person, and you're the
only provider in a community
that you have to provide an
affordable payment plan.
Um, that's what this bill
originally was introduced to
deal with. If you're like the
radiation example I gave you
which was a real world example
in Las Cruces. This sub
accidentally pulled it beyond
that, and said, if any service
that is beyond what's covered,
then you have to provide an
affordable payment plan and that
went beyond the original bill
that would
Pull out that record, you know,
obligation on the hospitals, so
that's really it. That's the
only change in what we're
waiting on in this, and that's a
change that's going to be
drafted here momentarily that I
can certainly fix.
On the floor if you like the
bill in general, But whatever
the committee's pleasure is
without all stop Mr. Chair,
Stanford questions and
O s. I is here again that can
probably give you more technical
answers. Thank you, Senator. At
this time we have to the
audience. Anybody here in
support of Senate Bill 146.
Go ahead.
Uh, Senator, Mr Chairman and
members of the Committee column
Bio with the office of
Superintendent of Insurance. We
are neutral on this bill but
helped Senator Stein born with
some of the language and in
those circumstances where there
isn't a contract between the
insurance provider of the
patient.
And the county hospital. Um,
what we did was help provide the
language of what's used when
this same sort of start
Circumstance happens for
surprise billing, so that helps
to establish that fair payment
rate. It makes sure the patient
doesn't get caught in the middle
of the dispute like that, So I
have an answer any technical
questions, Mr Chair also, you
know, unfortunately, just
because we're so busy I want
because my colleague Senator
Hamlin will know. The advocate
in Las Cruces. Yellow ideas who
works with cancer patients.
Who don't have money who deals
in the front line with
These types of patients, Um
And and she is a constituent
also, and she's the one I've
been working with on this
legislation. Also, Senate Bill
Bill 50. Unfortunately, just
because of the craziness, I was
able to know her five. I'm sure
she would be testifying like she
did at the last Bill online.
But that's a little context on
the bill. Thank you. Stanford
Question. Anybody online? Okay,
Early. We have anybody in
opposition of Senate Bill 146.
Anybody in line.
Questions from the committee.
Senator Smitty's
Thank you, Mr Chair and Senator
of what? What happens if there's
a
Health care provider that has
credentials at the hospital.
It doesn't seem that the bill
addresses that. So what if the
hospital now is accepting that
plan, But the individual
provider is not. How would we
did that Come up in the last
committee, Mr. Chair, Senator.
It did not, uh, gets a little
Little complex in a way, right?
Yeah, provided you know doctors
who have privileges how they
build separately from hospitals
Think
That you know that That's very
it's a great question in the
weeds kind of a question. I
don't know if Colin has a
thought on that on how something
like this would treat
Mr Chair and Senator Smitty's. I
believe in that circumstance.
The surprise Billing Protection
Act would cover that
circumstance. Um, I would need
to run that by our attorneys and
make sure that's still how it
all would work. But typically in
those scenarios, that's exactly
what that bill is attempting to.
Resolve. Okay, Mr. Chair and
Center. Yeah, I
And I don't want to get too in
the weeds. I just I do have a
concern there that the surprise
building a lot of that is is for
like, kind of urgent and
emergency care is not necessary
for like if someone's gonna have
elective surgery with a surgeon,
that's not I still have some
concerns. I'll go over that, but
it's just something that
continue to think about, you
know, because if we want to do
this, and then I would also say,
I mean, it seems that
Local hospitals seem to have a
financial interest in in having
these people be covered by some
kind of plan right because
they're and they know they're
going to get paid so already,
you know, I feel like we have an
incentive like a, you know, for
profit incentive already, So it
also kind of makes me think. You
know if you already have that
incentive, and these hospitals
trying to make money
Are we
You know, throwing incentivize
make the private why? Why would
you need a mandate it But
But all listening to if anyone
else has has thoughts on it. I'd
like to just
Fill out the debates. Questions
Senator Worth
So I do have some questions. Um,
I was noticing in the sub.
There's no definition of
contracting hospital or county
hospital. You had that in the
original bill. I'm looking at
I just I didn't know what that
meant when I was looking at it.
So why? Why is that? Not in the
Um
Mr Chair, Mr. Leader. It's you
know, it's a drafting issue. It
wasn't even the original bill,
but I asked them to put it in it
just so that with the sub was
done kind of quickly in the
nature of the session, and we
got it wrapped up literally. I
mean, late in the night, and so
they didn't include it. Uh, it
still means the same thing, But
and we can
So I mean, it was defined in the
original Bill Wright came out
Well, okay. Sorry, Mr Chair
Center, so it's still defined in
law. We just grabbed those
definitions to put them in the
original bill so people would
know what they meant for ease of
viewing, but the definitions are
still defined in law. Still,
that exact definition. We didn't
We didn't create a new
definition of the bill. That's
now long.
Over there.
And I will tell you you're not
inclined to have
Us doing a floor sub
To put in language that we have.
So I'm just wondering if there's
a way to fix this as we're
sitting here.
Today, because I just think that
at this stage in the I mean,
we've come back on Sunday when
we meet and get this bill
cleaned up, but trying to do
this cleanup
On the floor of the Senate is
probably not a great thing at
this stage of the proceedings,
so sure.
Yeah, I miss Mr Chair leader can
do one of two things. It
wouldn't be a sub It would be an
amendment.
On the floor. Um, that might be
my amendment right there.
It's arrived. We might have an
image. Yeah.
Is that yours?
Yeah. Is that your that's it?
Walk it right down to him in the
chair committee substitute,
Okay, subject fixes what I was
talking about. Sure. Luka
through a lifeline, who does?
I love it.
Mr Chair if I can provide some
context Well, senators working
on that if I may. Thank you, Mr
Chair and Committee in Las
Cruces. We have two major for
profit hospitals.
Um and without naming names, One
is not doing a good enough job
in terms of helping patients
that have what could potentially
be a life threatening,
especially cancer.
And so we're having challenges
of making sure that those folks
get the healthcare date they
deserve.
And I stress that they deserve.
And so it's it is a concern.
It's ongoing conversation that
we've had with the person that
Senator Steinberg is talking
about.
And um and it's It's unfortunate
because we have people who don't
know whether they need
In order to prolong their life.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you.
Try understand where we are.
Is that we've got to committee
show here.
I don't I don't know what
Senator Stein born has there
Uh, if mention him amendment
that amendment was supposed to
be here.
Previously.
So we could have looked at it. I
don't see how we can can deal
with it. What? 0.4 0.4. Okay, so
we have 0.3 of it to you. I
mean, it got it actually goes
back to the original. The change
goes back to the original
section. The second part of the
bill. Which you in the new
subjects. Actually, Mr Chairman,
Senator, we just hadn't
The procedure of the committee
is one thing we're not
Following the procedure.
You know the other. The other
option. Mr Chair is we can just
amend that section back in on
the on the floor wouldn't be. It
wouldn't be a sub or you can
just look at the sub and you'll
see it just
Brings back the section that you
already have had Mr Chair. I
think we're going back Senator
Gregg's days and Senate
judiciary. I mean, it really is
a one. It's a one paragraph
amendment that just goes back if
that's really what it does, and
we haven't seen it, But I think
it's much if we're going to do
it. We've got to do it here.
Make it It would be like someone
it would be like Senator Pirtle
walking in with an amendment on
the floor.
If if it's not a huge kind of
this is like the issue we dealt
with Senator Harm me or the
other night on his bill. I mean,
let's talk. Let's look at it
exactly what's getting changed
and then I think we make the
call. But I think it's better to
get this cleaned up, then to try
and do
Surgery on the floor at this
stage this chair this is really
simple, Straightforward language
is again the same exact
paragraph from the original
bill, so I'd love to hand it out
like an I V show toe type of
Amendment right here is much
simpler than that.
Yeah. All set up in the gallery
watching. I know I'm trying not
to carry any more bills, so you
don't have the surgery on
Mr Chairman. I asked do not pass
on Senate Bill Subcommittee,
substitute 146 and do pass on
Senate Bill 146 substitute for
or discussion.
Substitute for substitute right
now what it is.
Ready substitute for a
substitute.
We're discussion purposes.
Mhm. Alright,
you're staying born. You still
know how with it
Ready to explain it. This chair
Okay. So on Page two, B goes
back largely to the language
that was in the original bill,
which says that
That a county hospital or
contracting hospital shall
provide a patient with an
affordable payment plan under
the following circumstances, one
Um, that they're the only
provider. It's the same exact
language original bill for a
patient in a life threatening
situation
Page three.
That
The UM patients. Health
insurance plan is not accepted.
By the county hospital or
contracting hospital or the
patient.
Is uninsured.
So
And then if they are uninsured,
then then the rate the
affordable rate. This is new
that it shall adhere to a
Medicaid or Medicaid feast.
Restructure that way. They're
not being taken to the cleaners.
In a race
Okay. Any questions, Senator or
Smitty's or something? One thing
here for a couple of things, Mr
Chair. Uh, I think we were still
asking for
Hospital right in this presence
of is that correct?
Correct? Yeah, she didn't carry
it over into okay, And that's
that's um
I think an important point we
almost get back to wondering if
there's a way where
A private hospital still exist
in a county and if this passes,
then they say, Well, we just We
don't have any relationship.
We're not a contracting entity
because we don't have a contract
with the county. We're just
here. Just little old private
hospital here just in the
corner, so
Um so that I guess that's one. I
don't know if that's a valid
maybe I'm thinking about the
incorrectly, but I just wanted
to throw that out there.
I think it's probably important.
To have a definition there in
case and out of, you know, out
of state based
Hospital chain.
Might say they're not subject.
You think there'll be concerns
there? Uh,
Good question, and I will let
Colin answer. Madam Chair and
Senator Smitty's actually just
had this discussion earlier
today with the LCS drafter, Um
she had recommended that it
actually not being there because
it's already defined in this
act. So we do have the language
here if you all would want to
put that in here, but it was on
the advice of the Legislative
Council.
Okay. Thank you. And that helps
Madam Chair and Senator. So much
so that my follow up question to
that would be and I've got the
definition right here.
You know, it's it's a hospital,
located in New Mexico the
answers into healthcare
facilities contract with a
county or counties or a
political subdivision. So is it.
Is it possible then for a
hospital to be in New Mexico?
Without entering into health
care.
I don't know.
Madam Chair and Senator Smitty.
So if it was a private hospital,
then it would be able to. So for
example, in Albuquerque, Um, you
know, Presbyterian help
services. Um, their main
hospital downtown that's
privately owned. There's no
county ownership of that
hospital. But if you were in,
you know, Memorial Hospital in
last Christmas as an example
here
Um, of county hospital that has
essentially leased out. Um, the
the actual management of that
facility. And so I think that's
what the definition of the
contracting hospital is, Uh, is
trying to divine here, okay? And
so I would just end I'm just
I mean, I I don't anticipate
this would be changed for
hospital. Not anticipating that
So my concerns could be maybe
too much for what is gonna
happen.
But I just wonder how they would
respond to this is a hospital
going to not sign some kind of a
contract with
I mean, I think the answer is
probably no, but they're I guess
they're probably free to do
anyway. That's my only other
thought with this. Thank you.
Senator Smitty's any other
questions from Senator
Senator worth so on Page two
line 18.
Just putting my lawyer had on
here. County Hospital. Contrary,
hospitals should provide a
patient with
And affordable payment plan.
What is affordable? How do we
determine that? Yeah. So, Mr
Sheriff, That was something that
we
Did recommend, uh, definition to
Andrea Upstairs. I can read it
to you, and we can add it. Um,
because, Yeah. So, um
Yeah, the for an affordable
payment plan.
The patient total reimbursement.
Okay, sure. Uh, Matt, Mr Chair
and Senator, Um, we had
discussed the language of that
the patients total reimbursement
under the affordable payment
plan shall adhere to the
Medicaid or Medicare fee
schedule. Um, and you can see on
Page two line four.
Um, that instead of a definition
there, uh, it just lays that out
in the substance, and so is that
your understanding then that
that's what would default to and
figuring out exactly what tire
Mr Chair and Senator worth. I
believe that that's something
good. I appreciate that second
question is, and this may be for
Senator Schmitt, look at the
language of the bottom Section
one bottom Page two.
County hospital or contracting
hospitals, the only provider of
care in the county, where the
patient resides for a condition.
Including cancer.
That places the patient's health
in serious jeopardy.
Causes serious impairment of
bodily function or causes
serious dysfunction of any
bodily organ.
I guess when I read that
language, I'm concerned that
There's gonna be there's gonna
be something in the gray area
And I guess I'd be curious from
you know, as a physician.
Is this gonna be? Is this
problematic language? Is this
going to create basically a
bunch of lawyers trying to
figure out how to navigate
through the chair? Mr Earlier? I
think the answer is yes. And I
explain it this way is just
because you have a board yet. It
doesn't mean I mean, there's
some surgeries that I just don't
do that are still within the
nose and throat head in that
area.
And so it's hard to really nail
down per healthcare provider.
Like what? You know you're a
general surgeon, but you don't
do collect amis or you don't do
this.
And so
It will be.
I mean, I I think it is would
would be a little difficult. I
mean, I see what the intent is.
But I mean a hospital. Like for
example, Hobbs Hobbs.
Has at least back When I kind of
knew some people there they
would survive off of people from
Michigan coming for a month. The
hospital staff the M. D s in the
Doctor that gets well, I don't
do
This type of, you know that
we're going to transfer and I
think a lot of these facilities
were really are. You know they
will transfer its really
serious, right so
So I I think the answer is yes.
I mean, that's just my thought.
My personal
Mr Chairman. I appreciate that.
And again, I I support the
intent of what? What's here? I
just flagged that seems to me to
be
Potential to cause
Some challenges trying to define
exactly what's in what's not in.
Does this condition rise to the
level that true love to answer
it, Mr Chair just to just to
clarify this is about affordable
billing. This doesn't mandate
treatment doesn't say you have
to treat something beyond the
bounds of your capability as a
hospital, just as if you're in a
life threatening situation.
You've got to give someone an
affordable options so that they
do not get treatment. So
you know, and I appreciate that
again, having done quite a few
cases with these hospitals I
could see and agree that this is
a life threatening
Situation, so therefore we're
not going to give you the plan.
You know, we're looking at the
bottom line, so
I just flagging that But again,
I think I appreciate getting the
cleanup because this is the way
to do it. Um
And I think the address the
issue of
The affordable payment
definition has been explained by
Collins. So that's all I have.
Thank you, Senator Greece.
Thank you for sharing center in
this kind of just goes to send
her worst point when he's
talking about affordable when
you go back over here again on
Page two.
The senator pointed out. It's
used the word serious in three
or four different spots.
How serious is serious or what
is serious.
And you get mean.
I miss chair. I think I know
what we're trying to do. But I
don't know that I think we're
doing
And I think that while we might
like to fix that here, I don't.
I don't see us getting there, or
at least to me getting there so
I can't. I can't support it,
Senator Ted.
Those are just the things and I
Hope if it's something that we
really need to have we find the
right white wage to write it. So
thank you, Mr Chair, and thank
you, Senator.
The list for questions. So what
is the pleasure of the
committee?
Past with senators. Miti's
Second by Senator Hamlin.
Committee, please. Oh, yeah, we
call the roll.
Senator Brandt excused Senator
Gregg's No.
Senator had a meal.
Senator Lopez? Yes.
Senator Sanchez Senator Schmitt
is
Senator Tollman Senator Worth
Senator Hamblin. Yes, Senator
Shindo? Yes.
We have seven yeses and one no.
For it to pass. Thank you. You
have to pass. Thank you
Appreciate it. Appreciate it.
So committee members right now
we have our committee scheduled
for Sunday coming in before one.
So what?
Thinking about what? Maybe noon.
Committee. Yeah, two. So I think
So we're going to have the
house the house of
so we need to do the Senate
Amendment.
Sunday morning. Ah, so rules is
doing confirmations because I
have three of them.
Which I probably won't be there
for you. You're doing so we'll
have to, although you may need
to be here, too.
So we'll have to figure out will
announce the timing. Okay? Yeah,
we'll coordinate. Okay. So rules
is leading on in the morning. At
what time?
I am.
11 A.m.. The floor is at one.
See
When is it coming over? It was
you've got it needed stuff on
Saturday under the conversation
that we had. Yeah, we're gonna
use some time. Okay? That's what
according to time on Sunday,
folks know
It might even be before rules.
And 30 or so I don't think
right? Yeah.
I think that's the only one we
have right now. All right, well,
let's let's
gonna be some stripper Wells.
Yeah.
