Next okay.
I see Senator Griggs is in the
room.
Are you on Senator Griggs.
Okay Senator had a meal I'm here
again thank you Senator Kernan I
see you yes.
Sancious.
Looking for their grades.
Senator Sanchez it's not gonna
happen.
He's not coming.
No.
Senator Tallman.
Share worth is here it's just it
just it just I really don't know
right here on you need.
It were listen to your
conversation.
I thought it was talking to me.
Senator Padilla I see you.
And senator Schendel so you have
one two three four five six
seven eight you have a quorum
Senator.
Okay great so we'll go ahead and
the Mr Chairman yes vice chair
thank you Mr chairman so just
want to let the committee know
that so at one thirty Judiciary
is going to take off if they
haven't already and I do have to
actions over there I'll be
running back and forth when that
occurs to of bills for the thank
you I think we have a couple of
you guys are going back to this
committee and Judiciary so.
Of.
We're aware that so okay with
that Mr chair yes major just
just before we start on house
bill seventy five I do want to
make a disclosure which I do not
believe is a conflict of
interest but I do want to make
the disclosure and that I.
I in my role as a private
attorney do work as a court
appointed personal
representative in a variety of
cases that includes some medical
malpractice and wrongful death
cases so that is an area where I
am the court appointed personal
representative in a fiduciary
capacity on behalf of injured
families and I just I want to
disclose that I do not believe
it's a conflict but again I want
to disclose that to everyone on
the committee and Representative
Eli before we start the bill
thank you Mr chair.
Okay thank you for that is noted
so with that of go ahead the.
Representative Ely will start
with house bill seventy five as
amended thank you chair and
members of the committee I want
to start with that because I do
have a letter from the ethics
commission I can share with your
worth about those issues I don't
think any of that's a problem I
do want to tell the committee
that I don't I don't do any
medical malpractice I
potentially see lawyers so when
I campaigned door to door and I
tell people that I'm a lawyer
interface false I see none of
the lawyers whose lawyers they
got all excited so I'll just say
I'm so what this bill will do.
Is remove the hospitals from
what's called the patient's
compensation fund not be clear
there no public hospitals
involved that's not what this
bill is about nor the small
hospitals were talking about
twenty four of the twenty six
hospitals are multi billion
dollar hospitals and the other
two are hundred million dollar
hospital she is so these are
large hospital corporations and
by removing the hospitals from
the patient's compensation fund
we are restoring the fund to its
original purpose which is to
assist independent physicians in
securing liability coverage
malpractice coverage and we're
not having the untenable
situation of having patients who
are the most injure or killed as
a result of medical negligence
subsidizing these large multi
billion dollar corporations now
before I explain kind of what
this is about I do want to tell
the committee that I do have
experts with me that I'll call
on after my presentation Dr
barber McEntee will be first she
as many of you know a cancer
specialist position in
Albuquerque New it was also the
former president of the American
medical association largest
private organization in the
country of doctors are right
Vargas who is an attorney he's
an expert on both malpractice
and on on insurance which is
what's critically important for
this colonel Shaver can't yes
Representative insurers Spencer
who can talk about their
experiences regarding medical
negligence and why that's
important.
So as I was getting into this
area and learning about medical
malpractice and how the system
is set up actually as I tried
explaining to even to myself and
my wife an analogy helps and I
use I don't usually use the but
in this situation really does
help is I use a boat analogy and
so we will talk about it the way
the US is that.
In nineteen seventy six going
back almost fifty years
independent physicians and I
mean as opposed to hospital
employee physicians.
Could not find malpractice
insurance liability insurance
and they were actually leaving
the state.
So what happened was.
The advocates for the patients
and for these independent
positions sat down with
legislators and they created
this patient's compensation
fund.
Where the physicians would pool
their premiums put it into a
fund.
And patients and their families
would make claims against that
fund but they would be limited
in their recovery it would be
capped.
And that's system worked and the
way I think about ideas it's
like they created this boat.
And because of physicians could
not provide safe harbor and they
put these physicians and
patients on this boat in the
harbor and it was a story about
and it worked for almost well
let's see thirty three years.
And then in two thousand nine
the superintendent of insurance
for reasons that we really don't
know decided to put.
The first hospital into the act
and I think that hospitals like
putting an elephant on the boat
any any here's why that analogy
works is because when you're
dealing with positions under the
act initiative in every health
care provider not just
physicians that they were
limited to according to the act
three claims a year well for a
physician to be sued three times
in one year and that's
extraordinary I think it's two
to four time they're not covered
by the fund but for hospitals
that's not uncommon factor gonna
get sued dozens of times a year
and for whatever reason the
superintendent and I think and
there's a court case right now
that's pending illegally the
superintendent waive that
requirement hospitals rely to
make as many claims as they
want.
That's superintendent set the
precedent.
That when he left does the first
hospital in he did not get the
actuarial data that was needed
to set the premium so for
example to this day we'll talk
about the other hospitals in a
minute they did not get claims
information what is been paid
out litigation costs how many
are pending how many have been
settled it's like auto accident
insurance your auto accident
insurance company sets the rates
based on your accident history
the superintendent of the state
does not have sufficient
information so they put the US
on the boat will up to two
thousand nine the fund was
running a surplus in fact as of
two thousand nine I had a two
million dollar surplus.
What's this first elephant went
on the boat two things happen
one the fund she started running
a deficit.
And position started paying more
between two thousand two and two
thousand nine the independent
positions sign no increase in
premium.
Just in the last five years the
independent decisions premiums
in this funded gone up forty
nine percent.
So in two thousand nine they let
the first hospital in the first
elephants on the boat the boat
starts to sink how what should
have happened is they should
remove the hospital then from
the patient compensation fund
but instead the next
superintendent came in and said
you know we're going to do
twenty five more elephants on
this boat.
We started to sink so now as of
two thousand fifteen sixteen
twenty five for hospitals and I
say twenty four of the more
multi billion dollar hospitals
are put on the disposal and the
boats sinking it is now fifty
five million dollars in deficit
and on that deficit is going to
go up astronomically so long as
these hospitals remained in the
fund.
So.
Here's what can happen and this
is why again I think that
analogy works the elephants can
leave the boat Act anytime by
that I mean all of these
hospitals have private insurance
already they have other boats
that they can get up the only
reason they're on this boat is
because the premiums are
cheaper.
Once those premiums get up to a
high enough level these
hospitals will lead this fund
they are not wanted for the same
reason that the independent
positions are are the
independent positions on this
both because they need this
insurance if they don't have it
they won't get that's why we're
gonna have doctor Mack Committee
talk in part is to relate what's
going to happen.
On the other hand the hospital's
though those elephants can leave
the boat at any point.
The fact is is that if we could
restore the fund to its original
purpose then we can have the
physicians with adequate
insurance that they can afford
and from the perspective of
disadvantage first is those that
are privileged.
Patients are subsidizing these
hospitals by limiting their
recovery and they're getting
nothing in return.
And so what's happened is the
patience of the independent
doctors were never part of the
discussion with the hospitals
the hospitals were let into the
act they get what I have called
and will continue to call a
sweetheart deal.
Patients have to limit the
recovery doctors have to pay
more and once these premiums
rise to level that's
commensurate what was what's
really going on on our the
hospital's leaf the one last
thing that I would say before
turning it over to doctor Mack
and yes what really happened is
that the patients compensation
fund because of the hospital's
admission have turned into
something they're not which is
an insurance company and and Mr
Vargas when I turned or he'll be
answering most of technical
questions but as we start to
talk about this on one of the
things that will become apparent
is the system is breaking down
because the hospitals are in in
just one example.
One of the advantages the
patient's compensation fund that
the patients and the independent
physicians worked out would you
go to a medical legal panel.
Where you present your case in
advance so I think it's not a
binding decision but you have to
go in front of the panel before
you file your lawsuit.
When that happens the lawyers
and doctors listen to some of
the evidence and then they come
back with the decision and the
idea is is to help patients and
doctors understand Jesus is a
good case for bad case before
they go filing it's basically an
informal advisory board well now
that the hospitals for you and
and all of these claims are
being made those are affected we
can't be scheduled anymore or
the delay is so great it doesn't
matter because so many claims
are being made so the system is
breaking down and that part can
never be fixed because we only
have so many doctors and lawyers
in New Mexico to be able to sit
in on these panels so it's just
one example of this whole
funding turn to something it's
not because the mistake of and I
want to be clear about this the
prior superintendents the
current superintendent at really
had nothing to do with this and
just tested has inherited this
problem so with that chair and
members of the committee I'd
like to turn it over first to
drive Mackanin thank you thank
you go ahead drive.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Barbara
mac in any and I am a former
president of the American
medical association also of the
New Mexico Medical Society but I
am speaking for myself I am
president CEO and a cancer
doctor at New Mexico cancer
center practicing in Albuquerque
and Gallup I was also the lead
plaintiff in the medical
societies lawsuit against
superintendent Franchini
opposing the admission of
hospitals to the medical
malpractice act.
It is unusual for me to speak
for myself given my career has
always included speaking for the
medical society but in this
instance I think New Mexico
Medical Society has it wrong and
I feel duty bound to speak up.
The patient compensation fund
had a two million dollar surplus
with no increases in our search
charge between two thousand and
two and two thousand and nine
then the first hospital was let
in and did not follow the three
claim limit or pay their share
in twenty ten we have a ten
percent increase as more
hospitals were allowed in not
paying their share because a
very flawed actuarial studies we
have had the forty nine percent
increase over the last ten years
that representative Ely referred
to now with the hospitals
unlimited basis we have that
fifty five million dollar
deficit and the physicians
surcharges for twenty twenty one
will be another ten percent
increase in twenty twenty the
doctors collectively paid twenty
six million into the fund and
the hospitals only paid twenty
three point eight million into
the fund you will hear that the
because of the deficit is a few
bad cases from positions but
we've always had a few big cases
but they are rare the deficit
started when the hospitals were
allowed in the doctor's of New
Mexico did not become
incompetent because the
hospitals joined the fund.
The hospital claims have been
feet depleted the fund and they
are trying to get you to make
the independent doctors pay for
you will hear from the hospital
association and some doctors
that without the hospital
contribution the fund will go
bankrupt but as people who run
businesses narrow you not only
subtract the revenue the
hospitals provide you X. choose
tracks the expenses as well
every year the hospitals
contribute more expenses
withdrawals from the fund
because they have dozens of
cases every year my practice
hasn't had three cases in ten
years much less in one year you
will hear that there are claims
incurred but not yet reported
however every year we wait to
correct superintendent Franchini
spare there will be even more
cases I have reviewed the
actuals that it was actuarial
studies as part of my work as
chief point as I the the medical
society the twenty twenty one
shaped by Marian scout concluded
that the actuarial studies are
flawed because the actuaries
only had claims data from
doctors and one hospital so they
extrapolated from the doctors
but doctors and hospitals are
different businesses independent
doctor practices are small
businesses that pay taxes and
hire locally hospitals are often
tax exempt and as you heard
managed by out of state chains
hospitals and independent doctor
practices are paid on different
fee schedules hospitals charged
facility fees whenever a
hospital acquires a practice the
community loses a taxpaying
entity and the taxpayers must
then pay twice as much for the
same service to Medicare and
Medicaid patients because of the
different the schedule and the
facility fees.
This is especially cruel crucial
for rural New Mexico where the
big hospitals have limited
interest and doctor practices
are small businesses that can
provide infrastructure for local
economic development the doctors
of New Mexico manage the phone
before the hospital sneaked in
and we can do it again if you
will pass this bill and remove
them I urge you to support house
bill seventy five thank you.
On.
But Mr chair and members of the
committee so I I actually asked
Mr Vargas we wanted to speak I
think he and I both agree he
would be better for the
technical questions as they
arise sonitor or kernel shape
for next.
Thank you go ahead.
Erica hello I'm my name is
Micaela Schaefer and you may
actually remember my daughter
her name was Sherrin Eriksen she
was a morning news reporter and
weekend anchor at ko B. TV and
died at the age of thirty years
old due to malpractice in
Albuquerque.
You'll have to indulge me for a
minute as I show you her picture
because I want to make sure that
we stay focused on what's really
at stake here and that's
patients.
He was always active she's an
accomplished dancers to perform
that ballet companies in south
Lake City in Houston she had
been an airforce academy cadet
she wanted to be an F. fifteen
fighter pilot she was a
cheerleader R. Pirtle jumpers
twenty member of comedic actress
in a funny one at that and at
the time of her death reporter
willing to take a stunt jump for
TV for TV segment at the New
Mexico state fair.
My daughter died needlessly
during was was supposed to be a
relatively easy outpatient
procedure in the cardiac cath
lab the last time I saw my
daughter alive she was giving me
her signature thumbs up as she
was wheeled away.
We learned that the
cardiologists did not have the
requisite experience to do the
procedure and they didn't even
have the proper equipment
available I watched as someone
ran out of the hot camp led to
retrieve needed equipment from
another Albuquerque hospital you
look created twenty return
caring sterile equipment
packages and he stopped to tell
me that it was touch and go but
everything was okay now.
Time passed I heard a chilling
voice over the loudspeaker
calling for code blue I knew
what that meant and immediately
felt bad for the family however
I didn't realize I was that vain
me as my daughter died as they
were waiting for an operating
room.
You see the cardio thoracic
surgeon that was required to be
on call in case anything went
wrong had started another case
as a result neither he nor the
operating rooms were available
to repair the care they had
created insurance hard.
Institutional issues delayed
their every release of emergency
blood to so my daughter Waverly
bled to death waiting on
equipment and our and blood
products.
By the time you reach the
operating room she had no blood
pressure inner brain had been
totally deprived of oxygen too
late in the ICU lifeless for
four days connected the eighteen
nineties are hard competition
later before we finally chose to
honor her wishes and donate our
organs the most crushing
experience of my life.
It is the greatest you see the
allergist actually called me and
he was crying and told me that
everything went horribly wrong
in there I had never heard of
physician caliphate patients
family like that and tell them
anything remotely close to that
this was later confirmed by the
patient safety officer who
stated that a series of a
pandemic of current that had led
to her death the following words
well talked me for ever.
There were at least four hours.
Where we could have saved her we
have the O. R. the surgeon and
the blood required.
I repeatedly asked what it
happen but I never got answers
in fact the hospital refused to
do an autopsy and did not report
her unexpected death as is
required by joint commission.
I was forced to notify the
coroner myself and that autopsy
was done.
As you can probably guess I have
some medical background I am a
registered nurse with a master's
degree in critical care trauma
and a PhD in biomedical research
and ethics and I recently
retired as a colonel after
thirty years in the United
States airforce I was the
commander of a level one trauma
center I was a director of
nursing at director of surgical
services all of those times I
oversaw the patient safety and
risk management committees.
Since I have dug deeply into the
research on patient safety
errors and was shocked to learn
that they constitute the third
leading cause of death in this
country behind only heart
disease and cancer.
Of course.
Different do the pandemic but
entering the hospital long puts
one at high risk for death due
to errors in fact New Mexico's
in the survey found out that
thirty six percent of their of
people surveyed had had
experience malpractice in their
own family.
Hospitals contribute to the
problem is multi billion dollar
corporations choose profits over
safety and caps on damages only
goes to reinforce that mentality
I now spend my life educating
nurses and physicians on patient
safety across the entire country
and need for them to speak up
when processes lead to errors
often because the purse strings
are controlled by the hospital
providers are not in power to
speak up in the case of my
daughter they should have to
ensure that the appropriate
equipment and procedures were
followed.
I spoke up every single day of
my long career because my
priority was my patient not
profit not many.
Placing artificial caps on
damages one hospitals choose
profits over safety will Napper
amber create change nurses and
doctors need to take
responsibility for their role in
enabling hospitals to continue
to harm patients with their
silence I'm actually very
disappointed that nurses would
be in favor of a bill that they
think will protect them or for
their patients I find that
highly unethical and the work
needs to be done to make sure
that everyone has a voice to fix
the problem not hide behind caps
on damages.
Multi billion dollar hospitals
are leaving New Mexicans dead
and maimed and taking their
profits out of state and feel no
obligation to those they have
harmed.
Artificial caps as they in the
case with the patients
compensation fund never have nor
will they ever protect patients
obviously it feels like you're
playing Russian roulette with
our families lives when they do
not here's just standards the
system has allow them to just
get paying appropriate
reparations this only reinforces
their decisions to make money
over patient safety and errors
will continue to wreak havoc on
our families unless hospitals
are held accountable for their
negligence.
My husband and I lost our
beautiful daughter share our
brother and sister lost their
big sister and my daughter is
now a psychologist not by chance
but because of the loss of
sharing because all of us had to
learn new ways to deal with this
kind of brief but I can tell you
it never goes away.
You'll probably hear testimony
from the other side that the sky
is falling but I've actually
looked and I cannot find another
state there might be one but I
haven't found it yet that has
such a fun where do I even
believe that it's ethical I'm
hospital to continue to carry
their insurance but they have
during the compensation fund
without any transparency about
the cases they've settled they
do not belong to fund that caps
their financial responsibility
ended nice patients due process
in court.
I'm.
This I would ask you to consider
the following will enable the
fund further actually help save
your family member or any other
New Mexican from malpractice.
I know in your heart the answer
is no so my goal here today is
for you to focus on patients
moreover I'm asking them by your
actions you ensure that patients
get the best possible care and
are compensated for injuries
caused by malpractice and
prevent this devastation from
happening to any other family I
thank you for your time and
attention and ask that you
please please support house bill
seventy five.
Chairman and members the
committee I I think like to
mention a net Gonzales and then
we'll in with the with that
sherry and and Eliot Spitzer but
annectens dollars would be next
thank you.
Read.
Good afternoon.
My name is Annette Gonzales and
I am the eldest daughter of
floral and Senator my mother was
a very happy and energetic
person who loved life.
She was the wife of fifty six
years Lujan mother grandmother
and great grandmother we were
raised in a close knit family
inside other almost everyday.
Holiday gatherings were always
at mom's house barbecues Frito
pies for Super Bowl thanksgiving
with Turkey and all the
trimmings and Christmas making
the school treat those Boston
beat those and a full day of
tomorrow we meet.
In December of twenty fifteen
mom was complaining about a pain
in her right side at the E. R.
she was diagnosed with an
aneurysm in her aorta from there
she was transferred to a
hospital who prides themselves
as being the best when it comes
to cardiac emergencies.
She was admitted and the next
morning we met with the doctor
in this meeting he told us that
she needed to have a stand
installed.
He also told us that it was a
very common procedure and that
he had performed hundreds of
them.
Mom agree to the surgery and it
was scheduled the afternoon of
December thirtieth the surgery
went as expected and she had
done very well and was expected
to be released the very next day
where she could bring in the new
year with her family at home.
This is where our lives would be
forever changed.
At six AM mom called my sister
Patty telling her that she could
not feel her lakes paddy and I
rushed to the hospital and the
nurse attending mom couldn't
tell us anything except that her
doctor was notified and was on
his way.
How do you and I were still in
the room as her doctor examined
her this is what we learned is
yes F. during was placed during
surgery imam spine which require
close monitoring to keep the
fluid levels within a certain
range.
It turned out the nurses signed
by this hospital to care for mom
was not familiar with this type
of dream nor had she had any
type of training.
So instead of asking for help
she decides to clamp the during
shut the fluid Scott so
dangerously high in her spinal
cord.
That she became paralyzed from
her waist down I can still see
the look on my mother's face
when her doctor told her she
would never walk again and to
this day those words haunt me in
my sleep.
After this mom was in and out of
the hospital with one
complication after another and
to other surgeries related to
the paralysis five months later
mom passed away on the morning
of September seven the day
before mother's day in the home
where we grew up and where we
always gather.
And why.
Because the hospital failed maam
by not providing their medical
staff with the necessary
training to provide proper care
to their patients how does this
happen I will never understand
it and for that there must be
accountability our family does
not want to see another person
suffer as our mother did and
another family to suffer the
heartbreak as we have so today I
am my mother's voice and I ask
that you please support house
bill seventy five thank you.
Finally chair members the
committee I mistakenly referred
to as respite server as Eliot
Spitzer not the former governor
of New York so it's as Ryan
cherry Spencer will be elected
thanks thank you thank you.
Thank you thank you
Representative thank you Mr
chair members of the committee
thank you for the time today yes
I I have never governed in New
York so thank you for the
clarification
yeah my name is as much as my
wife sherry and we no about
about six years ago we we embark
to start a family Here became
pregnant with twin girls and
you know we had we had been
through a period of infertility
before that and we were we were
terrifying and overjoyed all at
the same time
pregnancy went mazing Lee well.
Perfectly really to be honest
and when it came time to deliver
we had you know we had selected
a doctor specialising twins we
had selected a hospital.
That presented itself is very
very familiar with the birthing
process and and we we just
trusted them and and wanted one
of the best thing possible for
for both our our baby girls and
and for share a and so
the decision was made that the a
vaginal birth should be attempts
at even our second daughter at
the was was a what's called the
footballing breach she was feet
first in euro.
There were there were multiple
warning signs I think that that.
Suggested this was probably a
very very high risk thing to do
though we were not aware of
those those things are going in
though we have a level of monies
and and requested to be inside
the operating room requests that
sherry have epic Durrell so that
if if I see section was needed
to be done without delay.
Our first daughter was born
Maisie was born without incident
perfect perfect healthy baby
girl
we had we have been told to
expect our second daughter
within about twenty minutes
three hours elapsed between
between her birth and and Macy's
birth.
Was the most violent three hours
I've witnessed in my life.
Her daughter was severely
associated in that process.
She was revived after birth
survive for five days before
passing away.
You know we.
We we held our daughter as she
passed from this life to the
next and that quite frankly is
something I wish on no one it's
it is truly.
Truly the most difficult thing
and and the ultimate sign of
failure to to plan your child's
funeral and
It's awful and so.
In that you know sherry was
severely injured in that birth
as well as has lifelong medical
problems from that birth our
daughter lost her life are twin
twin daughter lost her sister.
And you know I think as others
have said what is what is so
hard is that that there's
there's no accountability and
there's no justice and that's
the hardest pieces a parent to
accept you know nobody nobody
and that operating room an
operating room.
In a in a hospital full of
doctors full of nurses full of
many people.
No one spoke up one person spoke
a surgery Tax spoke up at one
point and asked why why no one
was doing a C. section we found
out later that that surgery tech
was subsequently fired from his
from his job and so I think what
you see is you just see silence
and account and no
accountability and what I would
ask all of you it is you know.
A couple a couple of pieces I
think stand out.
One is either so if that is why
the state of New Mexico in the
insurance business and do we
want to be and more of that
business or less of that
business because I think I think
that that is a real foundational
question and why why we're
offering special protections to
some at the expense of others
and and what I want everyone to
know is when there's been so
much talk about risk and and
numbers and you know all of
these things what I want you to
notice their human lives on the
end of this this is about human
beings right this is about the
death and loss of loved ones not
by mistakes not not by those
things by gross negligence and
there is no the current us the
current system has no
accountability and I would ask
all of you.
Would you accept six hundred
thousand dollars or even seven
hundred and fifty thousand
dollars for the life of your
child.
And would you believe that a
business with billions of
dollars in revenue and income
would be capable of changing
from those mistakes if that's
all the accountability there as
and I think those.
Are the pieces of this
legislation and this bill that
are so important because we want
to improve practice we want to
improve policies procedures so
this doesn't happen to another
family.
So with that you know I'll let
I'll let sherry speak briefly
and and I actually I'll just put
that all in context you know
when we left the hospital
without are dire.
We left with a bill for two
hundred and fifty thousand
dollars for her five days of
life so you want to talk about a
cap of six hundred thousand
dollars when I days of life cost
two hundred and fifty thousand
dollars there's just no way for
this current system to work when
those are the dynamics so thank
you.
I'm.
Hi Mister chair Mister chairman
and members of the committee
first I'd like to share a
picture of meeting at the and he
is obviously the the one with
the the tubes.
I just wanted to say a few
additional things when you're in
the hospital and as he was in
the queue and how may easy and
as our and I were down
You know I had a really
difficult time nursing I was
producing an email and it was
over Labor Day weekend and the
hospital had no access to a
lactation specialist
we were also really struggling
and asked about you know social
worker and the hospital had no
I'm access to social worker on
any surface of support or help
that we got about what was going
on with FE was on our own from
outside we also asked if we
could have the babies baptized
together we had a really hard
time getting a priest it took a
very long time we had to go up
the chain of command to allow
Maisie and us to get pictures
together we couldn't I mean all
of these things were happening
but at the same time that all
this was happening they brought
the bill to our room.
And stood in our room and waited
for us to give them a credit
card to pay that bill.
And then we also were visited by
risk management twice during the
same time all the while all we
wanted to do was be upstairs
with
Our baby girl and have our
daughters together for at least
a limited amount of time.
Thank you you.
Mr chairman and members the
committee I I wanted to present
that we're done with the experts
but I wanted to the show with
you why act Y. that was percent
obviously drive mechanism was
from an independent position
point of view somebody well
qualified and experienced we
talking about that in from the
patients it is really to point
out that when you limit recovery
for the small type billion
dollar companies there's no good
public policy chair you're not
increasing accountability quite
the opposite you're reducing
your reducing the incentive step
quality control checklist of
qualified people to hospitals
and Quitman they could have made
the difference in the lives.
And the only goal that is served
by having excluded independent
patients and these families from
the discussion about hospitals
being led into the patient
compensation fund is that these
large corporate hospitals most
of them are out of state are
allowed to earn greater profits
that is not a good public policy
goal for New Mexico it doesn't
help independent positions and
it doesn't help the patients and
with that are chair members the
committee will turn it over for
questions thank you.
Okay thank you before we go to
the committee.
For questions we will go to the
public for comment and I asked
the everyone will allow you
sixty seconds we have a quite a
few but we want to get to all of
them so with that we will start
with the opposition.
Our house bill seventy five.
We will now go to those of
pollution beginning with those
who registered in advance Scott
Scanlon and.
Moving on Dr Diane gallant.
Thank you chair members of the
committee thank you for this
opportunity to talk to you today
I am the president of the
medical society representing
both independent and employed
physicians
there's a difference between a
past president and a fiduciary
who speaks for all of our
members who include people in
many settings I just quickly
wanted me to few of the
hospitals were talking about
members good morale and Deming
Gerald champion Alamogordo Lee
regional in Hobbs Los Alamos
Carlsbad all of this stuff
Presbyterian Christus loveless.
Work for these are organizations
are dedicated to the care of
patients these hospitals are
parts of their communities it's
really strange to hear them
called out as as somehow you
know terrible actors after what
we've put forward during COVID
and and the way we've stood with
patients and patient care
quickly I would like to speak in
opposition to seventy five and
we're Senate bill two thirty
nine which is much more
comprehensive please do no harm
I believe this bill does harm by
pulling the hospitals that.
Thank you next we have doctor
Kristin writing.
Hi good afternoon thank you
chairman and senators for
allowing me to testify against
house bill seventy five my name
is Dr Christopher Reidy and I'm
an ophthalmologist practicing in
northern New Mexico.
Malpractice occurs the it can be
devastating however it happened
very very rarely taking the
hospitals out of the patient
care fund.
The medical malpractice act
threatens the small rural
hospitals that drive Galion just
mention a single lawsuit can
close the doors of all to the
staff and hold across hospitals.
Those are part.
These hospitals are part of our
communities and the rural
providers in these communities
desperately need them without
the hospitals and in on open
policy we're creating additional
rural providers will become more
and more difficult thank you for
your time and thank you for
opposing house bill seventy
five.
Thank you next up we have Ashley
Wagner.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I'm
Ashley Wagner director of public
policy for the New Mexico
chamber of commerce New Mexico
has an acute shortage of health
care professionals today
especially in our rural
communities this session we have
seen a good number of bills
aimed at addressing that
workforce issue by incentivizing
health care workers to stay in
or come to New Mexico we should
not stifle that progress being
made there are number of reasons
for the shortage but one that we
hear over and over is the
concern by medical professionals
about the high level of medical
malpractice payouts in New
Mexico we certainly agree that
injured people should receive
compensation but we need to make
sure we don't disrupt our health
care system that is working for
the other ninety nine percent if
you move hospitals out of the
fund or raise the cap our rural
hospitals will be incredibly
vulnerable to litigation they
don't have the margins to absorb
to absorb a ten million dollar
lawsuit we're also concerned
that this bill will cause
medical malpractice insurers to
greatly increase their rates are
leave the state altogether we
request.
Thank you next up we have doctor
William Ritchie.
Mr chairman senators with this
very brief time honestly very
sustained
I have two strong points one the
superintendent Suren
specifically in this study just
released stated it was premature
to make any changes in medical
malpractice act that there was
not enough data as previously
suspected stated I agree with
much of what Representative Eli
and doctor Machen if that but
with colleges to Representative
Eli he does not take is that his
analogy far enough we need to
keep the elephant in the boat
because they have the listing to
remove the water that is already
in the boat these are our
current policies there is a
large liability already incurred
by the PCS.
Because the house was a pin in
there we need to hospitals to
help pay that private positions
cannot pay all of their
liability is letting them off
the hook in the PC have
reimburses the patient of this
state who have been harmed and
if it goes away who is going to
reimburse them for that thank
you next up we have Larry Horan.
Thank you Mr chairman members
committee leader and registered
lobbyists for Presbyterian
healthcare services will be very
brief
this will not just impact large
hospitals if you if you pass
this bill it'll affect the small
hospitals as well and public
policy reason to keep hospitals
in the fund is from to provide
protection for patients and also
to help those have been injured
but also to ensure that our
fragile health care system is
able to be maintained and one
thing I'll I'll point you to in
statute in eggs in existing
statute under the medical
malpractice act if you take the
hospitals out now the patient
compensation fund was thirty
seconds liable for all those
claims that hospitals have
accumulated in forty one five
dash twenty six statutes as the
insurer wrote shall remain
liable for all causes of action
occurring prior to the effective
date of termination you can't
just read about the hospitals
not providing coverage and we're
supposed to be working out a
deal on this on the medical
malpractice act to come up with
a comprehensive fix you should
keep this bill in your committee
to give us time to work out that
deal during the remainder of the
session thank you Mr chair.
Thank you next up we have Ginni
Burlington.
Hello Mr chairman members of the
committee this is JD Bullington
representing the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
house bill seventy five is a
simple bill with tremendous
ramifications it will have
devastating consequences for
physician and nurse recruitment
for health insurance cost
increases and it's not good for
the vast majority of patients
for those two reasons alone we
recognize the law needs to be
reformed and we are supporting
similar legislation follows
guidelines from the
superintendent of insurance
thirty second hospital
association thank you.
Next up we have best
understandable.
I thank you for allowing me to
speak Mr chairman and committee
the doctor has to send bonding
CMO of levels health system I
was born and raised and trained
here in New Mexico have a large
family still use of our health
system three point two opposed
house bill fifty five number one
hospitals and doctors could not
be separated both of us are
employed by hospital number two
hundred millions of dollars are
invested and thousands are
employed by the hospital with
new technologies brought into
support care for New Mexicans
number three.
Decrease the act New Mexico
because transfers out of state
because closures of hospital
decrease recruitment and
retention of doctors special to
you and we will have position
pay more if the hospitals are
reduced as stated by this the of
the supervisor of Insurance so
again please we are asking that
you will propose bill seventy
five thank you.
Thank you next up we have doctor
Angela Sanchez.
Thank you my name is Dr Angela
Sanchez and I'm the medical
director for primary care at
loveless medical group I'm a
native New Mexicans from
Fratellis two years ago a bill
was introduced to raise about
half malpractice cap without a
plan for the PCS the governor
order a more balanced approach
can propose that we stop study
actuarial in development team to
work together on this complex
issue because all of us want to
keep New Mexicans safe here we
are now with the second bill
from the same author proposing
that we dropped the hospital
second.
Without a full understanding of
the downstream effects we need
patient advocates doctors nurse
practitioners hospitals
insurance companies and your
help.
Other for to develop a
comprehensive solution for a
complicated problem I propose
house bill seventy five in lieu
of Senate bill two thirty nine
to keep my patients safe.
Thank you.
Thank you next up we have Linda
Siegel.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee Linda Siegel
representing in New Mexico nurse
practitioner council in many
ways this debate has ceased to
be about the facts to
participate in the trial lawyers
against the physicians nurses
and hospitals in the state and
all nothing battle for victory
facts don't live interpretation
of facts seems to very we can
tell the law says even after the
hospitalists remove the PCF is
still responsible for successful
claims against the hospital for
the three year statute of
limitations the opposition says.
No payments can be very what is
the fact it will have to be
litigated but in the mean time
the two thousand two hundred
forty six independent doctors
that we maintain the fund
because all the hospital doctors
are out those two thousand two
hundred forty six will be
responsible for all the claims
made to the PCS the fact is we
don't know what will happen to
the patient compensation fund or
to the entire act if this bill.
Thank you next up we have doctor
Nancy right.
Good afternoon Mister chair my
name is Nancy right I'm a
pediatrician in Las Vegas at a
past president of the New Mexico
Medical Society I'm speaking in
opposition to house bill seventy
five I've been on the medical
staff at our local hospital in
Las Vegas for nineteen years and
I've been on the medical staff
leadership there for most of
that time if you want out of
state hospital corporations to
run our hospitals better
promoting unlimited malpractice
payments is not the way to do it
I have experience with this
house bill seventy five makes
doctors like me and our hard
working RN's respiratory
therapist.
This pharmacists and other
hospital staff suffer not the
CEOs in their offices in
Tennessee this bill will ruin
the stability of the patient
compensation fund I know
malpractice occurs I want funds
to be available for people
harmed by malpractice.
And this bill will drive
physicians out we won't be able
to track the more in and then
where will my family get medical
care we've lost so much with
COVID don't at this.
Thank you next up we have Connie
to heal.
Good afternoon.
Mr chairman and committee my
name is Connie Trujillo I'm a
nurse midwife.
New Mexico is a very progressive
state when it comes to health
care it's rural landscape is
forced of health care providers
to get creative and how we care
for New Mexicans throughout the
Great right.
But we can do better by allowing
non physician providers like
myself access to the project in
afforded by the medical
malpractice act not being
included in the medical
malpractice back.
Independent nurse midwives
options for the cost of
insurance coverage.
Would arrive and nurse
practitioners need to be
included under the definition of
health care provider in this
bill and every future bills
related to medical malpractice I
humbly ask you the nurse midwife
and former health care practice
while Telemeds business owner
that unless nurse midwives and
nurse practitioners are added to
the medical malpractice act the
vote NO for House Bill.
Thank you next up we have Troy
Clark.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee members we appreciate
and give our condolences to
those who have testified you
have had medical malpractice and
should occurrences in our life
and we also hear their message
that they want this to not
happen again house bill seventy
five does nothing to that
hospital seventy five point.
Asian access and and or
physicians are in harm's way of
removing the potential for
hospitals or doctors to leave
the state I am the CEO of the
New Mexico.
Ation we appreciate the doctors
in the efforts that they have
made and all of our heroes
during this pandemic.
They have saved us they have
been integral to the success we
have had in New Mexico today we
urge you to vote against house
bill seventy five of all four
house bill seventy five as a
vote against your doctors nurses
and hospitals will be in your
health care heroes and continue
to be so thank you.
Thank you next we have John
Harris.
Gentleman I'm the chairman of
the board of directors for all
the hospitals in the state of
New Mexico I have listened to
the remarks carefully today most
of these remarks that you're
hearing from mystery ally and
doctor Machen any anecdotal at
best.
Removing hospitals from this
from the fund is not a good idea
pay attention to the remarks
made by the superintendent of
New Mexico insurance this man
reserves that well he got it
right I ask you why are we not
listening to the experts why are
we not the second.
Doctors nurses and hospitals
have been your health care
heroes they have save lives the
continue to inject life into the
arms of of patients throughout
this this great state vote no on
H. B. seventy I don't pass it on
stop it now.
Thank you.
Thank you next up we have more.
We.
Mr chairman of the committee
Jason Weaks registered this
proper medical group we are
opposed to this legislation for
one simple reason comprehensive
medical malpractice reform has
to be to go in New Mexico we
need to improve the quality of
care and we can only do that if
we get comprehensive reform
house bill seventy five does not
represent comprehensive reform
the office of the superintendent
of insurance did a study they
did it probably with only half
the time the more data we need
more time to come up with that
comprehensive option house bill
seventy.
The news is simply reduces
additions from the fund which is
honestly maybe part of the
solution but probably not
probably what the solution bags
is broader more significant
reform as it relates to every
aspect of the act quite frankly
we do need to improve the
quality of health care in New
Mexico but the only way we're
going to do that is through a
comprehensive option in this
bill is not that option thank
you.
Thank you we have Kerry Brander.
Mr chairman members of the
committee Kerry robin Brander
registered lobbyists for the New
Mexico Medical Society the
medical society was established
in eighteen eighty six and
officially speaks on behalf of
more than three thousand members
that are both independent
physicians and employed
physicians the medical society
strongly opposes house bill
seventy five we care deeply
about the health of the patient
compensation fund not because it
is a slush fund for doctors but
because it is critical for
patients the fund allows
clinicians to pool their wrists
together and payout lifetime
medical expenses and and
settlements.
Thank you.
Next up we have Dan we.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Dan
weeks are representative of New
Mexico hospital association.
Ultimately of this bill is
enacted medical providers in New
Mexico will face an insurance
crisis that will do more that
which we were faced with in
nineteen seventy six and
result in the enactment of the
original MMA instead of a
collaborative approach to
modernize some of the provisions
of the forty five year old
malpractice act house bill
seventy five is a unilateral
plot forced instrument.
Mr Chairman thirty second
because of the committee and
considering your vote on this
measure.
Please respectively and adopt.
The maintenance of the
hypocritical and that is first
do no harm take the information
provided by the experts on this
issue and Tablebelow standards
bill thank you.
Thank you next up we have
Charlie Marquez.
We have doctor caring person.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee my name
is Karen Carson I'm a doctor
from Roswell I'm an independent
practitioner and a small
business owner I oppose this
bill.
Independent doctors we're will
be left alone in the sinking
boat we will be the ones holding
at fifty five million dollar
bank the cost burden will be too
much the rural communities will
lose their or doctors remember
most rural New Mexicans are two
to three hours away from
specialty medical care.
Thank you.
Next I have Scott Scanlon.
My name is Scott Scanlon
registered lobbyists for San
Juan regional Medical Center we
were founded in nineteen ten is
an eight bed facility and was
known as San Juan community
hospital for over sixty years we
became San Juan regional Medical
Center in nineteen seventy seven
each year the local hospital
corporation elects individuals
from the community to serve on
our board of directors the
hospital board is much more than
an honorary position they
actively work with the
management team on behalf of the
community although San Juan
regional Medical Center is not
currently a qualified health
care.
Participating in the fund we
want to preserve the option to
qualify one day regardless of
our participation San Juan
regionals concerned about the
negative impact passage of this
bill would have on rural health
care our physicians nurses and
patients all of whom are our
friends and neighbors in our
community please vote no on
house bill seventy five.
Thank you at this time either
any other members of the public
who wish to speak in opposition
to house bill seventy five acts
committed please raise your
hand.
Seeing no hands raised will now
go to those who registered to
speak in favor of the bill
beginning with Ellen white Sir.
Moving on we have eight L..
Sorry I'm sorry I was muted this
is Ellen Pfizer Mr chairman
members of the committee I
represent the senior citizens
law office that provides free
legal service to central New
Mexico seniors I'm just hero
unequivocally supports the H. B.
seventy five nationally over one
third of patients age seventy
and older and more than half of
patients over the age of fifty
eighty five leave the hospital
board thirty seconds and they
came in.
And at twenty ten federal HHS
report said that a quarter of
hospitalized Medicare
beneficiaries had suffered
adverse events for or as result
in medical care malpractice
claims reimbursed public funds
including Medicare and Medicaid
needs so it is important to
allow the jury to decide what is
fair compensation for injuries
and not restrict juries thank.
Thank you next up we have a new
trial.
Thank you good afternoon Mister
chair members of the committee
my name's Felice rail I am a
lawyer who's focused on the
rights of older and disabled
adults urged support of house
bill seventy five because caps
on damages which is essentially
what happens when we need the
hospitals as part of the patient
compensation fund
disproportionately harms older
adults it limits the remedies
available to them older adults
disproportionately use health
care services and there
disproportionately harm actors
Services older adults are also
more likely to suffer non
economic damages such as loss of
continents loss of mobility and
the loss of independence I'm
limiting remedies with caps
amounts to discrimination of
these older adults the unequal
access to justice and unfair
compensation I hope you stop the
hemorrhaging and that you pass
on hospice and I thank you.
Thank you next up we have
Kantrowitz.
One.
We are unable to hear you so we
will move on and he may raise
your hand at the.
Keep.
Thank you Mr chairman.
What happened.
You may go ahead sorry Mr and so
the next.
My name is rich kids with and I
just want.
We are still unable to hear you
so we will go on ten Mr coupons.
Thank you Mr chairman.
I think there's a little echo
all speak slowly.
I thank you for taking up this
controversy over a multi faceted
issue of who pays for hospital
negligence.
I've learned like so many others
the hard way about this win
seven years ago my granddaughter
was permanently and totally
disabled.
From an accident of birth.
This changed my life is changed
my entire family's life.
Luckily by the grace of.
We have a family is able to pull
together and support in times of
need but I will tell you it is a
terrible and eggs daylong fight
to get the services from state
agencies schools and a hospital
systems for the care she needs
US legislators struggle to fund
these agencies and we cannot let
the hospitals sure their
responsibilities to pay their
fair share please I urge you
pass this bill.
Thank you next up we have boiled
over.
Thank you for sharing the
committee
I'm here today and I'm honored
to be here today to seek justice
for the little guy well we're a
little guy owner victims of the
Sarah malpractice medical map
malpractice and I'm asking you
a white is a hospital I have
protection from the victim it's
not right that they fall under
cap and.
I was I found a fairly simple
simple surgery can turn into a
true nightmare for me this
changes my life everybody that
goes by for ever well practice
can take your life when up until
you so I'm asking the committee
to.
Block this and in favor of HBs
seventy five are to block those
hospitals are caps from.
Helping the victim thank you.
Backs we have Richard.
In next next up we have Nancy it
was only a.
Good afternoon my name is
Dominique de Paul and my family
is a victim of hospital
negligence at the birth of my
first baby I was given an
inaccurate an extremely large
dose of a dangerous medication
that cost me to have unrelenting
back to back contractions and
subsequently deprive my baby's
brain of oxygen this medication
wasn't an unlabeled back a
complete breach of safety
protocol we later discovered
that there were many years of
systemic failure at this
hospital that put patients in
jeopardy today my daughter
Josephine is almost eighty years
old she has ripple.
Requires assistance with every
aspect of her daily life what
happened to her was not her
fault or our fault it was very
clearly the hospital's fault and
it was preventable.
Just a few will forever live
with her significant
disabilities and my family's
life will never be what we had
envisioned I hope this never
happens to any of the LFC ninety
one else in that large
corporations like the hospital
where my daughter Josephine was
born are held responsible for
their actions please vote yes in
support of the house bill
seventy five.
Thank you next up we have Erica
I'll call.
Hello I am speaking on behalf of
my son Elijah Martinez he's four
years old and suffered brain
damage as a result lack of
oxygen at birth he cannot walk
set talk crawl or eat on his own
he has seizures that last forty
minutes or longer I was in labor
for twenty nine hours in the
nurses didn't watch the monitor
that was showing he was
struggling nor did they notify
the doctor CPR was performed for
over forty minutes he was
intubated incorrectly to times
furthering his damage he was
flown the UNM brain dead and on
life support I had to quit my
job.
Years to provide twenty four
seven care medical bills became
out of control and we couldn't
even afford groceries we percent
of medical negligence claim and
had it been capped under the
NMAA we would not have been able
to provide proper care the first
year alone was over six hundred
thousand in medical bills he
follows at least seven doctors
and therapies in and out of
state one medication alone is
five hundred dollars out of
pocket we are always exhausted
physically mentally and
emotionally no family should
have thank you next up we have
Jason start.
Michael.
Probably.
Okay we will now go to those
members of the public here who
wish to speak in support but did
not sign up Carly Kantrowitz.
Hello my name is Karley
Kantrowitz and my father
suffered from a massive heart
attack when I was in middle
school it was due to the
negligence of our local hospital
that my father has as much
damage to his heart muscle as he
does the amount of blood and
oxygen that is correct the press
the body is half of what healthy
persons with the as a result
from my he has a disability that
will attempt to restart his
heart in the event he stops
breathing.
You can no longer help me whole
Hey for my horses because he has
a fifteen.
Because he has a fifteen pound
weight limit.
He also has many other
limitations such as elevation
and exertion he's continued he
has continued health care costs
that will last for the rest of
his life I ask you to vote yes
on house bill seventy five.
Which the aftermath of financial
stress.
We are blessed I I V. I.
This time but others haven't
been as lucky and they suffer
emotionally and financially
because the cost hospitals have
misspelled thank you.
Thank you all right hander went
to Richard can't read you may
try again.
Good afternoon Senators my name
is Richard Kantrowitz nice ride
medical malpractice I'm not here
to tell you my story I'm here to
plead for all New Mexicans those
against this bill stated that
hospitals may close they don't.
You need.
Fund which is unique to New
Mexico.
What I don't understand is how
can these multi billion dollar I
state multi hospital systems
exist in other states if they
don't have the same protections
how did they make it without the
fund which they make you know
other states without protection
they can do it here in New
Mexico.
Otherwise they would only be in
New Mexico and.
Mr chairman we to ensure the
witness.
Public comment okay we.
I'm here Mister chairman I'm a
couple of pages over the.
Thank you very much that
concludes public comment at this
time.
Thank you.
The.
Yes we can hear you okay R.
thank you
We'll go now to.
The committee.
We have a Senator.
Padilla.
Thank you.
Our mail and Hamblen.
Thank you Mr chairman and that
thank you Representative and I
just received an enormous amount
of of of input on this piece of
legislation I will tell you that
the vast majority has been in
support of the legislation and I
will say that last evening I had
a conversation with Mr glad that
article get gap glance galant
who is us that we spoke earlier
and one of the few people that
reached out in opposition of the
legislation so I I thought that
was very interesting considering
there was so much energy and
ownership behind it
so Mister chairman and and and
Representative
So in addition to currently in
addition to the six hundred
thousand dollar cap of can you
walk us through what is lifetime
of care also means what is that.
R. Mr chairman and Senator was
that calculated Representative
yeah and I think in Mr Chairman
center I'm gonna give you kind
of topic sense and I'll turn it
over to Mr Vargas she's got a
lot more experience this year
than I do it does cover future
medicals but as a practical
matter they don't do that they
end up buying annuities for the
patients in fact if I remember
right this fund does not even
have a person assigned to kind
of monitor medicals and pay them
but I want to make sure I'm
actor with you Mr chairman and
senator let me turn it over to
Mr Vargas and I think you can
give you more complete answer
alright Mister chairman Senator
Representative I thank you for
the opportunity to answer that
question although the framework
of the act contemplated lifetime
medicals as incurred that hasn't
been the practice in fact
recently we reached out and
asked the superintendent of
insurance how many victims of
medical malpractice receive
future medicals as anchor and we
were expecting a list of
hundreds if not thousands and
the list we got had a total of
six people are there are six
people in New Mexico who
actually get their future
medicals pay in my experience
litigating these cases usually
what happens is there the
plaintiffs come up with a life
care plan that demonstrates what
the future medicals are expected
to be and if there's a
settlement and I will tell you
my experience.
Ninety eight percent of these
cases.
Lose.
The remainder either settle or
go to trial in the only way you
get your future medicals as
encourages if you win at trial.
Of those that don't go to trial
they either get dismissed early
on.
For their settled and when
they're settled the fund find
some amount of money for the
plaintiff to go and buy a new CD
by health insurance and send for
themselves and that is how it
has functioned in New Mexico at
least for the last twenty three
years that I've been in
practice.
Thank you Mr Chairman
representative Mr Vargas strong
voice state in nineteen eighty
nine.
Mr chair Senator I believe you
are governor that year so yes I
I thought that was you ten years
younger than me good for you
As you anyway I thank you Mr
chairman of the.
There's not apologize I just
thought that that gives you so
many years
so so I want to make sure I
heard you correctly so so in
order to get the lifetime of
care coverage you have to go to
court you have to have a case in
order to make this happen you're
still.
Mr chair Senator that is
absolutely right you have to
prevail at a in a jury or bench
trial and to do so you have to
have expert witnesses who
testified that the practitioners
fell below the standard of care
and you have to understand that
to take a case like this to
trial often cost hundreds of
thousands of dollars Justin
experts if you don't have
experts the law says you don't
have a malpractice case so
imagine those plaintiffs who
have spent or whose attorneys
have expended a hundred or two
hundred thousand dollars in
experts and then you win six
hundred thousand dollars plus
future medicals as incurred and
again the percentage of cases
that actually go that route are
so low that we only have six
patients in our state that fall
into that category.
Mr chairman I I have to say that
I'm very disappointed in how the
other side of this
this issue has Representative
about that was never covered at
all I'm I'm very disappointed to
hear that because you're right
Mr Chairman representative and
and Mr Vargas
you're gonna have to go to court
after going through a
devastating experience to begin
with.
That is probably shredded and
torn your family apart and now
you're gonna have to employ
experts.
To prove your case and then
you're gonna have to pay those
programs serving somehow this
whatever and and and that's when
you're going to receive lifetime
of Kerr it is is that did I say
that Representative correctly.
Mr chair Senator you're
absolutely correct.
I'm aware that so was there ever
a time and I want to say it was
right after Mr chairman you and
I can't and and Senator Griggs
and thanks for the only with the
came in that color the onset of
rents on the committee here with
this out was there and an
alternative to the cap at one
point.
What was it going to be raised
or what what was going to be
another amount with that
included
the lifetime of care in the new
cap or was there also a lifetime
of here we had to go to court
all these other groups together
but with was what was that
amount into that what happened
of that initiative.
Senator and I believe you're
referring to the twenty fourteen
bill that that governor Martinez
did not sign impact vetoed I
don't recall what it raised the
cap to but it raised the cap in
it added business corporations
to the Act because at the time
there was a case in from the New
Mexico Supreme Court that
question whether physicians who
practice within a business
corporation whether the
corporation itself got the
benefit of the cap.
That was the bill that went
through in twenty fourteen it
did not change anything in terms
of the plea to still has to go
to court still has to have
experts still has to prove their
case before they could get up to
the cap plus future medicals has
incurred and I want to I want to
emphasize that as in Kurt
because I've reached out to
other lawyers to practice in
this area and ask those that
have and again there's only six
of all but one of my colleagues
has a client who won her trial
who is getting medicals as
incurred and her experience is
that there is no one at the
superintendent of insurance is
office who handles these as
incurred and so she gets the
runaround anytime she needs to
get reimbursed for any future
medical care so the system
really doesn't provide lifetime
care the way it's been
Representative.
Again I am waiting here all this
is that is not all with the
other side this site is
representative of this thank you
for clarifying that also had a
question
The entire committee as
questions your cell and try to
keep my assistance possible as
chairman Howard and and and if
you all don't want to answer
this morning reliance somebody
else to how hospitals typically
insured for the liability of
this nature for themselves.
Sure and senator we have
actually some of that in front
of us I you Mr Vargas would like
to handle that I'm happy to turn
it over to us Mr Vargas thank
you Mr chair representative
Senator each of these hospitals
we've been talking about today
and the CEOs have come and talk
to you continue to Kerry claims
made excuse me yes claims made
insurance policies in some cases
up to a hundred million dollars
that insure their liability for
medical negligence and one of
the state of the entities that
came today stands out and that
is Presbyterian healthcare
systems because in addition to
having I believe eighty million
dollars in liability coverage
for these claims because they're
nonprofit their their tax
returns are accessible to the
public in their tax returns
demonstrated in addition to
their eighty million dollars of
insurance coverage they have a
reserve a hundred and fifty
eight million dollars for cool
professional liability claim.
so there is no crisis there is
no need for giving them the
patient compensation fund the
benefit of the doubt of the oil
is called on use insurance.
Miss Mister chairman Senator I
want to add to that so that was
one speaker was talking about
something executive officers
part correct I don't want to
emphasize this point these.
Rations while almost all term
are out of state corporations
and they operated insurance and
every other states without
medicine.
Caption substance that we're.
Next.
Or.
Thank you
That's going to ask the
webmaster to bring me to the
front pagers I can see everybody
in about going back and forth
thank you I'm on one of the
folks that spoke in opposition
Mr chairman I think it was Mr
weeks talked about you know
comprehensive reform and things
of that nature to this
This issue that this this
problem that's been attempted to
be saltier
You know you you all the come Mr
Chairman representative with a
solution and with the plan if
there was you know and I just
love when this happens here the
legislature been here nine years
now I'm in my ninth year and I
just here gosh you know we need
to study we need to do this
whatever we need to get some
comprehensive reform we need to
put a plan together what what
what what what has a better plan
come and I'm not really I'm
asking you representative to
respond to that but I don't know
if you one of the other side
wants to respond back because it
really doesn't feel very genuine
to me when the only time you
talk about reform or the only
time you come forward and say
you know we need to do something
here is when when another
initiative another group got
together and and put a plan
together so I.
The opposition wants to talk
about that at all and and and
what work is been done in what
what comprehensive reform plan
has been put together here to
ensure that this this these
funds don't go bankrupt and that
these are available for these
patients who have very serious
issues that they're dealing with
that are I mean going to control
the rest of their lives.
And if you come.
And I just don't know if anyone
else I want to respond to.
What what plan did you put
together because my questions
chairman.
Mr Chairman I'm not yet but I
can answer.
Senator the data there is a very
very sensitive plan not of them.
The others probably can't answer
it
that is the the the.
So to speak of plaintiffs
attorneys here and I will
address the number of your other
concerns so that you get a full
picture instead of just a pretty
limited.
But I'll talk about the office
of superintendent of insurance
who's spent over a year yes of
the setting at having a very
strong recommendation and I'll
go into that when I asked my
questions thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman I I'm I
had it in for five points here
that I wanted to cover because
I've gotten a ton of feedback on
this and it's by one of the ones
that got the most
but I appreciate you know the
answers are going to continue to
listen R. A..
Just to tell you that I am just
incredibly disappointed with how
the lifetime of here is been
Representative has been
represented well by the other
side and and that's going to
weigh heavily in my decision
thank you very much
Representative bring this matter
and and could see Mr Vargas
again you look ten years younger
than me so I'm kind of a little
bummed about that but I guess
what what to meet for coffee
sometime thank you.
Thank you a Senator Padilla but
Senator Hickey.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Representative Ely for coming
out to meet with us on this
beautiful Saturday that is
something we don't see much of
any more working in the
legislature a it's so
unfortunate I do have a series
of questions and clarifications
and and so I am going to take
some time to go through that but
I really first want to offer
condolences to those who have
spoken today I'm malpractice
it is a fact of life it is
unfortunate.
I work in the emergency room a
number of years in my career and
And I've even spoken with
families that in such a
situation where maybe some
malpractice and it's been awful
just awful.
Have to go out to the.
As some of the witnesses said
that they came out spoken out
into relates more.
But you know what.
Their current and they're awful
for the family this is my area
of expertise substance abuse and
behavioral health it's awful.
But it happens.
Car accidents happen.
And they they were in I worked
out on the reservation in the
clinic.
And had car accidents come in
and have to tell the families of
the COVID that no they didn't
make.
And so I really feel.
For those families who have this
happen.
And I believe and I'll I'll go
through how this works because I
believe that it's been
I don't want to say purposely
distorted but it's been and we
really haven't you know it's
kind of like you get a little
bit but you don't get the whole
story so that's that's were were
probably can go but first I do
want to offer my condolences
also Representative Eli it's
good to see you again.
File is what you know who you
are you're the second person who
talked me into running for the
Senate.
And I got a I I want to thank
you for that and and Barbara you
were the person who talked me
into coming back to New Mexico
you run New Mexico health
connections in true health and
you know we provided great
service of thank you thank you
for doing that it's it's kind of
a great irony because now here I
am today.
In a new role and and I love it
I really love it
and one of the best things about
being Senator is that you get to
illuminate.
And look at.
Tended consequences of law.
And I think that's what we're
dealing with here is that a lack
of recognition.
Of the really pretty terrible
and at the end I'll sum up with
this the harm that will come to
patients.
If this is an act.
That multiple harm and wherever
the harm come from.
If you don't have a doctor to go
to.
You don't have a hospital to go
to their painting these pictures
of Presbyterian we love lesson
now but fourteen.
in the funder and small little
communities and they will not be
able to afford due to issues in
our state such as change of
venue that is are there in
Chicago
they will not be able to for.
Malpractice insurance never
going out of business.
It's very clear thank you for
that in fact if you took the
time to read the FIR and I will
go back and read the whole thing
over to you it clearly points
out this will close hospitals in
New Mexico.
The end of the analysis to my
knowledge.
This will close hospitals in New
Mexico.
So
I think that that we need to
kind of start from that point
but I have a number of questions
to ask you to.
See if we clarity as I said
shine the light on the
unintended consequence.
And
So where so what the yes
Representative you are.
I know
you know you're you're bringing
this bill so I assume you some
sort of medical less for.
because you bring us and you
think you know a lot about it
what will happen
Me are you familiar with the
annual health care workforce
report.
Okay Mr chairman and senator
before I answer that question
what the legislature take your
time we are on the floor of the
house right now I asked the
speaker the question I said I
thought we were doing
celebrations
and he's what are you talking
about I said I didn't realize
this was national legislative
boring building so you take your
time Senator I want to respond a
couple things before I answer
your questions you made a couple
comments that I do want to
address what is there is no
prices with hospitals not like
doctors we never prices with
hospitals leaving the state
because they couldn't get
adequate insurance so this
notion that if they're not in
the patient's compensation fund
they will leave New Mexico there
is absolutely no proof.
And so I I have no idea
I love that you have that
opinion.
But I but before I can take your
opinion I do need back to back
that up I take the FIR study.
And these are not hospitals
leaving the state these are
hospitals losing yeah those that
Senator I'm sorry Mister
chairman Senator I'm gonna turn
it over Mr Vargas you just a
second a couple things that I do
think the committee needs to
understand.
The actuarial studies the the
things that have been in these
reports are based on St the
hospital have you read an
insurance company Mister
chairman Senator you know what
it takes to be able to run an
actuarial study to this day the
hospitals not provided the
claims information that
actuarial needs to be able to
set premiums so the the idea
that somehow we're going to make
out of whole cloth of the
hospitals going to be leaving is
based on information that no one
has not the FY are not the
superintendent of insurance and
the fact is is that when we're
talking about doctors fleeing
this one was fine before the
hospitals were leading it was
running a surplus and it is only
with the addition of the
hospitals.
The premiums for independent
positions in the last five years
have gone up forty nine percent
but I know that Mr Vargas is
inching to answer the question
thank you all right so Mister
chairman I could and senator I
will turn it over Mr works.
Mr chairman Senator
Representative Eli.
The fact of the matter is.
The folks who wrote the FIR did
not have access to any of the
claims information or any of the
hospital revenue information.
The superintendent of insurance
did not have access to the
claims information and neither
did the two actuaries that he
contracted with to provide
actuarial studies and Senator
Hickey run insurance company you
know the concept of sound
actuarial principles in addition
to being a malpractice lawyer
I'm insurance lawyer for twenty
three years I've read several if
not hundreds actuarial reports
the only two that stand out in
my mind are the two that were
given to the superintendent
because those were the only
actuarial studies I have ever
seen in my career where prior
claims data was not given.
Any time you get any kind of
insurance but particularly
professional liability insurance
the first thing insured does is
says what year I became here
lost run history and what that
is is that's a list of every
claim you have in the last five
to ten years everything you paid
out in the claim your claims
expenses and that information
can be used to assess the risk
going forward and to set the
appropriate premium that
information has never been
provided either to the
superintendent of insurance to
his actuaries where do people
drafting FIR is in the fact of
the matter is I learned this
year litigation with some of
these hospitals and even without
the benefit of the cap would
help reduce premium that they've
enjoyed from the sweet deal that
they got from the prior
superintendent those hospitals
were still extremely extremely
profitable in one case that I
had against eastern New Mexico
Medical Center Roswell that late
two thousand I learned that that
quote unquote small community
hospital earned over forty
million dollars profit in
Roswell New Mexico.
So the idea that you're not
giving them this sweet deal is
going to make them close up shop
is false any large corporation
that has an asset that brings it
profit doesn't shut down asset
down these hospitals are
profitable without this week
deal.
Thank you Mr Vargas for your
answer I would like to point out
to you.
That the OSI's I said answering
Senator yes question was there a
study.
That look at the situation and
look at actuarial that.
And they he had the benefit of
the Milam and and a couple of
other studies and the difficulty
with those studies is this and
it's not that they're supplying
that they're happy supplies
that.
The hospitals that employ a
physician.
Basically have there are no
practice things are paid out
there not a force and in order
to get an idea of how to
apportion future malpractice
premiums you have to have an
understanding of the
apportionment of the past
history four of the
accountability.
And because that what has not
been historically have they are
trying to develop that today.
Which is why in a very common
sense way is recommendation
overall and again you've seen
that and I will provided to my
college.
It's a it's about a thirty page
recommendation is recommendation
is we need one more year to get
the data I spoke with the chief
actuary.
At the OSI.
Laid out in detail and you're
right as an insurance person as
essentially almost an actuary
myself and sat for the exam.
I they have to be able to get
that information to do
questions.
They have come up with a
solution.
For the meeting.
Which is a very fair solution
and that was in fell to thirty
nine.
With the seven hundred fifty
thousand dollars.
And the continuation of the
insurance that does okay.
lifetime or shorter than that
you mentioned six cases.
It does Hey that does pay that
out and it remains state.
I think it may have been
somewhat misleading when you
said there are only sits in a
very small statewide that that
is not actuar yes was.
I would also remind you that
when a settlement is may.
It is made between the
plaintiff's lawyer.
And the defendants.
And whatever they work out they
work into whether the medical.
It can be settled there.
And there's also a misimpression
that you cannot go to court.
Senator Padilla you can go to
court.
This is the initials seven
nineteen seventeen seventy six
in nineteen seventy six well
we're in place a panel that
review.
Maybe three physicians three
lawyers and a seven.
Individuals to.
Survive between or or or to run
the and if there is merit
they look to see if there will
not be a supplement in the
settlement again lawyers are
right there.
For their patients to get
whatever they need to cover
their projected future medical
costs.
If you don't like the
recommendation of the panel you
can still go to court.
I have been a witness.
Special needs.
And in doing that I can tell you
we hasn't paid hundreds of
thousands of dollars I'm sorry
that was just a little bit of an
probably exaggeration I'm
departments of our guests
and does more slightly all that
can income within.
But maybe the fans to and from
and they do is to and sometimes
they win which is again
sometimes on the jury did not
vote.
And so that's why again you've
got a low number of cases and
and I'm and I'm going to
conclude with the fact that the
irony is that this bill in some
ways.
Almost regal malpractice in that
it would deplete the fund.
Because the doctors with the
then we'll go through all that
and hospitals
are still shut down most of the
questions.
and then and then there's no
money going into the fund to the
four people have that lifetime
benefits.
I can be of the pandemic when it
comes.
the OSI is in charge of the
phone and I can't tell you but I
certainly will fire next week
who is the person that Mr tall
masts in overseeing the fund and
that people get.
So now that we've the one
through that I want to go back
to my first question Mr at
Representative Ely that there if
you answer I'd like to just
stick to the answer this time
Senator here Senator go to the
chair please.
Yes I'm sorry Mr chair thank you
for your very.
Mr chair and representative Ely
are you familiar with the annual
healthcare workforce for for.
Should Mr chairman and senator
I I am going to turn over Mr
Vargas but but I do say so will
answer the question I I'm a
lawyer and so I can't help
myself to say listen if you're
going to give a speech and
you're totally tell you the
Senator but I I would like to
give Mr Vargas the opportunity
to at least if he wants to
respond to some of that and to
answer your question thank you
Mr chairman thank you senator.
Mr Vargas.
Your muted Mr you're on mute.
My apologies Mr chair Senator I
am aware of the report I have
not read the most recent one I
think the last one that I
actually had the opportunity to
review was in twenty nineteen
and I don't know if there's more
recent one but I'm aware of the
report.
And are you aware of the
shortages of physicians in the
state that report the twenty
twenty one points out.
Mr chair Senator as I pointed
out I am not read the twenty
twenty report although my
recollection is that
historically New Mexico has run
a shortage of physicians
although we have historically
been gaining them in number even
before the hospitals joined
medical practice act.
I like to give you a little
information out of the twenty
twenty report if I could just
stop so that you understand but
many people are trying to get
across here why I Bonnie Lee
this bill will do more harm
and then that what's being for
trade so in twenty thirteen
there were two hundred fifty six
OBGYN twenty nineteen with
different funding report
commented on there are only two
hundred and thirty access going
back.
midwives forty two down to
thirty five primary care there
is a deficit by the report which
changes methodology account
active license is not just
licenses there is a deficit of
in terms of what we should have
in our state three hundred and
sixty seven unfortunately the
report did not count alright
this is that is there an active
license and the number of
primary care physicians are
either retiring of us working
part time and or are starting a
family and that's working so
we're probably down I your
positions already and that
can definitely Reese general
surgery in Bernalillo county
sixty eight to forty nine
I'm I'm familiar
just again the.
Yes all of this
Raising rates to physicians and
unfortunately I'm not real good
back in may be called up to the
camera here and I think we have
to pass up the the
how much higher the rates are in
New Mexico in all the states
around us for primary care
general surgery and we need why
and and so that's that's the
reason I'm raising the question
because again we need to we need
this all needs with our.
And.
Mr
if I could drive mcity is
familiar with reporters question
about it if you want I didn't
realize that she wasn't I'm
sorry to interrupt thank you Mr
thanks okay I'm I'm I just and I
made the point that I think
we're germane here is the
reduction of clinicians in the
state tell you what one of one
of the things that really
worries me is neurosurgery
Hartman of neurosurgery at
University of New Mexico is just
the credentials.
And we have very few more
surgeons and it's going to take
three to six years to get re
credentialed and not only did
the physicians the.
The residents that about all
gone down the program so we
don't even have anybody online
and again trying to recruit new
physicians and to the state
where the salaries of or the
take home compensation this is.
Is some of the lowest in the
country
why why is that.
number one or or state.
Number two
half of our state is on Medicaid
Medicare the states around us
have nothing more that
proportion so don't have the
commercial insurance so it's a
very it's very for compensating
state and and in fact the costs
and the third lowest premium in
the country here in New Mexico.
Because of the low rate in the
state.
So that was one of the the the
the that.
So it's it's gonna be a tough
state to.
Recruit I just I want everyone
to be aware of that
so that we don't take an action
that actually causes further
harm.
The
and and speaking of UNM.
I guess when you know what one
thing that.
That that bothers me is you want
patients to have.
A higher.
Bility the state average right.
That's what I understand.
And I'm curious why you and M.
which is covered under the store
the state towards me math.
Didn't you didn't put in an
amendment.
Raise their cat.
Which is also quite well so are
you can you answer the question
why you didn't put I mean
because again you're asking.
or
you know trying to budget
patients which didn't include
you in that it's not Mr chair
and Representative that's real
simple
are we that is nothing to do
with this and on the rules chair
in the house I can tell you that
belong.
We get six Charlie different act
the tort claims act something
entirely different has nothing
to do with this couldn't put it
in this act I wanted to wasn't
consider.
Thank you that I I'm guessing
maybe next year he'll consider
that but at that okay
What one of your witnesses
It is a doctor Schaefer kernel
shapes I'm not sure are you
there.
This
is current share for Mr Chairman
is okay I I see she has a PhD I
just want to
ask your of what it what is your
Ph.D in this drive safer roads
safer.
It wow I'm trying to get on here
it's in biomedical research and
ethics okay.
Go to the chair please.
All sorry.
Or everyone please yes so Mr
chair in the state
you may explained that the third
leading cause of death in the
country.
Is due to hospital malpractice
that right.
Patient safety errors.
So that's the third leading
costs and what is your source so
if you're a PhD I think probably
are pretty alligned the science
which use force on that well I
wish I had my **** right here
but I'm in a hotel room in
Washington DC there are the it's
been that way for many many many
years over twenty years now
there's multiple articles out
that have taken care of and
that's why there are some
patient safety groups all over
the country trying to deal with
that I will be happy to pull
those articles for you I have an
entire biography of stuff that I
can send to you okay.
I'm gonna thank you certainly
appreciate that when you made
that statement I look at the
CDC.
Ten leading causes of death in
the United States and actually
everyone on your phone to go to
the CDC in the.
And I you know I although I'm
under the previous
administration sometimes things
were sketchy but the CDC has
curry Act zines answer.
And then well accidents and then
when you dig deep into accidents
number for incidentals are
respiratory.
It's hard from.
All.
Unintentional poisoning.
And they don't even mention.
Hospitalists so I just Mister
chairman Senator you want to
cite on the page United States
medical errors are the third
leading cause of death when the
Emory law journal lying fifty
three I'll be happy to send you
a copy since insurance or yeah
I'm send me that because I'd
like to take it apart used to be
a review and but at the moment I
think I'm going to believe the
CDC thank you see every
referencing specific diseases
are and I'm not talking about
patient safety car accidents are
the disease in a false or not.
Mr where you're you're you're we
stop Senator Hickey you have to
go through the chair please I'm
sorry I'm sorry Mr Chappell oaks
here experienced incredible loss
and was treated with respect
thank you.
So Mister chair I just I I would
the and fellow senators I we
look at the CDC and data and
remind you that.
Car accidents or not this is
all.
So I'm I think another thing is
probably using people and I
think Mr Vargas probably has.
Sounds like he understands and
actuarial science
and so I'd be happy to directed
to him who you are
Representative the line Mister
chair.
What is the term I do and are
encouraged but not report.
Mr chair Senator.
Your Mr chair Senator incurred
but not reported is a claim that
has been in fact included as a
lost about reported over and as
a loss.
Okay thank you and so in the
current law.
For hospitals were let in
although no reports of losses
were announced until twenty
nineteen
our process and so
that in sixteen seventeen.
And the
the that statute of limitations
and there are something
expectations are seven years.
So we've already had so so
someone who's had a and a
problem.
they are the report of maybe a
little later something were to
happen today I'm sorry that is
not it's three years someone has
and all of our.
Twenty four twenty twenty four
to report the claim and so in
insurance which you do is you
build up reserves.
And with we talked about
deficits and so forth your you
build up reserve.
To cover.
What might come down the pike
based on his.
Is for hospitals have a history.
And they there there is some
reserve in her.
But if these hospitals are
tossed out of the.
They no longer have liability.
Because patients who go through
the frontier and that's that
that you that.
This to them.
They will not be liable.
Next in the law.
Very plans of yes yes it is and
I know you're going to report
some cases Mr Vargas and I've
got I've got some resources
those cases and we want to turn
this into a academic got a case
by case I'll be happy to do that
with you but the fact is that
the hospitals out of the fund.
No longer have liability.
For whatever happens.
when they were when they were in
the funds before.
So.
The.
The fund now is is at a deficit
and and that way when the fund
was put together it was always
expected that it would run some
deficit the one year with the
two million eight I have the flu
that the now practice funds to
run a deficit in the made up
with surcharges over time and
that's how it goes you'll be
here.
But the the problem then and
here's here's trying back into
the positions.
The physicians who are still in
the fund.
Will be liable.
To pay up in to build up their
reserves.
All the money.
With the acts that people the
gentleman please sue for that
occurred in those hospitals and
the hospitals will not be line.
The doctors.
And so if you're a doctor and
you're already so.
We have already demonstrated.
That
Our doctors pay higher premiums
and anyone else about this.
Does it go up three to four
hundred percent.
And you know what the other it's
he said that has not been
brought out here on this I say I
I love this job because I get to
shine a light.
And the light is.
That.
As the.
Those are Paul that.
They also will allow the
physicians who work for them.
And fifty percent of the
positions in New Mexico.
You were.
For hospitals so the number of
physicians in private practice
what.
To make up and Hey out that in
urban I reported activity.
Are going to see somewhere maybe
between four and six hundred
percent increases make this
funds are.
And I don't know many positions
that are gonna take that kind of
yeah.
Then they can go to states
around the square of the
malpractices less where there is
not near as much Medicaid
Medicare payment as in the
state.
And the ability to recruit the
session.
Is going to be next to
impossible.
Because who would come into the
state of another fact.
That plays into all of this.
The average.
The oldest average age
physician.
By state.
The U. S..
Is in New Mexico.
You talk to the private
practices Manson how are you and
who.
Even some of the large system
they're not doing well.
This is not an attractive state.
This.
So that's why some unintended
consequences are in the.
We talked about rural schools.
And you kind of Rustom off in
the beginning talk about the big
guys the fourteen little ones it
will not be able to the stand.
Rate increases and again one of
the reasons that that rates are
high in the state is because we
do have a change of venue.
So that someone can happen the
currents
saying Silvercity.
We're maybe juries are just
historically family to
placements and.
And as the lawyer down there
it's a co chair of in Santa Fe
or.
Whatever other County that's
where the case will be heard.
And because of that venue which.
Insurance companies.
Are very skittish about insuring
in.
Mexico.
just a few other things to
highlight clear up
and and I'll be happy to answer
your question well.
so this this is a question
the hospital's first come into
your backpack is fun Senator.
If we can ask questions not too
much committee a new we got I
have six other senators to want
to ask questions and you are at
the floor for thirty minutes.
Mr chairman I can't hear Senator
Hickey.
Senator Hickey are muted.
My apologies the
It just I I know this committee
we do certain individuals take a
long time so but I'm I'm getting
towards the end of of my
questions here
when we were hospitals.
First within to the malpractice
and.
Representative the yes Mister
chairman Senator two thousand
nine the first hospitals but it.
Okay
I would like to work for you.
To the Santa Fe New Mexican
October third.
Nineteen seventy six thank you
probably find this on the web.
And here here's the headline
thank you.
Probably doesn't show up very
well but
and maybe it shows that
backwards but.
Back then when there is
difficult the first hospitals
were let into the fund by
physicians mutual.
They include San Juan.
Eight as we can Santa Fe
memorials Albuquerque house.
north in New Mexico Presbyterian
several others join if that time
as well so that's when the
that's when hospitals first came
into the fund and
The that part but anyway it so
and they were in the funds.
And they were in the phone.
Until about nineteen ninety two.
And then they got a better deal.
And they dropped out.
And then you're correct I
believe that was Saint Vincent's
and and the two thousand nine.
And then.
Presbyterian and the others.
Ask for entrance but nothing was
process to two thousand nineteen
so the deficit in the funding
this because by two physicians
with huge rewards back in twenty
fifteen in the southeast part of
the state.
So I think it's important to
really understand kind of the
history here and of the that
there.
So.
Mr chair Senator.
I am finishing up Mr chair that
is yours I I just was gonna pass
Christian that would be a lot of
response from of this and our
mission of the state and the
in response that the committee
has a wheels this act.
With that would be okay Mister
chairman Senator for Mr Arafat
would be fine with me Mr chair
and representative Ely in this
departments thank you Mr as far
thank you Mr chair Senator
Hickey representative Ely I
think Representative Eli was
answering a different question
you asked because we've been
talking about the deficit that
occurred with the inclusion of
St Vincent's in two thousand
nine but if you were asking
about a complete history of the
act I've had to research this
because I I made a misstatement
first testimony and I when we
did a deep dive and what I
learned was in nineteen seventy
six when the act was first
passed hospitals were included
in the definition of a health
care provider however none of
them elected initially to become
part of the act as senator he
pointed out at some point in the
late seventies I believe it was
nineteen seventy seven or
seventy eight some of the
hospitals became part of the act
there were leaders a large
number of claims against St
Joseph's hospital for a
radiation oncologist and that
created were threatened a
deficit in the fund in the
superintendent of insurance at
that time number one seven
nineteen ninety two amendment
and number two racer charges to
a point where it was no longer.
S. chief for the hospitals to be
in the act so they all left in
nineteen ninety two and it
wasn't until two thousand and
nine one St Vincents was
admitted that the next hospital
was admitted and then in two
thousand sixteen we saw the wave
of admissions under
superintendent drinking.
But after doing so we found what
what happened before happened
again once the hospitals were in
they had so many more claims
than individually insured
positions that the deficit
occurred.
Dr Hickey are muted.
Mr chair if I could respond to
that the observation by Mr
Vargas.
The
The the reason the claims
increase and this this is a
problem done whether or who
responded to doctor Mack in a
needs
are bad that it starts out the
opt out of your February
nineteenth I our mac in any
lacks understanding of important
issues involving the Mexico
malpractice that and the
compensation fund
as well as a lack of
understanding how the PCS
coverages price and here goes
into this point
the wait the way a premium this
price you can you have as a
physician or hospital up to
three inferences or you can have
unlimited occurrences and when
you do likely have no limits
currents when you have your
point so many physicians and as
a hospital your premiums go up a
huge amount.
And in fact they're saying that
he and the people who that the
the IFRC
that right now the portion of
yes the deficit funding is
better than it has been since
the hospitals and then you
remember the hospitals are
paying and millions and millions
of dollars.
To keep the funds state and get
the hospitals were to go out of
the funds.
It would fall apart.
The physicians would have to
pick up the liability that
currently exist for the
hospitals that want to drive
out.
Their premiums would go up
substantially conservatively
three hundred percent of it
actually the doctors and
hospitals six hundred percent
something they cannot afford
cannot afford in the state is so
you this issue.
And the inability to recruit
this.
So
As I said it's.
My heart goes out.
To the people who had to
experience not practice my
father.
Right now it's.
And and I wanted to bring suit.
And even die suddenly died
because of malpractice situation
guys medical students are relief
package.
Appreciate diagnose and he said
you know.
And and and he was gonna times
says what is that going to get.
And
I I still have very mixed
feelings of it so I I I
understand how people can feel
that one.
I myself have fired.
A number of doctors.
A grand loveless houses.
I ran the allegiance health
clinic Senator huge clinic in
the grass and I have brought
physicians up through peer
review mechanisms and due
process and when they found that
wrongdoing was done a that were
fired and be they were turned
over to the national that thank.
And so yes these bad things
happen.
But.
The calamity that will happen in
the state if you choose to see.
In passing this law.
Will be as I said earlier in and
of itself Iral maybe I should
have called the legal
malpractice but it will be a
practice because so many people
will be R. because I cannot.
Yes.
And that's what.
Those who have testified today.
So be and that's why is the
position.
And I know perhaps I'm overly
passionate.
But I took a no.
Did you know how are.
In the past as well.
Would be to do.
I cannot process.
And so I recommend to my
comments happy to answer any
other questions please
absolutely reject this law.
That we have passed the law who
are committed to thirty nine it
is based on what the
superintendent recommended
Senator Padilla.
And I'm hoping that we can.
Do that and not have the
collateral damage those we're
trying to protect and serve
thank you.
Thank you are Senator Hickey I
have Senator automobile good
afternoon Mister chairman and
with Representative Ely nice to
meet you now I have several
questions but I'm gonna cut it
down to my top two to give my
colleague sometime and so Mr
chairman if hospitals are
removed from this act does not
mean that they'll be left
without any medical malpractice
insurance or how does that work
so Mr chairman and senator
welcome and the short answer is
no but I want to give you a
longer answer to Mister Marcus
so I'll turn it over to him.
Mr chair Senator the fact is
right now every single hospital
to participate in the medical
malpractice act and taps the
patient compensation fund
actually has other insurance
that they are not using right
now as I mentioned earlier some
of them have up to a hundred
million dollars of insurance for
medical malpractice so we'll
have eighty million dollars but
they all actually currently have
other coverage that is simply
being on tap because they're
being subsidized by New Mexicans
to the patient compensation
fund.
Thank you for that Mr Chairman
one last question how do we know
that removing the hospitals
won't result in that doctors
leaving the state that's that's
one of the main things I got on
email or comments of people
saying if this bill went and we
were gonna lose doctors and
hospitals which would be filling
out of New Mexico can you help
me answer that question Mr
chairman and senator that that
is the biggest this statement
that's out there and I want to
shorten yes Mr partnerships
DJing answer that question so
I'm gonna let him do it Mr
hardest.
Mr chair Senator thank you for
that question doctors are not
leaving because of the fear of
insurance or medical malpractice
doctors are leaving as Senator
Hickey himself pointed out
because salaries in New Mexico
are too low we have for profit
the state hospital systems that
are making millions if not
billions of dollars in revenue
taking them out of the state and
then having the lowest salaries
possible for two used Senator
Hickey is simple for
neurosurgeons you know the fact
that you again using his example
the fact that our university or
medical school no longer has
accreditation for neurosurgery
is one of the reasons why we
don't have more neurosurgeons
but there is not been seeing eye
single piece of evidence that
shows the taking the hospitals
and the medical malpractice act
will affect recruitment or
keeping doctors here it's a very
simple answer if you're near a
surgeon in New Mexico and you
make five hundred thousand
dollars why wouldn't you move
next door Arizona where they pay
you a million to that's the
answer.
Mr Chairman representative thank
you and Mr chairman I'd just
like to also give my condolences
to the families who spoke today
and those were listening and I
have no further questions Mr
chairman thank you.
Thank you Senator I've Senator
Hamblen Senator Kernan and
Majority Leader.
You Mr chair and thank you
Representative you live for
bringing this forward I'm not
going to do a deposition style
Committee your question and I do
feel and I'm grateful for you to
bring this up because I feel
that is legislators
representatives and senators on
that when we bring together or
bring forth legislation it's not
because we're experts and it's
because we're passionate about
it and we see that there is a
need I don't feel that I'm an
expert in mortgage financing but
I will certainly bring it
forward if it's on a problem and
people are concerned about it
I'm I'm just gonna ask a couple
questions just a it will if we
talk about nothing Mr Vargas
said the talked about what it
happened when the fund was
created in nineteen seventy six
actually you representative Ely
out that I'm why was the patient
compensation fund created in
seventy six and then why is it
how did it become something
other than what it was intended
to be.
so I'm and again Mr chairman and
senator I'm gonna try extra
large I talked about a little
bit of my opening projects
workers question.
Mister chairman Senator Hammond
thank you for that question in
nineteen seventy six the major
insurer that ensured the
majority of physicians in New
Mexico left market and so those
those positions and then you
have to understand in nineteen
seventy six the majority of our
positions either have their own
practices or work in small
business practices were you had
five or six or maybe ten
positions since the majority of
their practices have been
gobbled up by large hospital
corporations and now that
they're all employed by large
hospital corporations many of
them and and I want to say this
because Senator Hickey said that
if we remove the hospitals we
will remove the physicians that
is absolutely incorrect the
physicians themselves will
remain in the definition of
qualified health care provider
founded medical malpractice act
and as long as they fill out
their application get their
occurrence based coverage for
two hundred thousand dollars per
claim they will continue to be
qualified health care providers
under the act in fact in recent
litigation between some
plaintiffs and the
superintendent of insurance
seeking information about the
surreptitious addition of
hospitals in twenty sixteen the
superintendent attached exhibit
to a motion and it showed that
the hospital a large hospital
create a surcharge of eight
hundred thousand dollar eight
hundred ninety three thousand
dollars a year but then they
paid surcharges for their
individual physicians as well
and those were much more
reasonable like ten to fifteen
thousand dollars per year so
it's not that.
Anything has changed other than
the practice of medicine and
that there was an opportunity in
twenty fifteen and twenty
sixteen unders secretary
superintendent Frank Keeney to
allow hospitals that never
needed this coverage that did
not have a medical malpractice
coverage.
Catastrophe that the doctors had
in nineteen seventy six but
instead what they had was an
opportunity to make more money
and they we have thank you Sir.
Thank you Mr Vargas thank you Mr
chair one other question when
did the twenty five of the
twenty six hospitals in the fund
coming into the act and did they
leave the state before that.
Sure I'm sorry.
Mr chair.
Representative.
Mr chair Senator let me have Mr
Vargas answer that again I
apologize Mr chair Senator
Hamblen prior to two thousand
nine from ninety two to oh nine
know the hospitals were in the
act in two thousand nine for
reasons nobody knows.
St Vincent's was allowed in the
act and then the rest of the
hospitals the other twenty five
happen in two thousand fifteen
and sixteen under superintendent
Franchini and in the vast
majority of those hospitals or
hospitals owned by the two or
three corporate hospital systems
that operate in New Mexico
there's really only two
individual hospitals that are in
that list of twenty six.
Thank you Mr Vargas Mister chair
I just have just the last thing
I want to do is just to
committee I think all of us have
to remember that at some point
or another we are going to be
patients and I have had two
people in my life.
Die is a result of medical
negligence and one was a woman
named and and she was the first
development director that I work
for when I worked in public
radio and every day she would
come in and right before
fundraising season would ask me
to stuff donor envelopes well I
was on the air and she
volunteered for soup kitchens
and she was active in local
politics and you work with a
number of nonprofits and she
also made some of the best
banana bread around and then
three years ago she brought over
some handmade bread as a gift
for my wife because my wife
loves fresh baked bread and this
was Halloween night and after
that she went to a friend's
house to continue her bread
rounds and she ended up losing
her footing outside and she
broke her femur in the hospital
she waited thirty six hours for
specialists to finally see her
whenever surgery the next day
because of the nature of her
injuries and it was it should
have been a simple surgery I
want to come down to a few more
breakage in terms of setting the
bone and recasting however she
never woke up from that surgery
and she passed on my wife's
birthday and the cause was from
negligence from the hospital
because of an oversight that
took place during her surgery.
And then a month ago my neighbor
woke up in the middle of the
night knowing that he was
feeling chest pains and knowing
that he was having signs of a
heart attack in his wife drove
to the hospital.
What to to the hospital he told
me he loved her anyone inside
and that was the last time she
saw him and I know heart attacks
are you know can be fatal I mean
my father died of a heart attack
when I was twelve
but to.
Was attended to as he went into
cardiac arrest and he survived
however because they were
procedures performed on him it
resulted in a fatal heart attack
and so I'm reminded throughout
this discussion we have
incredible medical practitioners
who are working to help others
my mother was a registered nurse
or her entire career she helped
run a family practice clinic she
did home health care and she
took care of older folks in
nursing home facilities what I'm
also reminded of is that
everyone of us is going to be a
patient one time or another and
I would hate to experience the
heart ache.
Read Judy.
That many of the people who've
talked about today who have gone
through.
And so I appreciate
Representative you are you
bringing this forward and and I
think you all of you who have
shared their stories of
heartbreak in English thank you
Mr chair thank you Senator
Hamblen of Senator Kernan.
So thank you very much Mr chair
and you know I joined Senator
Hickey and expressing my
condolences to all the experts
and all the people who've
testified today and and
recognize that certainly
malpractice occurs and no
question that that's something
that we have heard today and and
it's something that we need to
make sure we addresses as a
status legislators as people who
are no individuals that have
come under that terrible
situation so one of the
challenges when we do a bill
like this is you know we have we
have experts
as proponents of the bill and
we've heard from from five of
those we we have access to that
expert yeah for for the
legislative for Representative
Ely when when we don't know the
answer to question turned to our
expert at the challenges for
those of us who are opposed to
the bill I'm our opponents are
given a minute then we've got
many really good experts right
now online watching this that
really can't tell the full story
and answer some of the questions
that need to be answered in
response to this bill and so
with your permission Mister
chair I have just Dr Ritchie
former president of the New
Mexico Medical Society to answer
a couple questions for many if
you would allow that please
that'd be fine Senator thank you
very much and I hope that Dr
reaching that you're online and
that.
One of the things that came up
that really I want to make sure
I have clarification on as well
as
Act under Senator Padilla raise
this issue and it is very
concerning is with regard to the
lifetime care that's a forty
through this process and so if
Dr Richie if you could respond
to that and then the other thing
that I would really like to hear
about is what happens with
regard to insurance should this
bill pass.
The insurance challenges are
requirements that are employed
physicians would now face so
those are two things that I'm
not clear on and would really
appreciate Dr Richie just
responding those to.
Thank you Scott thank you
in that Mr chair Senator Kernan
centers of committee thank you
very much for the opportunity
and
it does take one more time to
explain so
certainly with regards to paying
out on future medical
there is laid out in the bill or
in the act section forty one
dash I dash seven subsection F.
this section should not be
construed preventive Haitian
health care provider entering
into a settlement agreement
whereby medical care related
benefit Shelby find so does not
have to go through a judge or a
jury and our it is lifetime
benefits and that is what the
PCF is for their eight other
states with PCF funds and so it
it is done around the country
and with occurrence based
insurance.
They are still alive they are
still liable for any acts that
occurred while the the insured
was was under the act in so
hospitals going back to two
thousand nine for one and for
the others all those liabilities
are there for the PC Act it's
still paid for.
And the this subsection is why
there may not be listed a lot of
people still getting the the our
payments out as they encourage
them because.
Due to negotiations between the
attorneys generally they settle
for the future medical as the
new V. and that's in large part
because of how the US legal
system works in that these suits
are taken on a contingency basis
and so the plaintiff's attorney
is paid based on that that
contingency fee up front and not
on future medical years in
future and so and the best
example of how these funds are
paying out to help you ship is
paying out yes we heard earlier
testimony how they are being
that the intake of the fund is
forty million a year and yet the
fund is currently at a deficit
so obviously the PCF is paying
out tens of millions of dollars
a year and so it is not true
that.
There are very few people
getting future medical obviously
future medical is being paid out
to a large extent and so if the
PCF is bankrupted.
These liabilities must be paid
for by someone and there if
money's not coming in and there
aren't enough private practice
position still in the fund to
keep it solvent the fund becomes
insolvent and someone has to pay
those bills whether it's the
taxpayers of the state or
whether they're not paid at all
someone has to pay these bills.
also there was a comment on as
far as that the doctors employed
positions
the most possible contracts the
vast majority possible contracts
the employee positions there
malpractice is paid for by the
hospital to benefit but then
they fall under the hospitals
doctors and be and the hospitals
insurance policy and so their
payments to the PCS are parsed
out separately however
their liability still remains
with the hospital and so if the
hospitals are pulled out unless
the wholesale change the
contracts in the employed
physicians which is over fifty
percent of the positions that
state are pulled out as well.
And so that's the thing to
remember is also that we're
talking about.
Large or keep we keep hearing
that it's these large multi
billion dollar out of state
hospital and hospital systems
the largest system in the state
is Presbyterian which is home
grown which is not for profit.
And so you know that is what
we're talking about we're
talking about local people local
physicians and and as we heard
also a small business all over
the state.
So I think that answers your
question Sir car number please
anymore questions think happy to
answer Mr chairman thank you
very much this.
Yeah I'm sorry I think from
hearing from Mr Marcus yes some
disagreements with that any I
might help the committee just to
get a full picture of it if you
if you don't mind Mr chair could
not complete my questions and
then I'll be glad and circle
back so thank you very much and
I I'm glad that up he was able
to clarify the
the last time making sure that
those payments are continuing
and.
The direction of this
legislation could affect that
but but I would just mention one
other thing you talked about
corporate hospitals is is if
there the the evil people and
and doing all of these things
within our our state and and I
will tell you and I appreciate
Dr Mack and I need that I'm the
one who lives in rural New
Mexico I lived in Hans and and
we have one of those are had one
of those corporate hospitals
that don't own our local
hospital regional it was CHS out
of Tennessee and yes they're out
of Tennessee that I just pulled
up their financials and and we
do have known over the past few
years that basically they're
selling off hospitals because
they don't their profits are
still very low their stocks have
dropped those are not.
Really for profit hospitals
until this first quarter this
year the hospital has left my
community.
So they're no longer there and
so what we do this rural
community when we don't have our
our are very rich for profit
hospital running our hospital
fortunately we have cabinet
that's coming in from out of
state it's a nonprofit hospital
and it has decided to come in
and it's going to cover our
patients that we're community of
seventy thousand people and we
lost our our hospital and now we
do have come in the coming in
and I don't know if that fall
under the you know I I don't
know how you classify them but
they'll certainly be under this
and they just program to build a
new hospital and I certainly
hope they don't change their
mind and and turn around and go
back to to Texas because we need
that hospital in rural New
Mexico so I do have some
comments and I'm gonna I've I've
thought about this for for quite
some time and and and I'll try
and be I returned quickly but I
think these are things that that
my committee members I want you
to know and understand.
And I want to begin by telling
the committee that my husband.
Practice medicine in New Mexico
for over forty years we moved
back to our home state in
nineteen seventy six and
remember that date in order for
my husband to join his father in
private practice and not an
issue for today in nineteen
seventy six the medical
malpractice act was established
which made to move back to New
Mexico appealing to us in
comparison to other states.
It's been had an independent
practice for over thirty years
and it wasn't until about twenty
ten that he determined he simply
could not afford to remain
independent doctor the cost of
maintaining maintaining an
independent practice in rural
New Mexico was too difficult.
Due to reduced reduced
reimbursement higher costs for
office expenses and the new
expensive electronic medical
records and I know senator Wirth
and I had many conversations
about that that it really was
kind of the the final blow that
that moved him into employee
status.
He along with many other
physicians became an employed
physician and no longer covered
by the patient compensation fund
want to be can import physician
and contract contract in his
contract he had a policy known
as claims May it's an insurance
policy which covered him for
claims that occurred while the
life of the policy was in place.
He was protected anticipations
were protected began to move
toward retirement to begin
planning for coverage after he
left employment and as part of
that he was required to purchase
a tail contract contact contract
that would cover not only him
that the patients that he served
in case something occurred after
he retired.
So that's how it works as an
employee hospital before his
hospital went after the patient
compensation fund no can't no
opportunity to go before the
medical late legal refuting and
all of those things.
Just an employed physician
that's that's how it was done as
at that time.
So in essence in my view it was
not a level playing field at all
for the employed physician
versus the independent physician
who was protected by cap and
have the opportunity to ask for
review by the New Mexico review
commission which by the way is
made up of both physicians and
attorneys equally and they
consider the validity of the
client if they decide the claim
has no valid purpose then they
can state that but that does not
prevent them from going ahead
and suing the doctor.
So I want to talk a little bit
about the difference in the
employed physician percentage
now then when this was put in
place years ago so over the last
few years we're seeing more and
more positions moving from
independent status to employed
status and what you're seeing is
a shift in the boat I mean
you've got to boats basically
you've got the boat full of the
independent physicians and then
you've got another vote over
here with employed physicians
and so they're all together now
but if this bill passes we're
going to be in two separate
areas and again you're going to
have those employee positions
that will be not allowed to
participate in bank station
compensation fund and then
you're gonna have the
independent physicians up here
that are going to be able to
afford the PCF going forward so
that his shifted from about
twelve percent employed
positions years ago to now in
New Mexico I think you've stated
word about forty two percent
employed and just that grows
you're going to see more and
more physician shifting over to
import status I've heard a lot
of testimony today about how
unfair it is to have employed
physicians participate in the
patient compensation fund and I
just want to make sure the
committee understands that we're
talking about health care
providers who are just as
dedicated to the care of their
patients as the independent
providers I've heard the
testimonies drive mechanism
valued and respected physician
that she is lobbying for the
removal of the employed
physicians from that.
From the fund I would suggest
that there could be a lack of
understanding about how the
patient compensation for this
coverage is priced hospitals
employment positions and are
liable for their actions they
have a higher exposure than
single physicians and the
surcharges hospitals pay into
the fund are proportional to
their exposure the PCS
surcharges for independent
physicians are low and the PCS
surcharges for hospitals are in
the millions because they cover
many providers the actuarial
studies have been done in our
part of the study that was
requested by the office of the
superintendent of insurance
Russell.
If you have not read this
report.
Hope that every member of this
committee will do so before this
bill reaches the for if it's too
late this committee but it's
critical that you understand
what is in that report somebody
ask why hospital so qualified to
join we're not interested in
participating in the medical
malpractice act when it was put
in line seventy six basically
couldn't find interest rate you
current form of insurance
occurrence policies protect the
patients regardless of whether
the policies in effect or not it
protects the patient in the
advantage plans make many years
out beyond the effective date of
the policy and I believe Dr
Hickey is already talked about
that don whether the former
superintendent of insurance and
he states that the other side
has the authority to allow
hospitals in and they're
employed physicians and that's
exactly what happened in twenty
sixteen the medical side did
object to the inclusion of
hospitals and their employed
physicians is a determined
rights allowing the hospitals
and PCF we're not set
appropriately.
Mr letter goes on to say that
the deficits in twenty seventeen
resulted from significant claims
from two positions and drive
back in ninety.
Mention this as well as of that
not being the cost but I think
there is some question and I
recall that suit that was
brought against those two
positions from Otero county.
So the hospitals joined in
twenty fifth sixteen and twenty
seventeen and those losses were
not registered until twenty
nineteen the actuarial study I
speak up in a few minutes
confirms that to be true.
New Mexico Medical Society now
is made up of physicians both
independent and employees from
across the state and they are in
support of this bill with a few
exceptions.
So the idea that independent
physicians do not want to be in
the fat dissembling about true.
Some have said that we don't
have claim history and that we
do not have the data but if you
will read the OSI report that
was done over this past year I
think that obviously there was
enough information at the
conclusion of the study includes
a report by risk regulatory
consulting that makes clear.
Expanding the pool of
participants in the fund keeping
hospitals and allowing cancelar
providers will be a benefit to
the PCS the PCF has already seen
that benefit with the entrance
of hospitals into the fund which
is roughly double the surcharge
volume and significantly.
Increase the fund balance while
the deficit in dollar terms has
continued to grow after
hospitals joined PCS the deficit
as a percentage of the annual
surcharge are you.
Senator you got muted somehow
accidentally.
The R. R. C. report removing the
hospitals out of the fund now
would not only double the burden
on physicians when it comes to
making up the current fund
deficit but also would place any
potential risk of having under
price the hospitals on the
independent physicians and for
this before I just want to
remind the committee when we
talk about our hospitals in the
state of New Mexico we're not
talking just about huge large
urban hospitals in Albuquerque
we're talking about the
hospitals and Hobbs Rossell
damning Los crucis and across
the state in rural New Mexico in
these hospitals are staffed with
doctors that are our friends and
our neighbors you know I guess I
just resent a little bit the
fact that they're lumped into
this idea of a large corporate
hospital these are people that
care for us and take care of us.
So basically I think it's really
important.
That we understand the
uncertainty of the lasting
impacts in moving forward with
this piece of legislation we
don't know if this physicians
will leave the state we don't
know physicians will even come
to the state I certainly know
that corporations are capable of
leaving the state they just M.
I. community and I'm just very
concerned about the impact
without giving time for this
study that the OSI has done to
come to a conclusion and and the
the response that they have
maintenance this bill should not
be brought this year it should
be at continue to be studied and
worked on by all people I know
that some negotiations have gone
on not much is apart from that
it really concerns me that we're
going to make a decision here
that's going to have an impact.
Mostly to rural communities
across the state of New Mexico
and it also includes the
patients if the PCF Fund is yes.
Taking out an collapses although
some people say that won't
happen I'm not convinced the
report of the odor is they
okay office of the state
insurance superintendent that
you're not clear on this it's
just very concerning to me that
we're going to make a decision
today that could have huge
impacts across the state without
giving time to really
negotiating study and what the
impact could potentially gate
you know I'm not there's been a
lot of pressure on legislators
across the state both in the
house an issue no this bill only
passed the house by one vote.
There's a lot of work that still
needs to be done with all due
respect to the sponsor and and
we have we've communicated on
this is nothing personal but it
just seems to me that as we see
more and more positions moving
to employment status.
That that part of physicians
that are no longer covered by
the PCS no longer covered with
regard to the cap it just
creates a real real serious
situation for our positions and
that with that Mr chair I really
I don't have any other questions
I thank Dr Richie helped with
the two issues that I was most
concerned about making sure that
that we did have lifetime
coverage and also just what
would happen to the employee
positions going forward it just
seems like this is a bill that
certainly at the trial lawyers
are very happy about because it
increases the the numbers of
doctors that are are really
pretty much open to.
Two awards that are not capped
prevents them from going before
the the medical review board
which is a critical piece and I
will tell you these kinds of
things these decisions affect
where doctors decide to practice
I'm not sure they're openly New
Mexico probably not and I will
tell you how difficult it is to
recruit physicians and the
recent physicians have come to
New Mexico over the years is
because of the not medical
malpractice at the PCS and and
the ability to to have a fair
level playing field and this
takes that away with that I'll I
will yeah thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Senator Kernan of
Majority Leader.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members
you know this this conversation
does make me pause and just kind
of appreciate the citizen
legislature that we have we all
have different backgrounds
experiences and I've always
enjoyed Senator Kernan I have
had fantastic discussions and
been on different sides of
different issues on in this
arena and you know we've been
able to kind of see them
navigate to solutions and I am
really hoping that there can be
a solution here I'll talk about
that a minute I thank you
representative Ely for bring in
the bill
you know this is not an easy
subject this is a hard
discussion and it's a very
complicated insurance issue and
I appreciate you taking into it
and taken out on I do want to
say for colonel Schaefer and the
other families that have shared
their stories we appreciate that
there really is.
These are human stories of
suffering and things that you
all have been through and I
think it's a very important part
of this process I know how hard
that is and I just want to
recognize that
there's also doctors and and
hospital folks that are on who I
respect tremendously doctor Mack
any doctor Reidy who someone
who's a friend she's a neighbor
I know her and.
You know both my kids were born
Saint Vincent's hospital I
served on the board for nine
years on the hospital foundation
board at St Vincent's hospital I
mean I have tremendous respect
this is our local hospital so we
this really is something that
touches all of us in different
ways.
But having said that I just got
a couple questions that I hope
Representative Eli you and Mr
Vargas can help me answer
because because it's some of the
things that that really is
causing me concern about why we
are where we are in front of why
this bills before us you know
the first thing I'd like you to
address representative Ely is as
I understand it and and Mr
Vargas there is a statutory
limitation of three occurrences
front entity whose in the
patient compensation fund is
that correct and if so I I guess
I'm just confused as to how how
we have a situation where
hospitals who are allowed to
come in under the fund.
Are able to not deal with this
right current so can you address
that.
Mr chairman and leader I way I
just want to just take a moment
to say how much just so
everybody knows how much I have
enjoyed working with Senator
current on the child support
bill which is going to the
Senate bill is going to hit the
house floor hopefully pretty
quick here and so I'm hoping
Senator Kernan will come over
and join me in that effort be
kind of fun will be the only two
on that side of the bills over
there so you'll be a little
lonely Senator current which
invited to come over I'm gonna
let Mr Vargas is that question I
do know the answer to about I
think you just been more
articulate in answering some of
these questions and I'd like to
turn it over to him chairman
leader.
You're absolutely correct the
statute calls for that
unfortunately it has not been
enforced.
When the hospitals are let in
under superintendent Franchini
he essentially allow the patient
compensation fund to be tapped
for a limited number of claims
for hospitals and that has in
large part created the deficit
and what we're seeing now that
we're a few years out is it has
brought the medical review
commission that has been touted
as such a benefit to physicians
to a grinding halt if you file
an application to appear before
the medical review commission
today you will not get a hearing
in months from now.
The fact of the matter is
because that law has not been
enforced properly we find
ourselves in the position that
we're in today.
And Mister chair and Mr Vargas
you know on that issue the
medical commission.
the review panel it's my
understanding that the state
Supreme Court.
And there's some confusion on
this page I'd like you to clear
out because I think this kind of
created some confusion right in
the middle of the discussion on
this bill and also on Senate
bill two thirty nine but my
understanding is three quarters
actually put together a
commission to look at that
specific issue not the whole
issue of medical malpractice and
you know the issue in front of
us today but that specific issue
so can you just clarify that
because there has been some
discussion well let's let the
Supreme Court have their
commission review this during
the interim I just like to
clarify that that's limited to
that issue Mr chair leader that
is my understanding and if you
think about it from the
separation of powers perspective
the Supreme Court doesn't have
the power to change anything in
the medical malpractice act
other than to interpret it maybe
differently than others have
with one exception and this is
the only piece that the medical
practice act provides that.
The director of the medical
review commission serves at the
pleasure of the Chief Justice of
the Supreme Court we have the
same acting director for about
twenty years now and I think
both sides plaintiff and defense
have voiced concerns with how
the commission has been running
and how the director has been
performing and in response to
that in accordance with his
statutory duty to current and or
discharge the director of the
Supreme Court has put together a
committee to study that.
Great Mister chair I just think
that was an important point to
clarify because there has been
some confusion about the scope
of that.
So I want to follow up Mr chair
if I can on on a point that that
Senator Kernan had on and I
think it's it's it's a very
relevant
reason why this issue needs to
be addressed now and we can't
wait.
and that is.
Kind of the issue Senator Kernan
referred to it as not a level
playing field and it's kind of a
chapter board is another way to
look at it and what I'd like to
do Mister chair if I could as I
understand from Mr Scanlon San
Juan Medical Center is not in
the patient compensation fund
that I get that correct.
Mr Chairman I'm sorry.
Or get Representative Eli Mr
chairman and.
Leader that is correct they are
not engaged.
So Mister chair so here's what
I'd like Mr Vargas here's what
I'd like you to do you practice
in this area.
You have a family we've heard
some unbelievable stories from
families and something happens
in the San Juan Medical Center.
You know just explain what that
means for that family in terms
of their ability to recover and
their ability to get future
medicals just so that we
understand the difference and
and kind of the extreme
differences my understanding
between that situation and a
family.
Who Is suffers malpractice in
account and to do so can you
just explain that for us.
Mr chair leader thank you the
big difference is that with a
cap and particularly the type of
cap we have the vast majority of
catastrophically injured or
killed patients do not receive
fair compensation and I will add
to your example if I may yes the
the person that was malpractice
is San Juan Medical Center was
number one the breadwinner and
number two kids.
If they were somewhere else
where the capitol Klein even if
their lifetime earnings would
have been in the millions their
family gets six hundred thousand
dollars.
However and San Juan Medical
Center because they have chosen
not to participate in the vast
majority of small hospitals have
chosen not to participate in
fact there are any haul small
hospitals that are participating
right now there are hospitals in
small communities that are owned
by large out of state
corporations there in the act
but there aren't any like for
example Holy Cross hospital
inTaos is a small local hospital
they are not part of the medical
malpractice act do not get the
benefit of the patient
compensation I may have in order
to but the big difference is.
It's like a crapshoot if you
just ended up at a hospital that
wasn't part of the patient
compensation fund and yet
critically injured or killed you
can get fair compensation for
your family.
However if you roll the dice the
wrong way and you end up at a
hospital is part of the act even
if it's a multi billion dollar
corporation hospital you're
capped at six hundred thousand
dollars that's the big
difference.
Mr chairman members just just
think about that for a minute
how in the world and we created
a system like this the system is
broken there's just there's just
no other way to put it the
system is broken and Mr chair
and representative Ely Mr
Vargas.
There is a case that has rural
the system not only is broken
unconstitutional my correct
about that.
Mr chairman and leader yes you
are correct.
So let me just let me just throw
out the consequences of why this
is such an important discussion
we have a case pending in the
Supreme Court right now we have
district judge was ruled that
this but this cap
is unconstitutional we haven't
raised it since then the mid
nineties I believe in two
thousand eleven it was with
Susanna Martinez we raise it to
a million dollars and I say we
do let me be really clear it was
an agreement that was brokered
by the medical society and the
trying years and I've been here
for seventeen years and this is
one of the hardest issues we
deal with and the way we get
through it is when the party sit
down and figure out a solution
and and I just.
Feel more than ever that this is
a moment when that is what needs
to happen because we have a
system that is wildly unfair how
in the world can we.
Again have a system where we're
literally if you go in the door
of one facility you're treated
one way into going to door
another facility you're treated
another way in in and we heard
from you know one of the one of
the victims that was on the one
of the families that suffered.
Six hundred thousand dollars in
one year in terms of the cost of
they have to deal with so.
You know I just you know I I I
hear I hear the everyone this
the the the world's going to end
if we move this bill forward but
I actually think we need to move
this bill forward we need to
move this bill forward to line
up in the same committee with
with the other Senate bill
Senate bill two thirty nine and
I just want both sides to get
the message right now you all
need to sit down and you got to
figure out a solution here I
just think this isn't a
situation that can wait
there's a spring court case is
going to declare
unconstitutional tomorrow and
we'll all be back probably
special session if that happens
to figure this out there is a
real opportunity right now to
figure this out and to go and
say this isn't part of the
solution and maybe the other one
is part of the solution I I just
would ask that we do the same
thing that we did you know
that's public affairs health and
public affairs did was Senate
bill two thirty nine they moved
it forward to the Senate
Judiciary Committee and again I
think both these bill should be
there and I think the parties
need to sit in a wrong and don't
leave until you figure out how
to do this it was done in two
thousand eleven and tragically
that bill was vetoed and that
took us back and that that
raised a twelve million as I
understand it from six hundred
thousand that was ten years ago.
So again to argue the seven
hundred fifty is the right
number ten years later I just
have a hard time with that but I
want I want the experts I want
to drive I want the lawyers to
sit down and see if there's some
way to do this to say that this
bill needs to die I just think
it's the wrong wrong answer at
this time and so I I certainly
in support moving forward but I
have tremendous respect for you
know for the folks on on on on
the side of this issue and how
challenging it is and I just
all I think Jason Weaks said
comprehensive reform has to
happen I could not agree more I
think we give this a chance by
winning this bill move to the
next step and putting the
parties around I thank you Mr
chairman thank you
representative Ely for bringing
legislation.
Thank you a Majority Leader now
have a Senator Tallman.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
thank you Representative Ely for
bringing this bill forward
The spend the stated that the.
OSI superintendent secretly
allowed.
Mr statements in in two thousand
nine and by two thousand
seventeen years dozens of other
Astros so he was such a good
deal I wasn't done secretly
although I did catch part of.
The second to Senator Wirth is
testimony to see it that was in
and out that he was the
addressing the same issue
Mr chairman and senator now we
we don't really know why they
let in the hospitals Meeder two
thousand nine or later but we do
know that was not done like the
independent doctors were done
well consulting both independent
doctors annotations advocates
and the Legislature to passions
patient compensation.
What was not done ladders that's
for sure and it's fair to say it
was done and she.
What is yes so I superintendent
to report to anybody or a board
to see operate independently
without any oversight.
You Mr chairman and senator I
want to be clear that we're
talking about prior
superintendent not
superintendent till but I let Mr
origins that question because
you've been intimately involved
smartest Mr chair Senator with
respect to this particular
decision the decision to admit a
practitioner or a hospital into
the patient compensation fund.
Historically the prior
superintendent did act without
any oversight in fact there is
litigation pending right now
because the insurance code
states that the superintendent
of insurance has to follow the
administrative procedures act
and it is crystal clear that in
admitting these hospitals the
administrative procedures act
was not followed.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
at.
Mr Vargas for the answer twenty
three states my understanding
have no can't I'm not saying
that we should have a cap of six
hundred thousand dollars is
unconscionably low it's it six
thousand dollars is nothing and
today if someone is permanently
disabled whether or there is a
death involved so.
Thanks we wholeheartedly with
the senator Wirth that the.
Six hundred thousand dollars to
certainly is a unconscionably
low in this age of need
certainty to be to be raised.
We've heard.
Questions may we heard that the
doctors are going to lead to the
state.
And during the minimum wage
debate we hear that the
businesses are going to either
close or leave the state during
the sick leave debate we hear
that.
This is our gonna leave a.
We go out of business and and
here we are with the.
During this debate we're hearing
that the doctors and other
health care workers.
Are going to leave the state.
It is not going to happen yes Mr
Vargas explained so eloquently
of a little while ago.
So.
The
That's all I have it's most my
questions very been answered and
the thank you Mr chairman thank
you
everyone who is participating
one particularly recognize those
up patients for those folks who
have testified earlier.
Was there heartfelt the
testimony appreciate your
joining into this discussion
thank you.
Thank you senator Tolman Senator
Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Very interesting discussion I
now know way more than I ever
wanted to know on the subject
but you know that's what we do
right we we learn about all the
subjects we try to make the
right decisions
Representative Eli I want to
make sure everyone knows up
front that you don't do these
type of lawsuits you didn't say
that so also it for you so when
those this is not a conflict for
you in fact I I don't know that
you do malpractice lawsuits but
it's not medical malpractice is
in that correct.
Mr chairman and senator yeah I I
said I might practice on at
least two of the orders.
And that's been one of the
reasons I I kind of like you Mr
chairman Representative Ely is
some you know I'm used to
lawyers you know I I I knew
there had to be a good reason to
have lawyers us to sue other
lawyers so that's a you know
it's.
Yeah this is the joke between us
we're we're kind of neighbors
are districts over overlap in
some places and so it's a it's
good to see you here in.
outside of the neighborhood
situation so
I I do have some questions and
some concerns and I would like
to respond a little bit too
the Majority Leader suggestion
at the end of that and so try to
remember to come back to that
but does this by Rick by moving
the hospitals out of this was
the fact then on.
Or for lawyers to sue hospitals.
Chairman center I'm not sure I I
understand that question
hospitals the twenty six
hospitals
are moved out of the act and am
I'm said this over and over
again it's twenty four of them
are you know multi billion
dollar hospitals and the others
are also equally large there are
no small hospitals in this they
have their private insurance and
then at that point patients
recoveries
to the extent they can recover
are set by the community by jury
so I I mean to whatever the fee
is yes with lawyers I I had no
idea I I will be very clear
about this Mr chairman and
senator my concern is not about
lawyers one way the other I
don't care so that patients and
about the independent doctors
and I think if we don't act
right now we're gonna be in
trouble I would be.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative and I I
appreciate that but you know
someone is going to make money
out of this and and it's the the
trial lawyers who do this type
of malpractice lawsuits I have
friends that do this so you know
some someone will and it makes
it easier for them to make more
money that's not the purpose for
that is a by product of what
we're doing or what you're doing
with bills that's just something
that happens so you know let's
address the elephant in the room
your is is the reason you know
for you I'm you know it's not
but it is the reason that the
trial lawyers want this so
badly.
So that they can help larger
works.
that's.
It.
If there's even a way to answer
that question yeah but I think
it's something should be
addressed Mister chairman
Senator yeah I can address it
I'm not interested I mean I
really I want to it's not it's
not the trial lawyer's that I am
I that motivate me to push this
bill it's the fact that this is
an unsustainable wrong for our
most likely unconstitutional
system both independent doctors
and patients are subsidizing
these multi billion dollar
companies and just as a
philosophy and I said this on
the house floor I would say to
you if you go back and look at
the legislation I have presented
in both the house and brought
over the Senate including bills
like exemption funds and some
things like that there's a
constant theme and that is to
try to level the playing field
between those who have the
advantages and privileges in our
society and those that do not
and in this case that disparity
could not be greater than multi
billion dollar companies and
those people who are victims and
their families of medical
negligence and so I appreciate
the question by I want to say
the most forceful way I don't
care about I'm sorry but I I I'm
not motivated by the travelers
I'm motivated by that disparity
and I don't think it's right and
that's why I'm here on a
principal basis.
Thank you Mr Chairman
representative I I didn't mean
that toward you that you were
but there are a lot of
legislators getting a lot of
emails a lot of pressure put on
them by the trial lawyers that
do this particular job for a
living so and that's just a fact
so it's it's not your motivation
and I never meant to suggest
that it was because I know you
and I know this isn't that's why
I want to clear up this is not
your area this is not where you
practice
but there we've we've been
getting a lot of phone calls a
lot of emails from trial lawyers
in their purposes because they
want to make more money
some of them may have the
purpose of wanting to protect
patients on I do feel for the
patients who have lost loved
ones who have experience
malpractice I am fortunate to
have a left arm today
because malpractice almost made
my left arm being amputated
and so all of us have personal
stories of people we either know
or ourselves where we have had a
bad experience I can tell you
also many stories of very good
experiences with doctors and
hospitals my oldest son would
have died.
In England if it wasn't for an
amazing medical doctor who
happened to be a colonel
at the military hospital
you would die I would I would
have lost my son.
But he this particular doctor at
ari of waking he so colonel I
don't know if you know where
it's out but my son was born or
if they can he and he would have
died if it wasn't for this
doctor
and so I I can tell you both
sides because I've had both
sides doctors are humans too
believe it or not and they do
make mistakes and the problem
is.
From the examples that were
shared by example with my R. was
because the nurses were on
strike and they didn't do the
proper care of my wound
afterwards I got six different
infections and almost and have
my arm amputated.
So you know that one of doctor.
But so those are situations I
didn't sue us know what you know
the head of time I decided not
to go that route probably could
have won that lawsuit in the
long run.
Very limited use of my left arm
because of that situation and
because of what happened.
So
you know that's we all have our
stories and at first you that
but at this point we've got to
step back and say what's best
for the state I think that the
majority leader's correct that
the two sides need to sit down
we need to figure out how this
works best I think he's
incorrect about sending it to
the next committee because maybe
the other bill sort of come to
this committee and we should
have been doing that work here
I'll remind him later who
assigns bills to what committees
we can talk about that some
other point but you know maybe
that bill should have come here
so we could be discussing both
of those bills today.
also remind everyone what
happened last Saturday.
and for bills that we kept here.
And didn't move forward that we
were supposed to talk about
today and move forward.
They're not on the agenda today
and I'll talk about that later
on as well didn't have anything
to do with this bill.
Concern me Mr Chairman.
Up.
that is it Senator for the I
just wanted to make note that I
know we're gonna have a fun
evening when Senator Brandt
start swinging thank you Mr
chairman.
I'm sorry maybe I shouldn't sit
so close to the camera.
The the US trying to see what
the.
Senator Wirth.
Facial expression was going
there.
There's.
The the concern for me is how
will this affect our to our
hospitals.
How will this affect their
ability to continue to operate I
think we have the expertise in
this committee with with the.
Dr Hickey who's who's been.
Very much involved in this type
of situation we've also got of
thank you so.
The other drive that's on I
get member's name sorry I'm
terrible about names
The doctor Reggie.
We have that's been able to
answer some great questions for
us.
What so so the the the
hospitals currently Kerry
separate insurance from the US
is what you you've talked about
Representative.
Is it so is it something in our
law that says that because
they're part of this pool that
they can't access the other help
me understand that do you
understand what I'm saying I
think so but I think Mister
chairman Senator I'm gonna let
Mr work issues which.
Mister chairman Senator because
they're under the medical
malpractice act they follow the
procedures in that in those
procedures number one require
that their occurrence based
coverage that they procured
pursuant to the act rate or at
least contribute if there's a
settlement or judgment the first
two hundred thousand and then
the remaining four hundred
thousand comes from the patient
compensation fund there is no
additional limit for any reason
or the ability to tap the
additional coverage.
So actually the cap Mr Chairman
Mr Vargas is two hundred
thousand that the.
Practitioner pays or the
hospital and then the rest is
covered by the fund is that.
Mr chair Senator the first two
hundred thousand can either be
procured by depositing it with
the superintendent of insurance
for a total of three occurrences
or by obtaining currents based
coverage not claims made
coverage but occurrence based
policies and then the remainder
is paid by the patient
compensation fund and if there
are future medical payments
those are paid out of the fund
as well I think that's as I
mentioned earlier that's where
we find ourselves in the
predicament that we're in with
the fund.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Mr Vargas I was just trying or
somewhere the six hundred
thousand came from I guess is
the two hundred thousand three
times of but is there a cap on
awards to the person who's
suing.
Mr chair Senator the cap is six
hundred thousand dollars so
again as as I mentioned in
response to your words question
if you go to a hospital and
doesn't participate in the act
there's no cap and you can be
compensated for your injuries if
you go to a hospital that is
covered by the cap six hundred
thousand is the cap.
Okay then thank you that that
sometimes we just have to say it
different ways for all of us to
catch it so trying to to to
grasp at all of these things
that we have no idea about
I was just one time was the most
the the worst thing about being
a legislator I sentence making
decisions about your health care
when I don't know anything about
health care so that's one of the
hardest things about being a
legislator we try to learn as
much as we can so I appreciate
that and I appreciate the
patience of that we've that
you've had today and I don't
mean patients As and patients
but you know.
So I appreciate the.
Answer on that I'm not gonna be
able to answer text messages for
people who are trying to
actually right now I can't
answer that and and and talk I'm
just not that good.
So.
Sorry my my phone is blowing up
with text messages I'm sure they
want me to ask specific
questions on just not that good
things like that so
I appreciate.
Those who who had losses.
The six hundred thousand helps
me to understand a little bit
more of why.
We're wanting to do this.
I I still am trying to figure
out the continuing care piece of
it so Representative Eli Mr
chairman so the six hundred
thousand as a direct award and I
know it sounds that's a terrible
way of putting it but I think
that's the way the court puts
it.
To the patient or to the person
who has sued.
And then is the is the medical
paid separately from that do you
understand what I'm saying so
the continuing care in the
future is that pay separately
from the six hundred thousand or
is that six hundred thousand cap
on everything so
Mister chairman Senator is not
again this is something Mr
participants dressed I would
like you to address absolutely
you know that's okay Mister
chairman Senator I do think
there's still some confusion
about that so this report is to
address that Mr chair Senator
first off I think there's
believe that if you bring a
claim that you just get paid to
get anywhere near the six
hundred thousand cap or get the
six hundred thousand cap you
have to prepare your case for
trial and in most cases go to
trial.
If you will in.
It's a special interrogatory
that simply asks or their future
medical.
Is there a future medical care
related to this malpractice and
if the answer is yes what the
statute says is the patient
compensation fund will pay those
medicals as they are incurred in
the future.
Well so six hundred is the cap
if the jury says yes there's
future medicals then at least
the loss centers.
One will pay them as an Kirk but
as a practical matter that just
hasn't been happening what's
been happening is if the case is
dismissed and again something
like ninety seven percent of
them don't make it.
The three that do make it are
either settle in as was pointed
out by one of the physicians
earlier the statute allows them
to settle.
To include future equipment and
I will just tell you how that
happens as a matter of course in
my practice and others and that
is the patient compensation fund
gets a life care plan.
And they settle for just a lot
of money.
They pay the plaintiff and it's
up to the plaintiff and worked
more likely than not their
attorney to set up a trust to
purchase an annuity to use that
money to buy health insurance
but that's it what's the rate
that the firm is off the hook
there are no future risks that I
believe the physician testified
earlier said the fund would
still be liable that's not true
it's a lump sum settlement and
they get a release in fact the
patient compensation fund has
something that they call the
standard PCF release that they
insist upon when you signed that
release choose I'm not going
after you for another penny
ever.
This is all I can you know that
that makes sense to me Mr
chairman I I've actually
done to automobile accident
settlements in the spring or
same thing right once you sign
and accept the final check.
that's it you can't then you
know go back later and every sue
and ask for more so that that
clears that up a little bit more
for me.
is Dr Richie still available I
think that was his name.
Mr Chairman center yes I'm still
here thank you Mr chairman Dr
Richard could you just cover a
little bit more for me on
understanding how the patients
continuing care.
the some of the the folks have
talked the talk to you know that
there were deaths and so they
don't have continuing care.
so those ones are probably a
little more simple when it comes
to the cases but what happens
when it's something that's more
of a life.
Injury where you're going to
have to continue for continuing
care how is that taking care of
in house that cover.
Mr chairman Senator Brandt and
and committee.
It I believe as I understand it
in again
I do this from the medical
standpoint I'm not an insurance
expert I think would be helpful
to happen independent insurance
expert here
my career the tent of Insurance
but that life care plan is
mentioned those are specially
trained people to do that and
set up exactly what the future
costs for care.
In including accommodations for
for loss of function etcetera
they they come up with a a lump
sum for the for the projected
future of that patient and it's
actuaries and so then that that
is a lump sum they can then be
established as an annuity as you
know like on a winning the
lottery there that the ability
is based on the present value of
that money.
And so
band that can be awarded to the
to the the injured person and
then they can do with it what
they will you know hopefully
they put it aside to pay for
those things and purchase health
care insurance etcetera
and so that's why I believe
they're allowed or were there
twenty thousand they can sign a
release because it is supposed
to cover it all and based on on
scientific principles looking at
what it's going to cost so it's
not just haphazardly just fine
and but it has to be used by the
as well.
Thank you that's probably where
we see all the commercials for
the structured settlements that
you need cash now
I hope that wasn't a commercial
for them but and that's that is
the kind of the sort of thing
you're talking over you get a
structured settlement over time
and then so anyway that's.
The reminded me of that and how
you might not take that money
over time and use it for what it
was intended for
planned by my guess is they
would also yes taxpayers we
didn't flip a lot of the bill
because they'd end up going on
some kind of state funded or
taxpayer funded insurance
program thank you Mr G. thank
you Mr chairman for.
helping me to to get some of
those things right in my mind I
do think that it's something
that we need to keep here I
think we have the right people
your.
We have.
People understand this issue I
think more here than we do and
then the next committee in this
is something that we need to get
the experts together and help
them work out
I would be more than glad to sit
down with anyone alone right now
we're not really allowed to sit
down with anyone so anyway we
can figure out how to do that
thank you Mr thank you Senator
right Senator Griggs.
Thank you Mr chairman I'll I'll
do my best to be brief
Mr Chairman representative Ely
can you tell me how many other
states that we are in the in the
country how many other have caps
like this and do we do we have
an idea of a range of what those
caps might be.
Well Mister chairman Senator
because this is not a capital I
don't know shortage Mr bars the.
soldierly.
Mr chair Senator I don't know
the exact number of states that
have caps I have heard ranges of
between one million and three
million for those that do that
I'm aware of.
Okay thank you Mr chairman and
gentleman I've heard that the
captain in Texas users are two
hundred fifty thousand try I
don't know it looks like we got
some some different numbers but.
You know I'm Mr chair I'll
disagree a little bit with
Representative Eli Eli issues
you can't build that's what this
seems to be about to me is that
we either want to general for
whatever reason and then H. and
the the reason.
It's been offered is the reason
that individuals who have been
injured don't seem to be able
to.
Required should fishing
compensation for their injuries
and
that that to me is what this to
this appears to be
I want to sit there and and talk
just a minute Mr Mr chair and
and representative about your
Senator Kernan talks about her
community hospital in
In the Hobbs well I've got one
in in Alamogordo there was a
major case it that hospital
before I got in the in the
Senate by a doctor that they
allowed to practice in the in
the hospital.
he was hired by the hospital
where he was allowed to to
practitioner in they were the
hospital was judicially he will.
Are almost closer hospital.
And Mr chair and and
Representative I think those are
things that will people people
are absolutely right and they're
important but in the you know we
have to have some center I
think that helps these rural
hospitals.
Be able to sure doctors that
they can come to that.
Part of the world and and
practitioners.
Mr chair and and Representative
do we know.
Right now how many speakers in
Alamogordo.
The vast majority of physicians
and I'd say vast meaning
probably seventy eighty ninety
percent of the physicians
anymore are employed by the
hospital.
Mr chairman I agree there are
very few individual
practitioners show I just want
to ask you a.
Representative do you have a
have a have an idea of what
shape let's go back ten years
twelve years what the different
shares as far as
doctors working for hospitals
and doctors who were not working
for us now Mr chairman and
Center before I turn that over
since it's been a long hearing I
do want to take the opportunity
just in New Mexico legislator to
take a shot at Texas Senator
we'll get that answer for you
when the lights go back on in
Texas but I actually have the I
actually have the the answer
that in taxes the two hundred
fifty thousand our capital
referring to is on non economic
damages so for economic damages
your is not that care but I want
to turn that over we have that
answer but I'm not sure we see
Mr Marcus dyes or doctor Machen
the one of the my aunt and I
turn it over to them.
Mr chair Senator I would say Dr
Meghan any probably has the
answer the number of percentages
of employed verses.
Sept private.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
there are slightly more than
fifty percent of physicians are
employed across the United
States now by hospitals the rest
are self employed the medical
malpractice fees are a very
small part of what makes the
decision the majority decision
as the two fee schedules that I
referred to in my testimony
where physicians are are paid
half of what hospital based
physicians are paid not that the
hospital based physicians see
that money but the hospital
facility fee covers that so it's
become economically increasingly
difficult for physicians to
maintain an independent practice
as more consolidation occurs
good literature is shown that
that increases the prices that
are charged to patients to
commercial insurance and to
Medicare and Medicaid every time
consolidation occurs but with
the consolidation happens and
referrals are kept internally it
does put the squeeze on
independent physicians and so
that's why that trend is
occurring hopefully that trend
can be reversed because as a
nation we can't afford to pay
twice as much for the same
health care simply because our
hospital corporation is the one
negotiating the rates thank you.
Thank you for sharing that
Representative and and experts
in on our.
I'm a little bit older than
Representative Ely I remember
back in the day when the doctors
used to make house calls show
what are you know medicines
changed a lot and I I certainly
hope that
The doctors correct in that more
practitioners will be able to be
and show practice but in
communities like mine I'm not
sure we'll get that roll out
right away.
sure I think you just it's very
important.
For the doctors are now in those
hospitals and and things it you
know that and I hate to sit
there you know I've got a I've
got a granddaughter that was
born and had a brachial plexus
injury and she'll never have.
The proper use of her right or
never in her life and those are
those are things that
You should do that she because
she's a she's a lovely girl and
I love her to death but that's
that will not be something she
she get.
But sometimes mistakes and there
are there are things that happen
and you know the doctor the
doctor did everything he thought
he could did everything right
early she's already did
everything right.
and so the sometimes all and we
all know how this works you get
lawsuits and people settle.
They settle because they don't
know what the results might be
if it goes to court.
does your those are things that
are absolutely factual I am I
know I know that in the state we
have have we have have not.
Got a hospital I've got a
community there's one of those
have not in lot of ways because
it's a small rural town and I'm
I'm I'm really concerned about
this bill and if and what it
might do to my hospital and why
doctors down there I'm I'm
surprised and
Representative and and Senator
Wirth I'm surprised that this
was not an issue that we're
we're on through the enrollment
stated Aveley in the in Rome so
we had a maybe a consensus that
came out so we wouldn't have to
bills are a bill like this one
in the bill rate the other one.
On the issue that seems to be so
important.
but but Mister chair
representative I yeah I
appreciate you stayed taken all
the staff all afternoon.
And
With that I'll I'll close I
don't have any more anymore
questions a Mr chair and
It's just time do the right
thing.
Okay thank you
Senator Griggs.
I don't have any other questions
from the committee but I.
Well actually I
think most of my questions were
answered and I I also do
Representative
Just kind of build on Senator
brands question you know I I ran
a insurance brokerage in my
previous life and I know that
the any entity always has
insurance reinsurance umbrella
insurance or access insurance.
And the.
And I think Senator Brandt
question was for those
hospitals that are in the pool.
Since they're in the pool you
know there cap because they go
through the process and they're
never able to access their own
insurance.
You know so.
It may be I in all I don't know
if that's something that could
be developed and also that it's
not just a pool I mean they have
I mean I know that I know
organizations have you know
reinsurance and then they have a
insurance on that insurance and
that means sometimes there's
entities are covered five times
over in the and and and.
Can can can can can someone
explain maybe expert witness and
and how that could be possible
and be to me turn it over to Mr
garner's that's right.
Mr chair thank thank you for
that question the fact of the
matter is each of these
corporate hospitals has based
coverage excess coverage in many
cases.
Second and third years of access
coverage the because they have
the benefit of the patient
compensation fund that insurance
never gets tapped it's never use
and I can give you some examples
I have the right here so for.
Our which is you know localist
heart hospital they have a five
million dollar first layer of
coverage and a ninety million
dollar access layer of coverage
but again that never gets chat
because they're getting the
benefit of the patient
compensation for.
Chris is saying Benson has a ten
million dollar first layer of
coverage and a hundred million
dollar access layer of coverage
for medical malpractice.
Community health systems which
has for hospitals in the state
including Carlsbad and Roswell
as a ten million dollar first
layer of coverage and a forty
million dollar access layer of
coverage.
In health care has a six million
dollar self insured retention I
know your insurance guy so you
know what that means but then it
has a twenty five million dollar
access policy above that it has
another twenty million dollar
access policy and above that it
has another twenty five million
dollar access policy so the fact
of the matter is you know when
we talk about the purpose of the
medical malpractice act was to
solve an insurance crisis the
positions were having these
hospitals have in some cases a
hundred million dollars in
insurance coverage that is being
on use because they're getting
the benefit of the patient
compensation from and they're
being subsidized by New Mexicans
and by patients and individual
doctors the insurances there.
Okay thank you a thank you
Representative and thank you Mr
Vargas.
Senator great
Senator great you have your hand
up are you.
I'm rich Mr chair Senator
finished I.
Okay that's fine
thank.
Other
I think the cabinet can be a
long term because I was also
looking at the.
The the statute and we've talked
about the fund not being
solvent.
If the hospitals or to leave.
Then also of if the hospital if
that the fund is not solvent or
if the funds are being
exhausted.
That if there is not enough to
pay those funds and I think you
talked about
That can you speak to about
proration pro rating you know.
Some of these what what does
that mean.
Because I know the statute it
talks about that the fund is no
not available that these claims
might be have to be probated
over that calendar year and then
this kid can of a representative
of explain that are sure I'm
gonna get internet orders to
workers I think you better
answer.
Thank you Mr chair I believe
that such for your provision
this provision you're referring
to is the one of the fun
completely implodes and just
isn't there anymore in that case
what the staff to talk about is
taking whatever money is left in
the fund and paying it on a
program basically and certainly
we're not suggesting anything
that would cause the fund to
implode and I want to point
specifically to superintendent
told testimony at the insurance
nominating commission on January
twenty eighth of this year he
was asked that question you know
if we take the hospitals out are
we going to lose the money that
they're paying in and his sensor
is we will be collecting the
additional money but will also
be reducing the PCS exposure of
course because those hospitals
will no longer be covered by the
PCS.
So when we talk about a fifty
six million dollar deficit it's
a projected deficit it doesn't
mean that the fund right now has
to write a check for fifty six
million dollars what it means is
they think there might be claims
up to that value down the road
for which they don't.
Have a plan but the fact of the
matter is if the hospitals are
removed today any claim that is
submitted tomorrow does not.
From the does not get paid for
the patient compensation fund
because the patient compensation
fund is one of the benefits of
the medical malpractice act in
to obtain any benefit the
medical malpractice act you have
to be a quote health care
provider as defined by the act
and what this bill does is
removes hospitals from the
definition of health care
provider and what it does is it
immediately shifted over so that
the claims that do arise in the
future.
Are going to be submitted to
those hundred million dollars of
insurance that I was telling you
about a moment ago.
Appreciate thank you
Representative thank you Mr
Vargas.
I think that concludes my
question but the as others have
stated.
I also want to thank you know
everybody that has testified
this is truly truly a
complicated matter that has to
be resolved.
I don't think we can the.
You know go on with this as as a
state you know I come to.
Listen to it all my colleagues
and senators and at least you as
individuals can talk about a
hospital in your community I
come from a tribal communities
and we don't have hospitals at
all to speak of.
And I've heard many tragedies
for more you know tribal
community members when they do
the hospitals.
Not have you you know doctors
and not having you know coverage
in a rural areas.
Scares us.
So we don't I don't know what
the real answer is I don't know
you know where things are at.
This is a complex issue and
needs to be resolved.
And the if this bill does move
forward I hope that the
judiciary will do its job.
Because of I do vote to move
this forward and if that doesn't
happen Judiciary that I may not
vote for it on the floor.
This is important.
I need to acknowledge and and at
the end of the day it's it's our
it's our patients.
You know there are loss our
families.
The testimony heard.
But individuals and their lives
changed.
I mean that's that's I mean I I
I can I'm I'm lucky as an
individual and as a family.
But for many that don't.
Or haven't you know.
There's a with them.
You know we're all you know here
to do the right thing.
And with this complicated issue
it's hard to know you know.
At the rate in is because on the
one hand we're talking about
families we're talking to
individualize we talked the
other hand we're talking about
those people that as you know
others have mentioned they're
gonna take care of us now as
medical doctors as nurses and
and all these things that that
we need our lives.
So I just want to thank all of
you that have testified in on
this committee.
And I hope that the.
There's a state we can do the
right thing and I appreciate
Representative we live for.
In this bill you know I.
Hi of.
So with that comes to my
comments and I think that we
have Senator Griggs has is for
stand up so what's the pleasure
of the committee.
Thank you thank you for sure
there is a bill and Senate
judiciary Senate bill two thirty
nine I believe it is that seems
to have a lot a lot a intrusion
and with that Mr chair I move to
table.
There's a motion to table that
is non debatable so lane can you
take real please.
Mr Chairman okay
I I just want to get
clarification it's it's it's
center the I don't know I'm not
and on the front row that's fine
on the front page anyway my
question was on the table in
motion
I think there was some debate
before that from Senator Griggs
all with all due respect Senator
Griggs I think there was some
some Committee before that I
don't know how that's typically
handled maybe the leader or
someone can tell us how those
are handled on those types of
centers.
So maybe Mr chair you know
tabling motion cannot be used to
stifle debate but I think in
this case we have had over three
hours of discussion and I think
it is perfectly appropriate to
accept that motion but that is
at the discretion of the chair
but I do think it's at this
point it's not stifling debate
given how long in the than the
involvement Senator branch again
has had on that so I I again all
due respect I just wanted a
clarification because there was
some committee prior to his
motion to the center of motion
thank you.
Appreciate that no I I I have my
questions and I also want to
just make some comments before
you know I closed the the debate
order questioning and then.
No so we have a motion on the on
the floor.
Or will be a Senator Griggs go
ahead.
Maybe Mr chairman the motion is
to is to table.
What the non debatable so then
can we do the role please
Senator Brandt.
Yes Senator Griggs.
Yes.
Now.
Senator Hickey.
Yes Senator how to meal.
Senator Kernan.
The C. R..
Senator Kernan.
Yes.
Senator Sanchez yes.
Senator Clemente.
Now.
Senator Wirth no.
Senator Padilla.
Senator Shendo.
No Mr Chairman.
Does it and I yess so the motion
fails I have Senator Tallman.
Thank you Mr chair like to make
a motion this bill goes next to
Judiciary since the opposing
bills.
Senate bill two thirty nine was
sent to Judiciary on to pass no
wrecked it is only fair that we
move this bill on the judiciary.
With the hope that maybe they
can work out a compromise
therefore I move I do pass no
rec do have a second that motion
also it was just to make sure
you have the right language Mr
chairman it's point of order
it's just a no rack it's not a
do pass no Representative shows
wreck the wreck.
Let's seconded it Senator
Padilla thank you senator.
Point of question.
It's a to pass no rec though the
do passes a do pass it's a no
rack we're moving it forward to
the next committee without a
recommendation from this
committee.
Is that is correct.
Okay well that's the same
language or use the last time
so.
I know.
I just wrote it down as.
We are.
Okay later please of
Mr Brandt no.
Senator Griggs now Senator
Hamblen yes.
Senator Hickey now.
Senator how to meal yes.
Did you say yes.
Yes thank you Senator Kernan.
No not like to explain more
about.
Senator Sanchez no.
Senator Clemente yes Senator
Wirth yes Senator Padilla yes.
Shendo yes.
Bill sixty five with Senator
Kernan explaining her vote.
So thank you Mr chair and I do
appreciate the discussion today
I think going forward the key
just as senator Wirth said is
negotiation and that has not
happened in I think that however
Judiciary handles this is
critical our experts we're not
allowed to speak and that's the
process and I understand that
but going forward in Judiciary
are we really encourage them to
X. to develop some sort of plan
for for there can be real
discussion back and forth
because I've learned some things
today but until we hear from
experts from both sides of this
issue in a committee we
legislators are not gonna be
able to make the right decision
and I'm gonna ask something of
all the members of this
committee.
Just and I don't do that very
often but I strongly encourage
you to read the report of the
office of the superintendent of
insurance.
Please read that before this
bill gets to the floor if it
does it is critical that you
understand from that perspective
what the potential of this bill
could get thank you Mr chair.
Thank you
With that.
Senator Corman your hands up but
it's.
Most it's okay it's down now
okay all right
okay thank you members of the
committee
I said we will I will keep you
guys hear till five thirty we've
got about.
Forty five minutes so I like to
a move on to Senate bill twenty
three Senator Padilla.
Mr chairman I have to go to June
your Judiciary thank.
Okay thank you Mr chairman I do
have an expert witness's name is
Michael doctor Michael pritom.
And he's
Thank you Mr leader.
Mr chair just that we all get
the same treatment all over the
place I'm ready to go sure can I
just can I just pause for a
moment can I just pause for a
moment again that was in no way
I just wanna be very clear I
apologize I was engaging with
Senator Brandt it was in no way
directed at you so I apologize
for that you know your bill's
important and I'm glad we're
putting it on thank you know I I
thought you were laughing
because I have a bill here in
two and Judiciary and I can't
get anywhere in life right now
so
anyway so I I have Dr Michael
credit who is an expert Mr
chairman I think in the admitted
to the room I appreciate it it's
the health care purchasing Act
Senate bill twenty three of you
to see a doctor program can you
announce yourself if you are
here there's quite a few people
here right now.
there you have a you also have a
an amendment right yes I do so
so this is Senate bill twenty
three it's a health care
purchasing Act essentially
doesn't allow insurance
companies to charge higher.
Copays for chiropractic
chiropractic medicine that it
does any other copay or
coinsurance or copay that that's
a lot of their the only the the
amendment that I have is is and
I'll move it for purposes of
discussion only Mr Chairman is a
member of the committee you
we've given it's been your
committee for about a week so I
apologize for the for the quick
run over there but essentially
the superintendent of insurance
came forward and wanted to move
the effective date to January
first twenty twenty two and and
we're perfectly fine that's all
the amendment yes.
Okay any of the opposition to
the amendment.
Moving the date to January first
instead of twenty first or
twenty second.
See none of you have amended
bill what.
Thank you Mr.
Okay.
The bill that's essentially what
it does you know Mr chairman
that the you know copays you
know as much as a copay may
assist with the preventing over
utilization and keeping health
care premiums down and
conversely a copayment may be
discouraging a patient from
seeking the necessary health
care that they may need so
that's that's something that's
very important to note here
there are health disparities a
higher copayment it keeps people
who cannot afford it from being
treated in the most conservative
waste Mr chairman and and and to
be preventative you know if they
get on it early on if they can't
afford those copays which in
some cases have been
astronomical for this type of
service then but then it would
just it would not not not apply
would help them to reduce this
issue that they may have down
the road and then of course it's
integrated medicine you know
conservative management leads to
lower costs lower accidental
overdoses better outcomes you
know and and and better wellness
so just a just wanted to make
mention of those things there's
a history of costsharing Mr
chairman that has taken place in
two thousand eleven and you know
if you're pressed for ten years
now we've tried a couple of
attempts over the years to make
up you know these things a
little more equitable across the
state our practice here is just
as important as any other care
that may happen in the state Mr
chairman and I do have as I
mentioned after Michael create
online I don't know if he's been
admitted to the Rohingya.
And give them a second to see if
he's here.
Mister chairman Senator of India
by Dr pritom is not available.
today and I hope the service
we're the property to help out
with this bill you know Dr okay
Mister Moore thank you very much
I see you thank you so much
and then I do have here Mr
Chairman all I think this was
emailed to you but it is a very
nice letter
from the New Mexico Public
Health Association that is just
discussing you know exactly how
important this is and it you
know chiropractic you know
positions are physical
therapists etcetera these are
all you know licensed physicians
here in New Mexico and and that
our doctors here in New Mexico
and we should allow them to
practice and not be you know
copay to you know I love
existence because their patients
can't afford to go see them so
that's essentially what the
legislation.
Mr Moore did you want to say a
few words before we move on.
Yes thank you Mr chairman mentor
members of the committee thanks
for taking your time allow me to
can to consider this piece of
legislation my name's I drive
Chasey more on the vice
president New Mexico
chiropractic association also
the clinic director of heights
chiropractic and sports medicine
in Albuquerque New Mexico the
language of Senate bill twenty
three is very simple and
straightforward with a very
simple straightforward purpose
health care purchase act will
improve access to conservative
non pharmacological Care for
musculoskeletal pain and remove
a common barrier created by
health insurance policy design
the purpose of reducing opioid
prescriptions and other more
invasive procedures.
Over the past number of years
many published studies have
shown that individuals that
treat with a chiropractic
physician are less likely to
fill or utilize opioid
prescriptions as recently as
last month a study in the
journal of pain medicine with a
hundred thousand subjects
concluded that patients at sea
Care with the chiropractic
position for spinal related pain
had half the risk of billion
opioid prescription at those
that don't and that reduction is
even greater for those is he
care within the first thirty
days of onset this all sounds
very simple more treatment from
chiropractic physicians and
other conservative providers
equals less opioids and other
invasive procedures.
Unfortunately our our current
health care to let delivery
system and third party payers
create Berwick barriers to
access this care.
These barriers come in the form
of visit limitations arduous pre
authorization requirements and
high copayments the nature of
chiropractic care and other
physical medicine often requires
multiple visits.
condition a single fifty dollar
copay may easily be budgeted for
but it typical three to six
visit treatment plant at a cost
quickly.
this to an opioid prescription
the cost a few dollars out of
pocket and too often patients
are pressure to make health care
decisions based on their wealth
instead of their well being.
More more I'm staying at my
patients come in with copays as
high as a hundred to a hundred
twenty dollars per visit.
Multiple professional
institutions have studied and
discussed in the health
insurance policy designed with
related to conservative care and
reinforce the same issue the
journal of the American medical
association review the topic and
many studies and commentaries in
two thousand eighteen their
conclusions were that many
insurers are focused more on
identifying high risk
prescribers and patients rather
than promoting comprehensive
strategies to improve the
treatment of chronic pain or
better integrate non
pharmacological alternatives to
opioids.
Government agencies and
organizations have also pleaded
with the health insurance
industry to self police and
address this discrepancy.
And two thousand seventeen
thirty seven members of the
national Attorney General's
Association including New
Mexico's Hector Balderas signed
a letter to insurance industry
leaders requesting them to
review their payment and
coverage policies and revise
them as necessary and
appropriate to encourage health
care providers to prioritize non
opioid pain management over
opioid prescriptions to date
little has been done to address
these policy that design issues
now is the time for more
aggressive intervention from
lawmakers to promote these
revisions.
Today I'm sure you'll hear from
representative representatives
of the health health insurance
industry tell you how this bill
result increased cost of
healthcare consumers fortunately
we have some data to assess this
claim in the past ten years at
least seven other states have
passed similar legislation some
of the state's both the lowest
average health insurance
premiums in the country
additionally several similar
laws have already been passed in
New Mexico for other provider
groups and although this is
anecdotal and my assessment of
the hundreds of insured Asian
spicy and practice every year
individuals have not been
subjected to a significant
increase in primary care
provider copays based on these
new lost.
In conclusion Senate bill twenty
three will lower copays for
hardworking New Mexico New
Mexicans and improve access to
safe effective evidence based
care that significantly reduces
the risks associated with
prescription drug use and that
is why I ask for your support
thank you for the consideration
and I welcome any questions or
comments okay thank you Mr
chairman and and those were just
a few words I apologize but I
was really really much better
description I could get I will
go wherever you think it's going
to Mr chair thank you.
Senator will.
Our bill twenty three first will
go to those who registered to
speak in opposition we have
grant more.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Brent
war I'm a registered lobbyist
for America's health insurance
plans and we respectfully stand
in opposition the Senate bill
twenty three estimates
opposition for for two essential
reasons first the cost of copays
is not the cost of the procedure
health insurance you pay your
premium and you also pay your
copay so when you look to
suppressing copays there will be
costs that are spread to the
premiums and so you need to look
at the overall factors with both
in order to assess thirty
second.
What is going on in this
particular area the other thing
I would tell you is that you
have chiropractors that are
asking for similar similar
treatment or lowering the copay
you'll see a long list of
specialty providers that will
come in after this is Safe*Treat
us just like you treat them now
it's asking for is equalization
it doesn't necessarily mean that
the copays for primary care will
stay low it just says that they
will be equal and we want to
incentivize primary care so we
respectfully request that you
reject thank you are there any
other members of the public
relations to speak in opposition
to Senate bill twenty three
please raise your hand.
Seeing no hands raised we will
now go to those who wish to
speak in favor of Senate bill
twenty three beginning with
Robert Jones.
Mr chair Senators I am the
immediate past president of the
American chiropractic
Association and immediate past
chair of the university of
western states health university
has chair a past president of
New Mexico chiropractic
Association and practice in
integrative setting I would like
to say is that the chiropractic
physicians are part of the
primary care teams and networks
and just as in the previous bill
where they talked about the
report that there's a deficit of
primary care physicians we help
fill that void for specific
primary care conditions and
lowering the copay will lower
that that barriers where we can
help out with the problem with
this deficit of primary care
thank you.
Thank you next up we have Harvey
Johnson.
Mr chairman senators I'm doctor
Harvey Johnson chiropractic
physician practicing in Los
Lunas New Mexico large health
insurance corporations exert
leverage over individual
practitioners the result is
health insurance companies
allowing approximately sixty
five percent less for the same
procedures than what is allowed
by the workers comp the schedule
on top of that the unilaterally
set visit copay amounts under
which patients pay nearly all or
all of the full amount.
Cost for a routine treatment
visit this phenomenon is
sometimes referred to as ghost
insurance four or five discount
plans these large corporations
want to use coverage for
chiropractic as a selling point
for their plans but in fact the
largely shift the cost of care
to the patients and just us
there providers thank you.
Thank you.
Members of the public who wish
to speak in support of Senate
bill twenty three please raise
your hand.
Thank you very much that public
comment
We will now go to committee so
Senator Hamblen Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman is more of
a committee I love my
chiropractor.
there I have experienced
mysteries and including and
separated just I joined bruised
ribs red heads of being popped
out and if it weren't for my
chiropractor I would be able to
walk in an upright position and
and I and I have a chiropractor
friends in Santa Fe and in Los
crucis and I truly feel that the
alternative ways of dealing with
health without having to go to
medications is the way to go we
need to make that accessible to
everybody and I feel that if we
don't pass this bill it's going
to make that a bit more
challenging and so I think I'm
in strong support of this and
thank you senator pretty efforts
for bringing this to the table
thank you Mr chair thank you
Senator Brandt.
Mr Chairman
Senator thank you appreciate the
bill I do have a couple of so
the the analysis the committee
analysis.
Brought up the fact that I think
it probably is up to you your
expert might want to address is
that normally when you go see a
physician it's about three times
a year it's a little bit more
per visit.
But it's about three times a
year so they got a hundred sixty
seven as the average for primary
care doctors visit but with the
car pressure you're going about
twenty times a year and so the
the multiplier effect is that
the chiropractor Care is
actually more expensive because
you're going more often.
So could your expert or you talk
about that a little bit and how
that.
Balances out with us.
Yes Mister chairman Senator
brand we actually got that
receive this question from a
previous iteration previous
committee but but Mister drive
more can you please chime in on
this.
Thank you Mr chair Senator
Brandt
I might question the twenty
visits a year average I think
that's a little high often times
that might be a cap on insurance
but they allow twenty visits but
I would say typically in my
office typical treatment plan is
going to run on average from
about three to eight visits per
year are per per condition
excuse me
now certainly there are
instances where patients will
require more treatment than that
but I I would say that the
twenty visit average per patient
per year.
Is a little excessive.
additionally.
I think I might question asked
that when when that when a
patient goes to a primary care
provider the B. that costs but
then there may be additional
costs associated with that tests
and things like that or other
referrals to specialists so.
I think we help contain those
costs.
By treating these conditions of
primarily and house of course
the maker for referrals when
appropriate but we are very
adept at treating spinal related
thing I hope I answered your
question Senator.
And you did the right it was Sir
and one of the huge supporter of
chiropractic I Hey I just wish
the the veterans administration
would actually allow us to use
it.
yeah because I think it could
potentially help one thing quite
a bit but they don't it's just
not it's not one of the things
that they'll do they will also
I've tried for twenty years to
try to get them to contracted
out let me go to a chiropractor
in Rio Rancho or anywhere.
and so it's it's.
I think the the concern on this
is that that it's you know with
your primary care doctor you're
going
a few times a year or three four
times a year unless you've got
some that's you know
chronic we having to go more
often but with the chiropractic
care you need to go more often
that a few times a year it's
probably about once a month if
you have some kind of chronic
condition
and so I don't know if is that
something of course not as many
people go for chiropractic care
skill for primary care and so
you're in a large pool so I'm
just trying to balance that out
in my mind as to how that works.
I want to bring that up because
I thought it was actually really
good catch by our by the the
analyst and in the the analysis
for us
So the the intention of this
bill Senator Mr chairman is is
really just to have the same co
pay across the board is that
correct Mr chairman and senator
essentially because if you're if
you're doing the you know three
on average three visits and yes
there are more visits for the
and and and and you're looking
at say you know anywhere from a
hundred and fifty to four
hundred dollars or a hundred
fifty two hundred eighty dollars
or whatever you know for your
copayment just can really cause
a dramatic effect on your and
maybe have your grocery bill for
the month of when you're still
going to pay the you know if
they still have you know the
service paid for it just justice
propose that out of pocket copay
and makes it more accessible.
Is there any concern I and I
know that the doctors committee
brought up last committee.
But
seems like as soon as we start
having the insurance companies
cover everything prices shoot
through the roof.
Of when patients cover the cost
on their own lot of times it
helps keep prices down.
that I guess until we start
require everyone to post their
prices for things.
that's going to happen but is
there yes we do we see
chiropractic care getting more
and more expensive
Are they going to continue to
post their prices for cash
patients how would that be done.
Mister chairman Senator I mean
that's sort of it's the the the
you know the the million dollar
question there I mean at the end
of the day though you're going
to have more access you're gonna
have more more visits so I I
think I think that's going to
correct that at least for a
period of time until we have
massive you know reform in terms
of how how it all happens.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator I do support bill just
one to touch on those couple
thanks thank you thank you
senator rand I know that you
suffer quite a bit in this year
and you and I talked about on
the on the floor in committee
many times thank you.
Thank you Senator Mario thank
you chairman so Senator thank
you for bringing this bill
forward I had a number of people
reach out from district I we
talked about the expands on
those who have to go sometimes
once a week and those go by
weekly so with that Mr Chairman
I make a motion for two passed.
This double check recruiting
have any other questions we do
not.
Madam seconds okay we have a due
pass motion by Senator how to
meal and a second by Senator
Tom lane please call role.
Senator Brandt yes ma'am Senator
Griggs.
Senator Hamblen yes Senator he's
gone Senator had a meal.
Yes.
Senator.
Excuse me Senator Kernan yes
senator Sanchez yes.
Senator Tallman.
Yes my vote.
Senator Wirth yes.
Senator Padilla yes yes Senator
Shendo yes.
tune one absent in senators sent
just wants to explain his
hammer.
I mean Madam sorry Senator
common.
Thank you Mr chairman.
I'll be very filling we live in.
World where the profits of.
Insurance company take precedent
over the welfare of the patient.
The insurance companies are
really unnecessary middleman
could be eliminated completely
if we had single payer thank
you.
Thank you all right so we're now
move to Senate bill three forty
nine I believe I saw Senator
Duhigg thank you Mr chairman
here.
Stripped down to run out to ****
and I'll be right back and see
if they'll hear me thank you.
Senator thank you Mr chair thank
you members of the committee
Senate bill three forty nine is
that the US it is the more the
mortgage relief act and what you
all have is that can Committee
sub for this committee that
we've come with because the
original bill included a stay on
for foreclosures we have taken
that out of the bill so what
this bill does is it just
increases our disclosure
requirements so and and let me
back up a little bit we have a
tsunami of foreclosures coming
that is likely to be worse than
that that we saw in two thousand
eight because of the economic
downturn and that we are dealing
with
we want to make sure that
homeowners again all the
information that they need so
that they are in the best
position possible to stay in
their homes if they are eligible
to do so and so what this bill
does is it just to make sure
that there are clear and
appropriate disclosures to
homeowners giving them the
information that they need to
pursue appropriate loss
mitigation loss mitigation is
our our our actions that that
folks can take when they are in
defaults to stay in their house
and appropriate
analyses for the mortgage yours
to do to see if they qualify for
those actions I in addition one
other thing that that I've done
separately but this meant as a
companion to this bill is we
want to make sure that there is
there are appropriate services
in place for folks facing
foreclosure and default to to
work at work those issues out
with their mortgage our so I
gave half of my junior fund
money to the second judicial
districts foreclosure settlement
program with the intention that
that program be expanded to
serve folks beyond both in
Bernalillo county and beyond I
give the other half of my junior
money to list of legal services
for.
Purposes of our services that
the assist folks with
foreclosure defense and that was
done specifically so that in
combination with this bill New
Mexicans are in the best
position possible to stay in
their homes as they as we claw
our way out of our current
economic situation I have mark
who stayed for who is the
managing attorney of United
south Broadway here with me he
is just available to and help
answer questions if need be
otherwise Mr chair available for
questions thank you senator at
this time we'll go to public.
Our.
The forty nine we did not have
any members of the public
registered in advance to speak
in opposition if there are any
members of the public here today
who wish to speak and I listen
to Senate bill three forty nine
please raise your hand.
Seeing no hands we will now go
to those who wish to.
This may excuse me I did right
in as a public before and I
don't have a hand to raise here.
So I.
Do you wish to speak in
opposition your.
Sorry I am so sorry.
I've been waiting for hours for
this I am so sorry no wind in
support I I apologize.
Okay yes we have you on the left
thank you sorry.
Okay now we will go to the list
for those speaking in favor
beginning with Marjorie I'll
bill are.
Okay.
We have currently here.
Hello.
Marjorie L. the R. you make a.
I'm I'm just a little bit
disappointed that you have
removed the state portion of
this bill.
That is what I was here to speak
for I believe you are going to
be putting out many New Mexicans
out in the cold myself included.
Apparently the banks and courts
think it's okay to throw
families out of their own in the
cold during this program hello
that's.
So I encourage you to put the
state back into the.
Thank you thank you.
Next up we have Kurt greater.
We have Diana Dorn Jones.
S. can you hear me yes.
Thank you of members Mr chairman
members of the committee my name
is Diana Dorn Jones and
executive director United south
Broadway corporation in two
thousand fourteen The New Mexico
state legislator passed more
house and Senate memorials by
Senator Padilla being one of
them then they the task force
was establishing a New Mexico
foreclosure process task force
chaired by United south Broadway
our charge was to examine the
residential mortgage foreclosure
process including servicing loss
mitigation and judicial process
as a provider to homeowners this
there is we ask that this pro
this bill gives clear consistent
guidelines to servicers and
borrowers forlornly path for
notifying borrowers of how to
cure default a resume payments
thank you very much request we
ask where do pass.
Thank you next up we have Ryan
Thomas.
We have Debbie Norman.
Chairman and members of the
committee on the program manager
for the high certified
foreclosure prevention housing
counseling program at United
south Broadway we have worked
with thousands of our state I
can help them work with their
lenders to keep their homes are
exit with dignity a major
contributor foreclosures when
homeowners don't know how to get
help what options are and
therefore don't participate in
the process this bill in short
they will receive timely
notification so they can do so.
We thank senator do hate and and
senator spoke McKenna Hickey and
handles the homeowners in New
Mexico who has suffered a
temporary setback and have the
desire and the means to get back
on track I urge support for this
bill thank you.
Thank you next up we have
Marianne St Germain.
Can you see me.
But we can hear you so you may
go ahead okay.
Members of the committee I live
alone in my home and was solely
responsible for surviving
financially I became ill working
mandated sixty hours per week I
dreaded the on this idea of
foreclosure thank god I heard
about US BC and applied to them
for legal help I fully
cooperated with U. S. B. C.
bringing them requested
documents on a number of date
finally the breakthrough came
here they had me sign the
documents on Saint Patrick's day
twenty seventeen I started
paying my mortgage again thirty
seconds.
I even started three months in
advance.
In addition to that my eighty
seven year old father sent me to
the place to live now I
supervises finances and other
basics I think Senator Duhigg
and the sponsors of SB three
forty nine for making sure that
all of New Mexico homeowners
know their options for saving
our homes this bill will prevent
honest hardworking people from
falling through the cracks of
society thank you.
Thank you next up we have
Christine Malcolm.
Thank you since this pandemic
many I'm unemployed and under
employed through no fault of
their own.
May be foreclosed on or rejected
and there's very little housing
available for people these days
services and law firms will use
this pandemic to take further
advantage of homeowners and
homeowners may not have the
funds to contest and giudicato
court as is their right in New
Mexico why hadn't the revision.
Why haven't the revision of the
moving the state has been posted
already that would have been
nice to know and not passing
this bill would be very
dangerous to the health and
safety of our community at large
I urge a yes vote on this bill
thank you so much for taking my.
For taking this time.
Thank you next up we have Bill
Jordan.
Good evening Mister chair
members of the committee Bill
Jordan with New Mexico voices
for children we stand in full
support of this legislation and
applaud senator doing again pope
in the other co sponsors for
bringing it before the
legislature many New Mexicans
are facing extraordinarily
challenging financial
difficulties through no fault of
their own I think we're all
aware The New Mexico already
faces a crisis of homelessness
but I want to remind the
committee that this comment
pandemic has been made worse
when something.
Some families took in other
family members who faced
eviction or foreclosure those
crowded multi generational homes
made the spread of COVID that
much more likely the tragedy of
COVID is not just the disease
but the myriad of ways it has
compounded other problems our
families need this help and we
urge the committee support thank
you.
Thank you whether any other
members of the public wishes
speak in support of Senate bill
three forty nine please raise
your hand.
Thank you very much public
comment at this time.
Okay thank you first I'd like to
since this is a committee
substitute I like to do a do not
pass on Senate bill three forty
nine and a do pass on committee
substitute Senate bill three
forty nine.
So.
Okay of I don't have any the
questions from the committee was
a pleasure.
All right do passed this over
the past senator Neville second.
Who was the second Senator Wirth
majority leader okay.
All right thank to grow.
Okay sorry Senator Brandt this.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen yes leader he's gonna
Senator how to meal.
your budget I'm back yes well
yes thank you very much sorry
Senator how to meal.
Yes.
Senator Kernan yes your Senators
yes.
Your comment.
Yes.
Senator Wirth yes Senator
Padilla yes Senator Shendo yes
eleven two zero.
Thank you chairman thank you
members of the committee I like
you guys a lot more than
Judiciary Mr chairman and
senator do they can please go
back to judiciary because my
bill because you were here I
can't catch a break today Mr
chairman.
Thank you very much we'll work
on that Senate Bill a.
Or ten Senator Burt.
Thank you.
Mr read chairman and members of
the committee I appreciate to
giving us in today
Senate bill fourteen internet
chill Alliance New Mexico's
large partnerships tax our
processes with the federal tax
our processes and procedures
with me today actually earlier
was Richard and can the
executive director New Mexico
tax research institute to is
been working on this he had to
leave unfortunately but with me
is from the multistate tax
commission is Helen Hecht expert
witness and I believe Mr
Chairman have eight a small
technical amendment.
That we would like to.
Put forth the so that we get to
discuss the bill at that point
with the.
Okay well we'll put that on the
screen so
And this by the way the the
amendment that was really a
discussion between the the in
these tax folks and TRD in the
state to make sure that we were
everything was lining up in the
language was in fact correct and
that's what this amendment does
Mr chairman okay great so I'll
go ahead and move the amendment
for discussion purposes.
Your.
Questions on the amendment.
Mr chair can we just get the US
senator Burke to walk us through
exactly what this is doing I
just wanna make sure we just
track it.
Yes Mr might be more than happy
to and if I could.
Mr leader I would like to defer
to my expert witness Helen
Hector was directly involved in
those discussions with TRD.
Mr chair thank you senator Byrd
of Mr leader the
The amendment does two things
we want this bill to mainly
track.
the provisions in the statute
limitation.
seven nine or seven one twenty
six.
Seven twenty nine and so
the initial bill I made a
mistake of saying that when the
assessment is paid the statute
of limitations runs from the
date of the assessment of the
date that the payment was made
of that tax and so we're.
Making that correction.
And we're also changing the
effective date there to sort of
separate
issues in this bill
and so we're making the
effective date for the of what's
called a composite return
separate effective date for that
for that provision just to make
sure that the tax department has
the ability to implement that
separate provision.
Great thank you Mr I'm would you
pass on the amendment.
There any opposition.
The line you have a amended
bill.
Thank you very and thank you Mr
chairman so at this point we
would be open for
Representative.
Questions or certainly input
from the.
The audience.
Okay.
For Senate bill for ten there
was nobody who register in
advance to speak in opposition
if there are any members of the
public who wish to speak in
opposition and are here today
you raise your hand.
Seeing no hands we will now go
to Mary horn speaking in favor.
Thank you Mr chairman this
committee Larry R. and
registered lobbyists for the New
Mexico society of certified
public accountants we worked on
this bill with with miss hacked
and also with Richard include
and so it's much more technical
than I'm gonna be able to get
into but it helps align us with
what the federal law is you know
still with these large
partnerships we appreciate your
support of Senate bill four ten
and at this late hour that's all
I'm gonna say.
Thank you are there any other
members of the public who wish
to speak in support of Senate
bill for ten please raise your
hand.
Thank you very much that
concludes public comment at this
time.
Right okay now I will go to
committee I don't see any hands.
Two passed Mr chair.
And second year and a second by
Senator Padilla.
Any opposition to the motion I
guess we had both.
Figueroa small technical issue.
The grant yes ma'am Senator
Griggs.
Yes if I could explain my vote.
Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Hickey yes Senator how to meal
yes Senator Kernan.
Yes percentages yes Senator
Tallman yes Senator Padilla.
Senator Wirth I'm sorry yes and
I'd like to explain my vote and
Senator Padilla yes yes in
Senator Shendo yes and I don't
want to explain what will.
You Senator Griggs and senator
Wirth want to explain their
votes.
Thank you Mr chair.
Real quickly I I wish I was
really impressed with the simple
easy little bill with all of
those changes I I just I can
hardly believe that but I was
really to go along with it for
my good friend senator Byrd
began when he brought his expert
witness that started making me
think again so I I don't know
but Center birds I was glad to
give you my yes vote in spite of
your expert witness.
And Mr chair what I saw was a
bill by senator Byrd I was
really having trouble but then I
saw his expert witnesses I
respect tremendously.
I got a new path vote for me
thank you.
Okay Senator Burt well Mister
chairman I appreciate the
comments all the comments I
really do.
I know I just seems like I'm I'm
I'm becoming Mr fix it here
almost the bills that I tend to
run are picking up odds and ends
of of good legislation that need
to be tweaked just a little bit
but I do appreciate Mr Chairman
your support and the the
committee support on this and
and especially at the guys you
want to pressure us integration
the floor leader right I do
appreciate them very much thank
you all very much.
Thank you we want to Senate bill
seventy twos Senator hard meal
thank you Mr chairman you're
gonna see how quick I can do
this but I to have the sub.
Okay.
We can what we can move on the
sub well okay we'll do a book to
bill number.
My phone number is three seven
two okay we'll do a quote for
you not pass on Senate bill
three seventy two and do pass on
some subset of bills substitute
we're Senate bill three seventy
two.
It so the explained the bill Mr
chairman are you ready.
We're to go okay so what this
does is it creates a new section
of the tax administrative
administration act specifying
that any regional transit G. R.
T. collected by the tax and
revenue department in the county
is to be distributed directly to
the regional transit district
now the R. T. D. is our form of
transportation which truly
connects rural New Mexicans to
larger cities and some not so
large like Espanola others
larger like Santa Fe what this
bill does is eliminates the
county as the middle man and
directs the G. R. T. directly to
the R. T. T. R. T. D. Michelin
but checks ascending path was
created in twenty two thousand
six when the agency was formed
as a protection but fifteen
years later there have been no
problems and the agency is
mature and can handle the direct
chat now with me today is at the
table throughout all of our to
do if like say a few words.
Are you you're you're muted Sir.
Mr Chairman Senator
basically as Senator harm you
know the explain to this bill to
simply removes the county as a
middle person in the
distribution process so the
funds would come to the regional
transit district of we're not
the only ones that would benefit
from this as well there's a
another transistor in the.
We kirke the Santa Fe area known
as real metro
we're the only two that are
voters have approved the
regional transit tax
as a Mr argue as indicated on
the sides that one of the
creation of these other benefits
to the bill
such as a.
During that the counties don't
even have to account for this
any longer because the way it's
handled now it comes into them
as a receipt they have to
reflect that in their budget
many goes out as a definitive
artificially inflates their
budgets.
it also helps when they are in
order to do is looking at up on
financing.
Currently the view of want to
bond finance as a regional
transit district you have to
enter into a separate tax
intercepted green ones with
every county in New York our
regional transit district well
by having the of this sow
revision maybe the only mothers
into one intercept the green
movements with the axe and
Revenue Department.
they also makes it very clear
that.
Portion of this tax cannot be
dedicated to the tax increment
for Development Act by county in
one of the districts.
And the Wesley this this
modification has no
implications or or negative
attributes to any city county or
even state.
Now stand for any questions of
the committee may have thank
you.
Mr chairman we can go that
public comment and then
questions okay what will.
public comment percent bill
three seventy two we did not
have any members of the public
register in advance it to speak
in opposition if there are any
members who wish to speak in
opposition balance your time
please raise your.
Seeing no hands we will now go
to Scott Scanlon who will be
speaking in favor hi Scott
Scanlon registered lobbyists for
the for the nor some protective
transit district or the blue bus
folks is as we call them
everything's been laid out we
support the bill a very
important no tax increase that
has nothing to do with
increasing taxes it's just shift
shifting where the check goes
thank you Mr chairman members.
Thank you we also have David R.
me hope but they do not appear
to be in the meeting are there
any other members of the public
who wish to speak in support.
Thank you very much that public
comment.
This will go to the committee
members I have Senator Brandt
and then of senator.
Thank you Mr chairman though
we're just about out of time but
I just wanted to ask so if
you're basically cutting out the
middle man
The.
The city's charge any kind of
the.
He for handling that money.
We're doing the counting on that
have have that work is that
actually end up saving money
Mister chairman Senator that's a
good question it's my
understanding that there was no
administrative cost but I'll go
I'll defer to my expert witness.
Mr chairman of.
Senator the the only fee that
success is by tax and
Representative the three percent
fee for processing the bump up
the number this money goes
through cities it goes through
the counties because of the
taxes imposed
through an Alexion the county
process so it doesn't blow three
cities.
So the tax goes to the the
county assessors that now that
we're still.
Mister chairman Senator the the
tax from taxed Representative
goes to the county and then the
county distributes it to the
regional transit district.
So thank you within that
district goes through that same
process in our case there's four
counties in our district so each
one of them undertakes that
crosses.
Okay thank you very much for
should.
Senator Wirth thanks just just a
couple questions so what what
was the change that was in this
from the original bill.
The Mr chairman and senator I'm
gonna let Anthony speak about
that change in the sub because
it's one he's on the are to
decide that needed to take place
with the bill okay.
Mr chairman Senator.
I believe the just divisional.
Clean up to make sure that you
know other than of parts of the
legislation we're.
Counties are mentioned in the
regional transit bill are are
struck so that the R. T. the
language replaces the county in
those cases.
So Mister chair if I gonna Mr
Scanlon just respond yes Mr Mr
chairman and senator the council
service felt that they had had
missed a a portion of the
existing statute and so they
they added that into the sub and
then I think most important too
is that the effective date was
pushed to January the first of
twenty twenty.
Twenty twenty two just to give
an additional six months for any
any
Changes to computer systems and
things like that okay just Mr
just following up on senator
requests my question there's a
lot of language at the bottom of
page thirteen striking our
budget fees that were imposed
under and I take it this is all
out of date just looking at the
dates this is just all out of
date language.
This also will apply to all the
other entities that that are
impacted by the statute in my
correct in that.
Chair Senator yes.
Okay.
And then one more thing that I
saw on page sixteen section
five.
So we're we had we used to have
information that can be revealed
to water and sanitation district
and now we're including these
our districts we define special
districts as both sanitation
districts and transit districts.
But I want to make sure so what
what exactly does this means an
employee of the department may
reveal to the officials and
employees up now the blue bus
They can ask for the information
for the names taxpayer
identification numbers and
addresses of registered gross
receipts tax payers.
For that special districts so so
what exactly are you gonna be
able to get with this by adding
yourself into this are you gonna
get all of all the taxpayers in
your in your district you're
going to get there.
Their names and addresses and
information am I reading this
right.
Mister chairman Senator I want
to go to my expert witness.
Mr Senator chairman on a really
cannot respond to that question
since I didn't.
Ask Miss World the drafter well
maybe those modifications.
So I could not speak.
Okay so I just.
You know the question for me as
to what what what exactly you're
going to and why why you guys
need to get that information
because that seems to be a
different issue brought having
said that water and sanitation
districts and I have Eldorado
water and sanitation district
and they're able to get it also
I just don't know exactly what's
going on there that something
that you should probably look
into for the next step on this
and then.
One additional question is
there.
Is there any fiscal impact to
this.
So Mister chairman Senator there
could be some fiscal impact in
changing the system or the
software today and direct the
feet from the middle man going
to the R. T. D. that would be a
one time fee but we don't see
that as a reserve currency.
Okay
And I know when I'm full
disclosure of mine and my wife
is a city councilor who was the
Santa Fe designees on this on
this board and I'm a big fan of.
Of the blue box I guess you know
I I'm certainly good with with
doing this it really makes
things easier I do think it goes
to Senate finance and they'll
need to look at the fiscal
impact issue of it Senator and
and and again make sure that you
know TRD is not going to gonna
have an issue with that so I
just want to flag that issue but
again I appreciate.
You know what's what's being
done here and it does eliminate
a stab I just you know well one
final question I guess you know
for for Anthony so what what
what exactly what's the problem
what's the downside of having to
do with the way you do now
versus what will happen if this
bill passes just so I
understand.
Mister chairman Senator the
question was was the downside of
having to do it this way yeah
the way you do it now the status
quo so what what's what's the
problem here that we're really
by eliminating the middle man
which again for lots for city
you know there's a lot of
different entities that don't
have this I guess what's how
does that help you to get rid of
that what's the advantage to the
district.
Mr Chairman similar to put this
on the same footing as a city or
county and
It would of had this pandemic
been in place earlier we
We're we're in the process of
doing debt financing for a six
and a half million dollar bond
issue that are and working with
New Mexico finance authority
and.
As a result of that
The New Mexico finance authority
interpreted the existing
language to imply that we had to
go get the approval through the
of each county through the
center sept agreement.
Withhold our our taxes in the
event we didn't make debt
payments.
And the tax doesn't belong to
the counties so because of the
way it's written it creates this
false impression that the
counties have some type of the
ability to do you have access to
with Holden and we haven't had
that issue lately but we did
back in I think it was a two
thousand and eight or or what
have you with with the member
County who
was displeased at the time was
would some issues prior to my
administration and the.
so they they were attempting to
to make a claim to the taxes
they withdrew so it it it really
makes a clarification that you
know they're they're just the
just the middle man processing
that and really it's not needed
I mean you know we're like any
other city in
the entity and the taxes is just
come directly to us we're more
than able to manage and so are
the other our TV's and.
In the state great that's
exactly what I needed and I
appreciate.
I appreciate what you've done
and your leadership for this
particular district and will
certainly support the bill thank
you.
Hey Senator Hamblen thank you Mr
chairman this is the and senator
how do we have for bringing this
and this might be a question
that your expert witness Mister
Scanlan can answer because in
southern New Mexico we have the
south central regional transit
district and Mister Scanlan
you're shaking your head so you
might know a little bit more
about this does this apply to
ours as well or will it provide
an opportunity for us to also do
that down here.
Go ahead Tony you're you're the
Tonys also I'm sorry Mr chairman
and senator Tony is also up
active in the in the statewide
association so Tony go ahead and
and yes thank you Mr chairman
Senator
I was a three about three years
ago I was.
In New Mexico trans Association
I'm very familiar with Mr Armey
hole in your area and the he had
planned on on speaking in
support of this.
Well because late our.
Moving stay online but anyway
this white any regional transit
district existing today are
created in the future.
Right thank you very much thank
you Mr chair.
Thank you.
I don't have any more questions
so what's pleasure the
committee.
Question for the past Mr chair
Senator Hamblen sorry Senator
Padilla.
Wrestle for it would be a second
name take role.
Senator Brandt.
Yes Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen yes Senator Hickey yes
Senator hard how to meal yes
Senator Kernan yes
Representative just yes Sierra
yes Senator Wirth yes Senator
Padilla.
Senator Shendo yes.
Eleven with no one absent.
Thank you chairman of if you
want this party to continue I
can present for Campos who isn't
here today it says Senate joint
resolution but that's up to you
you know members of we've got to
joint resolutions and the next
six bills are listed ranking
member and I went through all of
them those are on consent so I
think if I commit dollars Oakley
for a few minutes I know Senator
Pinto is also we've been waiting
so these are good morals I hope
we don't take too long but the
go ahead I I just like to get
this done thank you Mr chairman
I'll be quick and I'm stepping
in for center Campos who's in
another committee so Senate
joint resolution thirteen
consolidate its ownership and
operation of the state's point
of entry for GST and GPS to the
New Mexico department of
transportation pursuant to
exiting statute any sale trade
or lease of the state real
property of a hundred thousand
or more is subject to the
ratification and approval of the
state legislature this includes
any transaction between one
government agency to another
government agency and with me
today as an expert witness from
and M. D. O. T. is Mister Jones
the latter us.
It might make a few comments.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
economy of thank you for
stepping in we think Senator
Campos ring this forward we've
been working on this with chip
General Services Department and
part of public safety for the
last few years all it's going to
do is consolidate the ownership
and operation of the point of
entry at N. M. D. O. T. we
collect the permit fees will be
using those fees to streamline
the maintenance and improvements
and what that will stand for
questions thank you.
Okay we'll to public.
For Senate joint resolution
thirteen did not have any
members of the public register
in advance whether any members
of the public who wish to speak
in opposition please raise your
hand.
Are there any members of the
public who wish to speak in
support please raise your hand.
Thank you very much that
concludes Public.
Okay no members of the
committee.
Mr Chairman is yes when I was to
pass a motion by Senator Brandt
second by Senator Padilla.
Yes.
Thank all role.
Senator Brandt.
Yes Senator Griggs.
Yes Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Hickey yes Senator how to kneel
yes Senator Kernan.
Yes explained that.
Senator Sanchez.
Yes Senator Tallman.
Yes Senator Wirth yes Senator
Senator Padilla yes Senator
Steinborn yes.
Eleven to zero.
All right thank you senator
Neville just have a quick
comment thank you Mr chair spine
and hopeful that the DOT will
continue to do the very best job
they can with regard to the
point of entry are now coming
into our New Mexico from Texas
at my port of entry they have
assured me they're gonna start
good work there thank you.
Senator Griggs.
Just real quick Mr chair in all
their some descriptions in here
which to me or are are really
lacking
you know and I would I would
encourage the department to have
these tracks survey because
anytime you start you know
making calls that are shelf
without sounds twenty five
degrees west and all those
things you have a you have
opportunities for discrepancy
and when you go into a free
start on three sides which
you're not but you've got some
that are very similar to that I
would suggest that you get these
things surveyed so would you
know specifically where they are
so so thank you Mr chair image
search alliance.
Thank you thank you Senator
Griggs so we'll move on to
Senate Joint Memorial to Senator
Pinto.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee Senate Joint
Memorial to request the federal
government to base federal
payments in lieu of taxes to
local governments for non
taxable federal lands within the
boundaries of those
jurisdictions on the full
property tax equivalency basis
as committed to at the inception
of the program.
And that is this short and sweet
the joint memorial.
Do you have any expert
witnesses.
No okay all right we'll go to a
public comment.
Senate Joint Memorial to we will
go directly to the public are
there any members of the public
which to speak in opposition
please raise your hand.
Whether any members of the
public and wish to speak in
support please raise your hand.
Thank you very much second
public comment.
Okay we'll go to committee for
questions.
Do that sister Jr also for the
past by Senator Padilla second
by how to meal and Pinto that
was lightning fast.
Okay Roco.
Senator Brandt.
Your muted Senator your muted
Senator I think eyes are yes
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen yes Senator Hickey.
Yes Senator how to meal yes.
Senator Kearney.
Yes senator Sanchez.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator Tallman.
Yes Senator Wirth yes Senator
Padilla yes Senator.
Set Shendo.
Yes.
I'll ten with Senator Sanchez
excuse.
Revenue plus motion Senator
Pinto.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee you
guys have a great rest of your
weekend.
Thank you.
All right committee members.
the next six bills can can I do
what we say all of that Senate
floor that we all work to but
the
Mr Chairman I would just the the
house bill one of five be taken
off of the consent calendar I'm
good with the rest.
All right that's fine will pull
that out so of let's assume are
individually House Bill twenty
eight do pass the pass by
Senator Brandt second think of a
Padilla lame please take our
role.
I'm gonna say it anymore in.
This is house bill twenty eight
Senator Brandt yes Senator
Griggs yes Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Hickey yes Senator meal.
Yes Senator Kernan.
Yes senator Sanchez.
Senator Tallman yes Senator
Wirth yes Senator Padilla yes
Senator sugar yes can Andrew
want excuse.
Right now move on to Senate Bill
imia house bill sixty eight.
Mr chairman of the best but the
second second by Coleman.
The grow.
Senator Brandt yes.
Senator Griggs yes.
One yes thank you yes we had a
meal yes your granny yes Senator
center.
Senator Tallman yes Senator
Wirth yes Senator Padilla yes
Senator Shendo yes and one.
Okay now will go to help you.
Follow us I'm sorry which one
area.
just made the motion our meal
Senator Jaramillo second by
Senator Padilla thank you.
Senator Brandt I'm sorry for the
record I I didn't seconded but I
will seconded that.
Chairman I just record to be
correct.
Senator Brandt yes Senator
Griggs yes Senator Hamblen.
Yes Senator Hickey yes Senator
how to meal yes Senator Kernan.
Yes Senator Sanchez.
Senator Tallman yes Senator
Wirth yes Senator Padilla yes
Senator Shendo yes one.
Okay next.
One oh three as amended.
The best Senator Brandt the bass
packages were Griggs.
Raul.
Senator Brandt yes Senator
Griggs yes.
Yes Senator Hickey yes Senator
how to meal yes your Kernan.
Yes senator Sanchez.
Senator common.
Yes Senator Wirth yes Senator
Padilla yes Senator Shendo.
Yes.
do passing house bill one fifty
seven the second comes by
Senator Padilla.
Thank.
I'm going to.
Yes.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen yes.
A key yeah that.
How to meal yes.
Senator Kernan yes news that is
Senator Tallman.
Yes Senator Wirth yep Senator
Padilla yes in the yes and once
you chairman can I move it to
pass on Senate bill two seventy
seven.
It it's not on the two.
Right with a committee members
thank you I know it's a
beautiful Saturday afternoon.
What long.
Often I would thank all of you
thank our staff for also their
stamina or a drive down
everybody I know it's been a
long day I work for a run this
morning is beautiful and we sit
inside but the this is why we
get paid the big Bucks.
The rest of the evening go
yourselves and we'll see on
Monday thank you good evening Mr
chairman thank you bye.
Why.
