Mr chair I'm having a hard time
hearing.
In your view your.
Sorry my secretary is muted.
What would happen all the time.
I'm sorry.
Two years.
Senator.
Tom.
President.
Senator Wirth.
Your Senator Padilla here.
Senator Brandt.
I'm here.
And Senator Shendo.
We've got a full house.
Yes.
Okay great it looks like the.
We have a quorum so like to call
the US Senate tax business the
transportation committee to
order thank you all for for
joining in.
Of.
We're gonna try and go to the
agenda but what I like to do is
I know that the Senator Kernan
has requested she's catching a
ride with another Senator
heading south so
Want to move her built up.
After the dollars is
transportation bills so
hopefully that will you're not
time to.
Get those out of the way and
then she'll stick around for a
little bit longer but the.
But other than that would just
go down the line with the
exception of Senate bill thirty
four will insert that between
Senate bill twenty two and
Senate bill twenty four.
Good the objections.
Not.
We will go with the.
Senate bill twenty Senator
Gonzales transportation project
fund.
Thank you all Mr chair can you
hear me OK yes Sir okay very
well thank you.
On the Senate bill twenty of
this changes the distribution of
all eighteen point seven five
percent of the motor vehicle
excise tax revenue collected by
the local government road fund
to the transportation projects
on the bill does not make any
other changes to the amount of
the distribution of a motor
vehicle excise revenue.
Hello this with the this change
in place that would be a.
would create a recurring source
of revenue to the transportation
projects fund estimate awful
forty one point one million for
FY twenty two and the growing to
up twenty two point five million
FY.
Twenty two.
Mr chairman members so I also
have a secretary of Mike Santa
Fe some expert witness and the
he wants to share some comments
with the committee.
And he should be on there.
On your board yes are you ready
for his comments yes I am okay
until.
Senator US secretary Santo.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee and I appreciate
Senator Gonzales sponsoring this
bill for us basically Mr
chairman I do have just one
slide acting kind of sums up
everything that's really easy to
understand if you if okay with
that I can share my screen I
could explain it in about two
minutes with that work for you
were perfect thank you
secretary.
Quick.
Mr chair can you see that.
yes rest of the committee
members are able to see the
chart.
Chair.
Okay
so basically Mr chair back in
twenty nineteen house bill six
got past it made some increase
in motor vehicle vehicle excise
tax and maybe some distribution
so the last two years which is
under the currently column fifty
million dollars a year was going
to say wrote fund that was
designated to district to down
on the oil fields twenty two
million dollars a year continues
to grow the local government
road Fund but there was no
reoccurring FIA Senator Gonzales
said appropriated to the new
local transportation fund if
this bill doesn't pass and we do
nothing starting on FY twenty
two forty million will continue
to go the road fund for any
purpose the local government
real fun would increase from
twenty two million to sixty two
million dollars per year and
there still would be no
reoccurring revenue source for
the local transportation fund
all this bill does Mr chairman
is keeps the same amount coming
to DOT the forty million keeps
the same amount as it currently
is in the local government road
Fund but provides local
transportation fund which in
which is an additional forty
million dollars per year so the
distributions you can see on the
bottom remains the same it's
revenue neutral hundred million
two million dollars per year the
difference in where that forty
million dollars goes if you
remember the local government
fund road Fund is a seventy five
twenty five match it's very
stringent on what that can be
used for cannot be used for
design or planning or studies so
in a lot of cases it's really
hard for the locals to access
that money the new
transportation fund which is
already set in statute and has
rules
is a ninety five five match
there's also a waiver so if
there is a hardship issue we can
actually be a hundred percent of
funded make can be used on any
transportation issues you can
use it for design planning
etcetera the locals have.
Indicated to us on that they
prefer this new transportation
funding much better just because
it's more flexible with the with
the lower match and so what this
bill does is just move that
forty million from the local
government road fund which to
the new transportation fund
local still get their sixty two
million they just get it in a
different way or it's much
easier for them to spend so with
that Mr chairman I will stand
for professionals in the stop
sharing my screen here.
Okay great
Senator Gonzales of course in
anything else.
Well Mister chairman no we're
ready for any questions.
Many members may have all right
at that that just I will don't
know with anybody from the
public that wants to make a
public testimony will.
At this time entertain.
Those with the.
At this time we do not have any
opposing
is there any members of the
public who would like to speak
in opposition please raise your
hand now using the reactions
within sales.
No right to move on to
supporters first we have Carol
leech mislead.
Thank you I'm here which I work
for Concho resources and that
part by Kanako resources but
next week I'll be saying work
for kombucha resources but we
operate extensively in southeast
New Mexico and the when I first
saw this bill I was concerned so
I contacted some of the leaders
in local government in that area
and they're fully supportive and
so as I understand it this will
help get money to projects
faster and so I stand in support
of it thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you are now we will hear
from Michael Santa Mr Santa.
Your focus to secretary of my
apologies now we hear from AJ
forte.
You Mr chair members of the
committee.
This bill is really a
continuation of what the Senator
helps with last year with house
bill two twenty getting this
money into the new local
government project on really
does give our communities more
access because the ninety five
percent match eight stands for
this bill thanks to Sanchez
thank you Mr thank you.
And I was elected member of the
public that wanted to speak are
there any other numbers within
the meeting that would like to
speak in support I didn't get a
chance to send an email.
No it doesn't look like it that
would be the last public
statement percent New Mexico
twenty okay thank you we'll go
to the committee members at this
time Senator Griggs.
Thank you Mr chair and the
Senator Gonzales I'd like to ask
you or your your expert when we
when we set up the.
The local transportation fund
versus the local government road
Fund does that mean that more
things are the money can be used
for more things other than Roach
is that is that why we change
the.
The word you know local
government road to local
transportation is it a broader
broader use term Senator or or
not.
Mr chair representative of the
bill to all to secretary Santa.
Thank you Senator and Mr
chairman Senator Griggs.
it's still has to be used for
transportation but it's just not
as descriptive as a local
government road funds so it's
local government road fund is a
more formula based with you know
I have to use so much on bus
route to help you so much for
this you can not use a local
government road fund for design
and studies to prepare a project
to be shovel ready so there is a
lot of the new fund is a lot
more flexible I'm so that
agencies can help get their
projects ready as well as the
construction part so.
He does have to be used on
transportation but much more
flicks.
Thank you Mr Mr chair senator
and secretary Santa so what aid
what it does sound like and just
you know to be be clear I
suppose this could be used for
our.
Bus route for the the.
Purchase of of bashes can it
could that sort of thing happen
to it or is it really is it's
still supposed to be for actual
You know infrastructures for
road Gen and stuff goes or is it
can it really be expanded to
we're
if Albuquerque wanted to use
this on their.
On their transportation or bus
station they can apply for wind
up getting the vast majority of
that that dollars and use it for
that and it wouldn't go to to
road construction at all these
at is that right or is that is
that incorrect.
Mr chairman and senator David
has to go for infrastructure so
right now there's not any
provision in the new fund to
purchase equipment it's
basically geared towards either
planning designing or preparing
for infrastructure when it comes
to roads and highways so it has
all the same features that the
lower current local government
road Fund has as far as routes
go if it's a bus route it can be
used on the road that the bus
route is on but to purchase
equipment that's not something
that's currently allowed under
this fund.
Okay Mister chairman thank you
thank you Senator Gonzales and
thank you Mr secretary.
Go ahead senator Sanchez.
Mr chair Senator Gonzales I
guess is a question for you I
was looking on page two.
Line fourteen right where you
have stressed out local
government and the next one on
the slide show it says local
transportation projects is local
missing right there for the
transportation.
You might want to check that out
just so it doesn't get caught up
somewhere else.
Is that local.
Mr chairman bill Senator are you
on page two on.
Online working forty fourteen
yes Sir.
Well All.
Mr chair we definitely will look
into it and we'll check
Legislative Council.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator.
Okay Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman
Search results for shape to
bring the bill I I do think that
you need to make sure that
stretched on page two secure
catch by a server Sanchez
since it is mostly a local.
Transportation project fund it
does concern me what it's able
to be used for it so I guess I
have a question for secretary
Santa
you said has to be used for
infrastructure we have seen
transportation funds in the
state of New Mexico used in ways
that work roads
if I remind everyone of our rail
runner situation and a space for
to know where could this money
be used for that or for that
kind of a project in the future.
Mr chairman and senator my
understanding is no we do have a
regulation that I would be happy
to share with committee members
you can see exactly what we can
be used for I can tell you that
the first year back in twenty
nineteen.
there was fifty million put into
this fund a one time fund there
is a an application process that
goes to the local
transportation planning
organization both the R. T. P.
O.'s and M. P. O.'s they filter
up the projects to
the D. O. T. at the competitive
process all those projects were
ranked and then selected and
then approved by the
transportation commission so
there was not any projects that
you're mentioning and I don't
think they're eligible I would
have to hundred percent check to
make sure the rule but I'm not I
don't remember it being at all
eligible for the type of things
that you're referring to.
The US want to make sure
because.
In talking to legislators of the
past who were here when those
two things were shot through
you know they they have been
told before that money can be
used for that either and money
was and so it's something I
think we need to look at and
deal with this legislature to
make sure that those monies are
only able to be used for roads
and for road infrastructure not
real runners or.
Train cars for rocket ships to
who knows where there grow a
spaceport that is doing nothing
and is just sucking money out of
the state as well as a route
runner I don't know we've got
about six billion dollars worth
of infrastructure needs I think
that was just the bridges if I
remember correctly in the state
of New Mexico so that's not even
mentioning the roads which are
deteriorating very quickly we
need to make sure that the the
road monies are only being spent
on our roads our bridges thank
you.
Thank you Senator Brandt
The representative of their
hands.
From the.
Chair what is the pleasure of
the committee how move it
depends thank you okay I'll move
it to pass thank you.
The presentation Senator the
only ones.
I can by Senator Hotmail.
meal thank you us may two.
Yes.
Senator Griggs.
Yes.
Senator.
yes.
Senator.
Yes Senator how to me yes
Senator Kernan.
Yes senator Sanchez.
Yes Senator Kamel.
Senator Clemente.
Senator Wirth.
Yes.
Senator Padilla yes.
Senator Tom.
To
send me over.
You have this in their you get
this every every day you should.
It's.
This is thanks for second whole
all.
Senator Shendo.
Yes.
Again this is a standing for a
second members.
Okay now she's connecting the.
But I I'm
out because you can just call.
Mr chair what we stand in places
the wording above my head
correct now.
Yes thank you.
Level zero.
Senator but the the work
backwards.
It works when I'm in education
does not work when I'm in tax
business and transportation.
And the lord Senator Brandt for
your information your equity
the.
Okay we have a due pass thanks
for calling.
Once.
Senator twenty.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
and we'll move on to Senate bill
twenty two and the Senator
Padilla I need to step up just
for a second so if you can go
ahead and the.
conduct meetings I get back we
should.
Yes Mister chairman so we'll go
now to Senate bill twenty two
and I believe the Sanchez also
Senator Gonzalez thank you Mr
chairman and members so just so
very briefly this bill has been
followed before you few times
and the it actually was supposed
to be on the moon shot Bill
Clinton.
Well when we started out with
the new administration but for
some reason it was left out.
And for the Senate bill twenty
two what this does so it
establish a new motor vehicle
code requirements when the
transit bus operated by a
governmental mass transit agency
six two inner traffic and that
that bus has illuminated the
yield sign on the back of the
bus for oncoming traffic and
must yield to the right away
violations of these requirements
to determine by penalty
assessment of what Mr minu
penalty of twenty five dollars
so small passenger vans are not
eligible to claim the right
away.
All Mr chairman of members so as
I mentioned of this has been
before you a few times and
perhaps this would have been in
place it's so.
In the past I have been able to
demonstrate the the sign it's
approximately I guess maybe like
twelve inches by twelve inches
could I have this maybe we would
have avoided some of those some
accidents that happen in the art
project at the very beginning
and it's just basically a very
simple type of home.
mechanism to allow you know the
vision off you know when you
have the the yield.
And does so well with that I
also have an expert witness the
by the name of and then the and
I think it's one will tell you.
The once sure few comments with
the to the committee then he
should be on on your board thank
you representative and we will
have your expert witness now.
Can you please introduce
yourself.
More tomorrow I am the executive
director for the north central
regional transit district can I
also served as a board director
for the New Mexico transit
association that represents
approximately forty five public
transit systems throughout the
state of New Mexico.
Thank you if you can give us
your comments thank you.
Mr chairman members of the
committee
as indicated by Senator Gonzales
the bill Senate bill twenty two
is is essentially a moving
you'll sign on that so placed on
the bus that informs approaching
motorists one of us wants to
reenter traffic.
From a bus stop
the yield sign is an additional
measures safety for trans of us
and it was determined by the
natural snap tional center for
transit research to be.
Most effective sign instead of a
you'll detail.
Currently there's eight states.
That have you'll to bust laws
including Canada Colorado
California Florida Minnesota
Montana New Jersey Oregon and
Washington.
the way the bill is is drafted
it is an optional program to
transfer translation sees.
And it's a cost effective when
compared to traffic signal
preemption equipment.
Ending on the bus system the
signs can cost the transit
system anywhere from six hundred
to twelve hundred dollars but
again it's it's mostly an
optional program.
Even though there is a yield to
bus aren't if there was a yield
sign on the bus the transit
authority still required
emergency traffic safely simply
a tool to help create a gap in
traffic to better allow the bus
to reenter enter the traffic.
so that concludes my
presentation I think one of the
stand for any questions.
Thank you Mr more direct more to
yeah well Maduro politics
Senator Gonzales do you have any
other comments and I'll hand it
back to Mr chairman Mr chair of
the I think that is you know our
parked in the left to settle
this bill has been before it has
gone through the Judiciary
Committee and has been known
very well studies and research
so with that will stand for
questions.
Thank thank you Senator Gonzales
so we'll go to Mr with anybody
for public comment.
Public comment we have Mister JD
Bullington Mr Billington.
Thank you our can you hear me
yes Sir thank you very much for
the opportunity to speak Mr
chairman members of the
committee this bill actually got
up to the desk of governor
Susanna Martinez and was one of
fifty two bills that was pocket
vetoed and this is our next
opportunity to bring it back to
the legislature the bill is very
simple it says that a bus into
Tate voluntarily decides to pay
about three hundred dollars and
put a yield sign on the side of
the bus and motorists must yield
when the buses pulling in or out
of the bus stop and pay heed S.
like they would to any other
yield sign there have been some
accidents each year that are
cost.
People not yielding and so we
think this is going to prevent
accidents it's a very common
sense chair patterned after the
long Colorado thank you.
Thank you Mr Billington and that
was the last person who for
public statement email me at a
time is there anyone else who
came for public statement you
would like to speak.
No all right thank that will
conclude public statements for
Senate bill twenty two.
Okay thank you on the list we
have a Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman of.
Senator Gonzales I have a couple
questions I'm probably one of
the few that I voted no on the
spill over time Sir worth can
tell you my feelings on adding
more a penalties to the driving
coach since people don't seem to
even know what the laws are
currently on how to drive
but
When it comes to these of.
Yield signs and making a.
There are instrumentality of Sir
sure though you might want to
you know.
but if when you're a.
It's all right all of gently
remind people it's it's all good
but we're you know doing so.
First of all I don't find
anywhere in the bill that says
this just applies to coming in
and out of the bus stops your
placed anywhere correct.
Hello.
Mr chair the Senator Brandt let
me have on our expert witness
respond to up to the.
And only yes thank you etcetera
etcetera a.
Yes sorry believe that the the
yielding would apply to a bus
that is trying to enter in our
traffic from the bus stop.
So that's our understanding of
what the bill implies okay Mr
chairman of Senator where does
it say that in the bill.
Again senator Wirth can testify
that I'm a real stickler for how
it's how bills are written and
what we're putting into law
because this isn't just a nice
suggestion it goes into our
laws.
And it's really important how
these laws are written and I
don't see that it says this only
applies to when entering and
exiting bus stops do you read it
that way senator Wirth.
So I don't have it up right
front of me but I'll certainly
take a look.
Mr chairman Senator trying to
find it real quickly I do have
the bill up here but it's
seventeen pages long.
Mostly dealing with the
operators themselves.
Our with the definitions Mr
chairman.
Chair on page on page ten and I
can line fifteen it talks about
when the bus is attempting to
merge into a traffic light.
Doesn't say from anywhere just.
Merging into away.
Thank you Senator Griggs I
appreciate that the help us find
out because that's that's what
it's saying any traffic lanes so
if I am a boss.
and this may not be true Senator
Gonzales in your district but if
I'm in Albuquerque and I'm
master and that bus and I'm
merging onto I. twenty fiber I
forty.
it is usually the merging
vehicles responsibility to March
to yield not the going straight
traffic this bill would make it
where.
I driving sixty five or seventy
miles an hour on hi twenty five
right forty I'm gonna say sixty
five possesses the low in
Albuquerque.
I am the one that now has to
merge for a bus to merge into
the freeway that's the way your
bill relates it doesn't say on
city street.
From a bus stop.
So I think that's a real concern
because again we're putting a
law and it's going to be applied
across the board in law that bus
is now and then the other
concern that comes to me on the
US is that now the liability
because I've changed law and I'm
now making the other drivers the
ones who have to yield.
Is now the liability if you
don't yield is on you not the
bus driver.
Is that.
The way you see that serves
also.
Mr chairman of senator rand
you'll bring up a very good
point.
I know that we've had this
discussion before but let me go
ahead and the yield for witness.
Senator you know there's there's
two indicators of to the vehicle
that's behind the spots that the
bus is attempting to move into
in or out of the lane and that's
obviously the turn signal and
then the seal to bus sign isn't
did decisional indicator that.
That vehicle that is traveling
behind this for us should give
the bus some preference so that
it can make its movement into
the adjoining laying.
That the bus is attempting to
move into.
Again it's a it's it's it's
electronic courtesy that it's
basically requesting.
The vehicles behind it and the.
The caution basically the buses
is attempting to go into another
lane or we're gonna traffic so.
What other drivers do with that
the.
When the C. that is is anybody's
best guess this point.
At least they're being informed
of what the vehicles it is
attempting to undertake.
Well I don't know about anyone
else Mr chair but when I see a
bus trying to merge and I do
everything I can to get out of
its way.
that's common courtesy and no
that was for probably wipe out
my vehicle and make kids more my
passengers so I do I try to get
out of the way I know there are
some people that don't but what
we're doing is removing the
liability I believe that I'm not
an attorney I didn't play one on
TV and I didn't sleep quality L.
last night so I'm not the forty
on the US but I believe that by
making it illegal for me not to
yield that that moves the
liability on me as the other
driver when every other driver
for every other vehicle on the
road including semi trucks and
everything else.
If they are merging into traffic
it is their responsibility yield
not more.
And it concerns me that removing
the liability from the mass
transit.
To the driver of the car or the
driver of the truck under every
other circumstance would have
the right.
That that is a joint concern for
me and I think I think that's a
critical or with additional.
I guess there's not a response
to that so thank you I won't be
supporting the bill for that
reason I don't think that the
I don't think it's wise to
source liability understand the
bosses want you to more to get
out of their way I think
everyone that is reasonable does
everything they can to get out
of the buses way I don't think
they purposely run into a bus.
but I will tell you I've had
some buses come right out in
front of me without their signal
on by the way drug I had no idea
they were trying to come out or
there was no way I could March
without just locking up my
brakes and now we're moving the
liability on the driver who has
the right away in every other
situation on that road thank
you.
Thank you senator rent the we
want to Senator Griggs and then
after that was Senator Kernan.
Thank you Mr chair
the.
The concern I guess that I've
had which was similar to Senator
branch although image actually
in the same section where we
talk about and illuminated sign
and then we say that that's
that's the one that's at issue
here if we put an illuminated
sign on they have to.
Drivers have to.
Allow him to to have the right
away
if the guy's got a shining but
it's not illuminated or
eliminated.
Then I guess they don't have to.
I just.
You know after after hearing
center branch comments and and
and and looking at this I think
I think I know and then if
you're in the
Expert witness.
I think I know kind of what what
everybody was looking forward in
they're they're maybe they're
just looking for when they pull
out of the of the of the bus
stop but the bill the bill is
much broader than that and I
think it would probably be a
better idea to.
The the remain the bill bring it
bring it back.
Do something that clarifies some
of those points because you know
it's not really going to affect
me much in Alamogordo although
there's a few bus stops downturn
just you and your in Carlsbad
but.
You don't want to certainly send
law enforcement the wrong
message and they're going to
they're going to misinterpret
how to how to cite people on
this so I I believe it's good
intentions here but I think
maybe we need to move to deal
with it a little bit to be sure
that we we.
On to the intention of the of
the experts and to the the
sponsor I'm so so thank you Mr
chair in the and thank you
sponsored I hope we get this one
figured out.
Thank you Senator Griggs says
Senator current thank you Mr
chairman and I think Senator
Griggs as stated exactly what by
my thoughts were I think if it's
the intent to just.
Notify people this are missing
out of the best stopping this on
a city street that that
certainly is appropriate I do
worry a little bit about the
highways and again this won't
impact me in my area that but it
could be a problem.
Not even sure people would be
aware of the lost so many times
we don't know that it if this
sponsor could you could clarify
maybe through an amendment that
this would be our intended for
leaving the bus stop because
that could be a real problem I
think it's very helpful to know
when they're pulling out and
moving on thank you.
Thank you senator Kernan Senator
Hickey.
Thank you Mr chairman.
And I'd like to essentially
second.
What the Senator Kernan Senator
Griggs brought to light.
I I do travel tram way
which is a four lane road.
I had to.
virtually every day if I'm out
of the house and there are buses
on that and sometimes they come
up with okay.
To a very slow vehicle and
they'll put on their turn signal
to move over into the left lane
and
so there there are instances in
which that occurred and
obviously if the vehicle SLO and
buses slow and I'm moving the
speed limit I'm going tomorrow
the hope ask the bus
I think that's not to go on the
rostrum allowed until there's
it's absolutely clear so I think
there needs to be clarity in the
bill
just from from that experience
and there are buses on highways
and other times and so I would
respectfully agree
are that we need to write this
with clarity coming out of the
bus stop.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you a Senator Hickey we
have selected Sanchez.
Mr
Please raise your hand.
Okay and that'll be it for
public statements for Senate
bill thirty four.
Okay I now will go to a the
committee for any questions.
The.
After going again.
Representative.
Mr chairman no one has any
questions I would move to pass.
The I saw Senator Griggs thank
you.
Thomas.
You have a question Mr chair I
think we have a question from
senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr chair Sierra can
you mute please.
Senator thank you Senator Wirth
it's not your hand issue yeah
thank you Mr it's a thumbs up
that shows up so I don't know if
you agree with the bill usually
it's the hand but now you're
comes up shows up so I'm not now
Mr chair I want to understand if
I could why was the limitation
in place that it was only
projects over fifty million with
federal dollars what was the
reasoning for that limitation.
So Mr chair I'm gonna have to
refer to my experts if if I
could hear from from at the
chief engineer.
Mr chair there are us Senator
Wirth of the reason why.
Design build is limited to
projects over fifty million
dollar cap is that tends to be
the sweet spot if you will where
we really communicate the risk
component with our projects at
that level of projects under
that some really don't incur the
tax risk the design build would
lend itself to with regard to
the federal eight portion of it
as you are aware of such a big
chunk of our construction
funding is federal aid dollars
however over the last several
years we have of being able to
get substantial funds that have
enabled us to on some some of
our larger projects with one
hundred percent state dollars
and this just simply allows us
the flexibility to this design
build procurement that for those
projects.
And so Mr chair so currently
You know for the projects that
don't have design build for
example so the state projects
that we've done and I know we
have pushed out a lot of road
money which is great so are
there are there are architects
and and do the design work for
this separate from the
contractor.
Mr chair senator Wirth of what
we do is we do we go out
R. F. P. for what's called owner
Representative
there by we work with this owner
Representative it's it's a it's
a consulting firm that helps us
establish an alternative that's
going to get designed we usually
take that designed to thirty
percent and they help us just
develop performance specs that
we will then go out to a R. F.
to for for the design build
component of the project and
then through that process we
determined the risk component
whether how much risk you want
to take up in the front end
before we get to thirty percent
and how much risk you want to
push on to the to the design
builder so that's that's the
process by which works.
Just one final question so we
make this change are we gonna is
it going to mean that New
Mexico's smaller New Mexican
contractors New Mexico
contractors are no longer going
to get this work I just want to
make sure we're not going to
impact our our local businesses
if we make this change.
Mr chair senator Wirth of this
in fact.
Richard Kerr the current
procurement rules and and and
regulations require that there
is a of of of of of in state
budget or in the state a
preference for one hundred
percent state funded projects so
this is actually in fact will
will insure that local vendors
will have a preference local
contractors local consultants
and and and so we we anticipate
that that will be the case.
Right I appreciate that thank
you and thank you Senator Kernan
for bringing the bill.
Senator Tallman.
Thank you Mr chair
I'm very familiar with this the
design and build system of
managing construction projects
as a city manager is a wonderful
way.
The system saves money and saves
time on the for early support
this bill.
Thank you we have a motion by
Senator Brandt second by Senator
Griggs.
So with that of can you call
Rowe.
Sorry Mr chairman the motion is
to pass to do it to do a do pass
yes thank you Sir are I'm sorry
yes.
Also for the past by Senator
Brandt seconded by Senator
Griggs so if you roll Senator
Brandt yes.
Senator great.
Yes Senator yes the.
Yes Senator brought you.
Yes.
Senator.
yes senator Sanchez.
Yes Senator Thomas.
Yes.
Senator Wirth.
Yes.
Senator Hotmail.
Yes.
The CS yes.
Thank you.
Senator Padilla.
This is not.
Senator.
Okay yes.
Senator.
At eleven zero
zero.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
thank you members.
Thank you
Senate bill twenty four parity
of regulation of
telecommunication.
Senator Padilla.
Senator but it we can't hear
you.
Or I can hear you.
Zero.
Senator can you hear me now.
Can you hear me now.
Hello hello Mr chair can you
hear me.
Yes you can I don't know what
happened there sorry thank you
very much Mr chairman I think
the committee is aware that I've
been working overtime on
broadband issues as several of
us have in the legislature for
couple years now I did bring
already planned on calling the
broadband for all New Mexicans.
And a couple of bills related to
to broadband I bring all orders
six or eight of them depending
on how you look at on this year.
All right now I come before you
with Senate bill twenty four and
two thousand seventeen I was
chair of the science technology
and telecommunications Committee
that you're as well and I made
it your project and that year we
had about seventy seven bills
introduced we have about eleven
of the past I want to say seven
or eight of them were signed
three of a more money one of the
like it have to go to court with
the previous governor on because
of the echo related program one
of the other bills that we were
able to accomplish that Europe
was Senate bill fifty three
which was a complete rewrite of
all of our telecommunication
laws here in New Mexico which
really had not been modernized
and an innovative since before
the internet came along.
And so we passed this complete
rewrite of the New Mexico
communications act again the
public regulation commission two
years to promulgate and
implement the rules for related
to that legislation I will tell
you that they took that one year
eleven months thirty days and.
twenty four hours fifty nine
minutes to do their work and
their number reasons why that
may have happened.
But that once the longer with
what's the rules were put out
into into operation it was as
though the PRC up public
regulation commission
implemented the rules in the
complete opposite intent of the
law and so there was very little
involvement from industry very
little involvement from.
It was really a complete
disaster when the bill was was
completely promulgated and
implemented.
So we are once that happened we
had a year from when it was
implied of obligated and
implemented to now and so we
thought why don't we come
forward and other clarifying
with the expectations of that
law work from two thousand
seventeen.
And so what I'm proposing here
is further clarity with the goal
of bringing parity to
The implementation of that law.
So in two thousand as I
mentioned so really I think
people provided in section one
it requires the PRC to adopt
regulations on behalf on or
before December thirty first two
thousand twenty one we're gonna
give him a year this time versus
the two years because of
outdated a party that most of
the work that we were part of
the transition away from of
waste regulated industry and
encourage eight broadband
focused competitive market now
in the FIR hearing opportunity
to look at
it was a statement there that
the PRC does not regulate
broadband what we we we need we
transmit broadband are primarily
in our everyday lives
instead of the typical land line
pots line Plano telephone system
once we had previously so we
need to modernize their fight
that the PRC they're moving in
that direction and that's one of
the things that this bill that's
this legislation passed
inspection to acquire five yards
the will determine effective
competition so really nothing is
going to go away from the PRC's
ability to protect consumers and
to do their work in the relevant
market using clear objective and
well defined measures as
determined by the PRC chairman
market share for telephone
service to wire centers cetera
gonna specify to housing units
and business firms determined in
what they're taking that count
and understanding the census
information for how companies
will be regulated.
section Mr chair is eliminating
outdated process for notifying
the public regulation commission
contracts and agreements to
provide a public
telecommunications service on
individual contract basis so it
really provides much more
transparency and much more
information to the PRC is
they're making their decisions.
Section four as that is the this
action requires the PRC review
the impact of the provisions of
the New Mexico locations that
come residential business
customers in both urban and
rural areas we're still our
front here say Mr chair but we
do consider the central quarter
in the central point in New
Mexico as a metropolitan urban.
And every three years they're
going to be able to do that
requirements are requirements
lots of the in the two thousand
nineteen and and and reports
it's finding to its findings to
the legislature.
Section five is the section
repeals section sixty three
ninety two which is my old
purpose section of the NMCA
director telecommunications act
this section is outdated and
inconsistent with today's
telecommunications environment
and would need to be
significantly updated to reflect
the changes that we made
thousand seventeen.
We do have a short video and I
do have an expert witness with
you today we are popular from
CenturyLink which is one of the
companies that this is one of
the company's stock directly
affect but really the bottom
line to whoever's playing the
video I hope you'll see that a
few that I know that we have
provided to you before hand Mr
chairman one of the things that
we have is a huge problem here
in New Mexico if we have more
house and we have people and so
as a result the cost of
implementing broadband is so
much more expensive and so we
need to bring in private
investment into New Mexico and
this is one of the ways to help
New Mexico look much more
attractive for that investment
so we can watch this video and I
might Mr market to make a few
comments Mr chairman this is a
great let I'm college eyes for
the lengthy introduction but
that might be for that.
Okay thank you senator I believe
we have the video cued up so
until.
Work for the public regulation
commission to regulate landline
voice services in our state it's
time to clarify this legislation
and amend the New Mexico
telecommunications act doing so
will level the playing field and
ensure all telecommunication
providers compete equally.
It will also mean that we'll be
able to provide greater
broadband access to all New
Mexicans no matter where they
live.
Now is the time to act because
communities that have seen more
heavy handed approach to
telephone regulations forcing
last broadband expansion and
having trouble keeping up with
demand.
Let's learn from history in the
year two thousand we have more
than eight hundred and eighty
thousand landline in New Mexico.
Now that count is down to two
hundred fifteen thousand.
That's a decline of seventy five
percent conversely in two
thousand there were just over
four hundred forty thousand cell
phone users in our state now
that number is more like two
million.
History shows that it's
important for authorize air
regulations to adapt in real
time as technology changes.
Currently the PRC doesn't
regulate wireless carriers or
cable companies to provide voice
over IP services.
And even other landline
providers are regulated
differently.
It's time to regulate all
telecom providers equally this
means amending the MTA and
provide the PRC with direction
and how to fully regulate voice
telecom providers and streamline
the current regulatory processes
intern New Mexicans will have
better and more access to modern
voice and broadband services
this bill will achieve four key
objectives first it's going to
create an equal market place
that would encourage a
competitive market focused on
broadband.
All with a reasonable level of
PRC authority second it will
define effective competition by
using clear objectives and well
defined measures for determining
market share third it's going to
modernize the contracts and
agreements process for retaining
current nondiscrimination
policies and repeal outdated
sections of the MTA fourth and
finally it's going to institute
review carrots for the PRC to
occur every three years to
protect consumers now is the
time to join me in supporting my
bill to amend the NMCA and help
expand broadband access to more
New Mexicans I respectfully ask
that you support this bill and
help our service providers focus
on expanding broadband across
New Mexico which we all know
will bring distance learning
telemedicine and economic
development and job creation
opportunities to all New
Mexicans.
You Mr chairman I think you can
still hear me would like to have
a real Baca from Centrelink you
say a few words Kaliopi family
we can move on to public comment
and questions from the committee
thank you.
Certainly Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Leo Baca and the government
affairs director for Centrelink
in New Mexico I just briefly
there's a chart before you I
believe it's also going to be
emailed to you that reflects
some of the information that was
in the video this is showing the
access line losses that
CenturyLink has experienced in
New Mexico you'll see that the
gray line from left to right
going upwards are the increase
in wireless lines and meanwhile
the other line's going downward
are the traditional phone
service lines all of this is
voice type communication and as
was also mentioned in the video
the wireless lines those
wireless providers are not
regulated by the PRC whereas are
dying voice line business is
regulated by the PRC so what
we're trying to do here is level
the playing field create some
equity in regulation and allow
us to focus more on broadband
with that I'll turn it back over
to center.
You we are thank you Mr chairman
I I appreciate your diligence on
the lengthy introduction but I
thought it was important at this
point thank you.
Thank you representative will go
to a public comment do we have
anybody.
Yes for the opposition will be
hearing from human hand W. I
apologize if I mispronounce
that.
No worries and thank you
all be reading from my recent
remarks and then I'll be happy
to answer any questions my name
is Amanda yeah.
And I am bit communications
workers of America speaking
games SB twenty four at that the
regulation of CenturyLink's
Services quality obligations in
New Mexico.
Mmhm CW a technicians work on
the front lines and they work
with CenturyLink customers every
day they see the problems that
they're facing firsthand and
they have business at the rate
of business as practices have
changed over the years and our
this has exacerbated at issues
that resulted in New Mexico
PRC's decision to impose service
quality rules last year as you
know millions of people people
in backed up in various states
of social distancing and locked
on the phone and internet access
more than ever before to
maintain connections and that's
with almost daily in different
facets of life daily life
including work telemedicine
school and social activities so
it is in this troubling context
that that this committee is
considering you major payment
and changes to the New Mexico
PRC's Authority and oversight
over service quality and
consumer protections at
CenturyLink which is a major
phone provider in New Mexico and
that we believe that this B.
twenty four jeopardizes
subscribers access to essential
voice and broadband service and
CenturyLink will not be
obligated to maintain its
deteriorating at plants plants
but forty five thousand New
Mexicans our land line on the so
the rising number twenty seconds
remaining wireless customers
have called for by the
additional passing many of them
will be left to be at without
any protections and as many of
you fit that experience moments
ago I import an internet access
is and I urge you to vote
against this bill and protect
strong service call.
Thank you my apologies to cut
you off there just a reminder to
everyone making a public
statement there is a two minute
limit and now we will hear from
Dennis on the contrary Dennis.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
and members of the committee
thank you for for the
opportunity to talk to you today
my name is Dennis call on teen I
am president of the New Mexico
CW a retired members capsule and
a former CenturyLink technician
with forty five years of
experience I'm speaking against
Senate bill twenty four on
behalf of my colleagues in the
hundreds of CenturyLink
customers who have been dealing
with to committing Services and
repeated outages C. technicians
have first hand knowledge of
wholesaler the lack of
investment and understaffing has
resulted the gesture education
fits physical Google let these
include but are not limited to
damage holes not been removed
and much federal still six post
tables above ground remote
terminals without functioning
backup batteries in sufficient
redundancies to prevent averages
and short term as a turning to a
permanent solution CenturyLink
customers suffer from outages
including nine one one and the
second century to customers is
jeopardized everyday for many
customers CenturyLink's Papen
network is the only source of
telecommunications services for
others a poorly maintained
Senator work provides a little
competitive pressure
to provide is to provide quality
telecommunication services at
affordable price I was excited
when I learned of the New Mexico
public Regulatory Commission and
two months of review decided to
adopt to all quality of services
and consumer protection rules to
protect New Mexico customers
access to be concerning thank
you for.
Unfortunately said bill twenty
four overturn the support for
those who give CenturyLink a
blank check to continue going to
do to the conditions of the
split I don't disagree with the
school which is short for this
additional why do people been
using LED lights thank you for.
Thank you very much.
Now we will hear that was the
last of the opposition is there
anyone else in the meeting you
would like to speak on behalf of
the opposition.
Mr sent a long list were you
here to speak in opposition.
Okay we'll come back to you now
here too from supporters Mr
Robert black.
Good morning or good afternoon
Mister chairman members of the
committee my name is rob black
I'm president and CEO The New
Mexico chamber of commerce I
appreciate the opportunity to
speak with you today
last year eight the chamber I
will say a CI sorry about that
we changed our name as well.
we we we worked on a study to
look at New Mexico's
competitiveness economic
competitiveness we publish that
and said that to to all of you
earlier this year the key
finding that we did in the
survey research was around the
the regulatory burden in New
Mexico as a challenge for
economic development and growth
in eight it stretches across so
a lot of our economy but this is
an example of an outdated set of
regulations that force industry
to spend money on outdated
technology.
Instead of investing in where we
need to go in the future so we
applaud Senator Padilla is
efforts to move this forward
he's been working on this issue
for many years we thank you for
that leadership and would urge
your support of SB twenty four
thank you very much.
Thank you madam now we will hear
from Jason Espinoza Mr Espinoza.
I chair members of the committee
Jason Espinoza I'm the
registered lobbyists with the
New Mexico technology council as
well as New Mexico idea which is
the statewide association of
economic development
organizations and both
organizations stand in strong
support of this legislation we
think the sponsor for bring it
forward I just similar to what
Mr black said when we look at
the regulatory environment
companies make investment
decisions based on those
environments and when we look at
where we are today not only
because a COVID but moving
forward in order for our state's
innovates and capitalize on
technology companies and other
companies here in New Mexico as
well as economic development
opportunities really he creating
purity within the
telecommunications regulatory
environment is important so that
companies such as luminance
CenturyLink can make the
investments in the modern
technology so that we can
capitalize on those
opportunities as we move forward
so we stand in strong support of
the legislation.
Thank you very much Mr Espinoza
now we will hear from CHI St TLS
to believe is taking the
position of neutral.
good afternoon Mister chairman
Mr chair members of the
committee on J..
Antanas are registered or
lobbyist for New Mexico exchange
carrier group well this group
consists of ten rural telephone
companies in New Mexico.
These companies have fewer than
fifty thousand access lines and
due to this we are neutral on
this legislation that only
affects companies with fifty
thousand or more access lines we
want to think Senator Padilla
for bringing this parity
regulations legislation to our
group to make sure that no fix
on us and we.
Thank you.
Thank you are there any other
members of the public that
wished to make a statement that
didn't get a chance to send an
email please raise your hand at
this time.
No it doesn't look like any more
members of the public would like
to make a statement to that is
it for public statements for
Senate bill twenty four.
Mr chair if I can make three
calls on the public comment
Senator Padilla thank you Mr.
I thank you very much I thought
all of that was very good and
helpful I am very appreciative
of the State WA's involvement as
we've gone through this process
I will tell you that through the
two thousand sixteen two
thousand seventeen and two
thousand eighteen time grand I
think I visited this you're very
call in southeast Albuquerque
where presidents from all over
the state attended these
meetings so that we could
properties legislation two
thousand seventeen that was
workable not everybody got
everything that they wanted
including
industry including CW including
myself as we were going through
this process I I appreciate the
comments on typically ninety
nine percent of the time in
lockstep with UWA on this one we
just happen to disagree but I
appreciate Mr Hyatt had a human
Mr Connolly for the comments I
will say that since the
seventeen this legislation
Senate bill fifty three passed
century all call out one company
CenturyLink is maybe about forty
nine million dollar investment
in New Mexico since then and and
they're bringing additional
dollars and as as things you
know continue to progress to
continue to make those
improvements in those lines what
have you when you look at the
legislation itself Mr chairman
members of the committee.
The ability for a consumer to
continue to file complaint or a
company or whoever may be
utilizing Services none of that
is taken away none of that
regulation of.
Actions are taken away with this
legislation as a matter of fact
I would venture to guess that
their prove it because I would I
would say that they're approved
because now you have parity in
terms of how you would get that
done if you look at the current
statistics.
Or complaints made to the public
regulation commission whether at
the consumer or business.
In in the current promulgate
rules Mr chairman before any
penalties or any other thing
happens you Verlauf five
complaints per one hundred.
Currently the running average is
one point three complaints per
one hundred customers I I don't
know that that you know we need
to just beat the heck out of the
crackers of some of these
companies that are providing the
services because if you take a
look at what's agreeable by the
PRC well within that that
require I just want to make
those requirements instrument
we're open to any questions the
committee would like at.
Thank you Senator Padilla now we
will go to the committee for
questions I have center Brett
and then Senator Tallman.
Thank you Sir Padilla thank you
Mr chairman appreciate you bring
in the bill and I I am a support
the bill I think it's a little
bit difficult to hear you Sir
pretty I don't know if anyone
else is having that problem just
so you know thank you governor
turned my volume up and down but
I I I think we were talking
about and and what the you A.
was talking about was.
The.
You're saying on page three I
think is in the bill where it
doesn't remove any of the
current protections for current
customers is that correct in my
reading that correctly Sir
pretty.
Your muted service.
On the purpose of.
Yes little bit much more this
math because I actually have
quite working inside my office
right now so I want to protect
them with this man.
thank you for your question none
of that the protections for
consumers businesses whoever
utilizes telecom New Mexico with
this passage of this bill are
are diminished in any way shape
or form I did review for you
would essentially been under
these the processing of these
requirements and seventeen and
when the rules were promulgated
toward the end of nineteen and
you have seen the requirements
so I gotta go they must maintain
I got over less five requests
complaints per one hundred
customers one point three now
and so I think it's really
important to look at data and
information as we all talk about
science and data and this and
that and and if we make our
decisions so I I just want to
call it up thank you.
Thank you Sir we appreciate that
if I could ask a question of a
your expert witness Mr Baca.
Of course.
Mr chair that's Mr Baca was
gorgeous Senator Baca sorry
about that.
Help me understand
So.
The CEO in the video talked
about monopoly regulations and
my understanding is that the
telecommunications companies are
regulated the way they are
because they're basically the
not please you really only have
one choice in your limited area
but what we're getting into
broadband.
at least in most areas you have
multiple choices so why is the
PRC actually regulating this
industry.
Well was selected to to clarify
that even on the monopoly
regulation of the past which is
what I believe he referred to
you know there was a day any
decades ago where there was only
one provider but even in the
voice market there are multiple
providers the chart that I
showed at the beginning of this
of this discussion show the
wireless providers who competed
against us directly what was not
shown on the chart was a the
cable companies to provide
telephone service companies like
Comcast they are not regulated
by the PRC and then there are
other voice type providers that
are not regulated by the PRC so
there is there is a lot of of
competition in the voice just
the old voice market that's
going away but you are
absolutely correct in the
broadband market and going
forward in the broadband market
there are many providers of
broadband services whether it's
fixed wireless satellite
fiber optics cable companies the
traditional phone companies
resellers there's many many
providers in fact I was on a
call earlier today we're looking
at a fairly remote area of Santa
Fe and there were I believe four
or five providers in that remote
area of broadband.
And and basically Mr chairman
yeah for for me and I try to
look at who's going to give me
the best access to the internet
for the least cost and I think
that's what every customer is
doing and I think we need to
have a conversation in the
future all right now but I just
want to bring it up for us to
think about it as to whether or
not.
The broadband companies need to
be under the PRC or if that's
something that the customer.
Really sets the regulation on
that because they're going to
choose who they go with based on
whoever's providing them the
best service and then you will
you know you look at cost so and
I went with T. mobile instead of
rise and because of rising costs
twice as much as we a little bit
better service you know that's
what we do is we as a customer
we kind of choose what company
we're gonna use and we do the
same thing with our broadband in
our home and with I G. coming
around you know some people are
probably not even gonna have
you.
The broadband coming into their
own those issues their cellphone
even for internet service and so
yeah it's it's it's it's a
changing time and I'm not sure
the PRC is equipped to deal with
regulating
what is happening today object I
think they've proven they're not
and so I do support this bill I
think it's something that that
needs to go through for today
but I think it's on a
conversation we have going into
the future thank you Mr chairman
Sir thank you.
Thank you Senator brand that we
have Senator Tolman and then
Senator Hamblen.
Thank thank you Mr chair.
Question about consumer
protection.
Senator with the message.
My question is.
Thank you.
Development Senator Hamblen.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Senator Padilla for low look at
this I know that we've had
conversations for quite a long
time about broadband we're just
using that term really it's it's
can activity because when we
look at all of the different
opportunities and the different
ways of trying to get access to
the internet and the diverse
parts of our state using
landlines may not always be the
most appropriate thing more of
some comments rather than a
questions is that I know Senator
Padilla you've been working on
this for a long time and you
look at a couple of different
ways we know that not one bill
is going to address this issue
that there are different
different roads that we have to
take in order to really address
this problem as a whole
as a a member who represents our
small businesses we know that E.
commerce is going to be the way
to go for the next foreseeable
future we know that telehealth
is going to be ways that people
can access their medical
providers when they can't when
they don't have a car we know
that remote learning has brought
to the surface for many of us
that we've known for years that
the digital divide as something
that truly exists and it keeps
rural communities from having
access to the same thing the
people in the cities do the
thing that I would I would like
to to bring up are the concerns
that as we start bringing
forward more of an insistence on
getting us up to the level where
we should be of providing this
essential service it's just like
water it's just like any utility
now and should be elevated to
that level is the workers that
are going to be up installing
that that equipment and so I do
appreciate the comments that we
had from the folks at
CenturyLink I think that's
certainly something that needs
to be considered I will
obviously support this because
we need to get moving on this
yesterday and our communities
and especially our rural
communities and tribal
populations I believe should be
the first to get that so that
they can get caught up with the
rest of the state and then the
state get caught up with the
rest of the country so thank you
Senator PDF for for doing that
and and I think you Mr chair for
allowing me to stop.
Thank you Senator Hamblen that
we have a senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr chairman I
appreciate to the ongoing
journey it Senator Padilla and.
Leo Baca have been on.
And I am I'm all in when it
comes to deregulate broadband I
think that that is certainly a
good thing
and I had a couple of things and
then a couple questions I would
noted in the constitutional
amendment that's changing the
format of the PRC the one area
that's left in the constitution
for them to regulated utilities
so we have purposely given
ourselves and centered about all
on and on I am working on a bill
to address the potential for
moving some other areas
including telecommunications out
of the PRC so I just want to
flag that issue that's there
I guess my my question is this
so.
We have four forty five thousand
land line only and those are the
ones I'm focused on because how
many of those forty five
thousand people are in rural
areas where there's no cell
phone and there's no internet
and what does this bill do to
them.
But does not it does one it does
not change their ability to have
a problem with their money to
get it fixed and go to the PRC
and file a complaint and all the
requirements around how many
customers need to come together
before there's an actual you
know requirements do this that
or the other so none of that
changes.
What does is bring additional
help to bring additional
investment distributor into the
state
will eventually wash over I had
a positive way those areas that
don't have broadband because now
you'll have additional
investment in the state in
additional incentive to bring
other services to those areas
that don't have any other option
and we're talking other options
light overhead sky in Roswell is
doing your job developing a
technology because of the
topography of New Mexico the
area to maybe describing our
picking up on the which is right
outside of Santa our offense and
I think you're you're to staff
lives in that area and and
there's an example of an error
no matter what we do we're not
gonna be able to spend fifteen
million dollars going over that
not to get projects two hundred
fifty office right so so what
this does is it creates a much
more attractive investment.
Opportunity in New Mexico
instead of of being applied
overstate that we can bring in
these new technologies will
serve as a community like on
the.
And I guess Mr chair Mr black
said something that I that I
wrote down
It takes away the requirement
that there's four spending
outdated technology.
And again that I get that and I
get the transition part of this
I'm all in on that I just I'm
still concerned though that in
rural areas in places like I
could use a good example you're
right my chief of staff lives
there and has a heck of a time.
Getting an internet connection
she's able to get one so that's
a little different than a number
of other areas I just so for the
forty five thousand landlines if
this bill were passed would
anything prevent CenturyLink
from doubling or tripling the
monthly bill for those
landmarks.
Our.
We know what let me let me not
address that I have an expert
here why would I want to step in
that all of you know.
So that was over the legal
documents to the Mr chair.
Mr chair senator Wirth
I'm doing a little bit checking
on that forty five thousand
figure because I think that is
overstated but whatever it is
whether it's forty five thousand
or ten thousand
we provide the same rates
statewide to our customers so
whether the customer is in the
middle of Albuquerque or in the
middle of Cuesta residential
flat rate line is going to cost
the same and we've had it that
way for many many years and I
don't see anything that would
change that.
Same thing with our broadband
prices are broadband prices of
the same statewide as well so we
do not to practice
Happy different rates.
Situated customers whether it's
urban and rural.
Just to be clear that Mr chair
and I appreciate that but would
anything prevent you from
doubling or tripling the land
line right for everybody I mean
I still have a land line because
I've got such they have cell
phone service in Santa Fe you
know that I can't use the cell
in the internet's kind of in and
out what would you know so
across the board though I think
and again this is just the
challenges work and we have all
tremendously you know the time
I've been in the Senate we've
had these bills over and over
and over again and I think we
really have involved and we're
moving towards a broadband based
system and that's a good thing
and I'm all in for that I just
it's it's just what's causing me
to pause is you know the impact
on on those that are stock that
aren't there yet and and you
know in some of the poorest
areas in our state that don't
have any structure are we gonna.
It does this gift again because
of the cost of maintaining forty
five thousand lines and maybe
it's lower than that but there's
going to be a significant cost
to doing at does this allow.
You know CenturyLink if we pass
this to completely in effect I
mean raise the rates for or
quite frankly could you could
simply say we just no longer
want to provide the service.
I just jump right in there and
and I think those are phenomenal
there's a great you know
concerns and I we we honor them
I will say that we've been in
this environment for over a
decade now we're we're we're
we've been tracking along the
way and again I'm not an
attorney Mr leader I know you
don't going to court ask
question you don't know the
answer to but I want to take a
risk here and I'm gonna ask Mr
Baca in the decade that we've
just completed here now we're in
the twenty twenty one what has
happened.
The number of dollars.
Alright what you Mr chairman
Senator Padilla Senator Wirth if
I heard you correctly there's a
background noise coming from
somewhere but
Baca of can we ask everybody to
mute if you're not talking
please.
What legal okay thank you Mr
chairman
Overall the periods of time
going back decades that the PRC
that the the ability to approve
our terrace all our rates for
residential service our parents
and so even going forward our
rates for that service would be
would be terrified and so
ultimately they would have to go
to the R. C. for approval now
again
We're already losing customers
you know almost daily you saw
the chart the the lines are
going this way down and I saw a
statistic I did see a statistic
where there's only I think fewer
than five hundred homes in New
Mexico that cannot get cell
phone service so fewer than five
hundred cannot get cell phone
service so the rest of that
forty four thousand five hundred
it if that is even an accurate
number the rest of them at least
have a cell phone option and
which I don't know anyone that
doesn't have a cell phone
anymore but if if we were to
trouble rates which is I mean.
Not in my lifetime I don't think
but if that were to happen folks
have options I have a cell phone
option out there and and there's
like I mentioned to the
representative Brandt there's
lots of competition even in the
regular voice markets and so
even a little towns like quest I
think there's multiple providers
even of the voice thanks
services.
Yeah I appreciate that I see my
good friend Senator Woods on on
on the on the zoom and I'm not
sure you know with his big rural
area I think there's a lot more
than five hundred homes in this
state that don't have cell phone
I just gotta tell ya I mean I I
don't I don't think that's right
but I just want to get insurance
you know Mr Baca I I just
appreciated yes because I think
what what I want CenturyLink to
just let folks know that are
watching this is that there's
going to be a commitment to
continue to serve those that
don't have options and that's
what this is that's that's the
piece that consummate corporate
that literally there are options
there's not broadband there's
not another way to connect at
all and so I just again it's as
we transition because we've gone
we've watched that you're in the
numbers of gone down I just you
know I'd like you to kind of.
Let us know what I think you're
kind of saying that but that
that's really what you know will
make me comfortable kind of
voting for this bill which I do
think is is that right direction
to go it's just we're just a
unique state a pretty rural
state cell.
Well Mister chairman senator
Wirth one thing I can tell you
rather than to speculate the
future let me tell you what
we've done in the past there are
other states in our service
territory where we are not
regulated and definitely not
regulated in this in the voice
market and in those states we
have not doubled and tripled
rates so that's our practice in
other states already you know we
can all speculate the future
what we could or couldn't do but
our practice in states where
we're already do regulated is
not to do that.
And I appreciate that thank you
Mr chair I appreciate the
discussion it's it's always a
good one thank you.
Thank you Senator US Census.
Mr chairman just a.
I guess so jumped on with the
Senator Wirth there yes the
rural areas like in my area we
got Alamo we got Magdalena you
got fence lake you got your
model I mean there seven hundred
and seventy some people are now
more don't have any cell phone
signal Magdalen I think there's
over three hundred and some
offense late and can model their
there's no cell phone signal out
there it's all land lines so I
think those numbers need to be
checked a little bit on that
area and if we can get that
commitment
you know that that in those
areas and those rural rural
areas that you know that price
increase will never go up and Mr
but yet thank you for bringing
this bill we in those areas and
I know you worked hard on this
we do need to get broadband for
all those people out in that
area so again Mr Baca thank you
but I would check on those
numbers Mr Wirth.
Just generator and on what you
it said thank you Mr chair.
Thank you representative census
I the.
I think we have a Senator Brandt
for the second time.
Mr chair give you an opportunity
to ask your questions but I
would move to pass.
Okay no I I think we're
questions were asked when the.
There were asked about the rural
areas in terms of increased
costs so I think we're good I
don't see any other hands.
Senator senses the other hand up
again.
One more thing real quick but
the former employee had touched
a little bit on the temporary
fixes becoming permanent fixes
in our rural areas we see this
all the time the wires are being
on the top all bandaged up.
And it stays like that for years
and the businesses that are out
of these rural areas they're
always working on them and these
temporary fixes staying
permanent fixes if we could look
into that and start in the thank
you.
Thank you senator.
With that we have the motion for
two passed.
Senator Brandt.
Yeah we're motion for the past
correct that is correct Sir okay
and then I believe we have a
second by Senator Padilla so
Lincoln integral please.
Senator Brandt
Yes.
Senator Griggs dash.
yes.
Senator Hickey yes.
Senator Hotmail yes.
Senator Kernan.
Senator Sanchez.
Yes.
Thank you Tom.
Yes.
Senator Wirth.
Yes.
Senator India what.
Yeah.
Two one.
Representative.
Thank you Mr chairman I
appreciate that members of the
committee thank you Mr box for
being with us.
Thank you we will now move on to
Senate Bill.
Twenty six gross receipts tax
deduction for a data center just
for for the members I did speak
to the sponsor we are going to
be hearing quite a few tax bills
going forward so we can allow
the sponsored to but the bill on
and the we'll have our
discussion debate but we will
not take any action on this bill
so with that Senator Padilla.
Thank you Mr chairman I'll try
to talk a little bit louder than
before central twenty six
attempted to to bring this
before this committee a couple
of times before I think that
once again we all know that the
issues related to product and
are critically important
economic development is
important for the state federal
this is not I'm not in favor of
as much of tax credits
incentives you thousands of
federal unless they are forward
thinking and their innovative
and they're taking the state of
the direction of the economy is
going on and where we're going
so Senator twenty six does
create a gross receipts tax and
compensating tax deduction for
you are largely reconstructed
large data centers
you know I Economic Development
Department is required to
certify the eligibility for the
data center to be a non taxable
entity etcetera I will tell you
that there's a number of reasons
why we want to do this because.
Many secondary and tertiary
businesses that that spring up
around the status Senators all
that area isn't really a three
to five county region all boats
rise together when you bring
that much broadband in to
facilitate a data center so
those are very important things
as well they're obviously is a
cost to doing this I did forward
the in everyone in the committee
I I know it was today and I know
we're all very busy but I hope
people at some point take a look
at an economic study on that the
United States department of
commerce that I think you today
that really you're a great job
of cranking out what data
centers due to the areas with
the hello how much they cost
what is the return on investment
and then it took a look at the
dive into the state of
Washington and what based on
data centers we have maybe taken
the plunge in product the
Facebook data cycles women's
I've taken the science and
technology committee out to
visit and they're doing they're
just going gangbusters out there
there are multiple secondary
tertiary companies to support
that business and other things
coming in the last one is in the
Albuquerque area as a result of
that that data center building
there are the gross receipts tax
deductions going to rebuild
COVID center quit line is going
to be used to qualify Senator
for work the following types of
items that can be included in
the production which is computer
equipment heating ventilation
air conditioning systems power
supply systems back up
generators security and
monitoring systems and software
so as you can imagine all of
those things I just mentioned
need to be maintained they need
to be updated and upgraded and
you have somebody monitoring
them while we wish the data
centers produced hundreds of
thousands of jobs they simply
present a number of jobs to
construct of the facility to
operate the facility and to the
the technicians inside of the
facility but there is the report
back across the community could
see that they Senator come into
the area which creates an index
sample of Facebook can really be
eight
Credited with the contributing
ongoing another fifteen hundred
jobs as a result of them being
this is a pretty remarkable
investment group community to
make
I have an expert witness with me
today his name is Mr Martinez
many of us know him he has been
beaten the stronger I don't know
how long but I see this is
another great way for us to help
address are significant issues
related to project your next
post retirement and I'm not
going to go on and on as long as
I did with the previous bill I'd
like Mr Martinez sorry you Mr
chairman safety works.
Thank you senator Padilla a go
ahead Liz Martinez.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee my
name's Eric Martinez on the
yellow registered lobbyists for
the Mexico sold development
group message also as we know is
is is
The anchor in New Mexico for for
Netflix which is odd developing
further further they're also
have have a plethora of
innovative companies that are
going to be a developing over
there and and that this that
this tax credit is is kind of a
stimulant to attract a data
center developers and and and
things of that nature over here
and we at actually we have
another expert here I think dot
James prices on board was
actually a very technical he he
builds up to a data center
throughout the entire opt out
the entire world actually and
he's on the zoom zoom and I
think I I I he can I'll refer to
him for for a technical.
Thank you Mr.
When I provide Mr prices
information to your committee
secretary so that he was able to
have the log in information for
today you can say just a few
words I would appreciate that Mr
grant go ahead.
Yes thank you Mr chairman
members the committee it's it's
a pleasure to be before you
today all of the data center the
data center industries really
going through somewhat of a
renaissance it's it's a
technology oriented space but
it's you know the the pandemic
in the work at home environment
has really driven and amplified
the demand drivers globally so
we've seen a big surge in the
last twelve months in the
industry globally
both in the United States and
and in Europe and elsewhere
it's in it's a very unique asset
class and you know I I really my
comments are focus mainly on the
on the needs of the industry and
how the industry operates and
how they make their site
selection
you know I commend the state I
commend the local the local the.
Like that in other jurisdictions
and those are those are very
very sophisticated activities to
to to be able to pull that
together from a from many
different facets but there's a
big heart of the industry which
is called the colocation
industry which separates the
ownership of the facility to the
user of the facility as a
landlord tenant for lack of a
better comparison.
And and and whenever those
colocation users are trying to
select a location.
they tend to look for more
statutory base budget as opposed
to more local negotiate a budget
which I think is probably a fair
characterization of the of the
Facebook type of structure
because a lot of local
discretionary approvals I'm
other jurisdictions that are
pursue these type of programs
which this bill would represent
an example of this bill is
actually monarch modeled I think
originally after the program in
Arizona Arizona pastor bill in
two thousand thirteen they were
actually modeling their
activities after for junior
which is kind of the leader
across the country.
and last last year Arizona
probably hit a a very
significant level of development
as a result of the their tax
reform program at the bill
accommodated and I think a
report I don't know a Senator
Padilla few circulated the
report about the job creation on
the tune on that nine year ten
year anniversary and and and and
Virginia Virginia pastor bill
and not two thousand nine to
accommodate the needs of the
industry and their job their job
creation criterion for Genya
being kind of the leader.
This is astounding if you could
if you could achieve a fraction
of what they've achieved in
Virginia the state of New Mexico
would be very thrilled I'm sure
they projected direct jobs in
two thousand eighteen to be
directly full time equivalent
jobs created by the industry of
fourteen thousand jobs with
indirect jobs of in the range of
forty five thousand jobs so this
just speaks to the to the spin
off benefit that I think Senator
Padilla SCPA alluded to
this this particular bills
focused on more statutory
benefit that does not require
discretionary approvals but more
capital investment we can is
exactly how Arizona's is set up
but like I say
this is the trend across the
country the site selectors tend
to be going in those direction
maybe the fat to wrap up my
comments so as to not take up
too much of your time.
it was estimated last year there
were seven hundred megawatts of
data center tenant activity
collocation tenants in and the
twenty twenty.
A megawatt is is equity unity of
space is about ten thousand feet
per megawatt.
that that was the leasing
activity across the United
States and most of that went to
other other jurisdictions of
course because of the tax
framework available and in the
western States to recipients of
that activity was Arizona Oregon
and Nevada even to the detriment
of Texas because Texas has been
unable to adjust their
frameworks to accommodate the
needs so with that is that I I
hopefully give you some metrics
on the industry the national
trans and then how you all
choose to address that or
whether you choose to address
that you know is this over the
top policy works but I can I I
hopefully I can added some some
some some some information
helpful to you.
We're prepared to go where we
talked about it okay thank you
Mr rice with that.
Public comment so those are in
office
to build six school first you
have a few minutes.
A tailor.
First we'll hear from Luke Otero
Luke.
Thank you members of the
committee and Mr chairman good
afternoon my name's Louco Terrel
registered lobbyists for the
bill to all students this isn't
the first time we've seen this
bill we saw two years ago and
the legislature did pass that
this has grave consequences on
our village who is the home of
the Facebook data centers and
behalf of the village and the
more Charles great and the city
and village councilors I stand
in opposition but.
I have our village manager great
morning as well as our
attorney Jill Sweeney to answer
more technical questions Mr
chairman so I would yield my
time to them as well so thank
you very much.
Thank.
Thank you very much will come
back to you if there are more
people if there any members of
the committee that have
questions for the people you
listed now we will turn to Brian
Moore Brian Moore.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee Brian more New
Mexico counties you know we're
very appreciative of all the
work Sanchez done with broadband
with economic development and
and frankly we know what a
success of Facebook project
we've been on a County but in
that case.
The state along with the local
governments work together to
create a proposal that works for
everybody involved was later
Sanchez the higher be is all
these things involved Senate
bill twenty six bypasses all
that local involvement and
establishes how all of that will
work with dancers no working
together no local choice
voluntary support for data
centers and possibly a
tremendous amount of money
coming off the tax rolls without
any input from the local
government so again with all due
respect to the sponsor New
Mexico counties opposed Senate
bill twenty six thank you.
Thank you now we will hear from
Gregory Martin Mister Martin.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I appreciate the
opportunity to speak to you
today and your time my name is
Greg Martin Gage administrator
with the village last moments
and we have looked at this bill
as look mention couple years ago
and I propose that at that time
and still are in opposition my
understanding from analysis that
has been done is that SB twenty
six allows the state to create
gross receipts tax compensated
taxed property tax abatements
for new and reconstructed data
centers for which the taxpayer
independently or in cooperation
with other taxpayers expense
twenty five million or more in
eligible costs with without
local government participation
creating a negative fiscal
impact on the local government
which is estimated to
potentially exceed four million
dollars annually and increasing
every year I understand the bill
also impacts new and existing
projects and that there is no
opportunity to for pilot
negotiations he had payments in
lieu of taxes and the though job
creation requirements so again
Los Lunas having been through
this going through now with a
existing data center which has
no doubt been a benefit to not
just this one is but the entire
county region and state
we would not want to lose that
local involvement or the tax
benefit that has gone along with
that so thank you very much.
Thank you thank you all right
now we will hear from AJ forte.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee up I think in time
which I agree with the rest of
the opposition on this bill this
this is a great concern to the
municipally it takes away local
choice it creates you know new
deductions for G. R. T. in
compensated taxed as we know New
Mexico what are local
governments live and read a G.
R. T. and this takes the local
choice completely out of the
equation.
And and as we are more heavily
reliant on our G. R. T. with the
reductions and an old harmless
every right this is a major
issue for Los crucis special and
if more of these pop up that are
out of our control which is what
this bill would allow we would
have to make a choice this
narrows the tax base we would
ultimately have to make a choice
on on cutting services and
that's really what why we oppose
this bill so much and there's so
many unanswered questions the
bills written incredibly broad
we don't know this affects
affects property taxes and with
that in P. R. R. bonds that we
have outstanding.
So that Mr chair members of the
committee the the league
strongly opposes this bill thank
you.
Thank you Mr fortune are there
any other people like to speak
for the opposition any other
members of the public please
raise your hands at this time.
And it doesn't look like we have
any more speakers for the
opposition for support we have
Jason Espinoza Mr Espinoza.
Mr Jason Espinoza.
It doesn't look like he is
available at this time no one
else send it to speak in support
would anyone like to speak in
support now please raise your
hand.
It looks like that is it for
public statement for Senate bill
twenty six thank you.
Okay thank you thank you senator
a.
The DS so now we'll go to the
committee for questions we have
Senator Brandt.
Sorry Mr chairman.
I forgot the new password if I
could ask a few questions of of.
Mr Browde Martin from city lost
Lewis.
Yes go ahead.
Thank you Mr chairman Mr Martin
thank you for forget on here
thank Los blue is probably has
the most experience with this
and so we can learn from the
experience that you have down
there
what are some of the a cost that
the city would have to bear
without having these taxes to to
reimbursement for the cost if
you understand what I'm asking.
Infrastructure cost road
maintenance things like that and
then you would
So we would incur as a result of
economic growth and activity
without that revenue to support
it but infrastructure such as
our water lines sewer lines on
that are actively having to be a
built to accommodate growth as
well as Water and and as waste
water treatment plants are roads
of course that we continue to
need to expand so I mean we have
a lot of costs that are
associated with that we've
definitely been able to take
advantage and we appreciate the
tax impact the revenue impact
that we've turned right around
and are in the process now
making those improvements but
with the benefit of the tax that
comes from the project directly
so I hope that helps answer your
question and so if I understand
correctly if this went into
effect I guess it's pry would
apply to the faces of already
built and built a Facebook
except the ones kind of a
retroactive tax deduction which
is weird July first of of of
last year no your work twenty
one now of the nineteen
So before that you'd still be
able to collected your T. tax
but you wouldn't be able to in
the future
if Facebook decided to expand
but you still have increased
cost.
Out there because of the
increased infrastructure we need
to go and is that is that about
right.
I mean that is definitely my
A presumption and that we
wouldn't know for sure the
expansion of the of the project
going forward would encourage
costs in the future as well.
And I guess Mr chairman of Mr
Martin one of the big concerns
is that you wouldn't be involved
in the conversation.
You wouldn't have the ability to
go to Facebook's a down at the
table and saying you know maybe
we can you know.
Give you a little bit of a tax
deduction we've got to have this
much to cover the cost increase
of having you here.
Letting that local government
have that you know the other
concern I have thank you Mr more
I really appreciate it Mr
chairman Senator Padilla one of
the concerns I have and and I.
Maybe messing up but does this
in any way affect our schools
when it comes to of what they
usually get with payment in lieu
of taxes.
Revert separate issues all.
All of them because they have to
be no.
Chair Senators effect the.
Yet the property tax than that
would normally go to the school
district.
I'm not when I'm gonna do to you
are working as a Mr price.
Thank you.
Chavis Mr grace.
You know what the answer would
be on that.
Well typically your school
districts are funded
predominantly by real estate
property taxes in most
jurisdictions and this bill does
not impact real property taxes.
is not targeted a real property
taxes
I think that you know I'd have
to look at it more details if
there's any other aspect of G.
R. T. are some of the other
taxes are targeted in this bill
but like say it is not it's not
it's not it's not set up to have
any impact on real property.
Thank you I really appreciate
that I just of course trying to
make sure so one affect the mill
levies for us the line in those
types of things and that's
that's usually the money that
goes to the school districts I
appreciate that
so Mr chairman Senator I don't
really have any more questions I
just you know.
I have this continuing concern.
That New Mexico continues to
their tax code continues to look
like Swiss cheese.
this is got holes in it and
special carve outs in it for
everybody and because of that
everyone else has to pay a
higher tax.
and so we pick our winners and
losers to our tax code we pick
what businesses we want to come
in instead of actually dealing
with the problem we have within
our tax code that is that we tax
a lot in the state
and so and then I look at all
these tax increases that are
coming down the pipe you know
yesterday or on the floor I lost
count of how many tax increase
bills that we're bringing.
The.
Senator.
And I just looked you know.
It seems like we need to go back
in and maybe throw the baby out
with the bathwater when it comes
to our tax system level the
system and make it work everyone
has the same
benefits and same restrictions
when it comes to our taxes the
last thing we want to do is make
it more difficult but every time
we give a tax deduction for
someone else the our local
communities have to raise their
taxes to provide those basic
services or our state has to
raise taxes and in another area
and I think it's really
concerning thank you very much.
Mr chair by the response.
Senator this brief this brief
I appreciate senator requests
comments I couldn't agree with
you more on this page please
comment I made that comment
multiple times on the Senate
floor we have to live in the
environment that we're in right
now we made this huge investment
in the center Senator
Representative your idea and we
made we made a huge investment
to have this huge tax policy
study and quite frankly I never
heard of it again and I'm just
as frustrated as you are on that
on that matter but we have to
live within the this is the
false or whatever different on
the commentary on both lotus I
love often as I graduated from
was one of high school the more
they're used to babysit me when
I was a baby I know him very
well more correct funds family
and I had a great conversation
with him yesterday on this very
matter and while we talk about
the minimization of what's
happening what the what will
happen to a town or what will
happen with you know this this
piece of of their life and their
world.
We also need to balance that
with what else will happen to
them as a result of making this
decision so yes it is a decision
that we need to make your but
should we be implementing tax
policies on industry are and and
and and and area that it died
off twenty two years ago are to
be living within our current
means and and living within our
current tax policy on something
that is about the future and
that's exactly what this
particular proposal is going to
I just want to make that comment
district chairman appreciation
of rants on.
Thank you Senator so Senator
Brandt the are you done.
Okay thank you I will move on to
Senator I have Senator Tallman
Senator Griggs and senator
Sanchez almost.
Thank you Mr just a couple quick
comments a couple of questions.
Obviously of Facebook.
The minister made a major
investment without.
The benefit of this proposal.
Senator Brandt point out the
form.
Dutchsinse credits.
This and situation.
What the staff development
department support this
bill.
With a look at what are the
legislative information I don't
believe I thought you were in
the report that the proposed
provided the wealth of
information on what the type of
policy all of the with the with
you perfect.
Thank.
Also.
The industry said would not
provide this benefit the
next.
The people at.
Approved for comment on the
telephone also termed can and
for calling.
What what happened with Facebook
there are a number of things
that you know we talk about
Facebook and with Representative
for top.
But if we had to come together
as a community of the state
around the.
Proverbial you know Townsquare
and maybe at the number of
cable tray for criminal defense
and the markup after a while
you're you are going to wind up
fifth with datacenter coming
from number of reasons I but but
what I think we really need to
be looking talk looking and it's
part of the state Martin the
future of of what we should be
fine but we should be part of
something like that and
you for your cooperation for
both one of the for the for New
York but they cannot many many
different things when I come
from.
Thank you Senator.
The.
It offers the same types of
benefits.
To.
Industries.
Senator.
On the most sensitive issue.
Thank Facebook with help.
This budget.
But I remember.
Correct me if I'm on a.
The discount from the amendment
on the.
Electric right because it is
consumes large quantities
of actresses thanks for get.
Number one
are the number of other than
help them constructor.
We can offer please.
Senator the one.
Budget with the Facebook
without.
Exempting.
J. RG so the.
The former city manager
department began gives local
governments all when they tell
me with the respect and.
And I
need to get some.
Support.
The defender
of but we're not going to vote
on this today so we have lots of
time to talk the.
The lady.
Go on with your.
So thank you Senator.
What.
You should your efforts to try
to distance so that's all I have
in the future thank you
very much thank you Mr chairman
I encourage everyone of the
committee reviewed the economic
Impact study that I think.
Thank you Mr chairman and I I
guess if am I reading this right
Senator that this deduction is
for thirty years.
Senate Republican leader you
also.
Or.
Thank.
Chairman asked Mr Martinez to
address the questions of the
length of the intent.
Twelve to.
In that in reading the the bill
on page on page two section two
we talk about the dish in which
thirty years
after they've been issued the
datacenter deduction on taxable
is that maintenance at how long
vision.
elimination of G. R. T. gos Mr
Martinez for thirty years yes
well a if we have it it's in
language yeah and and I've been
I love them and you know Mr
Burciaga talking earlier today
in and we're thinking to make
people of all more a more
favorable towards this is is
maybe I have a sunset clause
that we we can just a stimulate
industry to actually to develop
rather than have them prolonging
a GRT tax exemption maybe we can
do a well we're we're thinking
of maybe implementing something
to where you can actually done
to dot the development of a tax
burden and then after that start
paying the G. R. T. after I mean
I think that would be a good it
can economic stimulant for this
type of industry here in New
Mexico and maybe that's
something that that would see
more more feasible for for the
on New Mexico counties and
municipal league.
Thank you thank you Mr chair
senator and and the rest
Martinez is the is the reason
we're we're wanting to to do
this is it that communities and
we're we're too slow in working
in the through IRB's because
it's pretty obvious at least I
think it is to me that job
creation tax credits don't
really really applaud to
datacenters because they don't
they don't create enough enough
jobs for there to be the you
know for that to be very
attracted to somebody.
But it seems like I guess
Facebook they used I are be used
to.
to work on this show.
Why is it that we believe that
this is a better approach than
usual in the industrial revenue.
Thank you Mr chairman and I want
to have and it was incredibly
difficult for Facebook to
finally break ground get things
rolling and moving it to the
very lengthy amount of time a
lot of effort and jumping
through hoops on fire the other
thing that this does and the
reason that this would be
important I I I I want to make
this comment before we moved on
to the next speaker but really
it's all the brings a laser
focus to this particular type of
a business and brings and makes
what what this is a massive
growth industry across the
planet it brings a laser focus
to New Mexico in the study that
I sent to it really does take
New Mexico from being you know
if you look at the department of
commerce tractability you know
schedule it's in the in the
study that I sent you we welcome
really the bottom of the fifty
states it to the top five as a
result of doing this and then
all the other secondary director
economic development incentives
for economic development options
account as a result of doing and
so I just want to throw that out
I want to draw that distinction
thank.
As thank you Mr chairman and and
thank you Senator into the.
Of.
One of the things that the
counties in the and the city's
winner involved in the shorter
staffed with a higher visa have
opportunities to negotiate help
which you know is payment in
lieu of taxes where they can
they can work out maybe some
things which may be your budget
for those communities that this
this particular thing doesn't
seem to.
Provide for them.
This also you know one of the
things that I would I would
suggest that potentially when
you when you Senator just is not
going to be voted on right now
but you should care and you
eliminate the G. R. T. and and
G. R. T. age for everybody in
the city the county they they
all get a page and the state
gets a page if you really in our
your you may want to just look
at if this is going to be and an
issue with local governments and
how to how to work with them
well you only exempt the state
portion G. R. Tate you don't
exempt the other guys in the
they continue to maintain
whatever G. R. T. they would
they would then get but
yeah I don't know I mean I I
think Senator be it's got some
very valid points about this
type of business and when we did
the when we did the local
economic development actively
went after you're primarily job
creation tax credits those
things are
Our what is driven some of the
economic activity in the state
but I'm I'm I'm concerned when
you have the association
counties you have the the
municipal league and you also
you have the community just got
the only big data center that we
have all in opposition to this
bill so I I believe there needs
to be some work done in order to
to figure out how to get those
guys she ended the same way you
do our gonna have a hard time
getting the supportive enough of
us to to move it forward so that
Senator I you know I appreciate
all the work you do on economic
opportunity staff but I think we
need to to work on this one
maybe a little bit more show Mr
chair senator and witnesses
thank you all very much.
As you know I do my level best
to make everybody happy.
This doesn't always work out
that way I have that very
conversation Mr chairman with Mr
Stewart yesterday on the skin in
the game yeah well I have a
conversational wanted to just
cut out cities and counties and
and and have the state but their
portion and this and that you
know I I I'm warming up to that
idea I will tell you Mr chairman
but I also feel like everybody
that benefits from the other
things that happen as a result
of the data center come into
their community should have some
skin in the game I don't know if
it's the amount that we're
looking at but but it's
definitely
that Department Ricky and.
Thank thank you senator a little
going on to Senator Sanches and
after that we have Senator
Hickey.
Mr chair Senator Padilla thanks
for bringing the bill.
And I stand with the senator Tom
and and but Senator bridges says
You know these they got the
municipalities and the county is
gonna have a seat at the chair
to have their voice when
something's coming to their
community just like you said the
other thing I see is we're gonna
tax credit to these businesses.
Are we being held hostage why
are we going down this where
they blackmailing us trying to
come in what about the
businesses that have been here
that make less than twenty five
million a year that have been
here for fifty years forty years
twenty years are just starting
that have anywhere from one
employee to.
Thirty or forty employees.
You know I think we need to look
at giving tax credits to
businesses that already have
roots here in New Mexico so they
can grow.
Thank you Mr chair
representative here
Representative Mr chair Sanchez
and and what I would tell you is
jump in the swimming pool with
all of us the water's fine we we
have to have this discussion
you're getting a keeping helping
of why we need to revise our tax
policy and report thank you.
Senator Sanchez you still have
the the floor.
That's all Mr chairman.
Okay thank you would on to a
Senator Hickey.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Senator Griggs and Sanchez
and comment as a new Senator I'm
learning a lot about a very very
complicated issue.
and Senator Padilla thank you
for bringing this bill forward
I'm trying to sort all this out
but I would like to share to
impressions that
I have struck me.
Kind of.
After the election as I've
gotten further involved in
particularly revenue in taxes in
the state.
One is that we.
We seem to we we have a lot of
scarcity here.
And we we have lived in the end
you all of the arguments and.
And we're kind of looking at the
scraps that are on the table and
and how to divide them up and.
and you know that's important
but I just don't know that we're
ever going to get up you know of
the full.
Where we want to call it soleil
or something that's really large
to be able to divide up and
dress the issues that we have in
the state unless we have more
business in the state and
revenues to tax on incomes and I
also on trying to learn about
corporate taxation I understand
it's pretty small that if we
don't get more revenue on the
table we're just gonna keep
cycling through these
discussions year after year and
while this year we're leaving
some.
I'm gonna be leaving some people
behind with the taxes that we're
adding and with the scarcity of
the needs of that are there but
I'm I hope that we're not
leaving people behind twenty
years I hope that we somehow
will change our focus and our
culture to realize that we have
a lot to do we have a lot of
potential and if we were able to
execute on that then we really
are going to have in fact the
future but at some point we need
to start we need to say we're
going to enhance business
development in the state I don't
know that this is the right bill
I know wind and solar may be the
right place to start we have to
start
my second observation is a Salt
Lake City I had an opportunity
just to drive and I think it's I
seventeen or whatever it is it
goes north and south
through Salt Lake and I have
done that probably fifteen years
and I was shocked.
It is a non stop.
Business urban area with tons of
national businesses are located
here and as we go through Salt
Lake they had one of their
typical inversions periodically
you know it's it's it's nice
it's pretty but it certainly is
going to whether it's here and
it's just so.
I remember thirty years ago
under governor Johnson we we had
opportunities like the other
states to take off and we did.
And and and now here we are
stuck in the same place that
we've done so
I I don't have an answer here
I just have not sedation if we
don't pick the right issue to
start with and do it A. S. A. P.
we're going to find ourselves
having the same discussion
twenty years from now and and
our kids and their kids are
going to be worse off or so
Senator Padilla I congratulate
you and bring this
very difficult issue to the fore
but if someone comes again to
note raising all boats and we've
got to we've got to develop a
way to figure out how we get
investment and you know I I it's
great that we're we're having
some businesses and they're
starting with got three thousand
tech start up that's great you
know maybe some of those will
become big we need to get large
businesses that generate huge
amounts of revenue
and figure out how to address
our margins and pull that into
the state and we are going to do
that I I don't believe we're
going to do that all by
ourselves we're gonna have to
bring in outside investors
whether that be data
wind solar whoever it is we have
to bring in outside people to
get us going and get us thinking
about what could be so Senator
Padilla I'm glad we're not
voting on this today at the love
to talk to you more about this
to understand
I don't know that I know data
centers are taking off and I
don't know that their wages are
real high in terms of taxation
and less we're starting to talk
about that there the area of
data analytics which is then we
need to train people for with
our community colleges are high
school degrees those jobs pay
very well on.
so.
That locally that's the type of
business that you're talking
about that is growing is going
crazy big data quote unquote R.
S. twenty one indigenous to our
state but everyone's getting
into that business and how do we
attract others here do that as
well because of the high paying
jobs in those will develop
income for taxation and as well
stating out of tax the earnings
on many of those companies thank
you for allowing me to.
Observed Representative.
This but the general comment is
we have got to become.
Business development focus and
we have to start now as other
states are doing it and we're
going to get left behind.
So thank you Senator Padilla
thank you Mr chairman thank you
offer tolerating the going off
from my little model thank you
very much.
Thank you for thank you Senator
Hickey in the I don't believe I
have anybody else on the list
Liz I miss somebody.
Of but as I mentioned to the
committee I think Senator
Padilla thank you for bringing
this bill forward I know that a
lot of work has gone to the very
complicated the issue but I
think your colleagues have
recommended suggestions and I
hope that you get a chance to
visit with them and then we'll
come back again to
Representative hopefully this
ability to.
Mr chairman I appreciate
everyone's comments and I just
a.
For the chair to you know I'm
sure that we're gonna treat all
tax bills the same way and I
know you are I know that you're
very honorable man and we're
gonna have to that way and so
with that I'll move to temporary
table my own bill which I
normally don't do but and we can
we can move on from there thank
you for.
So the table with the you know
unavailable of motion so.
if there is no opposition to the
motion.
Mr chair just to clarify
temporary cable cable I'm sorry.
Temporarily until next year or.
That's that's debatable homes.
Now more now Mr chairman.
German there actually is not a
temporary table motion it's not
the real work anywhere it's
either table very painful it's
up to you.
Terminology Mr chair for the
nine years I.
I apologize for that are you
want to handle it so what would
issue a what is holding here.
And yep.
Okay so what.
So no action would just hold it
so we'll move on to
Senate Bill
Thirty eight.
Senator Corman.
Okay thank you thank you Mr
chair
This bill.
Thirty eight the.
The most straightforward simple
was built this afternoon.
Senate bill twenty eight million
one sentence or less modifies
the definition of.
Phone for having to allow
carriers.
To include charges for nine.
Telecommunication.
Good and our services and
customers telephone bill
provided the carrier has
obtained the customer's
permission.
Cramming all cramming is
prohibited under New Mexico law
thank nineteen ninety nine
obviously much is changing
administrative censorship
including now commonplace
practices and.
Then the.
Representative online using wire
line.
And mobile broadband services
with.
Such is that storage and
parental controls.
this practice
necessary for the.
The small to the the.
There's no fiscal impact.
With respect to this bill.
And the Mr chairman we have with
us.
the sector well before that
incidently this is New Mexico's
wanted to say that the last
state and country change the
small to up from that.
So Mr chair we have with us this
afternoon.
Highly esteemed expert witness
Elizabeth right.
Mess with the assistant general
counsel.
With the lines so.
We can the hear from her thank
you.
Thank you senator Tom hi there.
Go ahead.
Can you hear me thank you so
much chair members of the
committee thank you so much for
having me here to speak with you
today as the senator said my
name is Elizabeth rating yes and
I'm a government affairs
attorney for Verizon.
I am here today to speak on
behalf of Senate bill thirty
eight and the senator has done a
really excellent job of
describing it it is extremely
straightforward as the senator
mentioned New Mexico is the only
state in the country where
telecom companies like Verizon
are prohibited by law from
billing their customers for
anything that isn't a telecom
service so the most common
example and the one that I think
most people have familiarity
with its Disney plus another
example is apple music so as the
senator mentioned we we and
other companies in in the phone
industry often now run
promotions where will give folks
a free period of time then they
can elect and every other state
to continue to be billed for the
service on their phone bill and
in New Mexico does not allow
that customers do not have the
option if it's not a telco
service they cannot sign up to
purchase it through their
telephone carrier and that's
something that is is solely the
result of changes in the
industry since nineteen ninety
nine when the statute was last
visited and I'm here to answer
any questions that you only have
about why we're doing this we
want our customers to have the
same choices and opportunities
and the best customer experience
that we can offer and we want
that in all fifty states
including Mexico.
Allman internals.
What the thanks for asking Mr
chair.
All right thank you you don't
have any other expert witnesses
we will go to a public comment.
At this time I don't have anyone
who emailed me to speak in
opposition if there any members
of the public who would like to
speak in opposition please go
ahead and raise your hand now
you see the reaction.
The C. Marco Gonzales go ahead
and speak Sir.
Yes good afternoon Mister
chairman and members of the
committee my name is mark with
all of the rest of this act
right it is two points that I
wanted to read your.
And so thank you for that in
your folders electronic folder.
Which is the wireless industry.
Relative to the better support
and really as I I R. Sanchez and
by the expert witness isn't
really a consumer choice bill so
what we're doing is allowing
Often the services and this is
fresh off.
Four years outdated
with popping the word private
open up the report I found this.
so I thank you very much
chair of the committee this
afternoon.
Thank you Mr Gonzalez and one
more time this is for opposition
so any more opposers please
raise your hand at this time.
Only could you mute please.
It looks like we don't have any
other opposing members of the
public so let's turn to Mr
Robert black.
Afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee it's
pleasure to be here again rob
black president and CEO of the
New Mexico chamber of commerce.
all this year a little personal
story as as a regarding this
issue last year my family and I
converted we will join Verizon
wireless and we're very pleased
to get the Disney plus our
package and my kids fell in love
with baby oda and the
Mandalorian and as we came
around to the next year I got
this notice that it it was going
away and I needed to sign up for
going forward so I went on
Verizon's website in trying to
do it in couldn't and then it in
I'd struggle with it for
actually a couple of days trying
to figure out because it's not
designed for New Mexico it just
said I couldn't do it so then
surely I was able to I just went
to Disney plus directly and was
able to sign up and my kids let
me stay in the house because we
could finish watching what
happened the baby that but it
was a it was a really
challenging process to go
through and I think it is
exemplifies how important it is
to make it as best we can
seamless Act
are opportunities for people to
shop all in one place to be able
to do it seamlessly and I would
again this is we are the only
state currently that is
restricting this and would
encourage you to to support this
bill thank you very much.
Thank you Mr black on to any
other members of the public that
with the to speak in support
Senate bill thirty eight which
raise your hand at this time.
It doesn't appear we have any
wind so that will conclude
public statements for Senate
bill thirty eight thank you.
Thank you of.
Senator call then we will now go
to the members of the committee
for any questions.
Dome.
See in the.
Hands going up.
So what is the pleasure of the
committee.
over the past.
Would you press with the Senator
but can you hold for one second.
That.
thank you Mr I'm I'm sorry I
haven't been called by the
fourth no not you to them the
orthopedic surgeon I'm gonna
take this call are you so we
have a second by Senator Brandt.
So
can you roll Senator.
Yes Senator great yes Senator
Hamblen yes would you like to
pass on Senator Hickey.
Senator had a meal yes Senator
Kernan.
Senator Sanchez
Yes.
Senator.
Yes.
Senator Wirth.
Yes.
Senator Padilla.
And.
The.
So.
Will hold for a second I'm I'm
waiting for senator Hickey.
The good office called to
hopefully won't take too long.
The test is available now.
Okay.
The report read and downs and.
The.
Thank you.
Your.
I think the phone calls probably
takes a little longer so
Mr chair the the rules what's
basically disease out of the
room just like you do if we were
back in regular committee
discusses the vote just what it
is.
Yes so we'll go ahead and the
with this.
But none of these this event
will be.
Mr chair if you'll call about
one.
Okay Dr Martin
Hickey of being a roll call vote
have a motion for do pass and so
we've all but of all of us about
it so it's your turn.
I'm back Mr chair I apologize
yes we are in a roll call vote.
So we have a motion for a do
pass we have a second and the
It's your turn to vote.
And and what is the current
vogue Mr chair.
Home
all night in favor of the do
Passo one excuse Senator Kernan
and now it's your turn.
I've yes thank you.
Thank you doctor thank you all
right so Senator twelve we have
a due pass.
On Senate bill thirty eight
thirty eight.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
members of the committee.
We will now move on to a Senate
bill fifty.
C. contrast for special field
permit Senator Woods.
Thank you Mr chairman good
afternoon.
I've been sent here just basking
in all this information I'm
getting from your great
Canadian.
I am in.
So let me get own before you get
bored to death.
I am
I am asking.
To provide a special The Oprah I
met for a cotton modular
transport vehicles now.
Because of the.
Because we're not farmers
anymore many of us in the
committee.
You may not realize that cotton
is still an important crop in
the state of New Mexico.
But the problem has to do with
the fact that the nearest cotton
gin and my part of the world.
Is in Texas.
So those trucks that transport
cotton from New Mexico into
Texas cross the border quite a
bit.
And I have with me a our expert
witness that is the general
manager of the Parmer county
cotton gin Mexico well.
And his name is Greg.
Roar Bach and I would answer the
chairman if I could let him kind
explained the reason he needs a
use permit.
Okay Senator go ahead Mr
About.
Well thanks for the opportunity
to speak with the Mr chairman
yes we are we're in need of a of
some allowance here over here we
have I'm Redekop in actually of
curry county New Mexico resident
but seven miles into the borders
where I I work at our McKinney
cotton growers which is a pretty
sure
operative by of the producers
that do business with this.
the.
As Mr would are Senator words
had alluded to if you're not
familiar with this process the
models that producers making the
field are about twenty thousand
pounds eight feet wide thirty
two foot long a foot tall and so
with this it takes a very
special unique truck which is
actually
Recognizing the motor vehicle
code at the end we have a good
relationship with the port of
entry in up to this point we
were able to use the thirty day
act permit and so we have to
point to provide your a couple
years ago saying that that
wasn't legal so we're having to
currently use a day permit.
And every check that we go to
every field which could be up to
a hundred fields in this season
we have to go to the poor every
time we want to go to a
different location and so do are
conduct our business for our New
Mexico producers it creates
quite of our so what were you
we're asking is to utilize a.
Similar type of permit to allow
us to go across the border and
then retrieve these models in
the tracks that's required.
I'll be happy to answer any
questions and clarify anything
that might come up.
K. O. thank you
Senator would you wanted to
before we go to public.
Senator would you are muted.
Senator would we can't hear you.
All right more.
I am so sorry you have found the
worst technical guy in the
building that has to do with
anything on are not bad our
tablet or anything else so
please accept my apologies I
would like to add this.
We are asking for a sixty day
permit.
At the cost of two hundred fifty
dollars.
And there are a few things that
I'd like to note on the if I are
if I could one thing is
the methodology for estimating
revenue impact.
And they said due to absence of
data.
We can't tell whether it's going
to be a call for loss doing it
this way.
And what they don't know is
simply the amount of trucks that
will back permit sure how much
it would be a weight so if
you'll permit would cost of the
wires so that's the reason for
that and in policy issues and
that same FIR are made the
statement.
Taxi Revenue Department can
regulate the issuance of a
prepaid permits for custom
harvesting operators.
Now that says they can do that
already.
Trouble is they're not doing
that already fact is the point
are tell us Randall said today
so I would like to make it very
clear to all.
That this would be a permit for
a cotton hauling module truck.
The
The R..
Tax revenue department will also
like me to add some language to
that.
To exempt from weight distance
tax and special tool tax to
exclude bill of lading.
With the cottonseed permits.
I would be happy to amend that
if you would pass out of this
committee I would happy to make
that amendment to do that and
for tax revenue.
And the last.
That have on the TRD from the
TRD as they say that it will
cost up to eighty thousand
dollars.
To change the I. T. information
and their data bank in order to
do this.
Few minutes ago in your
committee Mr chairman.
There was a notation that there
were several tax law changes
coming or at least folks.
So.
If any of these other changes
happen.
I would suggest that this could
be picked up at that point in
time and probably not cost
eighty thousand dollars for
single change.
GSA Mr chairman
I do not have any further.
Anything else in my bill does
specifically R. D. I am a state
got modular transport vehicle
means a motor vehicle trailer
our combination of motor vehicle
with the trailer used
exclusively for transport of a
cottonseed module this is not
for calling Hey Hollywood cattle
really thank you only one years
Mr chair.
With that I would be happy to
have public comment in Stanford
question Sir.
Senator Wirth.
We will the Republic of.
I did not receive any email
supporting or opposing this bill
however if there are members of
the public who oppose the bill
that would like to speak now is
your opportunity to raise your
hand.
It looks like we don't have
anyone in opposition do we have
anyone in support of Senate bill
fifty I would like to make a
public statement.
And that looks like that's it so
we do not have any public
statements for Senate bill fifty
at this time thank you.
Right okay so now we'll go to
the committee I have Senator
Hamblen.
Yes Mr chair and thank you so
much and Senator Woods I like
the way you talk my friend you
know it's just about getting
straight to the point this is
what it means and that Mr rock
I'd like to let you know you
know down here in the southern
part of the state we also have
cotton and you know given that
we don't have real seasons we
tell by we know when it's chilly
season what is cotton season and
when it's on in season my what
vehicles are on our roads and so
you know first and foremost you
know it it it kind of breaks my
heart if I kind of following the
line of of Senator Woods breaks
my heart that you have to go out
of state to get the cotton
produced in to get it processed
and so but it's what you gotta
do right now and so you know I'd
love to always bring it home I
talk about keeping it local in
keeping money in our community
at the mall at the moment that's
not that possibility for you so
you're trying to do your part to
to make it work for your farmers
in the area and so I appreciate
that and and you know Senator
was I would certainly support
this I think you know anything
to help make folks do their jobs
easier you know the time being I
just want to put that little
seed I want to plant that little
cotton seed of you know whatever
we can do to bring it so that
you don't have to go out of
state to process the cotton keep
money in our state and our
communities I'd love to be able
to support so just keep me in
mind for that thank you thank
you Mr chair.
Thank you Senator Hamblen.
We have any other.
Committee members questions.
I
what is the pleasure of the
committee.
Over the past Mr chair okay for
the second the.
Thank you bye.
It will.
Yes Senator dash Senator hamlet
yes Senator Hickey yes Senator
Hotmail yes Senator Kernan.
You senator Sanchez.
Yes.
Senator com.
Yes.
Senator Wirth.
Yes.
Senator Padilla.
Senator Shendo.
Can do you have.
Thank you Senator Woods.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
I almost voted for senator Wirth
begins so thank you very.
Okay we'll move on to our last
bill on the agenda Senate bill
fifty two.
Extended unemployment benefits
Senator o'neill thank you
chairman sent Shendo and like
Senator Wirth that been basking
in the glow of this new a name
committee and I'll get the hang
of the new name here soon but
here we go Senate bill fifty two
and I'm sponsoring this on
behalf of our workforce
solutions and I have secretary
workforce solutions ready to
zoom in at any moment so during
the Great Recession along New
Mexico along with other states
passed a law allowing for an
extended unemployment benefits
for the long term unemployed.
And above the regular twenty six
hours twenty six weeks for the
regular program that the federal
government helps pay for state
law still has these dates from
back in that time and that is
for the program and the
department of labor which funds
this program a hundred percent
by the way has said in order for
them to keep paying for the plan
that we need to update the law
so as of today there thirty two
thousand people on this program
if we don't update these dates
these people are in danger of
losing your budget so that's the
bill and senator and I chair I'm
sorry secretary mccamley former
house member we won't talk about
your best probability he's up
next you can explain this bill.
All right thank you a Senator
Neil Mr Secretary thank you Mr
chairman at my basketball
ability is pretty minimal as
senator o'neill well knows that
he he basically got hit the nail
on the head this is just
updating a couple of dates in
old unemployment law allowing us
to continue and extend benefits
program that is for the long
term unemployed the only other
point I would put in is that to
qualify.
The New.
And both me eight if it's an.
So we ages than you would be
able to make for the regular
unemployment program and the
reason for that is this was
designed really help those folks
that we're consistently long
term on kids on a budget but
long and short the department of
labor has asked us to do this we
have like I said about thirty
two thousand people in this
program if we just update the
dates we should be able to
continue get federal money to to
continue that program and I'd be
happy to answer any questions
you.
Great thank you.
Senator.
Or what what.
Yes.
We go to the go to the audience
and then to the committee hi
okay thank you.
Or
no one from the public email to
speak in opposition or support
are there any members of the
public that are in the meeting
at this time would like to speak
please raise your hand are using
reaction button at the bottom.
Okay it doesn't look like we
have anyone in opposition do we
have anyone in support who would
like to speak now is the time
for support.
Okay it doesn't look like any
members of the public would like
to speak on Senate bill fifty
two just as a note Mr mccamley
you kind of cut out earlier so
I'm not a hundred percent sure
that all the members of the
committee were able to hear what
you said so some of the
questions may be repeating that
it might be helpful if you turn
your camera also but leave your
microphone on just to increase
audio quality thank you.
Okay thank you with that we will
go to the committee I've Senator
Griggs and then Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman in center
nail and Mr Secretary does this
make the program open ended to
where as long as you guys
unemployed he will be able to
receive benefits with with
really no.
No requirements whatsoever half
half how does that actually work
I guess what I'd I'd like to
understand secretary.
Yes thank thank you Mr chair and
senator so the answer is no this
is just adds another thirteen
weeks on to the end of what you
would normally get from a twenty
six week program so it's just
additional weeks that are set up
and you can run out of those
weeks is not open and it.
Okay thank you Mr mission Mr
etcetera etcetera nail and Mr
secretary.
Okay Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you.
Secretary sorry I was out of the
office just a few minutes while
you were a.
Speaking so my understanding of
this bills is just to comply
with federal language because
our starter money out there for
the program that we might not
qualify for free don't change
this Mr Senator correct okay
and
It looks like that's all it does
I do have other concerns I'd
love to talk to you about
secretary when it comes to the
unemployment insurance fund and
its current balance I'd really
like to talk about some ideas on
how we can fix that without
killing our businesses so at
some point I'd love to.
Connect with your doctor about
that thank you.
Thank you this I don't see any
other.
And up from the committee
members I think this is a pretty
straightforward so what is a
pleasure to the committee.
The is performance for the fast
I can.
Second by the Senator Hickey of
please take Rowe.
Yes.
Senator Griggs yes.
Senator Hamblen S..
Senator.
Yes Senator Hotmail yes Senator
Kernan well.
Senator Sanchez.
Yes.
Senator Tom.
Yes Senator Wirth.
Yes.
Senator Padilla
Senator Shendo at.
Ten one.
Health
you Mr chair members of the
committee.
Right.
So members include our.
Meeting eight and we will be
back on on Thursday at one
thirty we we have a a nine bills
that we're trying to tackle that
day and then we'll try to
hopefully get a dent agenda out
for Tuesday's of bills hopefully
by the end of two a tomorrow so
people have a chance to to take
a look those over we can.
Again
I'm sorry Senator Hamblen go
ahead.
Mr chair thank you so much I
promise I will keep us all it's
kind of like saying you can go
to recess now and then keeping
the door from thank you for
going out the door I just wanted
to extend thanks to just the the
wonderful discussion that
happens in this committee and I
would love to give a shout out
to market a lot and share Shendo
for running a very good meeting
and just moving things along so
thank you very much and for your
crew to help make that happen
and that's all Mr Mr chair thank
you senator thank you senator
would appreciate it yes elect
your thank my staff which are
really helpful and I'm in the
committee room we're all in here
so on that at home getting cut
out from my it broadband hema
so.
Otherwise I would be a different
story but propitiate thank you
with that we are adjourned thank
you committee members and the.
Thank you.
