Senator Tallman.
Senator Wirth.
Your.
Senator Padilla.
Your one two three four five six
so we do have a quorum.
Yes so I guess we can get
started do we have of.
Senator Campos.
We didn't have the link I sent
it to you're the first bill on
the agenda is Senate bill one
fifty three Senator Campos.
For.
Thank you everyone for your
patience we'll be getting
started here momentarily.
And so also in juggling today I
will be stepping out
periodically to make a
presentation to Senate finance
not only do I have a bill there
but I also in presenting on
broadband there with a couple of
other folks for a panel that
they're hosting today on
broadband so I just wanna let
the committee know that and when
senator chairman Shendo arrives
I will probably step out
momentarily.
We have Senator Campos.
Senator Campos hasn't joined us
yet Senator Padilla okay well I
really do want to get things
rolling and that I want to keep
this moving along here so let's
go ahead and start with Senate
bill one sixty one withholding
wages for taxes Senator
Schmedes.
Thank you Mr chairman and I
realize Campos right from here.
Senator Neville expected short
presentation we'll see how the
discussion of thank you Mr
chairman and members of the
committee
I think.
Just a couple people I haven't
met yet my first bill to present
to this committee so that's real
honor privilege and then are my
and my co sponsor for this bill
is Senator Sanchez cemex markets
to us so this bill basically
what it does is it gives a this
is a a small business relief
bill and what are the.
This is just an option for small
businesses.
In this time of of economic
hardship throughout our state I
think we all recognize that have
already passed through our
chamber.
All business what.
And basically what this does is
it says that the small
businesses that they would like
to choose not to withhold
tax from their employees
paychecks they can elect to do
that
this results in a administrative
cost savings for the small
business it also results and and
a savings for our the the
individual because what's
basically what's happening with
the automatic withholding it
it's kind of like an interest
free loan.
State that we're we're kind of
prepaying this stuff that with
with no no interest.
So this is this is basically a
you know coming at a time where
you all business related but it
also gives really both the
employer and the employee number
two for one that's why I I like
it
and.
I would also finally notes that
this withholding began in
wartime it began around World
War two
for for those you know at
extraordinary reasons and I
think it's time to revisit this
idea and I think we can help a
lot of people by passing this
bill and with that Mr chair I
turn over for marks for centers
this.
Thank you senator committees
when we went through role we did
not have Senator Sanchez signify
he was here so are you in the
room.
I do not hear Senator Sanchez
centers meetings do you have
expert witnesses that we'd like
to hear from at this point no
not are just then Senator
Sanchez.
Thank you on if he is able to
join us will ask him to say a
few words but at this point I'd
like to go to Mr Clinton but
will walk us through a public
comment starting first with
opposition and then going to
support.
Senator I did not have anyone
signed up to speak in opposition
for Senate bill one sixty one
are there any members of the
public that are currently in the
room with us at this time who
wish to make a public statement
in opposition percent about one
sixty one please go ahead and
raise your hand either raise
your hand at your camera or
reserve handed the reactions at
the bottom of your screen.
Okay it doesn't look like we
have anyone who wishes to make a
statement in opposition I was in
did not receive an email for
statements of support so are
there any members of the public
that are currently enters in
meeting who wish to make a
statement of support for Senate
bill one sixty one again these
are statements of support.
Okay thank you very much and I
conclude public statements for
Senate bill one sixty one at
this time.
Thank you Mr Clinton we're gonna
go to committee at this point
Senators meetings with them to
ask you some questions I don't
know what I don't see anybody
with that well let me go back to
my participant component here
okay so we'll start with Senator
Kernan you have the floor.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
and that Senator you know it's a
small business owner it at that
Probably wouldn't make that much
difference to me but I think
about my employees and
their tax liability at the end
of the year sometimes I think we
run the risk of putting
employees in a position where
they need to plan ahead and make
sure at the end of the year when
they have to pay their taxes
that they remember that they
have not been with health so do
you have any information on
That would look like for many
employees if you think that it
would be able to save that money
for the end of the year and for
what they owe the state of New
Mexico.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
great question I the question
was coming that question come up
in the development this
legislation backed when I you
know that was something that
that was a concern of mine as we
were we're drafting this bill
and
so that's why there's no there's
no mandate here is just an
option it makes sense for some
small businesses and for some
other small businesses it just
doesn't and and you know this
would probably require a you
know if you have I employees for
you know find require sit down
maybe people say Hey this is an
option to us now is anyone
interested
like I said that the main
benefit is yes you do have to do
a little bit of planning ahead
if you're not gonna have this
automatically withdrawn off the
paycheck every month however the
benefit to those that do want to
take that extra step plan ahead
there the the taxes are not due
until the end of the calendar
year also April fifteenth well
now you're gone all that money
what you know so that so they
get it earlier.
We are.
Sorry okay thank you thank you
and senator Tom you can use your
line thank you.
Please proceed that centres me
these are I'm sorry yes.
So so to wrap up the answer to
that question is yeah there's a
trade off you have to plan ahead
little bit but but you're no
longer getting that interest
free loan to the state to get to
at a time money in the pocket
and then you just plan
for us for for the future
however you like to do that and
people can pay quarterly if they
want to or they can yeah they
could pay all want some of the
and the equipment is totally
flexible totally their option
and and
just another tool in the toolbox
for small business it makes
sense for that.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator and I'm just reading the
analysis there seems to be some
issue with regard to
How TRD would be able to handle
it and and whether this would
affect.
State investments are throughout
the year when you don't have
money coming in that typically
has command and interest earned
on that have you done an
estimate say fifty percent of
employees of small businesses
took advantage of this the
impact to the state the with
regard to the investment of
those dollars over time.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator so the and and just to
be clear this is not something
that that employees would choose
on their own it would be you
know sort through their employer
and so I I don't have an
estimate on that I do know that
had the wrong.
You a numbers for me to try to
help so that the fiscal year
twenty twenty two income tax
estimate is one point seven
billion dollars ninety three
percent of which yes yes
personal
personal income tax so we're you
know the the the total
Certainly clear that so the the
total pool of money we're
talking about is approximately
one point five million dollars
and so it would you know like I
said it does require a little
bit of planning on the employees
standpoint for being prepared
for that tax liability at the
end of the year and then you
know TRD and in the in the F. R.
F. I. R. that the the the fiscal
impact them is extremely small
they they had put in here of
five thousand two hundred
dollars over over a course of
three years so very small
amounts to.
Take it with a few I. T. issues
but it but yes it does you know
that's like it like I said
that's the trade off.
TRD would not necessarily have a
a a monthly income for those
small businesses that Act this
option but I don't have the you
know I don't have a a number for
how many people you know it's a
certain percentage of businesses
chose this option I I think it
probably be you know fairly easy
to to come up with that number
at some point.
Thank you very much that's all
thank you thank you.
Thank you Senator Kernan centers
meetings up before we proceed I
do want to just do a little bit
of housekeeping well it Senator
Campos know that you will be
next and we have three actions I
want to get things rolling
Senator Campos we do have you
first on the agenda will come to
you instead of the one fifty
three estimates were down here
and then I know you also have
one fifty eight and one eighty
six before we also proceed are
co sponsors in the room for this
bill I want to get Senator
Sanchez a few moments to say a
few words about the bill and
then we will go to Senator
Hamblen and then on to Senator
Hickey senator Sanchez.
Thank you Mr chair and sorry
about being late I couldn't get
my internet to work but I am the
co sponsoring this with the
Senators species and.
To just maybe a little bit on
Senator Kernan.
The impact to the state will be
that great I don't believe we
don't have the numbers that
would have to look most small
business under fifty employees
they replace they only report
once a month or
quarterly anyway are there with
holdings so the impact to the
state on that would be great the
biggest thing is that we can get
this money into the hands of the
employees you know looking
anywhere from twenty seven to
fifty two dollars a week and you
know for.
All the necessity that they need
now in this pandemic you know
their prescriptions are electric
bills there rant
The issues they have with their
children all the medical need to
come up is would be extra money
by the end of the month it could
be as much as two hundred
dollars depending on the way
they have their deduction set up
on their payroll you know
whether they're married or how
many they're claiming but it
could be from twenty seven to
fifty two dollars.
A week for the employees so this
is just this bill the reason I
support is because it is it does
get money into the hands of on
and they're not having to have a
loan that is going to have
interest on it
So that's why I'm in support of
this and I will turn it over now
to any questions Mr chair.
Thank you senator Sanchez
centers committee did introduce
a bill and thank you for the for
the set up there as well so
we're gonna go back to we have
already offered at center such
as a public comment and I were
in committee members were to go
to Senator Hamblen now thank you
Mr chairman thank you the the
centers committee and senator
Sanchez for introducing this is
you know I I've heard about the
challenges that small businesses
are having all over the state as
a result of the pandemic and
trying to keep our community
safe I'm there to questions that
I have as senator Sanchez you
might have touched on it just a
little bit but if somebody if an
employee for whatever reason and
whatever their deductions are
their situation is could they
opt out if their employer
decides to implement this.
do they have that option or do
they have to go along with it
and then secondly is there
sunset clause on this because it
seems like we're doing this
because of the challenges that
are brought by the pandemic and
I'm wondering if there's a sense
that close thank you Mr chair.
And centers on Islamic finance
part of that and just the rest
out I would be hope you know we
we actually talk about a sunset
on this Mister chairman Senator
it's a great question
and I I I am completely open to
the sunset.
To see how it goes in that way
we have a real life number you
know say we sunset and you know
whatever twenty of twenty twenty
four twenty twenty five and we
and we go back to TRD USA Hey
how does this work out was there
a major impact I I agree Senator
Sanchez on this week a major
impact the state honors in the
some major budget crisis however
I think the as senator Sanchez
explained I think the you know
if you have an extra ten dollars
a month
and that at that is there you
know sooner than that just
waiting for say a tax rebate or
whatever that may be
depending on the person's
situation I I think that can be
give us give some people some
great relief so minimal minimal
impact the state but I think
it's a maximal impact individual
for the small business and then
Senator Sanchez on a if you want
to answer the other part of her
question your thoughts on that.
Yes I was trying to take those
can you ask the question one
more time Mr chair Mr chair
Senator Sanchez's and I
appreciate it and I do agree
with you Senators minis that you
know it's it's good to be able
to experiment and see how this
is going given that it doesn't
have a significant impact that
we're we're not gonna be in the
whole whole lot of money that
it's an opportunity to see what
works and what's effective and
so I do appreciate that
opportunity and and and hope
that that that seems to be a
good solution senator Sanchez
the question was whether or not
an employee if the employer
chooses to do this doesn't
employee have an option to opt
out just because of whatever
their deductions are whatever
their circumstances are is that
they would choose not to.
Mr chair Senator I'm a
like us Senator you said we're
open for amendments and we are.
I think I'd be a great thing if
they wanted to opt out they
don't have to I don't think we
should make it a mandatory thing
but this is a good option for
the employees office the
employees if we can and it is a
minimal thing you know the fifty
two hundred dollars that is
going to cost the state over
three years of seventeen hundred
dollars and thirty three dollars
seven one thousand seven hundred
thirty three dollars a year over
the next three years so it's
very minimal for and it's just
the FIR is just for the I. T.
work you know the new upgraded
system not to put to implement
this but we would be
for an amendment or you know to
look at that option to sunset
and
but anywhere they could opt out
when they want to.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator Sanchez I think it's
it's a really good idea I think
it is you know I especially
right now to see how people can
can can be helped but I do think
there might be some unique
situations where people are
going to want that money taken
out just for whatever you know
whatever their tax situation is
and so I but I do appreciate the
opportunity to try to help I
think we've got a number of
resources at our fingertips and
and we need to to look at all of
this to help our small
businesses so thank you for
exploring this thank you Mr
chair.
I thank you Senator Hamblen I
there was discussion of a
potential amendment I don't know
if you want to do that at this
point but Senator Hamblen if you
want to think about that for
just a few moments or if you if
the bill gets out here you can
work with these Sanchez before
goes on to the next committee
let's go now to Senator Hickey.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Senator Schmedes no Sanchez.
Interesting concept but I've got
I've got a few questions
What so is the money that's not
paid on behalf of the employee.
Is that part being held in in
other words.
It.
So it's really it's the employee
that has a liability at the end
of the year is that correct
not the it's not the employer.
Yes Mr chairman.
This does not change it for tax
liability for anybody.
L..
Mister chairman Senator Schmedes
but but it the if the employee
each the employer Tory chooses
to do and the employee chooses
to do it.
Then
the employee is gonna have
something do it some point.
Is that correct.
Mr.
I'm sorry I couldn't.
Mister chairman Senator yes
that's correct.
Okay
When I kind of worrying about
well there's two two things that
I worry someone about
The.
You know we all have to if we we
didn't do enough withholding in
our federal taxes or and so
forth you know we end up being a
Jack at the end of the year that
always hurts
and I've certainly had that
happen to me
and and my wife and as kind of a
sudden hello grassroot where we
going to do a we're beginning
defended this savings that but
people don't have savings to dip
into when it comes do that and
you know we this committee heard
about it's been a long time on
the small small loan industry
and you know are we potentially
going to push people into a
position whether it's thirty six
percent or whatever it might or
might not be but
pushing them into a position
where they have to take a loan
out within the data the long
gets turned over and gets turned
over again
And and the other thing that I
worry about yeah and and that's
just a comment that's not a
question that's.
but what is the provision the
state employee works up to
November doesn't pay at and then
moves away doesn't leave any
forwarding address how does the
state get a hold of that
employee that pay those taxes.
Mr Chairman
We're.
But
having a hard time hearing you
if you wouldn't mind maybe just
a shutting off your video and we
can hear you but audio.
Okay sure I'm I'm in my I'm in
my office so I don't know what
that is okay great yeah I'm just
up here on the fourth floor
thank you Mr chairman Senator
you know that's that's that's
tax evasion then there's there
are penalties to that I mean
people people don't pay their
taxes there's consequences in
this this has nothing to do with
with someone who chooses to to
break the law I mean if you
don't pay your tax if you have
your taxes set up quarterly you
don't pay M. is the same as you
if you haven't set up annually
not them I mean.
People have that responsibility
to to the government you know
people that use.
The public services we all pay
taxes some some people pay in
certain different ways all this
does is give people an extra.
If they if it fits their
particular tax situation and you
know I think that the Senator
you brought up is is gonna be
more COVID people that are very
very high incomes or maybe have
investment income this is not
with us bills addressing that's
not with this bill dressing this
bill is addressing getting money
into people's pockets earlier
getting them paid with their
paycheck instead of paying their
taxes early with and basically
what like we said before
interest free loan to the state
so that people get get the that
money up front but this this has
nothing to with with tax
evasion.
Thank you Senator Schmedes and
Mr chairman the the I have more
and bill notes that the TV are
is very concerned that a lot of
people would take advantage of
this and not pay their taxes so
why we say there's not a cost to
the state and I know that might
be a hard and judgmental number
to try and figure out what that
impact might be state lost
revenue and I that makes me a
little nervous is B. as we
invest committee particularly
and and the Education Committee
who are who Senator Ryan as well
you know we Zabel where's the
money going to come from the
network thank you and tensely
taking money out of the coffers
that could be millions of
dollars
It I just kind of human nature
is you know you can get an easy
interest free loan and got it
and the worry about tomorrow
rather than just kind of paying
it as you go
might have a detrimental
consequence in terms of all the
things we're trying to fund for
the state I know there's lots of
money coming in
but I worry about that and I I
and I also.
Would want to put a sunset on
this but I I would think of some
setting it in the in two years
our rep may be the last to get
through this period.
Thank you senators committee and
senator Sanchez for bringing
this I I think it's a very
creative idea I'm just worried
about the fiscal responsibility
and again thank you for bringing
the bill and that with that
ideal thank you.
You Senator Hickey and centre
Sanchez did you want to make a
comment.
Yes Mister chair and and you
just a touch on that a little
bit you know if somebody.
Get a pay their taxes and they
try to you know go to another
state or whatever the minute
they ever try to get another job
and their social security
numbers but back in the system
the state will you know will go
after and do what they need to
do if they apply for any of
programs or anything with their
number they're automatically to
state that the red flag you know
so I don't think they would run
away were you know wouldn't
catch on but the thing is thank
Senator is set as you know we're
off we're willing for amendments
order on it is a good idea and
it's just to get this money into
these people's hands I think
they're responsible enough we
are working New Mexicans here
are responsible enough to do
this and you know it's it's a
little bit more help and it
doesn't have a percentage at the
end of it the third and came
back and in the long.
so that's just my comment there
thank you for the question
streaky and Mister chair to
yours you Senator just want to
give you an opportunity to your
bills well so I'd like to go
over to Senator Griggs now.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
you guys thanks thanks for
bringing this I mean this is a
this is an interesting bill
I you know owned a title company
for years and more often.
Then having people actually if I
wouldn't withhold I had people
ask me to withhold more because
there were they were concerned
frankly that they they would at
the end of the year and they
didn't know how they could have.
the bill I guess absent
amendment you guys correct me if
I'm wrong the bill leaves the
election though totally up to
the employer at the moment not
you know not the employees
getting to our to make a
decision is just if the employer
decides then and it doesn't
really say yeah yes if the
employer decides to.
Not withhold that he can not
withhold for our
One guy in with hold on another
guy addition is that the
employer may elect not to
withhold from the employees are
those employees wages which.
I would guess where the bills
written it's intending to say
that if the employer wants to
make this selection the employer
does not withhold from every
employee so are you guys could
you could you address thank you
I mean is that what you envision
this bill that employer makes
that special election and he
just done with old from
everybody.
Senators meetings are Senators
options.
Yes senator Sanchez you wanna
you wanna answer that one.
The for you.
Yes.
Next door would be fine right
yeah I can go agrees might why
things were
so right now yes it says the
employer and like I said we're
open for amendments if when you
put something there and I think
that's a good idea
Senator Griggs
It would probably be were if the
employee wanted it the employer
would do it if it you know not
just all across the board
would be optional it's like a.
Any on insurance and other stuff
if the spouse has insurance
sometimes the the husband that
works for the company doesn't
want insurance so it would be an
optional thing we could do that.
Our.
Restricts.
Again thank you thank you
senator you know back when again
when I owned on my business we
have those options especially
for things like insurance from
you have to take insured with
with payroll tax you you do have
to pay your your taxi of and you
know a lot of guys use
bookkeepers I wish I was the
bookkeeper and and our vision
show I I filed nine forty one
jar file to see are just ones I
filed it you know the W. she
once I did I did all of those
and you know my concern and H.
it's not the decision of a good
idea for shall my concern is
that people are so used to the
other system.
The disappointment is going to
be difficult.
And it's not gonna like
initially heard you state but
it's going to hurt that employee
because even though he has more
money today he or she when they
when they come what comes time
in in March or April to pay
their to pay their taxes they
won't have set aside the money
to do that.
And what I think might be better
for this bill.
Is honestly to run it through
the in rural and get some some.
Some input from all sorts of
businesses.
Because you know we're talking
about I think a business where a
guy.
The employees don't make a ton
of money.
But there are businesses where
employees make a lot of money in
their their discipline.
It's just like anybody else.
Just because they make more
doesn't necessarily mean that
they're more disciplined with
with that with that money so I
mean that's what I think would
be a good thank is to run it
through and get get businesses
to to tell us what they believe
is the right way because you
know right now whether would put
more money in people's hands
today.
You know what it's a good deal
it should be a good deal for.
From now on
so that's that's what I think Mr
chair and and and Senators is
I'm I'm just really concerned
and people are going to have
struggles and you're going to
wind up having people not be
able to pay their taxes and
they're not gonna be able to go
find a place to borrow the money
to pay it show were sure thank
you Mr and thank you for the
ideas Senator and I I do believe
it be a good thing to study any
are.
Are that do you I think you have
a comment.
No Mr chair thank you Mr grace.
Thank you very much Senator
Griggs I don't think I seen I'm
looking just scanning the.
Does anybody have any other
questions it has raised their
hand actually on.
Yes the one sixty one.
I see chairman's rejoined us
will just finish this so Mister
chairman if it's alright with
you and then we'll we'll go run
SB one sixty one has.
Action by the committee Senator
goes up because you're the only
one Mr Chairman a brief closing
statement that could be fine
I'll as Senator just had the in
the center Hamblen I think
suggestions very very good and
so if this committee chooses to
move this bill forward I will
put a sunset on the bill and
then and then we will also I
think we'll do is just have a
have an opt out put in as a
simple one sentence opt out
that for those employees to give
them that extra flexibility as
well thank you Mr chair.
Thank you for your closing
statement about what is the
pleasure of the committee at
this juncture.
Like to motion for the past Mr
chair we have a motion on the
floor for to pass some Senator
Hamblen do we have anything
amendment with the amendments
that the Senators committee with
amendments that that's not
amended just yet Senator before
we proceed but we have a motion
on on the on the floor do we
have a second.
Chairman of the second Senator
Brandt seconds we will go now to
senator Wirth.
Substitute motion to table.
Okay that is non debatable we
have a motion to table
if the.
Clerk will call the roll.
The motion of yes will table a
motion of no will.
Take us back to our previous
motion Senator Brandt.
No.
Senator Griggs.
Can I hear that Senator great I
heard in.
No.
I didn't hear you now thank you
Senator Hickey yes.
Senator how to meal.
Yes.
Senator Kernan.
No and I want to explain its
profit that's a lamp on this.
Senator Sanchez.
No.
Senator Tallman.
Yes.
Senator.
Yes Senator Padilla.
Yes.
Senator Shendo yes.
Six yes.
I know it Senator Kernan to
explain.
Senator searches in senators
committee your bill's been table
Senator Kernan to explain her
vote we'll just quickly and I
was going to bring this up but
then we kind of ended questions
that took my hand down but.
You could very easily insert an
amendment that you said at the
request of the employee and and
so I think that's it I think
that would have been a very good
amendment and certainly worth
going forward on thank you.
Thank you Senator Kernan thank
you centers meeting senator
Sanchez I just want to determine
where we are at this point so we
have been through Senate bill
one sixty one Mr chairman I
wasn't quite as efficient as as
you've been of late we do have
Senator Campos in the in the
virtual room now
it is build a carryover for
Senate bill one fifty three is
where we would go next he also
has Senate bill one fifty eight
that your pleasure and cynical
one eighty six at your pleasure
also he's available now Mr
chairman as you know I'm gonna
go over to finance for a few
moments to present a bill and
also to make a presentation on
broadband and I will come right
back.
Thank you thank you Mr.
So we'll go to Senate bill one
fifty three.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
of course thank you very much
Senator for the for the Curtis.
I would be in finance to listen
to the broadband presentation I
just wanna let the the members
know that the people that are on
online today that you have been
working very very hard insuring
that we're gonna have a
broadband he's legislation or
pieces of legislation that
definitely are going to help us
as we move forward with the
resources coming from the
federal government as well as
the resources we use at the
local level so Mr chairman of
course members of the committee
you should also have received an
amendment for Senate bill one
fifty three but if I may and
privative just to go through
what this bill does so Senate
bill one fifty three creates a
cap from so again the tax credit
thank you to allow racetrack
gaming operator licensee to
claim a ten percent of your
monthly tax liability of a not
to exceed one point five million
for fiscal year if the licensee
has expenditures for capital
improvements or long term
financing of capital
improvements at its racetrack
facility equal to or greater
than the amount of I don't like
to act really and there's other
things but if I may Mister chair
members of the committee in
essence what what we've done is
we've been working if you will
with many of the stakeholders to
try to come up with a consensus
piece of legislation that
addresses us and dresses the
issue during very tough time of
COVID.
This specifically began as a
piece of legislation that was
aimed at assisting some of the
smaller racetracks as an example
in communities like we have so
many years back I Representative
right so in the course of the
livelihood there is very much
dependent on the racing industry
all the way across the board in
dealing with agriculture
R. our system as well as the
people in the community who
provide to a very strong
hospitality services all of that
being said what I'd like to do
Mr chair and the members of the
committee of finance I can
deferred to
Mr chair if true.
Who is with the read also
racetrack but allow him to start
at the very beginning with the
amendment to explain the changes
that we just recently have
worked through and then from
there get to the bill but again
always at your discretion are
you wanting to see.
Go ahead.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
if I may deferred to again Mr
chair to go ahead and talk
about.
The changes within this piece of
legislation and what the
proposed amendments would
entail.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
yous Senator Campos for
introducing the bill.
I'll explain the in the the
original bill it was intended to
give.
A capital J. capital
improvements tax credit to the
two smaller racetracks in the
state as you may know there are
five racetracks that are that
operate in the state of the New
Mexico racing Commission those
same five racetracks also have a
casino license regulated under
the New Mexico gaming control
board.
In years past when we introduced
this bill in the house we felt
like the smaller two tracks were
the ones that needed the
assistance in candidly pre COVID
the the other three larger
tracts were necessarily
interested in in getting that
however now that we are where we
are with the COVID pandemic the
fact that all of the racetrack
casinos have been closed since
March fifteenth twenty twenty
and remains so today and will
unlikely be open within the next
thirty maybe even sixty days
there's a significant need to
re invigorate the the racetracks
in their in their result and
casinos so the amendment opens
the tax credit to all five
racetracks at a one point five
million per year per track
basis and also addresses the
amendment some of the issues
that the FIR analyst brought to
for which were a couple of words
changes from shall to may and
also address the definition of
capital improvement which is
simply that which is a qualified
G. A. A. P. approved capital
expenditure on our audited
financial statements that we
turn in and then there was a an
issue with regard to TRD having
more guidance on what exactly
constitutes a capital
improvement expenditure which
would be eligible for this tax
credit so we believe that
working with all the
stakeholders working with
Senator Campos that we have a
bill that's universally
supported by the the reports
racing casino industry and we we
are looking for those changes
thank you.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
and of course our we wanted to
explain that amendment and so
that's before you at this time.
Senator Campos.
Yes Mr chairman we don't have an
amendment.
Was that.
Because so many.
Secretary and
Thank you very.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
and again my apologies if you do
not have the amendment is been
work on.
Last evening and I believe that
it was sent out to our.
Earlier today.
If it's not available we did
explain it but
For you then at least you have
that particular language.
Been explained in the course
again my apologies of the
amendments not available.
It.
I checked with the committee
secretary and our analysts and
none of the seen it so.
Simmons Mr chairman
Will proceed to according to the
way that you feel would be the
best direction at this time.
Chairman Sir.
Mr without having the amendment
less it's just a very small
technical amendment it would be
almost impossible for us to look
at it.
Yes.
Laney is trying to.
See if she can the.
Find the amendment.
So Mister chairman.
Senator so I wonder if it would
be possible at just to
Set aside just maybe go through
the next bill and then swing
back around and and then we'll
know what the amendment if it's
too technical or not.
Maybe we could find out I hate
to think to send this down the
road the other day if there's
any way to.
It was sent and that's.
One of the confusing things
about this because we we think
our amendments are getting there
and then we we found out they're
not so I don't know what you
want to do.
I will go ahead and moved to
Senate bill one fifty eight if
they don't have the amendment
which receive the sponsor.
That we can circle back to a one
on one fifty three.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
and I I really appreciate the
suggestion moving on to Senate
bill one fifty eight I believe.
This move to one fifty eight now
and it will circle back thank
you very much and what I was
doing was I was calling to check
on the amendment to see
its location so Mister chairman
of course of members of the
Senate Committee and as we move
forward
and this is Senate bill one
fifty eight makes an
appropriation of the workforce
solutions department job
readiness programs for youth and
adults and this senescence makes
an appropriation from the
general fund to the workforce
solutions department in the
amount of five hundred seventy
five thousand dollars and as we
move forward several of the
issues that continue to surface
with workforce solutions.
if all around the fact as we
move forward how are we going to
train are you and so within that
so what it will do is it would
strengthen the resources
available to provide for you
reading this program so within
and being overseen by the work
workforce solutions department
that's in essence what this does
Mr chairman members of the
committee.
Thank you you have any expert
witnesses Mr chairman members of
the committee I do not I don't
know if secretary mccamley is
on board listening if not at
this point I I do not.
Okay thank you Senator Campos so
we'll go to the audience to have
anybody.
Well for a public comment.
First one twenty eight I did not
receive anyone who wishes to
speak in opposition is there
anyone here in the meeting with
us and wishes to speak in
opposition at this time.
When times were members of the
public who wish to speak in
opposition.
Thank you very much we will now
move on to statements of support
and we will hear from Mister
Rogers Greer Mr grant are you
available.
One more time for Mister Roger
career.
Okay are there any members of
the public who wish to make
comments in support that are in
the room at this time.
Mr Ruben Bach I did you want to
make a statement.
Yes ma'am is this on the.
In those bills one this two
sixty eight in we're doing
Senate bill one fifty eight at
this time did you want.
Did you want to make a statement
for for Senate bill one fifty
eight.
Okay no problem.
Are there any other members of
the public who wish to make a
statement at this time.
Thank you very much this
concludes public statements for
Senate bill one fifty eight.
Okay thank you we will now move
to the the committee.
For any questions so I have
Senator Hamblen.
Thank you Mr chair and and the
Senator Campos for bringing this
forward did did Senator did
secretary mccamley I'm in on
this at all did he have any
input on this.
Really appreciate the the
question Kris Mr chairman
Senator Hamblen in terms of his
direct communication the only
thing that we talked about was
that I would have this bill
introduced it's something that
I've I continue to work on and
with in these youth and adult
programs workforce solutions
over the years.
As we have worked closely with
colleges and universities are to
deal with it but again to go
back to the.
Response he and I did not talk
about
the bill itself and the amount
that you are.
Requests if I may just to go
back in terms of the.
Process for this if this make
this out of this committee are
any of the resources that would
be considered for this program
would go directly to workforce
solutions and that's something
that secretary mccamley and I
have talked about in the past in
terms of the resources that
would be available for these our
job readiness programs thank you
very much Mr chairman thank you
senator Ben.
Thank you now we'll go to.
Both the Senator haven't used to
have the floor.
Thank you Mr chair you.
Okay thank you over to Senator
Hickey in an Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman for
Senator Campos surveying this.
Or I'm I'm trying to understand
a little bit more so this would
In terms of workforce solutions
with this go to like boot camps
setting those up and helping
fund them and helping people if
they had to actually go
somewhere for the boot camp of
the training whatever that might
be
or the tuition how would it be
you is that sorry bout my
ignorance on this but I'm still
learning thank you thank you
very much Mr chairman of course
Senator Hickey and turns up the
our job readiness programs that
are available as an example with
one of our colleges if there
would be an individual who would
like to become and and just talk
about a vocational program a
carpenter then the resources
would be available because the
individual would probably have
to leave their employment would
not be employed but they would
qualify them for
a stipend and resources in order
for them to be trained for that
particular area and so what
would happen they would work
with workforce solutions are as
an example to the location of
program and from there that the
resources would be used as a
stipend.
Be used for retraining could be
used for the first job but
whatever it is it's to prepare
them for or employment so that
in essence is what the resources
are used for thank you Mr
chairman thank Senator.
Mr Chairman if I might just do a
quick.
Follow up question maybe that
real quick but pretty quick the
Senator Campos Mr chairman
the I know from from a number of
entrepreneurs and and tech
startup folks that they are just
dying for people who are trained
as analysts
are software engineers
And the
and and they're just not finding
and because there I mean I know
we've got a great community
college but I do know that there
are both campuses do that these
people can move into if fifty
sixty seventy thousand dollar
jobs with this with with a high
school education and what the
both camper maybe they get the a
a degree and and I spent a long
time with have the the CNN Tracy
Collins hearing about it so
I'm gathering the this is that
this is the type of activity
that would go forward because of
the start ups can get out of
their starting phase and get
into the founded the round of
funding our seed round they can
become you know a moderately
sized businesses are just twenty
one is one that was recently in
the paper that's growing by
leaps and bounds we help them
get into the healthcare area so
if I'm understanding you
correctly with the air and
enhancement that really would
help move the state forward and
and I correct in that
assumption.
Can half of thank you very much
Mr chairman Senator Hickey
you're correct in essence as we
move forward and that another
example is the G. C. working
with the
associated general contractors
through what we've done is we've
been able to work with training
people in the area of
construction particularly with a
large
housing within the Albuquerque
area the apartments and homes
are going up and so the training
would occur individuals would be
compensated for that and then
they would go on to be hired by
companies and from there of be
able to make a viable living so
in essence it's the same thing
in health care R. as in the
other areas but that that is the
impetus of not only the use of
the resources resources will go
to workforce solutions in order
to that thank.
Thank you Senator Campos and Mr
chair
try getting a plumber.
These days
we haven't grow shortage and so
this I mean it and and that's a
great job so I again commend you
not only in the the.
Knowledge Jerry if that in the
skills area that's it's been of
the I think it's really a great
help to the state thank you
Senator Campos and thank you
health centers and Mr chair for
allowing me to go into that the
observation thank you thank you
Mr chairman thank you senator.
Thank you Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman sort of
the
With the.
Mister chairman Senator
This is interesting Senator
concept
how much is in the house bill
two right now for this this type
of project.
Thank you very much Mr Chris
senator Graham for.
Okay line item and so I don't
believe that we have any of
these resources in house bill
two right now
for this specific program.
Mister chairman Senator I will
tell you Senator Hickey S.
actually Senator my questions
and and I will join him and and
talking about how important the
trades skills are it is one of
my focuses and has been up here
for several years and so I
actually really appreciate
having someone else's is up here
joining me in those because we
really need to work on things
like plumbing electrical those
trades that we just have a
massive shortage of in our in
our state is amazing how much of
a shortage we have I talked to a
plumbing companies electrical
companies all these companies
all the time HVAC that they
can not get enough people that
are qualified to work in those
fields so is that what this is
geared towards is that what this
is working towards getting these
trade skills trying to.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
Brandt this is exactly what
these resources are.
I would be used for regardless
of whether it would be to train
someone in the area of academics
Care someone who would like to
become
proficient one of the trades
those resources would be used to
assist that individual so that
the people to go to school
become certified or become
train with a with a degree and
then from there get into the
world of work and it would be
done with a supervised program
through the workforce solutions
in the past we have appropriated
resources into work point tions
they have overseen the guidance
of these programs the stipends
for these programs and then
lastly once the individual has
been certified it's also for the
the placement of individuals and
so we work with various programs
over the years the unfortunate
aspect particularly now through
COVID
of the the focus concentration
resources as the non employment
and dealing directly with those
type of issues and programs so
this is an important component
if we're able to.
Yes the salon and secure some
resources workforce solutions
are job readiness program.
Thank you Mr chairman etcetera
so in your in the bill.
This very specific
appropriations bill addressing
thousand times within your bill
it talks about job readiness
programs is that the find
anywhere workforce solutions
already so we can kind of look
at what that would actually go
to do they have a program here
actually funding currently where
this money would go into or how
does that work.
I appreciate that Mr chairman
thank you senator Brandt I do
not have the.
The definition but in essence
what happens is that is a
coordinated effort to ensure
that as an example a certified
program and we've used for CNN
as an example would be used as
the credentialing program and
then from there there would be a
stipend that would be paid to
the student in order to go and
go through the readiness program
that could be an adult learner
or are you right out of high
school within the definition
itself I don't have that with me
but I would do everything
possible to get that to you as
soon as I can
if this bill continues to move
along it doesn't it's still like
to go ahead and get not only the
definition but some of the
historical data that we've used
in the past to develop these
programs.
Mister chairman Senator I guess
by I I guess my question is is
this those this program already
exist that we're trying to put
money into so we can look at
what the program actually offers
or is this a new program that
you're trying to develop because
it just never says an
appropriation bill right and so
Mister chairman Senator Brandt
it's an existing model.
Within that however of the
resources coming directly from
the state
Have been there and some years
other years they haven't I I
just don't know the exact amount
that would be available for the
existing program that's
something that I can get for
you.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
Sir that would be greatly
appreciated to know for trying
to expand the program we're just
trying to keep it alive I think
would be very helpful Mr
chairman I wish I knew about
this program yesterday because
I've already done my junior
money but this looks like a very
good place you could put some of
your junior money.
And maybe some could join us
although we're supposed to have
that in you know at five o'clock
in more forty five minutes away
so maybe a little bit late but
that's something that that I
would have been interested in
using some of my junior money to
fund a program like this if I
had all the details of the
program so did you put any of
your during your money into this
thank you very much Mr chairman
Senator Brandt I did not
I am applying resources to other
like small business
Other areas that
with the directly with health as
an example
some of the
use clinics that are around the
state and so within that tribe
and to address the priorities
that I see today of hello.
Of course our the support for
programs like this but in their
areas as well which should be
small business.
So I I have not faced any
resources there right now but
we'll keep looking for those
dollars that are going to be
coming in from the federal level
are just people know the.
Chief executive will have access
to discretion the use of some of
the public money that will be
coming in and if this is
possible this would be one of
the strengthening arms of making
sure that we do have young
people and adults ready to go
into programs
to create if you will that job
readiness thank you Mr chair
Senator grant thank you Mr
chairman thank Sir Campos really
appreciate a lot of the idea I
like to know a little bit more
about what already exists if
it's just something we need to
get more money into seems like
that's kind of a question that's
kind of out there still what
we're doing currently in this
area and what we can fund more
Mr chairman I do have a the
procedural question for you if
you have if you might be able
to.
Mr chairman and if I may essay I
just there was an afterthought
that I can also include that
before the following question.
Absolutely Mr chair problems
what one of the one of the
things that I keep hearing and
the discussion is that what
we're doing is we're resources
or those that are most in need
but if reality of what we
getting in return and so within
that thought that came to mind
is that through these programmes
for we get in return will be
trained individuals for able to
go to the World War and receive
in my opinion good salaries so
again I apologize but I wanted
to reflect that within the
conversation.
Yes that's been one of the
questions as we received if you
will stimulus resources and
running for
Ointment and other aspects their
effectiveness for COVID
nineteen.
Thank you Mr chairman that's
that's a great point Senator
that maybe somewhere that some
of the cares money can be used
Mr Chairman you have a minute to
ask answer procedural questions
at the center Mr Chairman Sir I
Mr chairman I've been a little
bit confused on whether or not
we're taking action on these
bills it's appropriation bill
which bills are we holding in
committee in which bills are we
moving forward.
Of all.
This one to provide.
Goes to finance and the ones
that we are.
Holding or those bills that
either or given tax credit or
anything with the budget so this
is an appropriation so we will
take action on this one.
Thank you Mr chairman pursuit
that.
Okay Senator used to have the
floors are.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
very much okay thank you senator
Byrd one hundred go to senator
bill of a Sanchez and then
Hamblen what a second time.
Just a quick question Mr chair
of Senator Campos
In these programs is it for the
user this is after out of high
school and then you go to the
program and then into the work
force.
another very good question is we
deal directly with the it is for
are you as an example if there
is
A seventeen year old who has
dropped out of high school but I
would like to enroll in a
vocational program and one of
our community colleges then that
person would qualify the idea of
the program itself is to ensure
that those individuals who are
not in school or who are
currently
Unemployed or are looking to to
make a change in their career
they would be allowed and and
and able then to qualify not
only for the program would be it
also be helped if you will with
the resources so that they would
be able to hopefully be service
program for that receive a
degree.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Mr chair Senator Campos thank
you for that.
Very good thank you thank you
Sir.
Senator Hamblen.
Thank you Mr chair of this is
actually just more of a comment
and work that I've done through
doing in a community college I
am of the similar Fund Senator
Brandt and that the trade jobs
are really important right now
we're going to see that a whole
lot more and actually there's a
study that I'll get you Senator
Campos that my colleague Tracey
Bryan at the Bridge of Southern
New Mexico showed that there is
a higher return on investment
with the trade jobs right now
I'm because they're so important
and so needed and so I I'm
excited about this opportunity
in this legislation and I'll get
that information to you sometime
in the next couple of days.
Thank you Mr chair thank Senator
Hamblen and just as a follow up
comment from a Mister chair I
really appreciate that because
as we continue to prepare if you
will the next generation of
employers and employees
this in itself is an incentive
and so it's it's crucial in my
opinion as we go forward
particularly as for dealing with
the federal resources will be
coming in as well as the state
dollars we do have available for
purpose of that would service
people that are being but
they're going to school and
hopefully that in the end would
provide a a career that they
love thank you.
Thank you Senator Campos I don't
see any other.
Hands up from the committee so
what is a pledge of the
committee.
For the past Mr chair the motion
for the past as COVID seconds.
Second by it was a common.
Senator Corman okay lane please
call roll.
Your costs are
I got a.
The grant.
How are your your.
Yes.
I don't have
any circle Senator requests be
able to do our.
Yes senator Tom in your Mike is
hot.
Senator Hickey.
Yes.
Thank you.
Yes.
Senator Kernan.
Yes senator Sanchez.
Right yes.
Senator Clemente.
All.
Yes Senator Wirth.
Senator to do is out Senator
Shendo returned.
It's regarding my vote is my
vote is yes Senator Shendo yes.
He can.
Not to.
Nine two two two excuse.
Okay excuse content sorry.
Okay Senator of Campos you have
a ten to one.
I just want to.
Mr chair.
But Senator Kernan thank you
very much and it's my
understanding that
agency requests received the
amendment and that and I guess
my concern.
K. all of these are gonna have
amendments and subs and things
as we go through this process
and I know the rules are are
that we need to get those sent
twenty four hours before and I'm
not quite sure what the process
is it's my understanding that
into the bills drafted or maybe
the Sanchez send that in by
email your secretaries and and
so I just think we need to make
sure that
I get so many emails and I'm
sure that that the secretaries
to as well and sometimes these
things just get lost in the
certainly not.
Being critical of anyone that we
just need to make sure that.
That.
I guess the Sanchez it's our
responsibility to invest need to
call and make sure that the
products that.
This is just one of the things
that that we're gonna have to
deal with going forward but it's
my understanding that the email
has arrived with the amendment
for the previous bill and I just
wondered if it would be
permissible for that to be sure
on the screen or what whatever
we needed with regard to that
bill so we can move forward or
be heard at least thank you.
Okay thank you of the Senator
Kernan yeah we
we would got the copy from the
Legislative Council they were
drafted last night in the in the
the twenty four hour of
their lines so but we do have a
copy in the I asked the the
Meister to put it on the screen
when we get back to that bill I
think one of the things that we
probably should do is you know
if we know the bill has gotten
amendment probably even telling
me or text me.
so that lease I can inform our
secretary to take a in all watch
out for at least I can us so for
because we're getting tons of
email I I understand all of us
or and and and they can get lost
but the.
Well it certainly secretary
state agency and we are post
that on the screen thank.
So we will go back to of Senate
Bill well one fifty three and we
have the amendment posted in
the.
if we can have the of someone
moved amendment for discussion
purposes.
The amendment for discussion
purposes okay senator Gary of
Kernan thank you so we do have a
motion for discussion purposes
so go ahead of Senator Campos
explain your amendment tell us
what.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
of course members of the
committee.
I can hear it I'm not hearing.
I don't like this.
Mr Chairman is it okay to
proceed go ahead proceed I'm I'm
sorry thank you thank you very
much Mr chair members of the
committee.
In essence in a minute if I
admitted again defer to to Jeff
and few minutes but in essence
what this does is it does create
if you will
the equity opportunity for all
of our race tracks and to
participate in this particular
our credit if if this bill which
were to pass and if I may again
Justin privative Mr chair
members of the committee again
deferred to Mister Jeff true to
Talk a little bit about what
this ammendment does and if you
would also Jeff maybe talk a
little bit about how we've been
able to work with the other
tracks in order to come up with
this compromise amendment thank
you.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Senator Campos said I appreciate
the opportunity.
Again this ammendment.
Is meant to open the available
tax credit to all five
racetracks again there are five
racetracks in the state
collectively these five
racetracks with their casinos
there six hundred slot casinos
there.
Putting in over sixty million
dollars a year directly in state
tax revenue from those
facilities.
We're asking with the amendment
to not restrict the tax credit
to the two smaller tracks
because previously we had a cap
of twenty five million in gross
gaming revenue we've taken the
gross gaming revenue cap off of
this bill so that all I racinos
can invest in their properties
to remain competitive to
overcome this this COVID problem
that we're having and then be
able to.
Again be the business drivers
that that they are in their
communities we work with all I
Racetrack operators racino
operators if you will and we
have agreement that everyone of
us needs this and if I could.
the issue is that.
There are no state funds for
these racing businesses there
are no federal funds for these
racing to businesses and given
the volume of of money that
these I businesses contribute to
the state we are
we're asking for this tax credit
to be available to us Mr
Chairman.
Thank you Mr chairman that in
essence is what the amendment
that was thank you.
Thank you.
So
We have a motion and and so they
will go ahead in a.
Take action on the amendment.
The secretary just stepped out.
With this any place for a second
we were getting this echo in
this chamber so we're.
Trying to fix that.
Senator
Padilla.
What's the questions on the
number.
I'm sorry what yeah we have
questions go ahead I'm sorry.
We're discussion.
Okay so thank you and so to the
sponsor
R. Sanchez.
I think I heard that yes this is
gonna be positive or this is
going to allow for this
mechanism to work for all.
Tracks and racinos and and if
they can explain the difference
in the two terms or.
but is it would anybody be
excluded from this mechanism to
bring down this additional
revenue I thank you very much Mr
chairman center for the I'm
going to begin it will not
exclude any of the five
racetracks if I may defer to
Mister true to give
an explanation in terms of.
Of the this the terms racinos
and race tracks if I may do that
Mr chairman I appreciate it
thank you.
Then per se Mr chairman.
I don't know that the chairman
can hear us.
Know what was question sorry.
I thank you very much Mr
chairman
I I indicated that this would be
treating all I racetracks equal
or inequity if you will and the
other
Was tied to that
what is the definition or how do
you explain racinos and race
tracks and at this time I'd like
to defer to Mister true
for that explanation for me yes
yes go ahead thank you thank you
Mr chairman and and senator
patina for the question.
Racetrack casinos is we combine
those terms to call them racinos
so there I racetrack licensees
and there are five racetrack
casino licensees so there I
racinos it's only I introduce in
the state.
I hope that answers your
question well it does Mr
chairman and senator Campos so I
I believe that the Albuquerque
racetrack right it is that
considered a racing on the state
fairgrounds.
Mr Chairman.
Please put please proceed I'm
sorry my apologies Mister
chairman Senator Padilla yes Sir
Albuquerque is a racetrack and
casino therefore they are
determined they receive mail
because we're if I could.
A little bit because we have two
different regulatory bodies that
oversee our primary businesses
racing and gaming we've got the
New Mexico gaming control board
we've got the New Mexico racing
Commission sometimes depending
on the body that we're speaking
to
we use different terms but these
are I introduce each have these
two different licenses.
And so I think that you know Mr
chairman and senator Campos I
don't know Senator Campos if
you're aware of this but I did
meet with that Mr true and his
government lobbyist before the
we came here not today but in
the past couple of weeks and I
think there was some some
uneasiness by the folks that
were similar to the Albuquerque
track can you talk about that a
little bit and has that been
resolved where is that I have
not heard anything else beyond
beyond that that conversation I
had with you.
First of all if I may thank you
Mr chairman center for the in
terms of not the conversation
but in terms of the issue in
terms of how the racetracks
would be treated as we not only
introduced the bill but as we
move forward the intent has been
how we can bring people to the
table to work on a consensus
issue in the back and I'd like
to defer again to Mr true to our
lab right in terms of the
conversations that have taken
place.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Padilla.
The initial introduction of the
bill follow the pattern that we
had introduced follow the
pattern of the bill which would
introduce in previous sessions
and so the original intent was
that the two smaller tracks
being read also in Farmington in
those two tracks being
identified because of.
The.
We had a cap in the bill as we
discussed in the amendment there
was a cap in the bill that a
a receipt which earned less than
twenty five million annually in
gross gaming revenues would be
the tracks that were eligible
for the capital improvement
gaming tax credit.
Again.
Speaking to the other racetrack
managers we recognize that we're
all hurting and we're all in the
same position with the inability
to access federal or state funds
to deal with our businesses so
this is this ammendment is the
result of collaboration in the
industry on this bill and others
and I would
I would add that I believe all I
racinos and the horsemen's
organizations or supportive of
this measure because of what it
will do for our business and for
the state Mr Chairman.
Well thank you I'm still I'm
still trying to to get my hands
around
Who are we creating winners and
losers here I guess that's I'm
just gonna put it out there like
that Mr Chairman because I'm I'm
very curious because some of
these tracks they seem to to to
be thriving and flourishing and
others seem to be having a
little bit of our time and so
I'm trying to figure out where
where this ammendment affects
all of these folks do this type
of business here in New Mexico.
And I don't want to answer that
Senator Campos or if you want to
just.
Mr chairman etcetera but if I
can begin with the amendment I
believe it creates winners in a
situation where people within
all our communities as they are
they're dealing directly with
the racinos and when I say that
there are people that will
travel to one of the destination
points find that the racinos are
having difficulties and as a
result it has a an adverse
effect across the board on
tourism on the economy and on
the future of for horse racing
and
Or a circus you know state with
the amendment and working
closely with the I racetracks
what it does because it does
have the opportunity for these
racetracks and to make an
investment in their future what
it does is it enhances the
economy in the communities where
the racinos are located so my
response would be that it
creates winners with are all
five of our staff which means
that are racinos or if you will
our racing industry.
So does this Armstrong
conversely yes this negatively
affect any of the groups in New
Mexico the do this type of work.
Mr chair and senator by the if I
may I would like to defer to Mr
true who is in the industry and
if there is anyone else to.
He has available grant wishes to
comment because I believe that
that is the question we're
trying to assist.
People in the private sector to
ensure that they to participate
in a growing economy and so that
some of the concerns that would
bring forward with this
particular tax credit this
before you so if I may Mister
chair just in privative asco Mr
true to respond.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator today at one thing in
common that all five of these
racetracks have our horses.
Thousands of horses and
thousands of people which depend
on these racetracks to be an
operation to have safe racing
Services to have veterinary
services available to be able to
invest on going in their
properties to remain competitive
with the with the growing market
place there are no losers as I
see it to user terminology all
five tracks can invest in
racetrack safety and you know in
the painting their facility in
adding amenities for customers
we all drive tourism to a great
degree and specifically right
so.
More than fifty percent of the
attendees at Rio dosa downs come
from out of state they drive the
tourism economy of central New
Mexico similarly Albuquerque
Farmington Hobbs Sunland park
each of them drive tourism and
the the volume of money that we
put into the state the economic
impact of the business to the
state demands that we continue
to invest in our properties we
are investing I can promise you
that but given the last twelve
months of could shut down our
facilities we're gonna be years
before we're able to get back to
that level of investment.
We're looking for those this
collective industry is asking
the collective state to
participate in our growth post
comment Mr chairman and senator.
Thank you I think you've heard
enough up to this point I'm
gonna keep listening I think
there's others that may have
questions on the amendment or
comments thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you senator of Senator
Kernan.
Thank you very much Mr chair and
senator and and I'm gonna speak
to the amendment first and then
I would like to speak to the
bill that this amendment
actually brings in the we're
seeing no in my home town C.
part but I will tell you even if
this amendment or not on the
bill I would support the bill
but I am pleased to see the
amendment because I think all
the receiving those have
suffered greatly over the last
year and I don't know that
people are aware of the.
The maintenance is so critical
not only for the people that
attend these races but for the
courses themselves when you
cannot maintain the racetracks
which are very expensive to
maintain are the stalls.
It's very difficult to get this
industry moving again I know
that.
The fact that they are dormant
bank been dormant for over here
we lost our racing season for
the most part in December
November well October through
December it's just been a
disastrous thing for the racing
industry
that by including all the they
were seen as I think that I
think that is a fair thing to do
because they all have been shut
down in the same manner they all
have expenses that to cover the
safety issues and so I I really
do support the amendment but
should the amendment failed I
would still support the bill
because I do know even the
smaller receive notes that that
probably are struggling at a
greater rate than that maybe the
others but certainly are
suspension down of that revenue
we get most of our revenue from
Texas I would say it would be
even more than fifty percent
probably closer to eighty
percent that
this is critical for this
industry they're not getting
help anywhere else and so that's
up to speak in favor of the
amendment but even if it doesn't
pass a certainly speak in
private.
Okay thank you senator I have a
passionate breaks.
Thank you Mr chair and and
Senator Campos at the amendment
the.
Very first one item one talks
about striking shall and
inserting may.
And and senator I guess I'm as I
look at it.
Given the department discretion
to.
To allow this tax credit
Because I don't I'm not sure I
understand the the reasoning
that to change their shelf so
Mr chairman and and senator
could you explain the the change
to may because.
I I'm just not sure I get that I
don't I don't know why we needed
to do that.
Thank you very much Mr chair and
I'd like to defer again to Mr
true and the reason for that
because I was not in on the
discussions when it came
directly to to make that change
and then from there I can offer
if you will just part of what I
believe why that change occurred
if I may Mister chair.
Yes go ahead.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator rex for the question
your the the change from shall
to may was recommended by the
legislative analyst said almost
exactly that I don't have that.
As run from the at the moment
but she said something that the
analyst said something along the
lines of it does not give the
TRD discretion and therefore it
should say may.
Okay and and Mr chair Senator
and and Mr true I that's kind of
what what I get but I don't know
that it is the intent of the
bill to give the tax and Rev
Department discretion on whether
to whether or not to give you
the credit
But we have I think yeah I think
what we ought to do is we ought
to go ahead move the amendment
get it and then if that needs to
be dealt with change we can
change it down that down the
road but I'm I'm kind of
concerned about that and I I
just I don't see why really we
need to to make that change but
you know there are lawyers in
the Senate that are certainly
more cable than I am and I just
would the.
I struggle with that particular
change but are Mr Mr chair have
we moved the amendment we have
the the motion of the motion was
made for discussion purposes
only we haven't taken action on
the amendment itself.
Okay do we do we need any other
other motion to approve the
amendment or are we at that
point it well we're we're having
a discussion on the amendment
and so once that's done been
will take action on the
amendment.
Okay Mister chair thank you and
and thank you senator and an
expert witness.
Okay is there any opposition to
the amendment as presented.
Mister chairman Senator Brandt I
would have to vote no on the
amount.
Okay we are so certain of.
Nine can you to take role on the
amendment please yes Senator
Brandt no Senator Griggs.
Yes Senator Hamblen.
Senator Hickey yes Senator how
to meal yes Senator Kernan yes
senator Sanchez.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator Tallman.
Senator Tallman.
Senator Wirth.
But yet when they have the
amendment I can't do my speed
work.
Senator Padilla.
Yes the amendment.
Senator Shendo.
Yes of the members.
Seven yes one no and three
excuse.
Okay Senator you have an amended
bill of.
You know we're we're we'll go
back on the bill but I I should
have a I know that this is
Senator Campos I probably should
have stated this earlier that
set all the bills that have
fiscal impact on our budget
because we're looking at I think
based on the FIR is about a
seven point five million dollar
a tax credit.
That we're we don't take actions
on those bills with us hold them
over and then hopefully at some
point we could put a package
together so I just wanted to to
to.
To explain that to you and so we
can have that discussion and
debate on the bill but we're not
going to take any action
tonight.
Okay.
Senator Campos he still there.
Can you can you hear me.
yes I can I can.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
I fully understand and as you
deal directly with tax credits
and other issues as you move
forward I know that you're going
to continue to deal with them as
we do and finance for going to
be responsible deal with a
balanced budget most importantly
we're going to deal with those
issues that in a positive way
will affect the economy and of
course the people of the great
state of New Mexico so again
thank you very much for your
consideration as we move forward
thank you Mr chair members of
the committee.
Go ahead senator Sanchez we are
now on the bill so Senator
Sanchez and out of Senator
Brandt.
I don't have a comment on the
bill when you have the amendment
out I can't Fund I'll do my mute
speaker so I couldn't vote I try
to jump on Griggs is computer
but you guys insinuating.
So did you vote yes or no.
Yes the amendment but if you.
The
cast but I couldn't oh okay yes.
Wait a minute.
This bill is with your right
hand and the Google is with your
left hand so we have to figure
that hand so so so so looking
forward to that happens just let
me know.
Senator Brandt.
Mr chairman thank you Anna and
maybe the reaction should add a
thumbs up and thumbs down I know
we have the thumbs up but you
maybe we could just have a
thumbs down added to that and
then we can just vote that way
So thank you Mr chairman and so
I've got I've got some
reservations Senator Campos and
help me understand
and and Sir current please
forgive me for what I'm about to
say I love you dearly but help
me understand why government
should subsidize gambling.
I thank you very much Mr
chairman thank you Senator
Brandt.
So the question.
So.
Reality as we move forward.
well so the lights went.
You Like router Defense behind
to their Senator.
Give it to the doctor.
it would only happen to us as
we're going through this bill
not just.
where we are.
This is yours yeah I I've I've
tried to do that before and I'll
have to get up but I do respect
to the committee on.
so Mister chair where Senator
Brandt I I don't consider.
Be a method of subsidizing
if you were.
Gambling Racine.
What I do consider this to be
just an economic stimulus.
In that building and so as we
continue to deal with.
An industry we have fought over
the years to keep safe.
Be able to offer local
employment offer opportunity for
people to gather
but in reality what we're
looking for is if people are
going to invest within their
community to have something like
this to follow the regulatory
issues.
I believe that this is something
that we can work hand in hand
with and so again I would just
say it this way I've never put a
coin in the
The machine I have ridden horses
in fact at Riyadh also downs
many years ago working with our
D. and John Hubbard in the whole
process are working with the
agricultural industry and so
many others we worked to keep
the viability of this race track
going and the community of the
the communities of the area of
the roof they re investment
means jobs money for
infrastructure and most
importantly it means a
relationship
with with government so again I
look at this as a an economic
incentive that's the perception
that I have been Mr chair of
course and I would the vote to
defer to whoever else wishes to
comment in terms of that
particular response.
Mr chairman Sir I think your
response is fine I actually have
put money in machines I have
that on the forces I have no
problem with doing that I just
struggle with us using taxpayer
dollars to subsidize and and I I
I'm.
I think this would be a struggle
for me going back to my
community to say that I was
willing to use our tax dollars
to subsidize this kind of an
industry
I I get the whole idea of how
many jobs it produces I I get
the idea of all the connections
with Ag the that go into this
industry
I think the fact that they've
become ill.
Not just race tracks that they
become casinos
really concerns me I I don't
know maybe some other states
subsidize their casinos I don't
think that they do.
it it it's just it's one of
those areas that I struggle
and I know they're trying to
compete with other casinos
throughout the state the trying
to find a way to survive and I
get all of that but I just I
struggle with putting a one half
million dollars a year.
for five years into subsidizing
this industry to help us survive
Mr chairman Senator are they
able to were they able to get
PPE funding was able to get any
of the loan programs or the
grant programs that we had out
there.
Mr chairman if I may I'd like to
defer to Mister true because my.
Act
they have not been able to
secure those resources unless
let's say for example they do
have that relationship with the
lending institution and they've
gone to to that institution and
file the proper paperwork but I
don't have that response or that
answer but again if I can defer
to Mister chair out of like to
do that the Great thank you was
okay with you Mr.
Mr chairman Mr chairman before
we go to Mr true I I sincerely
apologize ripping did you say
earlier we're not gonna vote on
this bill yes we can hold it
over like with other because
it's got a.
The seven point million dollar
tax credit in I just wanted to
double check on that thank you
Senator Campos thank you Mr trip
Mr Chairman I'm gonna run over
to finance I'll come right back
thank you thank you.
So Mister go ahead Mr chairman
thank you and that Senator
Brandt thank you for the
question.
The characterization of
subsidizing gambling I think
ignores the fact that we pay a
twenty six percent tax on our
gross gaming revenues that's
compared to tribal casinos which
a third of that at their maximum
right.
Secondly.
The horse racing industry
generates more than eight
hundred million dollars annually
the the racino and racing
industry generates eight hundred
thirty eight million dollars
annually the Economic.
And supports thirteen thousand
jobs when we talk about
investing.
Smith and I'll talk about right
us downs the property that I
operate when we invest in our
property that means that I'm
hiring the trucking company down
the road to bring the asphalt to
improve the roads it means I'm
buying from the local hardware
store it means I'm hiring more
people normally reduces downs
which is a seasonal we were all
seasonal businesses in the sense
that we only run live for a
small portion of the year in our
casinos run year round we
normally get rid us of downs
will have as many as three
hundred fifty employees in the
summer.
The rest of the year will carry
around one hundred twenty.
The other racetracks care even
more because right those is one
of the smaller ones because
we've got to casinos within the
tribal because within five miles
of this we're the lowest on the
run in terms of Janet Reno what
we generate with the collective
racino industry puts more than
sixty million dollars a year in
direct taxes in addition to that
affect and we've done that for a
long long time more than a
decade so if you you just look
at the last ten years racinos
have generated six hundred
million dollars in direct tax
revenues to the state we're only
asking for a limited amount of
time to take a limited amount of
that money and invest in our
properties that have by state
mandate been shut down since
March of last year and remain
shut down now I would again say
that.
You know we drive tourism we
drive Aggie Kanemi and and
whether you like gambling or
dislike gambling or the concepts
of it it's a business that is
very active in the state while
the tribal casinos have fourteen
or fifteen locations and
generate seventy something
million dollars in tax revenue
to the state through the revenue
sharing program they've also
been given tens of millions of
dollars by the federal
government.
They have also run they're
currently operating these tribal
casinos well we're Sir well
we're currently shut down and so
finally I would close with your
question about the PPP we read
also downs and I'm pretty
certain the other state as well
we applied for and read also
received a PPP loan last spring
when this thing first started
with the anticipation that as
promised those PPP loans would
be forgiven and then would
become requests we found out in
November in fact those loans are
going to be forgiven further the
state's.
allocation for economic recovery
does not apply to racetracks
because we all have more than a
hundred fifty employees I don't
find any.
State money federal money grants
cares Act funding there's none
of that available to us.
And.
We're simply looking for a way
to try and recover from this
year long shut down and recover
a business that we believe is
not only culturally significant
but certainly economically
significant to the state of New
Mexico I.
This is not going to this is
going to be paid back in in
dividends to the state currently
so again thank you Senator
Brandt for the question and and.
Chairman Gendo.
Mr Chairman Mr chair that was
very helpful thank you very much
that's that help explain that
for me and that's that's what I
need so just trying to wrap my
mind around it trying to figure
out how that was working didn't
realize you guys put so much
into the tax revenue of the
state so it sounds like that
that would with the the revenue
would still come into the state
if we can ever get you back re
opened
as you probably are well aware I
think it's ridiculous that you
were ever closed
and think it's ridiculous that
you haven't been allowed to read
be reopened yet we look around
the country in the of statistics
clearly show that whether we
close down businesses are not it
really hasn't affected the
number of cases for comment so
you should be reopened now and
really I think that's what you
really with Representative would
rather have a tax credit is
you'd like to get re opened so
that you can do your business so
that you can contribute to the
economy and so I do appreciate
that and that that helped me
immensely so thank you very
much.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator Senator Kernan.
Well thank you very much and I
do appreciate at.
The response from Mr true and
and senator brand I am glad that
you heard that as well and and
also we won the second that we
are you know the.
We expect gap to the policy of
accepting were seen as in the
state of New Mexico and
certainly not everyone agrees
with that but there could be
people that disagree with that
of supporting you know the
restaurants that serve alcohol I
mean we could go down that to as
well and talk about that but I
think that Mr true it's very
clear and the contribution that
are received us back to the
state of New Mexico and you know
it's so it's important to
receive all of those revenue
Steven from our tribal casinos
that's an important part of the
revenue that we receive as well
so but Mr chair on thank did we
skip public comment on the bill
because we won't have that
opportunity I don't believe when
we come circle back around to to
vote on all of the so do we miss
public comment up I I on the
bills thank you senator for
bringing that up you know what
this promotion we're having
little to I have to get my let
my secretary to go back into our
office because we can't you know
so anyway I yeah we ended up.
Not doing the public would be
able to circle back around and
allow for public comment on the
bill that we did for the
amendment yes I would like to do
that I'm sorry I think to get
that up yeah I was just thinking
about that too.
I don't so.
Well let me see here.
Okay I believe we so so we'll
circle back and let's go to
public comment of and of.
R. Taylor do we have of folks
for a public comment I believe
we I see some hands up.
For Senate bill one fifty three.
At this time I would like to
hear from Mr sorry from doctor
guy Clark Dr Clark go ahead.
One more time for doctor guy
Clark responded that ago and he
was our first to speak in
opposition.
Robson we started earlier he
left the room unfortunately.
Okay.
Dr.
If you could.
Yeah hang on it's on mute.
We can do that.
Okay I'm I'm doctor guy Clark
and gentleman to stop predatory
gambling New Mexico we are
strongly opposed to Senate bill
one fifty three but we don't
think racetrack should deserve
major tax breaks that up
spending productive businesses
don't receive your order just
lots and lots of businesses that
suffered under the pandemic some
of them have gone out of
business some whole industries
are just about gone the the
racetrack industry use a word
Lucien is not the only one that
suffered under this but right
now to only one to us for major
major subsidies and this is a
subsidy most of your work here
in ninety seven ninety eight for
the tracks lobbying lobbying law
that day to get slot machines
and they promised.
They promised that if they got
slot machines they would never
ask for subsidies again well
that promises been broken time
and time again that it's being
broken in two thousand twenty
one you know most businesses
most business transactions in
the community produce what's
called economic multiplier
effect meeting that money spent
for example in your grocery
store is used by the grocer
divide budget struggles of the
farmer they get set many uses of
that you too bye of fertilizer
it it just circulates through a
second.
Well
I'm sorry to report chip so
little time does she is actually
appropriate but of.
We need to look at this so with
a clear mind and understand that
that gambling is not a really
productive industry like most
businesses don't deserve of the
sort of of stimulus to sort of
Sorry to cut you off there Dr
Clark on your two minutes for up
and just so everyone knows the
seem to Madam forty to everyone
and their opposition or support.
are they hands I'm seeing right
now at this moment for people
who wish to speak in opposition.
Okay then we'll go ahead and
start with Mister Richard R. did
you want to speak in opposition
Sir.
No ma'am I'm sorry is up for
this bill so I will bring my
hand down until you all are
looking for proponents of the
bill thank you at.
No problem we will now go to Mr.
Of all the hands disappeared
okay.
One more time these are for
statements of opposition for
Senator one fifty three.
So if you are wishing to speak
in opposition please raise your
hand at this time.
Okay thank you so go ahead.
Yes good evening Mr chair and
members of the committee my name
is Becky Brooks and I am the
president of the Rideau so
valley chamber of commerce.
And I am in support of the tax
credits that would allow our
racetrack as well as the other
risks the nose.
The the funds to perhaps.
With the money back into our
track
I can only speak on behalf of
our track because that's what I
know and
Read also downs track maybe one
of the smallest in the state but
in our neck of the woods they
are one of the strongest
economic drivers.
Their financial well being
affects all of the businesses
and Lincoln County quite frankly
as well as some in the Otero
County
Our races run from Memorial Day
through Labor Day in the
tradition of coming to the races
amid does so has literally been
passed down through generations
of fans obviously with the
pandemic we were not allowed to
have fans and our races this
year and we don't play in twenty
twenty we don't know about
twenty twenty one.
Unfortunate health crisis has
put a serious financial burden
on our track and the tax credits
of this bill would provide would
be instrumental in helping in
critical elements of property
the property on and also it
would help improve the equine
and riders say thirty seconds
okay well I just want to thank
you all for your time and I want
you to know that all in all this
would give us an economic boost
at a time we need it most in
Lincoln County thank you very
much.
Thank you.
and just to clarify we were
trying to get statements of
opposition not statements of
support so just one more time is
there anyone in the room who
wishes to make a statement of
opposition that was not afforded
the opportunity.
Mr true I see you've just muted
yourself did you want to make a
statement opposition.
If you're saying Mr Trudeau I'm
a proponent of the bill thank
you okay just making sure I got
everybody will now move on to
statements of support.
So we'll go ahead and hear from
Mister Richard and hard go
ahead.
Thank you good afternoon Mister
chairman members of the
committee.
First I'd like to thank senator
Pete Campos for introducing.
Just be one fifty three my name
is Richard Ehrhardt the
executive director of the New
Mexico horsemen's association.
To our rooms Association is a
state registered five oh one C.
for not for profit the renewable
organization representing
approximately four thousand
racehorse owners and trainers
competing on our I New Mexico
racetracks.
Board of directors of the New
Mexico horsemen's association
stands in unanimous support of
SB one fifty three.
Under the bylaws of the New
Mexico horsemen's association
our duty includes the active
promotion promotion for me of
the horse racing industry in the
state of New Mexico which I will
note in concert with the
associated gaming represents the
third largest economic engine in
the state.
We're also tasked to institute
or aid in any movie that will
promote the safety and protect
the general welfare of its
members they're licensed
backstretch personnel and their
horses our equine athletes these
duties are clearly addressed
through the objective stated in
this bill and again New Mexico
horsemen's association strongly
supports and urges your support
of SB one fifty three thank you
very much thank you Mr Earnhardt
we will now go to Mr Scott
Scanlon go ahead Scott.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Scott Scanlon registered
lobbyist for Sunray park in
Farmington San Juan County and
Sunland park racetrack and
casino in someone park New
Mexico in Dona ana county I also
want to commend senator Ron
Griggs for remembering that it's
bow tie Thursday Mr chairman we
we both restricts stand in
support of this bill we think
Senator Campos for for
sponsoring it we we urgent
support I do I would like to
address one thing Mr chairman
and members I know Senator
Padilla was asking about the
term racino just it's it's
racinos merely a term it's not
found anywhere in statute the
correct term is racetrack casino
so nobody should be considered a
confused between what a
racetrack casino is and what a
racino is there really isn't
anything.
In statute called the racino the
racetrack casinos but anyway
that's just a little bit of
history thank you Mr chairman we
support the bill thank you.
Thank you Mr Scanlon we will now
move on to Mister mark brown.
Yes my name is mark brown I'm a
fairly new resident here of New
Mexico good everybody here to
have I serve on the New Mexico.
Our readers Association.
I also served as chairman of the
American Porsche Association
racing Committee and I serve on
the racial council.
My family and I we have raised
our run in different states for
over thirty years
Right right our business is a
big business it's a lot of
family businesses.
You know we we've spent hundreds
of thousands of dollars reading
right in some of the horses that
run racetrack and in this bill
what it does for us is not the
we're owners for trainers and
that is it what's the traction
that the we do business with
that we perform.
Former and for athletes because
state services state farm's and
it's not really a supplement I
wouldn't say it's more of an
investment in the in the state
reinvesting in a at eight are
race tracks reinvested the
committee should have supported
them.
Before I came here I work with
tax investments with in the act
just as a tractor sales and tax
credits a farm subsidy it is a
way to re invest and it actually
creates and you'll get the
evidence back at some of.
On behalf of the American forces
association my family is
breeders New Mexico raiders we
highly support this energy to
jump in and reinvest in New
Mexico thank you.
Thank you Mr brown we will now
hear from Brian wonderful.
Brian are you available.
One room time for Mister Brian
magical.
Moving on we wanna hear from Mr
Nathan real ball.
Go ahead annually politics.
No worries thank you chairman
Shendo committee members all the
nice things you have to say
about the race forcing industry
I appreciate you thank you for
going are just your time and
provided on our behalf provide
and Roybal at Bernalillo county
resident our owner breeder
physician business owner.
I have placed money into these
machines however that's not
we're all of my money goes these
days it's into farms and raising
and breeding and those sorts
costs and I think that we were
talking about this as a.
Gambling what we what we would
really describe ourselves
disbursement sportsman cowboys
entrepreneurs
these racinos are are and are
not just casinos but they're
gathering thanks for
agriculturalist from around the
state the breeding farms that
raise the horses the farms that
support the parameters that
raise the hate and and so the
idea of these racinos these race
tracks is central to rural New
Mexico mac New Mexico or the
identity of New Mexico growing
up in rural New Mexico this is
where you come to race and and
and show your stock and this
ultimately is good for all of
New Mexico.
And as it's been pointed out by
Jeff true and and Senator Campos
really well this is these
racinos attract people from all
over the state up to two million
per year here and as they're all
borders near your Colorado three
San right taxes or Hobbs and Sir
Lankans and so I do ask you to
look at this as an investment in
New Mexico in New Mexico culture
in New Mexico act Representative
culture and so thank you for
your affirmative vote for Senate
bill one very very.
Thank you Mr.
We will now hear from Lynette
Baldwin when that are available.
One more time for Mislintat
Baldwin.
We will now move on to more in
Crawford Crawford.
Yes good evening chairman and
committee members thank you so
much for taking time.
to you know look into this
matter it's very important for
the village of Ruidoso the city
route Ms Lincoln County
and the other mayors would have
been here with me that just had
other things I've had to attend
to but would also is first and
foremost a tourist community and
it is very evident we have
analytical software that we're
able to see what who comes into
the community what they spend
their money going through
tracking cell phones credit
cards things like that in it is
evident when the workers at the
track commune whether they're
training the horses.
During the fields you know the
new hires that the track puts on
there's an immediate response to
our businesses whether they're
restaurants is the cleaners it's
together grows the Hey of the
people to pick up the manure all
the way to the mid town shops
are the parts it goes one on one
and then it really picks up a
moral day weekend it runs all
the way through Labor Day and
that's the way this community
has been built we've worked hard
to build Schilder season but
without this tract there's not a
whole lot of positive things in
the future for this valley
because it is that important
which through the analytical
software that we have we've been
able to determine that the track
as a in the economic impact of
over fifty million dollars to
the style and that's not just
guessing that's analytical
software showing how important
it is
you know it in we have a lot of
poor people in our community
even low a lot of people don't
realize the road also is that
right we're made up of about
sixty percent second homes it's
people that have just vacation
homes here in short term rentals
those things pick up in our
school in the summer months and
that's when the money is being
spent median household income is
very low here and also just
point out that the city route
also dances are recognized as a
colonias community and so you
all know what that means but we
need your help we thank you for
the very cert sincere
consideration but the bills
route also is one hundred
percent behind this anything
that we can do to help our.
Second industry cluster this so
many other businesses and
families depend on so thank you
very much for your time and
consideration.
Thank you Mr Crawford we will
now hear from Mister John
Thompson go ahead Mr Thompson.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I want to be
respectful of the committee's
time seems like there's a lot of
folks to stand and support I
just want to thank the sponsor
for bringing the bill forward at
and one quick comment Mr
chairman members the committee
this bill will absolutely have a
trickle down effect on
agricultural based family
business is in the state of New
Mexico and we ask that you would
consider it as as we form a
package to to move on to the
next step thank you so much to
me this evening.
Thank you Mr Thompson are there
any other members of the public
who wish to make public comment
support Senate bill one fifty
three.
One more time these are
statements of support.
Thank you very much this
concludes over public statements
for Senate bill one fifty three.
Thank you thank you mark tell
us.
no we're of back in the bill I
know that are the anymore
questions from the committee.
I know that we're not taking any
action of for now no not so
Senator Campos.
Senator Brandt service chairman
is more procedure where do you
see it you know we we've put a
lot of bills on the side table
which I don't have a problem
with but how how are we looking
at when a we're gonna bring
those back and talk about them
and make a decision on which
ones we would recommend going
forward to the finance committee
what time line on that I I
haven't the I I'm going to have
that discussion of had simpler
discussions with the chairman of
the Senate finance to see where
they're at I know that there was
a revenue estimate presentation
done yesterday afternoon I try
to sit in on that one as well so
I will be talking with the
gentleman yield the Senate
finance committee and and see
where they're at and and and
look at what some of the bill so
we're looking at thank you Mr
Pritchard yes.
So Senator Campos with that we
will go ahead and hold the bill
here on and to we talk about a a
package that we want to move
forward.
Senator Campos.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
thank you for all.
Like to back on there you.
Thank you Mr chairman former
suite me if I may just we're
we're looking at this very
closely in terms of the language
that was changing shall to may
and Senator breaks Griggs brings
up a great point I'd like to
have that considered at some
point to as you go forward if
this is one of the bills that
you considered to a release to
Senate finance but it began to
each one of you thank you for
your time here interest and most
importantly your concern for the
people of New Mexico and all of
our industry.
Thank you very much Mr chair
members of the committee right
thank you Senator Campos I know
you have another bill a Senate
bill one eighty six I want to
move on to that so that we can
get you going on to the Senate
finance I'm not sure they're
still meeting on a.
Thank you very much Mr chair
members of the committee in
essence they may not be but
we're working on the
I believe it's Senate bill seven
amendments which is considered
to be a junior bill just very
quickly and I understand that
Franklin Garcia is here from the
department of transportation
what I would like to do is to
move forward and and have a
point of clarification hope
we're not going to be here too
long with this but there is a
Senate joint resolution thirteen
that it is the proper method as
I understand it with the
transfer of property and within
that I believe that this bill
also.
Deals directly with the same
issue but I would like that
clarification because in all of
these processes are we're
getting information and
direction
from different perspectives and
at least as I've dealt with the
transfer of state property from
one entity to another within
government it has always been by
a joint resolution so before I
explain if I may Mister chair
call on Mister Frank Garcia see
if that's the issue if not then
I'm up for to go ahead and
explain the bill may be that Mr
chair
Senator thank you is so Mister
Franklin Garcia available.
Yes Sir a good afternoon Mister
chairman members of the
committee and Senator Campos yes
thank you we were going to when
we look at the the plan for
point of entry we were initially
wanted to run one bills but
after reviewing all the moving
parts we identified that a joint
resolution is required for the
transfer the properties even
government to government at a
because the the value of the
properties meets the threshold
so we ran the Senate joint
resolution that you are
assisting in sponsoring on our
behalf along with this
administrative functions so they
are two separate bills they are
tied together in their capacity
as far as the duties for the
DOT.
So thank you very much Mr chair
I just wanted to make sure that
as I dealt with it
that we weren't duplicating so
with that being said Mr chair if
I may then turn it over to a
again the Mr Franklin Garcia to
go ahead and explain what this
bill does and and then from
there will be available for
questions.
Where is Britain's thank you Mr
chairman members the committee
as far as introductions my
name's Franklin Garcia with New
Mexico do T. mobile division our
point of entry is house under
our mortal Division so what this
bill does it clarifies our our
duties as far as commercial
vehicle permit sales
right now within the the duty
functions we're working under a
memorandum agreement of the
agreement with the department
of.
Public safety to allow us to do
those permits sales starting in
twenty sixteen we took over that
administrative function also
currently all these actions that
we're doing are allowed through
this that agreement
and so what this bill does
formalize that process and will
codify that
DPS will maintain all the
enforcement duties the citation
the commercial motor vehicle
inspections so DOT doesn't have
authority there were not taking
over that
we did a provide a summary of
the bill is a thirty page bill
and hopefully the committee did
see the the fire that we had
that kind of breaks down the
transfer of duties because it's
really just technical fixes
technical language fixes
throughout the bill
also I know in the the analysis
DPS does mention that they will
take a hit of about ninety four
thousand dollars per year the
duty we have budgeted for that
so with this fund they are
eligible to utilize that for
inspections and enforcement so
there will be any impact the
general fund so with that all
stand for questions and and here
to support the Senator.
Thank you Mr Garcia this time of
before we go to committee will
it's any public comment.
For.
One eighty six.
Senate bill one.
Chair.
Is first on my list.
This is a dollars available.
Are there any other members of
the public who wish to speak in
opposition.
Moving we will now hear from
miss Alice little quite agency
requiring billable.
This.
Go ahead.
I.
So mental disabilities planning
council.
Good afternoon.
Mr chair members of the
committee developmental
disabilities planning council
very much like to support this
bill.
R. organization.
Deals with all the time issues
that arise with
New Mexicans living with
developmental disabilities and
other disabilities and this is a
this is a population that is
often subject to abuse neglect
and exploitation and anything
that we can do in the state of
New Mexico to address those
issues would be very much
appreciated so we strong support
system thank you excuse me a
Madam I I believe you were
speaking on Senate bill one
eighty nine we're all one eighty
six.
Many apologies at I heard my
name and so I I very much
apologize committee and will
return for that comments thank
you.
To clarify for my sake Senator
reading one.
Eighty six or one sixty eight
one six but it all has built up.
Are there any other members of
the public who wish to make
comment in opposition or support
for Senate bill one eighty one
sixty eight my apologies.
One more time this is for Senate
bill one eighty six are there
any members of the public who
wish to speak in opposition
please raise your hand.
Any members of the public who
wish to speak in opposition
Senate bill one eighty six.
At this time that includes all
public statements for Senate
bill twenty six.
Okay thank you now we go to the
committee
Thank you Mr chair and just a
quick question
with regard to the ports of
entry and it.
Responsible Mr chair and senator
for the maintenance of the ports
of entry is that the D. O. T. or
DPS or.
This responsible we have one in
Lake County and just curious we.
If you could answer that
question thank you very much Mr
chair a and senator if I cannot
like to defer again to Mr Garcia
because he's dealing directly
with that and he can offer not
only the responsibility but in
terms of some of the issues that
they've run into a state of the
with those ports of entry thank
you Mr thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Mr chairman members
the committee and that Senator
Kernan currently under the
memorandum of agreement the duty
has been managing and
maintaining the facilities all
the twelve act point that are
throughout the state and not
only have we been maintaining
I'm just the day to day
operations we've utilize the
existing funding to do some
major improvements to those
reports that needed it so I
we've been having ongoing
maintenance and ongoing
improvements within the point of
duty has been handling that.
So thank you very much Mr
chairman and I always appreciate
the hard work that DOT does in
my area.
Just my circle back in this it
was someone from my district at
to to maybe get a little help
with that our city and county
invested quite a bit of money in
the in the port of entry and and
hospice you come in from Texas
and and we probably need to take
a second look at what's going on
out there and and maybe get some
help and I appreciate the fact I
know you've been doing all the
work permitting and this just
that clarifies the
responsibility is with the DOT
for permitting and just one last
question for you
actually is a permitting done as
they come into the port if it
had happened how does that occur
because I know at one point we
did have some issues with some
of the permitting and.
It on that a couple years ago it
must been resolved because I'm
not hearing anything further
that do you all do that from
what side what system do you use
with regard to permitting.
And that would be for our.
D. O. T. person.
Your.
Thank you Mr chairman members
the committee and Senator Kernan
the week we currently use an
automated system called New
Mexico NM ops and that's been in
operation for several years now
so the majority of a of the
commercial vehicles are
purchasing their permit prior to
coming into the state or prior
to traveling through the state
however we do have data groups
and and different.
Permits that are issued in the
point themselves for people that
are doing it on a regular basis
so the majority of the purpose
are sold or are a trip permits
or care about permits things to
translate calling or
transporting mobile homes things
like that so so that permitting
system is in operation it's
pretty robust we do have a call
center we do have staffing at
all point to handle that and so
that was the goal of the entire.
Memorandum of agreement it's be
more efficient and allow law
enforcement to do their
inspections allow law
enforcement to do the citations
and have DOT handle the
administrative portion so that
has been working we have seen an
increase in the permits and we
have seen efficiencies that have
occurred.
Well thank you Mr chairman I
think that is the case and I
appreciate all the hard work
that you all did thank you very
much.
Okay thank you Senator Kernan I
do not have any other.
Questions from the committee if
I miss anybody please speak up
on if not what is the pleasure
of the committee.
How many to do pass will motion
for the past by Senator Kernan
Mr chair Senator Hamblen all
right here we go little and
action there so lane can you
take grow please.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen yes Senator Hickey yes
Senator how to meal.
Yes Senator Kernan yes Senator
Santis.
Yes.
Senator Tallman yes.
Senator Wirth.
Senator Padilla.
Senator Shendo.
Yes.
Three excused and.
Eight.
Yes.
Senator you have a do pass on
your bill Senator Campos thank
you very much Mr chair members I
really appreciate the afternoon
the discussion and again thank
you very much for your time.
You we're not going to move on
to the Senate bill one sixty
eight of this will be our
probably our last bill I know
the Republicans are having the a
caucus so we will lose our or.
Thank.
So
We are going to go ahead and
move with Senate bill one sixty
eight.
Mr Chairman I'm ready we're
Senators Mr chairman of the
members of the.
The committee with the house
bill sixty eight.
what this this this so give in
now the committee a little bit
of history I am going back to
oil.
nineteen ninety four ninety five
Senator of we're on Senate bill
you said house bill I'm sorry
I'm sorry.
Okay how does your is in the
house so okay
well it's probably because so of
the number of years trying this.
With the Senate bill one sixty
eight Mr chairman and members
some.
just a little background on this
is that you know nineteen ninety
four ninety five there was a
repeal of six sons to the gas
tax.
This is the main revenues and
all that fun stuff the
department of transportation.
The whole thing with that is so
as some of the campaign and
that's how it was going to was a
popular thing to do and we never
You know this really hurt the
department and actually just
consumers we never saw this
because industry within a week
or so went up by eleven cents
at all nevertheless so we
repealed six cents.
So well enough for to at least
bring a little bit awful.
Stability in more revenue to the
Department what this would do is
if this would add one cent.
Increase to the gas tax the one
cent to the special deals for
five years so very incremental
one cent per year until the
funds until the fifty year.
Mr chairman of this department
has some receive though.
Very very little revenue in fact
it's only been into the last few
years that additional funding
has gone to the Department and
this is from about twenty six
years of not seeing revenue
increased.
Just so you can see the need so
we have one infrastructure the
needs in our highways the
making of the state quit then.
this would be a very modest
part.
And also what we've been seeing
is our neighbor and states have
all by passed us by at least ten
to fifteen cents higher you know
within the last five years so
with that Mr chairman of I have
a few more points but I also
have a sickle Sanchez Senator
Tallman no to wish to make some
comments.
We had.
Thank you thank you Senator
Gonzales thank you Mr chair well
I yeah I just like to add that
the.
We want to have a had a
Tax increase.
The tax increase in twenty eight
years of only three states have
a lower tax.
Then that.
Mexico is.
Mississippi Missouri.
And
Alaska.
And the according to the FIR
that inflation is because the
fuel tax revenues to lose their
purchasing power the tax imposed
in nineteen ninety five at
seventeen cents that was
equivalent to ten cents after
adjusting for inflation.
According to the DOT we have
three billion dollars in new
construction and deferred
maintenance this bill if
enacted.
Would generate a hundred and
fifty.
million.
Dollars of.
Over the next few years which is
only five percent of the total
deferred maintenance that to the
DOT has a.
As indicated that we need and
finally Mr chair according to
business insider magazine New
Mexico ranks number ten number
one being the worst.
Having the worst road conditions
and we're number ten so we're in
the bottom twenty percent
according to business insider on
the condition of our roads this
tax increase is long overdue
appreciate your support to help
generate more money so we can
conclude improve the condition
of our roads thank you Mr chair
thank you Senator Gonzales.
Mr chairman
Members so just to add to this
you know this was set up.
Well the one cent ring C. nine
point one million.
And on the special fuels that's
full of six point two million.
So roughly of giving the
department of about twenty five
million more per year and again
it's so much needed on their
equipment maintenance then us we
see a the needs some bridges the
other part Mr chairman is that
every year we have all a report
that is done by trip.
And it's a national organization
that comes in and also an
assessment of our state and
every year they point out the
deficiencies but you know that
doesn't help those who don't
have funding no to work with
this and also we have all this
is Dawn Iglesias from the
legislative finance.
The LFC.
Well if you would like to make
any comments or you know she's
also to assistance with any
technical questions and she
might have a conflict a motion
on that.
She mentioned that she would try
to be available.
Are you on.
Miss Iglesias.
Yes yes.
Not will stand for questions or
you can go to public comment.
Area at this time of the public
comment.
We'll be hearing from Mr Ruben
Baca the opposition Mr Bakari
available.
Thank you Mr chairman of the
committee thank you for taking
my testimony only very short is
getting along.
I have traditionally for twenty
two years.
Always.
oppose any gas tax increases.
I'm gonna propose this one.
Also from my good friend Bobby
Gonzales.
And.
I would like to say another
thing is.
As you look down the road what
you're gonna look at is at the
federal.
At the federal level.
The tax increase is coming from
there once a day pass the
infrastructure bill and they
will pass at this time.
Will be looking at anywhere from
a ten.
Fifteen maybe to a twenty cent a
gallon increase so.
My customer pays for.
The guys driving down the street
together is trying to make a
living you know a penny is not
much but every little bit
counts.
Thank you very much thank you
bye.
Thank you Mr.
We want to hear from Mr Paul
guessing stressing are you
available.
One more time for Mr hold
guessing.
Moving.
We wanna hear from Mister Tom
Hennessey Mister Hennessy are
you able.
It doesn't we will now move on
to Mr Chairman Winchester Mr
Manchester you're available for
the support.
And it doesn't look like he's
available are there any other
members of the public who wish
to make comments in support
Senate bill one sixty eight.
Yes.
Okay Mister Daniels.
Yeah.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee members can you hear
me.
Yes.
Thank you very much staff at
thank you Mr chairman and
committee members for your
service and thank you Senator
Gonzalez for bringing one sixty
eight forward.
I believe that this is a very
good bill and I appreciate that
you're doing that Senator
Gonzales because I you know you
and I served in that house
transportation committee for
many years and your chairman I
was chairman before you it and
you are you always did a
tremendous job and we're always
looking to help the deal T. to
To have a proper funding tool so
that we can.
Improve and maintain our our
infrastructure and I
particularly like this bill
because I think if you're
providing a long term vision for
a funding of our infrastructure
and just Senator Tallman mention
we have fallen behind
I think at one time probably
about ten years ago I think we
moved up to number
and the number fiber closer to
you the number one pick this
monies were spent at that time
additional money and I
appreciate what the legislature
has done in recent years.
And they have been very generous
and funding and thank you and I
support this bill.
The highly thank you.
Thank you Mr so are there any
other members of the public who
wish to comment at this time yes
ma'am please.
Go ahead please.
Yeah this is the can you hear me
yes we can Mr John.
This is Johnny Johnson the
managing director for the New
Mexico Truckin Association and
historically we've been on the
opposite side of the.
Reasons for that purpose stand
with.
Senator Gonzales Mr Chairman I
and committee I certainly
support this bill I took this to
our executive board and they do
also support this bill for a
couple of different reasons
number one it's been stated it's
been a long time since we've had
an increase but the
infrastructure is extremely
important to us and whenever of
Mr Gonzalez and I have visited
in the past.
We have talked about if it goes
through the road fund will
support it and I don't want to
go back on my word Senator
Gonzales so I said I would
support this and the executive
board will support this and we
believe this is a good move for
the state of New Mexico Mr
chairman members of the
committee thank you very much
for your time.
Thank you very much Mr Johnson
are there any other members of
the public who wish to speak at
this time.
Thank you very much that
concludes a public statement
reasonable one sixty eight and
just to let the committee know
Michael Santa the secretary for
at DOT is available to answer
questions on this particular
thank you very much.
Thank you so much element will
go to committee I have I I.
I don't know if Griggs
recurrence had just hand up can
you help me here.
Griggs you're the winner Senator
I can Senator I think is that
bolo tie that did it as the bow
bow bow bow tie.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator Gonzales I I applaud
your tenacity for for roads in
your your passion because you
know that's not misplaced.
I find myself though have a
do agree with.
Ruben Baca which is not all the
time that we agree we we do
agree casually but not all the
time.
the gas tax.
Is something that I think we
just need to try to get away
from.
We need to look at different
approaches because we're not you
know we continue to push for
this legislative body continues
to push for electric vehicles
and those sorts of things and as
we push for those in as we're
successful the gas tax will
become a less I mean it become
less and less of a factor so I
think we need to look at what
can we do today what approaches
are better then then using the
gas tax even though this
probably Senator is the.
Is the best gas tax.
Bill I've I've seen because
you're you're doing it
incrementally you're doing it in
a in a way that that is as fair
as anything.
But senator I'm I'm not going to
support the bill because I
believe we need to be find in
another way because the gas tax
is just one that as we go toward
electrification as we raise the
cost of people have been to to
pay at the pump we're gonna she
less miles driven it's it's just
a problematic tax to me and I I
think we need to figure out some
other approaches and hopefully
we can find better approaches
but thank you Mr chair and and
thank you Senator Gonzales.
Thank you senator Greg so now
we're Senator Kernan.
Thank you very much and that Mr
chair and senator and over the
last few years I know our former
chair of finance was very
supportive of increasing the gas
tax and in fact a couple years
ago I actually voted for tax
increases we did the excise tax
and that was a very beneficial.
Thanks for the state of New
Mexico because it just send more
money to the department of
transportation and I support
that I know we have to take care
of our present and we've got to
figure out a way to do that.
You know a couple of days ago I
would have said goodness I'm so
worried about revenues but now
after that the the forecast out
we have a lot of money in the
state of New Mexico now with
very hard surface and and so
it's really hard to justify tax
increase under that scenario I
don't know what to look I can
three four years but certainly
right now we're in pretty good
shape and we hope that part of
that money part of those
reserves would be dedicated to
our roads and it's very
important to do that but I
actually agree with Senator
Griggs and I don't know that at
Senator Gonzales is there
anything in this bill.
That would
require owners of electric
vehicles to pay their fair share
of using rogue waves I don't.
You can see it I don't know is
that my missing something is
there anything in the bill that
that put some of that burden on
roads.
Maintenance and and such on the.
Owners of electric vehicles.
Well Mister chairman Senator
Kernan no it does not and all.
and the.
The reasoning for this so so I
wanted to keep it as simple as
possible.
I have been trying for a guest
increase for quite a few years
and it always seems to be like
one thing or another you know
I'm just looking at all I
visited with the.
A few of the people from the
department.
And you know just for the need
for equipment is unbelievable.
You know this things are
expensive you know and then on
the other hand we always see
you know one of the things that
was brought out the so you know
from what Senator Griggs.
The part here is even if we're
all electric eventually we still
need rules and we still need
bridges that we still need the
other part two is that we have
to look at is at what point do
you coming to.
R. for liability is more
expensive them.
Keeping up our maintenance you
know which can be you know when
you start seeing Gail Railcards
we start seeing bridges are
deficient for school buses that
down the line.
So the other part that I have
seen this is my twenty seventh
year.
And every year.
It's not the right time.
Either we don't have enough
money but we have too much money
and then again it goes into the
priority and then goes to the
big fight who gets the money.
The extras and it's just a
responsibility you know we need
to have our votes we need to pay
for them and let me tell you all
one of the things that was very
interesting and since some.
Right now I can't recall the
name exactly but it was by the
chamber of commerce from
Washington DC.
It was a stay members said is
when the when we're behind in
infrastructure.
We never catch up.
You know because just at the
expense you know and it and it's
such a valid comment you know it
just the other part is that I
always enjoyed that this was an
article that but I read
sometime back and this is during
the Eisenhower administration.
When we develop our industry our
industry system.
Was the most advanced the most.
Advanced system in the world.
And what was mentioned there is
because of the four lane to and
from and across the nation and
could go to any part with the
Interstate.
And was mentioned a big big
mistake those done at that time
that there was never a part
figured out for the maintenance.
We built it was brand new but it
gets old.
And it's a constant you know
with with our state roads county
roads all of.
So there again this is just part
two you know I know that
electric is coming and I know
that it is but it's not here yet
in the meantime you know and do
have to figure out that powers
you know all.
Of that point with that portion
of you know what do they pay but
no it's not in this bill.
Well thank you for that Senator
Gonzales and Mr chair and that
in again I have great respect
for you and I know you've worked
very hard on this over the years
and I certainly know the DOT
needs of funding but we do have
another bill coming before this
committee at some point that's
going to regarding special
special fuels clean fuel
standard act and I know well
they they claim that that will
not increased fuel costs that I
am not convinced of that I think
we need to be careful on that I
don't know with that many of you
remember back in the seventies
when that we were not able to
that gets you all oil from at.
From foreign countries and my
fear is going forward eventually
we may refer to having to import
oil again rather than exported
and that's going to certain
price the cost of gasoline I
think it's a fairness issue the
people that use the roads are to
be paying for those present
until something is put in this
bill that would require owners
of electric vehicles to
participate and that thanks for
their fair share of using the
roads I think it's really
difficult for me to support the
bill.
That maybe that could be added
and I'm not sure but I do
appreciate your effort.
I do think we're going to begin
to see increases in the cost of
fuel I think what was up to
sixty dollars a barrel now and.
That's something that will
eventually affect the cost of
gasoline.
Maybe not tomorrow the next day
but it will at some point I do
support that at trying to figure
out a way to fund our roads that
I just don't know that this is a
mechanism at this point thank
you very much Mr chair.
Mr chair I can answer the Santo
currents question.
Go ahead Dawn on one I'm not
sure Mr chair what was my
question.
But I would argue yes about.
Not sure what question I have a
bill that's going to require a
hundred dollars registration for
electric vehicles thank you
thank you very much for that I
appreciate that thank you
Senate Bill number fifty eight
low number has even had its
first hearing at at this rate.
Anyway I'm having a lot of
trouble getting my bills for but
anyway electric the Senate bill
fifty eight with a call for a
hundred dollar legislation fear
like a coward I come up with a
hundred dollars if you want the
average person drives about
twelve to thirteen thousand
miles getting out thirty
thousand gallons of time
modified by eighteen cents you
you get a little less than a
hundred dollars.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator we might be able to roll
okay I I would be going in at
willing to roll that into this
bill.
Thank you very much thank you.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator to vote for that
explanation I will go to senator
Sanchez then I have Senator
Hamblen and then Senator Hickey.
Mr chair of thank you senator Mr
Gonzalez for bringing this our.
This I I've heard you say both
this increase of taxes for
equipment.
Or for the roads are both.
Mr chairman.
So of what this would do is so.
This would just give additional
revenue to the Department.
So nothing to do that you know
the.
I hope that you know a majority
of that is used to purchase
equipment.
We do have a Senator secretary
of transportation maybe if you
can explain how that the role
for work that will be good.
Secretary St will you all.
Mr Chairman yes I am secretary
Mike Sandel from DOT I think
this would go into our general
fund and I think Senator
Gonzales having been on
transportation committees and
just in his role knows that.
We are it badly in need of of
equipment and I think we would
put this money in in the best
place it can be useful but
certainly are quit line is
getting old we need to modernize
our department and so I would
guess that if this were to pass
and get signed that some of that
at least we go the first three
years of trying catches up on
equipment but on the way the
bills written it can be used on
on anything that the road fund
could be useful.
Thank you secretary Santa so
we're back a senator Sanchez.
Thank you Mr chair thank you Mr
Sandel.
The more.
Okay so move to a Senator a
Hamblen.
Thank you Mr chairman just
actually comment and I don't
know if you saw but when senator
Tom and talked about taxes for
electric vehicles and Senator
Kernan also talked about that I
know that in when I was
campaigning that there were
people who own electric vehicles
were like I need to contribute
to the roads that I'm driving on
and and so if we want to get
together and rally that I'm all
for it.
Appreciate it thank you one
thank you Mr.
Senator Hickey.
Thank you Mr chairman and.
Thank you.
Senator for bringing the bill
forward.
I'd literally came within inches
of dying on what is called I
fifty today
back in the day when I was
working on the Navajo
reservation because of a bad
road it truck went off the line
and almost when it handed me
from not and another time sure
could have used the equipment
with the black ice not too far
understand the C. grow and pile
ups occurring so I think this
bill will be helpful to my
question is will that road which
is wonderfully for land now but
it is a U. S. highway five fifty
would funds like this go to help
keeping that road in shape or or
fix some of the things that you
need to be fixed on it.
Senator Mr chairman of Libya all
you know I know what my response
would be but let me have all our
secretary addressed.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Senator yes road fund can be
used on either an interstate US
highway or New Mexico route so
this if this were to pass on
that money could be used on any
of those classifications of road
in our state.
Thank you and and thank your
predecessors.
US secretary for having created
a four lane highway there I
continue to drive that then and
still alive so thank you Sir and
the thank you senator for
bringing this bill forward and
thank you Mr chair.
Earlier.
Thank you Mr chair so I am
I'm working hard to get the
Senator Kernan vote.
Because because I I agree that
Our good friend senator Smith I
think
Knew how important this was in
was a champion for doing it
right and centre Gonzales you've
been a champion as well and I
guess my question Senator
Gonzales
I do think the issue of the
electric vehicle.
Surcharge or whatever we're
gonna call it is something that.
And make this a better bill.
And make it more palatable I'm
just curious whether you have
any interest in working with
senator Tom and to put these two
together.
Because because again you've
come up with the senator Gregg
said I mean it's pretty hard to
argue against the formula you've
got here I mean it's a penny a
year my goodness I mean it just.
This secretary Santa and his
team need a steady recurring
revenue but as we transition I
think the argument Senator
Kernan makes is really good I
mean we have to acknowledge that
more more elector cars are going
to be part of this and so why is
there a way to reach a sweet
spot here's I'm just curious
Senator it's your bill whether
you have any interest in putting
your bill together with was
senator Clemente.
All Mr chairman of the Senator
Wirth I would be more than open
to the.
Well Mr chairman I might yes
again it just feels to me why
there's a real opportunity here
to do something that does have a
balanced approach and and I hear
loud and clear Senator Kernan I
and I and again it's I still
your caution needs to continue I
mean we just need to keep having
the discussion about year to
year what things look like but
it's when we're using hundreds
of millions of dollars in
non recurring general fund for
our roads because we haven't
done the recurring revenue
stream that works now but when
we don't have it then we're
really in trouble and we we've
been in those times before for
sure so I would just suggest if
the if Senator Gonzales is
willing to do it and senator Tom
is willing to.
To to put these together that we
could really have a something
here that.
I know Senator Kernan will look
at it I'm not going to commit
her to doing anything but I
think the point you raise is
really good so I just would
would throw that out as a
possible option to put these
together is a set up and bring
it back on I mean heck it could
be done soon enough we could
have it back on Saturday and
actually get this done and I see
Senator Kernan shaking her head
so maybe she's willing to think
about it.
Right thank thank you Senator
Wirth the that was a good
suggestion I'm going to go to
Senator of Sanchez for the
second time that I've Senator
Kernan.
Sorry Sir I don't have my hand
up I've got it down okay I'm
sorry K. senator Kerr from
second time well thank you very
much Mr chair and
I think that's a great idea and
look forward to the opportunity
to just see those bills margin I
will tell you that I was the
only Republican that voted for
the tax bill couple years ago
and took a took a beating on
that when I went back home but I
will tell you I also heard from
my constituents in southeast New
Mexico especially during the.
The real been timed with oil and
gas people would say to me I
will do anything if we can get
funding and get help on our
roads in southeast New Mexico.
And I will tell you that's
exactly what happened the excise
tax.
Helped southeast New Mexico.
People want safe roads and I
would feel.
Not going to make a promise
today but I'm willing to take
the heat when I go back home
because I do think it is
important for us to have safe
roads I know we have a lot of
money that budget right now but
I agree we don't know what
that's gonna look right down the
road and that.
I I certainly would take that
into consideration if they could
pull those two bills together
thank you.
Thank you Senator Kernan and and
I have senator Cormann but but
before he speaks I don't know
what he did to the chairman for
having his bills not being heard
but maybe you need to have a
conversation.
Senator Tallman.
Sh.
Thank you thank you Mr chair
just want I just want to re.
Reiterate that I'm more than
willing to combine my bill with
the senator consols is bill
that's all I have thank you be
willing to to work with thank
you very much
Mr chairman Senator Gonzales
okay great appreciate that and
if you guys can the can tho work
started after this meeting and
the come to some of the
a compromise on how you want to
build that we consider to put it
on for Saturday that we were not
wasting much time Mr chairman we
can have it ready in ten minutes
already that's great
for that it's been a good
conference for a before Senator
Kernan changes.
You got you have you may have
forty eight hours you guys
remove quick.
The I appreciate the committee
it's a five minutes after
another Republican to having to
office of I wasn't invited on a
why but the of appreciate you
guys I know we're all for
Saturday morning at nine AM and
we will roll these bills over so
thank you again thank you Mr
chairman thank you members are
thank you.
All right very.
