my computer on mute this entire
time so.
So I believe
Senator Ivey said I'm sorry
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
I believe.
Madam chairman yes I I would
love to president of the
committee's consideration for
confirmation
Sonya Smith.
Who is the secretary as for the.
Permanent reference Affairs
mention services in the state of
New Mexico
This junior.
But the after high school and
and
Service in the military she was
in the Air Force reserve served
as a medical technician.
Actually served in the Gulf War
is considered legal for veteran
for his service to our country.
As a medical technician.
Sure in bachelor's studies to
received her bachelor of science
degree in health services
management from Norfolk station
in Virginia.
And then we can working as a
senior consultant with the
Kaiser Permanente a in Rockville
Maryland.
It is very strong in that field
she's working not just those ten
years Kaiser permanent day where
she specialized in compliance
with federal regulations.
But also then she went to work
Community health center.
In compliance quality assurance
was focusing for professional
work.
She came to Albuquerque.
twenty thirteen and this is
working for the university of
New Mexico as their inaugural
compliance manager.
Station.
Issue.
Credentialing.
To review activities for the
department of health care where
database.
Thank you to send and working
for the selfless care center
again as as mistreating dealing
primarily with
federally qualified health
center regulations the
accountability
for achieving goals and
requirements for primary care
programs.
She's going to work for the
department of health and this is
raised the height of the COVID
thank.
She she worked directly for the
secretary of the health
department as special projects
coordinator.
COVID nineteen federal
guidelines.
Thank you
health orders for statewide
compliance.
In October the governor and
designated her as a cabinet
secretary for Veterans Services
she's been working there since
then and it is right
right before the turn it over
here I do want to mention some
of the things that she's been
involved with with your
Incredibly important
she is a member of the
Albuquerque African American
chamber of commerce board of
directors.
She is chair of the she was the
chair of the Albuquerque March
of dimes chefs in fund raiser.
She was in the United Way in
Virginia.
Development storyboarding
director's in Norfolk Virginia.
She's worked with the as a
parliamentarian with the
Albuquerque eliminate chapter of
delta sigma theta.
I think she's been on the board
of directors The New Mexico
nursing home administrators.
Conversation with her Madam
chairman and and committee
members it is very clear is that
we have in the Sonya Smith an
incredible
Well skilled highly
professional.
Secretary for the department of
Veterans Services so I will ask
her if she would like to see a
few words about her background
and her plans for for this
department.
Thank you Sir.
Good morning madam chairman.
Members of the committee.
I want to begin by first
thanking senator Ortiz if you
know first time yours and
sponsorship.
I want to also extend my
gratitude to the governor of the
high Gretchen for the
appointment and to
Representative Stapleton for her
support and encouragement.
I'm joined today by my family
transistorized is in Virginia
Georgia and of course here in
New Mexico.
Also in the world of the
dedicated staff of the
department of Veterans Services.
I have been privileged to lead
this agency since October of
last year and for that I am
profoundly grateful.
This is no way there is no way I
could have known seven years ago
when I moved here from North
that I would be given such a
distinct honor but my
grandmother always said what's
for you is for you and she was
always right.
It is not lost on me the
significance of my appointments
as we have seen the glass
ceiling is broken for women of
color.
The where is the vice president
Harris many learned about
historically black colleges and
universities and the divine
nine.
I am a product of both.
I'm a graduate of Norfolk state
university and an active member
of delta sigma theta sorority
incorporated.
This is what the sorority of
Shirley Chisholm who broke
barriers by being the first
black woman to run for president
of the United States.
Madam chair and committee I am
proud of what we have
accomplished these past few
months which includes a renewed
commitment to advocacy access
accountability.
We have adopted internal model
every day is veterans day.
To help remind us of the
privilege we have to serve those
with Sir.
I'm going priorities include
suicide awareness and prevention
so far we have presented to
successful Facebook lives since
December and we're working on
our next.
Partnering with advocacy groups
to address homelessness and
women veteran issues also by
working closely with our sister
agencies to ensure all that
enjoy the full benefits of their
entitlements.
We're also working on a plan to
engage service that and service
bets and their families live in
a rural areas because we do not
want anyone disenfranchised.
The pandemic has not slowed our
drive to assist veterans and
their families with claims and
state budget.
As we have embraced the virtual
setting which allows us to
assist veterans from anywhere in
state.
We met recently with the VA
Medical Center and deal wage to
brainstorm strategies that would
ensure veterans are registered
to receive the vaccine we think
we are at the beginning of a
good plan is very encouraged by
what we can do together.
In closing madam chair and
committee my staff is heard me
say repeatedly we have one job.
And that's to improve the lives
of our veterans and their fans I
do not hesitate in saying we are
the right folks to get that done
thank you for your time this
morning and consideration.
Thank you Secretary doesn't
Smith
and before we go to public
comment I have I'd like to
continue the tradition of our
our major with
Senator Lopez who.
I and and thank you for for
being I I know that we're all
very very busy thank you for
being here this morning and
thank you for your your service
and for your willingness to to
serve the our state Miss Vigil
is there any public comment.
Yes senator we have a Mr Fox.
Mr Fox please go ahead.
Madam chair members of the
committee it is my honor to come
before you this morning.
As the former secretary of
veterans services for New Mexico
I full understand the challenges
that Secretary designation Smith
will face she and I've met
several times I strongly support
her I think she is the right
person at the right time to take
the helmet Department Veterans
Services I can't think of a
better individual to assume this
responsibility at this time
as senator Ortiz Pino said and
as a secretary does Naismith
says she comes fully qualified
for this and I just want to
stand before you Representative
veterans all over the state of
New Mexico and it's strongly
encourage you to confirm her and
she will be the right person to
assist you as you care for the
veterans across the state of New
Mexico thank you for this
opportunity I sincerely
appreciate.
Thank you Mr Fox.
Miss Vigil is there anyone else.
No Senator I don't think so.
Then we'll go to questions from
the committee.
Senator Stewart.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you so much Secretary
presently swept for your words
this morning.
You know they they brought me to
tears because I've been thinking
about my brother lately who is a
veteran who moved here to New
Mexico about three years ago the
only living on his social
security after a lifetime of
work in the private industry
after serving in the armed
forces during the Vietnam War.
So the good news is that the VA
hospital has just called him and
registered him for his vaccine.
For anyone else in the family
and way before anyone else I
know about and we're just so
grateful for that in fact when
he moved here.
Three years ago
it was the VA of that determined
of some of the illnesses he had
including hepatitis C. and
within three months they had
cured him of that
the cost him of ten dollars a
month for pills that cost six
hundred dollars a day so I am
I've become a big fan of the
veterans administration services
in Albuquerque and you know
three years ago when we moved
here was the time that there
were
there are a lot of criticisms
about the V. eight this low wait
times the long wait times and in
Phoenix in particular
and we were just not seeing that
in Albuquerque they were you
know he when he needed of.
A medical work they they saw him
very.
So
I just I think your job is very
important I'm I'm so grateful
for your comments about the
glass ceiling especially for
women of color so I'm just very
happy to be at the wanting to
support your confirmation and
and I'm willing to help you in
any way that you need with
Veterans Services we have a we
have a fair number veterans in
Albuquerque who are homeless and
It's it's it's kind of difficult
to try to provide housing for
all of them in my district in
Albuquerque we've set up the
tiny home villages for homeless.
in the first six people that
have come that we have of of
allowed into that project there
are three veterans and so I'm
I'm really hoping that we just a
state will work harder on these
veteran issues and I just want
to thank you so much for taking
the helm even without a
confirmation all these months
and I'm so happy that we
hopefully will confirm you today
so thank you very much thank you
madam chair thank you madam
chair thank you Senator Stewart
appreciate that.
You.
At I see that the senator words
handed up but I'd seen that
Center Morse's hand had gone up
before that Senator Moores
due to having measurement circle
to skip difficulties of what
senator Wirth all these got rid
of his not ability to talk to
you could probably ask questions
now on Wall I'm figuring this
out thank you.
Senator Wirth.
I'm always capable of talking
and happy to do so.
there is.
To see you Senator Moores then
it's been a it's been a long
time
no I just also want to stand up
in full support of your
confirmation and thank you for
your service and
Senator doing thank you for
referring to Senator Lopez is
comments about what a big deal
is to step up and serve in
positions like this and we all
kind of huge amount of thanks
you said something that really
is important that I made a note
of really every day is veterans
day yes and I think that is a
Refik slogan and I just want to
share kind of an amazing
experience I had in twenty
eighteen one of the things when
you're in leadership is you get
to travel and participate in
leadership programs and I was
very lucky to be part of a an
incredibly small group I think
there were.
Fifteen of us that went to
Normandy France.
And had a chance to walk on
those beaches and study the
leadership lessons are that
happens on those beaches.
And then to come back and
realize that we were serving you
know with a Navajo code talker
Senator John Pinto who
participated in World War two.
Just having a really profound
still makes me emotional
profound influence on me and it
really major your statements are
ring true so I just again I
appreciate you being willing to
serve and for those of us that
did not serve in the military I
I just think it's it's it's
important to just remember
that role and all those who have
served and what it's meant for
us and our ability to live in in
this amazing country and and to
be free and I appreciated the
time so again thank you so much
and we're delighted to have you
very soon here the officially
confirmed in part of of this
administration you help veterans
thank you.
Thank you senator.
And I don't have senator Morris
is still dealing with some
technical difficulties.
Yes I am one of my
laptops will to case on my phone
so my apologies I'm sure.
I'm going to try to just a
second.
Change my view also.
thank you Sir US secretary does
me really appreciate your
service Act can't say anything
more appreciative than what
Senator Stewart and Senator
Wirth just expressed
in their operations what you
council country and for stepping
up for this role so I really
appreciate you doing this
I do have some questions so I
think it behooves us to talk
about your took off so you can
from the department of health as
you said you wrote the.
All right the got orders from
we'll get to that one gets a
secretary Department of Health
and but I wanted to talk about
what happened when you came over
to Veterans Affairs and what
happened to your C. with the
home down there those are gregis
gregis lacks the let someone
with COVID coming to work
actually working spread around
costs are on backroom lakes can
you talk to us about what
happened with that decision to
let a cop of COVID positive a
person come to work spread it
around a very fragile population
and people have asked away
especially with your background
have you written the health
orders would expected to Bastar
much more care would be taken
within that department so please
explained that to us
and that's also what we're going
to do so it doesn't happen
again.
Absolutely madam chair and
senator Morris thank you for the
opportunity to talk about my
brief time with the department
of health and one of the reasons
I was asked to come to the
Department of Health was because
of my background in compliance
in healthcare administration and
if you recall the virus is
moving in the still moving at
very alarming rates and when I
was asked to come to the
Department things that already
started to begin to get out of
control throughout the state and
the governor was doing her best
to to get things under control.
When I had an opportunity to
contribute to the language for
some of the guidance it was in
regards to how the long term
care facilities would to be able
to get tested unfortunately I am
not familiar about those
specific incident that you're
referring to because my
participation was certainly more
broad in that regard and I did
not have a lot of opportunity to
engage with what was going on at
the veterans home at that time
so I do apologize for not
knowing specifically and I
certainly don't want to begin to
try to make up something that
wasn't part of so Sir that's
really the best answer that I
can get right now.
I'm confused it's been an
Albuquerque journal it's been in
the papers about what happened
down there so explain to us what
did happen and what is being
done but make sure that.
That doesn't happen again to our
local population right what I'm
madam chair and and Senator
Moores when I'm trying to say to
you is that probably is very
much the case.
And my focus when I was with the
department of health was more
broad and more specific to the
minority community and making
sure that we have representation
for that group to.
So comfortable with testing so
while I did work at the
department of health there were
other teams that will work and
specifically on that but what I
can say now is that measures
certainly have been put into
place to make sure that those
things don't happen as much as
possible so again I apologize
Sir that's I don't have much
more knowledge of that.
I'm sorry I'm secretary were you
that doesn't need for Veterans
affair one that outbreak
happened at the veterans
hospital into your state.
My time long most of my time
long time why not correct are
that happened in December after
you were appointed.
Okay well Sir I think you need
to understand that the veterans
home is not under government
services the veterans home is
under the auspices of the
department of health.
That is not in my agencies are
so again I am not knowledgeable
of what has happened over there
with that have been made privy
to that information so.
Right I thought we I thought we
transfer control the veterans
hospital to the veterans
association last year two years
no Sir no Sir it is not under my
agency once upon a time it was
in my agency but it was reverted
back to the department of health
so perhaps of Secretary Collins
might be able to respond to your
questions of a little bit better
but I'm also glad to say it is
our top Secretary columns in
that are going to work closely
together to make sure that the
veterans are taking care of in
that facility in as much effort
as we can but thank you Sir for
let me explain that further.
I'm Bob must be confusing
timeline to it was so I thought
we had transferred the ownership
of the facility from generals
services I thought was to
Veterans Affairs if it's not
with well that is my mistakes
but as secretary of Veterans
Affairs site you you will need
to make sure that those veterans
are taking care down their
sincerity
all population.
Well everything else on the San
of do some more research part
wrong on that I apologize and if
I am correct in my I would like
to have a full conversation with
you about that
On your boards and commissions I
noticed that you are calling
press during health care or do
they have any contracts with
your departments there isn't any
conflict of interest there are
you know press during those the
largest private employer in the
state large insurance providers
State largest medical provider
in the state with a lot of
conflicts around the state so
are you prevented preventative
conflicts of interest
Presbyterian and you have a
contract with your apartments.
Madam chair Senator Moores to my
knowledge we do not have any
contracts with Presbyterian
foundation.
and we have a very competent
legal team and if there is
anything that we're going to
conflict with that I was
certainly recuse myself and
would be advised accordingly Sir
thank you.
Any other conflicts that we need
to be aware of any contracts
with the state government or the
other agencies that might
present a conflict in the
future.
Madam chair Senator Moores to
the best of my knowledge no Sir
I do not anticipate any
conflicts but if there are we
will make sure that there won't
be any because I will recuse
myself thanks thank you madam
secretary creator service again
to our nation and I look forward
to work with you about thank you
Sir.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Thank you madam chairman and I
just I just wanted to comment on
on senator Morris concern over
the administration of the
veterans home intruder
consequences he's correct when
when we when we first.
Still in need under the Veterans
Services
Two years ago and maybe even
three now and in fact we have a
committee meeting a Health and
Human Services Committee meeting
and facility while it was being
administered by the Veterans
Services Administration but they
ran into serious problems being
able to staff it adequately
that's not there this their
Bailey wick of running
institutions like that and so
shortly after our committee
meeting down there it was
transferred back to the back to
back to the Department of Health
for the
where the expertise and the and
the know how for administration
of institutions is is this part
of their their whole charter and
so this the smell under the
department of health is been so
for I believe for about a year
and a half or two years now.
I thank you Senators miss madam
chair because I remember that
tearing down there and that was
causing more confusion so I
appreciate you explain that to
me thank you senator.
Thank you Senator Ivey Soto.
And then Senator Baca.
Thank you very much madam chair
and the secretary of those bits
but thank you so much for your
willingness to step up to serve
and and for the
For the for the truly impressive
resume that you bring into the
position
I I I am curious speaking of
legislative initiatives related
to veterans services and I do
think this is under department
of not please educate us but
about I think for five years
ago.
The legislature approved
establishing state veterans
cemetery.
we have to federal but from
commentaries in the state one in
Santa Fe that wonderful paired
and and and as I recall we had
identified six locations for
state veterans cemeteries so
that metroplex families wouldn't
have to drive so far
divisibility ones as well as as
of the time of the garlic sauce
what is the is the status of
those.
At this time and the
what can you tell us about that
project thanks yes Sir
Madam chair Senator Ivey Soto
thank you we are very proud of
our cemetery program we have
currently as you said to
federal.
Program to federal cemeteries
that we are working we also have
the one in angel fire we will be
working with the city of tiles
which breaking ground soon I'm
sorry can you hear me
will be round soon inTaos will
in conjunction with the city of
tax we are the angels I project
is going to also have a replica
of the Vietnam War memorial
we have have done many
interments and we will continue
to to establish that program
that program is under federal
grant and we are very proud to
be able to do with that so
I think hope I'm answering your
question with that we don't
facilitate or for seeing any
problems with that program going
forward and we will just
continue to do our best with
that so while we are certainly
working with veterans when they
have served their time and
deserve this treatment of being
very
properly with all of the honors
and distinction we want to make
sure that we're working with the
veterans who are still with us
to make sure that they continue
to enjoy what they're entitled
to as well so thank you so much
for the question Sir.
Actually so okay so then we've
got the one and you were regular
on thousand working on angel
fire are we doing anything in
other parts of the state my
recollection was we're looking
at one point at.
The Gallup McKinley area and the
laws will area.
Is those yes Sir yes Sir madam
chair Senator Ivey Soto yes that
is correct we have we will be
breaking ground in Gallup let me
check my notes here because I'm
still learning and I want to say
anything wrongly Gallup and
sports stand we have a new one
coming in Carlsbad thank you so
much steep.
Thank you Senator Ivey Soto are.
We finish yes yes yes the the
just last thing is is you know
so much of a Veterans Services
is our.
Federal and yet we have a.
The department of for this area
Really needed because of
historically record the they get
attention to the feds but from
services which I find to be
respectful of what about one of
the.
Thank you Betty Department out
from two months what do you see
as the major challenges that
you're facing is all of the
opportunities that you are.
Okay.
Share Senator Ivey Soto I also
appreciate the opportunity to
answer that question when I
first started I met with all the
directors to find out really
where we stand with certain
issues and the common
denominator and the red in those
conversations was that we have
an opportunity to raise our
profile we also have an
opportunity to educate the
public on where state budget and
and with federal benefits begin
so we have to make sure that we
do that
in a way that people understand
also to have in the public to
really understand who a veteran
it's we tend to think of a
veteran as being someone who has
served twenty or thirty years
they retire and then the
transition back into the public
what we know is a veteran can
also be a young person who has
served a couple years and that
they are now transitioning back
into civilian life and that
person can have some of the same
challenges in any New Mexicans
have so that's what was
important to me to also reach
out to our sister agencies so
that we can find out where our
agencies intersected more
importantly to also see what we
could do to help promote their
services because we know that
veterans have the same concerns
and challenges as anyone in the
state so it would be a
disservice for us not to develop
those relationships.
Well thank you very much for
that.
Very much for your willingness
to serve you know the those of
us who will do the work that we
do in terms of policy do so
because of the freedoms and
liberties we all enjoy as a
result of the service of people.
Thank you so very much
appreciate.
Thank you Sir.
Senator Baca.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Secretary designate for hearing
before us today
Fortunately I guess so we we
usually receive a the curriculum
by team or a brief resume of of
of the persons before us today I
guess due to the distance we
were provided those of and so I
I apologize but I don't have a
really good resume for you
sitting here in front of me so I
was gonna I'll just go through a
few questions I have no if you
don't mind do you think you can
summarize and and I'm not asking
for real brief summary summary
as to where we were born and
raised and then a kind of a
brief timeline up until now
including your your time in New
Mexico and that and I think you
said six years or so but if you
if you don't mind going over
that appreciated okay madam
chair and senator Baca thank you
so very much yes I have been a
new New Mexico resident for the
past seven years I moved here in
twenty thirteen because I needed
a change following a divorce and
I'm just trying to just get
myself reestablish and I'm proud
to say that it was one of the
best decisions that I have ever
made so I came here to work for
the university of New Mexico
medical group I was hired to be
their first compliance manager
and was higher specifically to
get them twelve and
so that they could enjoy some of
the benefits as a result of that
from there I went to South was
care center really for the same
purposes the agency was trying
to get certified for FQHC and
some of the certifications and
because of my track record that
I had established with State
University Medical universe in
New Mexico Medical Center I was
hired to do that in a proud to
say that we were able to to do
that from there I went to the
Department.
Hell's briefly to work with
secretary Konkol that the time
COVID had just started and now
we were trying to figure out the
best way to have in reach and
outreach into the communities
and as a woman of color is
important because representation
matters we wanted to make sure
that we were working with some
minority groups so that there
was a level of comfort when it
came to testing and also to
answering questions about the
virus at the time because of the
historical nature of what have
happened to the people of color
in dealing with
the health care industry from
there that's where I am now I am
currently with the department of
Veterans Services and I could
not be more proud to be here so
I try to make it as brief as
possible.
Thank you for that thank you for
telling me about that and I
appreciate your candor and your
answers well as that's your
purpose is for moving here
You served from what I read
were you were you active duty or
we're you reserves I was a
reserves are.
In the end you were were you
stationed in in in the Gulf if
you don't mind me asking no it's
not is it was not confidential
Sir Akhil that you know where I
was I was in Oman.
Okay and and how long were you
in theater.
We was there for three months
there.
What did your duties include
will you were there absolutely I
was a I'm sorry madam chair on
one I'm not doing this right
madam chair president of Baca
though we have to be in order so
madam chair Senator Baca I was a
medic and I was there to help
keep not only our airmen and
soldiers safe but also to
process the presence of war
thank you madam chair and
secretary designate of how long
did you serve exactly.
Thirteen years.
Yes because your departure madam
chair yes raising children.
That'll put a whole to anything.
Yeah it was my intention to take
one year off and then when you
became to in later became three
so yes that is something that I
regret.
Looking back madam chair and
secretary designate on the you
stated earlier that you help to
write some of the health orders
that
that have came now in retrospect
now Monday morning
quarterbacking yourself madam
chair is there anything that you
still could have done better
regarding the health orders or
that you would do differently or
that you felt should have been
done differently madam chair.
Madam chair Senator Baca.
one Monday morning quarterback
and is one of my favorite
phrases.
What we know now certainly that
there we probably could have
done some things differently but
at the time we did the best that
we could start that virus was
moving fast and furious and just
ravaging
our communities so based on the
knowledge of the health care
professionals we were doing the
best that we could and trying to
implement what was
What was available at the time.
Thank you madam chair and the
secretary designate
And so so in retrospect that and
I definitely understand that can
you tell me how long exactly
were at the department of health
secretary doesn't.
Madam shares Senator Baca was
there from March to
approximately September.
When I moved over to the
department of Veterans Services
so you were they're
approximately six months.
Madam chair senator property yes
Sir.
Madam chair and secretary
designate
How do you bill you we talked
about a little bit I heard that
you were a compliance officer
madam chair how did that benefit
you at your time of the
department of health.
Madam chair Senator Baca.
as a compliance officer you are
certainly trained to be detailed
oriented.
But also from someone who is
also very community oriented I
was able to combine those skills
so to reach the community but
also hopefully to be personable
because dealing in the pandemic.
Emotions run very high because
of what is no so I just tried my
best to be balanced and to
operate from a point
information is to be consistent
with that information thank you
Sir.
Thank you madam chair and
secretary designate and you are
I I appreciate your answer
and you know other you talked a
little bit earlier and and
there's been emphasis on on
some minority outreach madam
chair and secretary designate as
to COVID testing and and that
sort of thing and and as you
probably know by now in the
seven years that you've been
here madam chair and secretary
designate
the the the cultural differences
from other parts of the country
when compared to New Mexico are
vast we are I a my job of
majority minority state the
state of which I'm happy to be
part of that major and so I
guess my question to you
regarding not focus on minority
outreach what leads you to
believe that there is some year
or some apprehension from
minority groups that that to
reach out to medical providers
and have that sort of trust the
with medical care providers that
the briefly mention Madam chair.
Madam chair secretary
you madam chair Senator Baca.
The Tuskegee experiment is still
something that is very profound
and in the hearts and minds of
the black community.
When trust is breached it takes
time to build it back.
You compound that or just
propose that against what is
going on with this virus and the
at times selecting messages.
It can make anyone costs not
just a person caller.
So what we're trying to do is.
It really dispels some of those
equipment and to reassure people
through representation.
And saying that it is safe to
point to even take the vaccine
averages just like the vaccine
and I'm waiting for my time
because it's important for me to
lead by example and to stand up
for what I believe that we are
hoping as a community and we
hope that every New Mexicans
built this way that what we're
doing or what the status or the
department of health is doing it
with the VA is doing is making
sure that our messaging is
consistent that this vaccine is
safe and it will hopefully
hopefully stop this virus in its
tracks thank you Sir.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you secretary secretary
designate by appreciate that
answers well you I I just wanted
to point to the cultural
differences I've I guess I'll be
directing my question madam
chair secretary designate you
expect it.
After your your time here in
seven years that you've been
immersed in in this culture
enough in this state that that
you feel comfortable entering a
position where where state with
two point six percent of the
population is African American
in the state and all forty eight
percent this is Hispanic or
Hispanic next would you do you
feel like you like you can like
you are comfortable adequately
representing of both the both
cultures
White.
Hispanics to have a significant
amount of Hispanics here and and
of course African American you
feel comfortable with the chair
and secretary doesn't.
Madam chair and senator Baca I
want to make sure I understand
your question sure.
Are you asking do I feel
comfortable Representative the
department of Veterans Services
as a black woman is that what
you're asking
that really is what I'm I mean
that that is immutable trait as
I'm understanding now I'm so I
guess whatever we do in our life
from day to day we do is that so
you know if if that's how you
madam chair and secretary
designate answer that we know
what you're welcome answer how
you wish you're the you're the
one madam chair secretary
secretary designate that earlier
mentioned this minority
communication and so that's all
I'm exploring here and so I hope
that clarifies my question for
you thank you madam chair
secretary Senator Baca thank you
for clarifying that yes you're
right it is immutable I am who I
am.
And I don't think that when the
governor of the congressional.
tapped me for this position she
was concerned about my color I
think she was looking at my
skill set and my ability to be.
That's first and foremost
being a veteran.
Is something that I really feel
that regardless if you are a
Democrat Republican and
independent that typically
people can get behind because of
the commitment in service that
they've been able to perform and
so that being the first black
person to be appointed to the to
this position was something to
somebody else pointed out to me.
I was interested in because
there are opportunities within
the state to make the lives
better for our veterans and
their families yes being a black
woman I'm sure is going to come
up from time to time because I
am a proud black one.
And living here in this state
for the past seven years has
been a hindrance for me
everything that I've done has
been the next step up the next
level up.
And I would like to think that I
have made those steps not
because I'm black but because I
am highly qualified to do what I
do.
And
You know I
I just feel that there's so much
opportunity if you want to get
specific with within the range
within the the black rates when
I first moved here I was told
that we're approximately three
percent of the population that
didn't deter me again at all if
anything I find it to be a
benefit because that tells me
that we have strength in small
numbers.
So I hope that answers your
question because I so much
appreciate that.
I appreciate your answer thank
you all you know all all all
leave it at that I I guess I
didn't really so I I guess it is
and I apologize I must not put
my question correctly but I'll
leave it at that of moving on to
to the state the federal of of
relationship madam chair and
senator secretary designate
How do you view the the
interaction between states
that's one one I one thing I
hear from veterans quite a bit
it is and and it's difficult to
walk the line well as to where
state agencies can help them
report where they land a within
federal jurisdictions are able
to a system with with things
like health care and and
veterans benefits and things
like that.
How do you how do you see that
relationship and and how how do
you how are you going to pursue
that with that with the federal
government madam chair.
Madam chair Senator Baca we
currently enjoy a very good
relationship with the local VA
all of our veterans services
officers aren't trained and
certified to assist any veteran
albeit regarding a state claim
or even a federal claim and
that's one of the benefits of
being certified I don't
anticipate anything but
furthering that relationship
with the the federal side.
Thank you madam chair and and
the and thank you Secretary
designate and and and there are
you know these questions I know
I went a little bit in depth on
some of but I to as you might
know Emma desert storm veteran
active duty and from the
location you indicated I was but
a few miles off shore during
work most of that that conflict
reduction desert shield and
desert storm so I have of the
probably the identical southwest
Asian deployment model that you
have and so I do appreciate your
service in the amongst those of
us that are sitting here I can
certainly understand this the
the sacrifice and and the what
you done for your country and so
I I do welcome you to New Mexico
and and I look forward to a to
see what what you do with that
and Services cause it is us most
certainly a topic that is near
and dear to my heart as is as is
the the the remainder of the
populace here but that's a just
a special spot for me sell I'll
conclude my questions with that
and the thank you madam chair
thank you Secretary designate
for your patience in your
demeanor and your candor and
your answers I appreciated that
thank you thank you Senator Baca
for your service.
You any other.
Committee a.
Wish to speak.
The man I.
Secretary does need of I just
want to to thank you for your
service and for your your
continued service to the state
of New Mexico it is wonderful to
know that there is we have such
a highly qualified person here
to serve the veterans of our
state and I look forward to
supporting your confirmation.
What is the pleasure of the
committee.
You do pass Madam.
Second.
This insurance to pass Center
more seconds and senator Wirth
miss with please call the roll
Senator Baca yes.
Senator Lopez.
Senator Moores yes.
Senator o'neill yes Senator T.
C. Pino yes Senator Pirtle.
Yes Senator Stewart yes Senator
Wirth yes Senator Ingle yes.
Senator.
Yeah stand Senator Ivy Soto.
Yes.
Ten to one.
Ten with one excuse given to
pass.
Thank you very much of secretary
does me Smith and so you know I
my understanding is that the the
committee is recommendation will
be considered on the floor next
week.
Right thank you so very much
madam chair and I have to think
general fox taken time out of
his morning to come and speak on
my behalf and again to everybody
in this New World Trade some
meet ups this morning thank you
so very much for your time and
thank you senator Ortiz Y. Pino
again for your kind words.
Senator Padilla.
Thank you madam chairwoman and
thank you to the members of the
committee
very pleased to introduce you
but I don't need introduce you
because this individual has
probably met everybody at
different times in his career in
state government and in other
roles that he's had John Salazar
has been our.
Cabinet secretary designate for
almost a year now I think we're
coming up almost on a year now
and I cannot say enough about
this individual have had the
opportunity to work with them
online offline it cetera I've
been wildly impressed with his
ability to listen to bring
consensus to bring people
together to look for solutions
it is really very exciting to
To be able to present this
country to you again just an
amazing human being all around
he has been so supportive of any
number of initiatives are but
they're just a chief information
officer he has served in the CIO
role for four different
government agencies here in New
Mexico yes extensive experience
providing hands on management of
large scale information
technology and modernization
projects.
He's prove it has proven
experience guiding business and
technical areas to complete
projects on time and more
importantly to us within budget
some of these projects get
wildly out of control and I
believe he will be very helpful
in bringing this
this budgeting exercise that he
is a huge budget and has a lot
of money is coming from a lot of
different areas and keeping them
on track and is able to merge
customer and user needs within
business requirements again the
budget restrictions and
logistical considerations are
top of mind walking manages
people and helping them to
motivate them to get the work
done.
Just a couple of phrases that I
want you to be aware of that are
super important for someone in
this type of role
you know his extensive
enterprise software
implementation experience in
management and and
implementations.
he's developed and and proven
methodologies for monitoring
controlling project budgets as I
mentioned in cost controls he's
very collaborative he's a
strategic thinker and it's
something that we really need in
this particular role so I I can
just could not say enough about
this concrete he is supportive
of organizational business
requirements that land people
process and technology we have a
ton of legacy systems all over
state government and he's very
focused on modernizing those
I've already worked with him on
a couple of those projects and
he is a certified PMP which is a
project management professional
and we have not had you know a
lot of that skill set as in some
of these rules let me just tell
you some of the rules of these
had again coming up on a year is
our designation the cabinet
secretary role for do it for
what what we're looking at him
for today he's been a contract
project manager over at CS this
we've got government non
government cetera also very
important he's been which CIO
for the New Mexico department of
workforce solutions and did a
ton of work there to modernize a
lot of the work that's that
more.
And it's been a project manager
at the New Mexico taxation and
revenue department which is one
of our largest you know state
government agencies and and just
brought nine hit a couple home
runs in that role he was CIO for
the New Mexico taxation and
revenue department as well as
they were going to many many
different changes.
And he was an I. T. director for
the oil and that natural gas
administration revenue database
which is it which is what he was
the owners called on guard as we
know.
He was also the I. team manager
for the personal income tax
system for the tax and
Representative department and I
could literally go on and on
about all of the various
experience that this gentleman
brings to this role I think
we're very lucky to be able to
talk to somebody like this for
this type of a position and it
really is a great you know but
addition to his his career as
well one thing that I think most
people know about me is that one
of my major some lanes is is
that I work on broadband
projects within the state
legislature.
when I took my role in the
legislature about nine years ago
coming up on nine years.
Immediately started working on
this issue and it just like
pulling teeth with the previous
administration when they were in
in their in office and you know
I'm not trying to you know bad
mouth or anything like that that
particular group but it was
really difficult to get
information within a very short
period of time secretary
designates on the side was able
to bring a plan together a cost
strategy and and was able to
come to the legislature and say
here's what we really do need
here's what the problem is and I
think that's going to lend
itself to getting this massive
challenge that we all have
accomplished here in New Mexico
and fixed for every every New
Mexican.
So with that Madam chairwoman I
could talk for probably another
ninety minutes about this
country but I'm happy to to if
it's alright with you to hear
from secretary designates on the
side and then we'll go would in
whatever direction you'd like
Madam chairwoman.
Yes US secretary of those cells
are please please go ahead at in
chair members of the committee
on and thank you for Senator
Padilla for the introduction I'm
so honored to be in front of you
today for this hearing for
confirmation well I heard the
term wall one day when my
daughter graduated from college
the individual said we stand on
the shoulders of giants and I I
look at that and that is really
my mind.
Life in a nut shell I stand on
all the people before me I I'm
so grateful to my parents my
grandparents for all the
sacrifices that they made in
their life so that I could be
hearing from you today I stand
on the shoulders of my staff
members we have a four hundred
forty staff members here at do
it to do an excellent job on day
in and day out on the sacrifices
that they make for their
families as well I stand on the
shoulders of my family my wife
my children who had sacrificed
and and so that I could be here
today because I can be with them
you know like I am very grateful
to the governor for the
opportunity to serve I wasn't
quite sure that I wanted to take
this job our when I met with I
could feel the passion in your
heart that she had for
constituents that the goals and
the missions that she wanted to
accomplish and I was just
honored that I could be part of
that team it reminded me of
someone that I worked for in the
past more Debbie had a meal that
really made an impact and set
the City of Santa Fe with her
thoughts her knowledge and her
passion and I thought that our
governor had the same passion
and it would be an honor for me
to work with their it's been a
challenging year I was hired on
March second and I believe on
March eleventh the governor
announced the health emergency
our our staff members work
diligently and and getting a lot
of the software in place you
know we have to
Move of course to establish a
telework infrastructure to allow
seventeen thousand employees to
work from home that was not easy
all we have to order equipment
we order two thousand laptops at
the time that everyone was or
laptops throughout the world we
finally got the laptop to rule
them out we had challenges with
department of health and their
legacy systems and tracking
positive positive taste test
cases and contact tracing but
we're able to roll up our
sleeves get in there without
department of health and help
modernize that system to produce
better results.
from there we went to build our
our budget we've been working on
cyber security issues we've been
working on broadband and I I can
honestly say that my staff
members have worked very
diligently and have done
everything that we've asked them
to do and beyond their dedicated
group of individuals and I'm
just part happy to be part of
the organization I do have some
family members as well as co
workers and this is business
partners from the community
vendors that we deal with on a
regular basis and hopefully they
can speak on my behalf so madam
chair thank you so much again
Senator Padilla thank you for
your introduction.
Thank U. S. secretary designate
madam chair woman I think there
are some family members however
you'd like to to proceed we're
open to your direction.
Thank you thanks secretary does
and secretary for the at I'm
sorry Senator Padilla
and and thank you secretary
designate cells are
again for for taking the for for
being here today and for for
your your willingness to to
serve the state
yes we have quite a few people I
believe there's thirteen people
I signed up for public comment
on this and during public
comment I'm actually going to
have to leave and chairman Ivy
Soto will end up taking over by
phone but as we're managing that
Miss Vigil will be.
Letting folks know what order
they're going to be going and so
so I'll let Miss Vigil started
out thank you thank you senator
so I believe family is important
so we'll start with US secretary
designees daughter Jennifer
Salazar.
Let's start with the secretary
designees daughter Jennifer.
I'm sorry I didn't M. U..
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee it's an
honor to be here today to
support my father I've known him
all my life and he's always
displayed qualities of hard work
dedication loyalty honesty and
reliability.
I look up to him as a role model
he's taught me much about the
values of hard work and
integrity.
And more importantly he's taught
me care and compassion for
others he's always doing things
to help others from volunteering
to help family on the weekends
with various projects and just
decide now he's very handy as
well to inviting people over for
now when they don't have a place
to go.
He cares deeply about people and
he cares deeply about every
project he takes on.
He's already display these
qualities in his role as
secretary designate which she
started just a couple of weeks
before the pandemic struck he's
worked tirelessly sometimes
operating on very little sleep
he does so because he believes
in the value and importance of
this work and it's serving the
people of New Mexico especially
during this challenging time.
In both his personal and
professional life he always
shows that always gives his all
and always gets the job done.
I have no doubt that he will
continue to continue to do a
great job leading the department
of information technology.
Thank you so much for the
opportunity to speak today.
Thank you next we'll go to
secretary can Ortiz.
Good morning madam chairman and
members of the committee thank
you for the opportunity to speak
on behalf of secretary designate
John Salazar it's the truly an
opportunity to stand in support
of Mr Salazar going back a
little bit of time I had the
pleasure of working most of my
career was secretary Salazar
when I was appointed as in B. D.
director back in two thousand
five John was the chief
information officer of the
taxation and revenue department.
M. B. D. as you know is division
of
the taxation revenue department
so I started working with him
and his team implementing a lot
of technical logical advances we
strengthen the security of our
driver's license with facial
recognition I saw him lead a
team of very capable individuals
not only for MVP but the entire
cast Department of moving
forward when I was appointed in
two thousand and eight to as a
cabinet secretary of workforce
solutions one of the first calls
that I made was to secretary
Salazar at the time workforce
solutions did not have a chief
information officer and I was
lucky that I was able to
convince John to join me over
there in two thousand and eight
it was the largest recession in
modern history not nothing
compared to what workforce
solution is doing in two
thousand and twenty but there
were individuals that could not
certify could not receive their
unemployment at budget on time
they could not get through to
the Department and so we work
together on a comprehensive
solution to implement an eight
hundred number so unemployed
would not have to pay long
distance charges and also we
were able to basically
implemented for funding can be
paid to their debit cards within
twenty four hours
moving forward when I was the
secretary of state's office due
to a constitutional amendment
that was passed for the new the
corporations be bureau from the
PRC to secretary of state's
office I and reach out to John
to assist us as we are
modernizing the system at that
time the average wait time for a
corporation document was about a
hundred and ten days and then
within six months through
technological advances we
eliminated that wait time to
about six days which was a.
Huge accomplishment within only
six months
I I his daughter indicated about
the late nights that secretary
Salazar she's off on her on her
side of it I experience it on my
side because he was working
overnight sending emails
overnight and I I just can't say
enough about his dedication last
thing I like to say is I've been
truly impressed with the team
that he's built around him it do
it lot of capable folks I've had
the pleasure of working with
several of them and I think the
department information
technology is is set to bring
New Mexico for as far as
technology madam chair members
of the committee is strongly
urge your support Secretary
sells our confirmation thank you
for your time.
Next we'll go to secretary of
transportation Michael Santa.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee secretary Mike
Santa for DOT also speaking to
you as a friend of Mr Salazar
for fifteen years I worked with
them both in the his public
sector life is private sector
life.
One of the attributes I think
has not been mentioned and I've
always appreciated as his direct
nature as we live in this
virtual world we turn on our
computers are messing with our
cameras and microphones we
always don't care about the wire
the how why they're not working
we we just want to get to that
solution quickly and John can
always cut through the clutter
he's very direct and get to that
solution and make things work
the way that they should yes a
big job ahead of him I know
how important broadband is for
say I think he's the right
person for that we're going to
work very closely on that I
can't say enough good things
about him and I just heard your
support in his confirmation I
think you have a good one here
and I hope you vote yes to
confirm so thank you madam chair
members of the committee.
Thank you next we'll go to our
acting director of state person
Ricky Serna.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee it's a pleasure to
speak on behalf of the secretary
just new set aside I I met him
shortly after he joined the the
administration in March he came
in with his experience of
department workforce solutions
and it's our unemployment
insurance system to very quickly
help us react and respond to the
pandemic to to help us implement
new federal cares Act programs
for the state of New Mexico and
really help us ask and answer
the right questions that cut
down on the time it took to get
New Mexicans the resources that
they need to overcome the
pandemic and I think I'm very
much for that what I appreciate
most about it is he knows how to
not speak I. T. to individuals
like of the rest of us that
don't understand IT he
understands how to translate
problems into solutions and he
he understands how to get things
quickly so we've always
appreciated his sense of urgency
for example one evening I called
them up to let him know that we
were working with MPD who needed
dozens of laptops to get their
staff up and running are
remotely and and working from
home and in two days the staff
have computers in their hands to
be able to do the work that they
need to do to get New Mexicans
and B. D. services to a quickly
and timely now over at the state
personnel office we appreciate
very much his vision to help us
automate the business processes
for processing personnel actions
that the state of New Mexico
which is going to help state
agencies re hire people very
quickly and more efficiently so
I just want to thank John will
have the opportunity for for all
of the help that he's went to
the two agencies I've had the
pleasure of working with in the
past couple of years and
strongly encourage your support
of his appointment thank you.
Thank you next is Brenda
Prescott's.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Brenda for Estes for the past
six months I've been working as
a project manager at the
department of information
technology prior to joining do
it I work for the LFC is a
program evaluator and I. T.
analyst I have known secretary
designate Salazar for the past
twelve years in a professional
capacity during my tenure at LFC
Mr cells are served as a I. T.
project manager on various state
agencies IT projects where I was
either evaluating or monitoring
the projects
secretary Ortiz mentioned a
couple of them one being the
Project over at the secretary of
state.
John continues to demonstrate.
high level of professionalism
I've known nothing but that from
him and all these years that
I've known him and his extensive
IT knowledge and experience and
leadership as a secretaries
Ortiz mentioned is going to
bring New Mexico forward and I.
T. I am respectfully and proudly
in support of John Salazar's
confirmation as a secretary of
the department of information
technology and thank you for
allowing me to speak today on
his behalf.
Thank you next up will gar
Clark.
Well good morning everybody and
of thank you for this
opportunity then chair and
members
John Salazar secretary does need
to I first met him in the early
nineties and I was asked to.
Develop the geographic
information system for being
here so you Santa Fe and Hughes
I. T. director at the time and I
was impressed with the way he
handled me.
In the context of the let me go
back to your can be back within
the I needed it and so his his
level of of of administrating
and surrounding himself with the
people of no is is fabulous so.
I moved to the state engineers
office are and
To system and overseeing the
building of their enterprise so
your spiritual information
system and he was at that time
the CIO of the taxation and
revenue department and at that
time you can give me a call and
said I need to G. I. S.
expertise and also assisted him
in the.
In hiring an individual who
still there now is a rock star
by the way but what I the reason
why mentioning that is apt to
his ability to recognize talent
and surround himself with good
people of integrity and good
work ethic is exceptional I know
working for him with him at the
department information
technology I am that you're
special information officer for
the state of New Mexico and also
to I have Lee support the New
Mexico broadband program as
well.
And I gotta tell you why I want
to tell you is that
the
secretary designate salads are.
Has all the right port point you
know the difference between a
bit and byte by the way since
technical large technical
knowledge is is phenomenal it's
wonderful ideas attention to
detail is great but he knows
when not to go down into the
weeds that's for us to do also
he also has good administrative
skills you've got the are
wonderful people skills and he's
got all the parts of the cabinet
secretary and CIO I'll be very
blunt that we have not seen in a
long time so it's a pleasure to
be is a breath of fresh air that
has come into the department
information technology and I am
up and also to these madam hard
as well are usually put all that
together you and in the last
scene he's he's really helps to
so.
But I just want to say that I'd
like to get that designate out
of use of title and I highly
supported it's a pleasure
working with the music
taskmasters masters you know
it's he he really gets things
done any gets us working even at
night as well too but to.
It's a pleasure to to respond in
that way because of his
leadership so thank you very
much.
Thank you next we have a
assurity bus from risks that.
Good morning madam secretary
members of the Senate thank you
for this opportunity and then a
mystery to us COMITTA I'm the
CEO offer a sense the company we
funded out of New Mexico tech
I'm a proud otherness of tech.
So.
Secretary Salazar is an amazing
individual like like everybody
stated but there are some very
interesting things that maybe
New Mexico on the map today I'll
give you an example I met him in
two thousand five in support of
New Mexico off no more.
Asked for an opportunity that's
what we were doing to the
federal government at the time
on cybersecurity we were not
proven the researchers have and.
And machine learning PhD in
computer science did lot of work
but never in a public setting on
a commercial setting but as well
research he give us the first
opportunity that spot then as to
stop what this insisted that we
are the largest cybersecurity
employer in the southwest not
New Mexico southwest a hundred
and ten employees that one
opportunity give us the stock
company that's very successful
if when we accept will be one of
the largest exits have a New
Mexico had and New Mexico tech
is the single largest
shareholder so to that.
To me that is an amazing moment
in my journey to be a successful
seo today I get to meet too at
world class leaders and solve
problems of interest that puts
New Mexico in the top quadrant
and cybersecurity innovation
research and employment that's a
very important point the other
important point lot of people do
not know is John give life to
several people like me who come
from India.
It's a very fine subtlety off
all the places nobody comes to
New Mexico I mean I'll be very
honest right I mean if it's not
my advice that I would not have
shown up in New Mexico an
opportunity to go to top schools
in the country but retaining us
in the state is an extremely
hard of thing as well because
once we graduate we leave the
state right of it that's the
thing not just with spread
students like me but even New
Mexicans a study in the top
research universities leave the
state for opportunities what
John dead over the years was he
gave life to numerous immigrants
like me I mean I can name them
by name sort of extremely
successful to that we doing well
we got our families here we call
New Mexico hold to me that was a
very important civility job
creation and retention is
something people forget that and
he changed our lives that's a
very subtle point before gap in
I. T. retaining talent and
recruiting talent of the hardest
things and we're the years he's
been successful giving us those
opportunities to call this home.
The important thing when he was
designate secretary tree the
most important thing was a
pandemic while everybody was
worried about the virus COVID
nineteen the cyber attackers
were taking down states states
like Maryland.
Virginia Georgia taxes Luciana
Alabama Mississippi declared
state emergencies our governor
was extremely nervous saying
that what will happen to New
Mexico then we are of state with
not a lot of resources yet we
got to protect our citizens the
students.
The state employees and our
critical services John was
trying to get into is all at the
same time rollout the work from
home and F. secure are without
hindering the service of the
state it was a hopeless task and
he did extremely well is it get
the right people in the room.
He can give us three sees
collaborate communicate.
Builder confidence.
Focus on these three sees keep
me posted and let's make sure we
as a state will not declare
cyber emergency that is a big
thing and thankfully not can
work to date we were able to
take that on every single alert
every single pandemic that you
see in the front lines of Wall
Street and New York life sorting
of New York times we still have
those problems but critical to
communicate and address them in
a real time so with that madam
chair and Senators I truly want
to support secretary Salazar for
the opportunity has provided for
numerous people like me is that
true partnership today we all
are Val settled valgus backed it
in our own rights but it's not
opportunity to support him for
what he has done for us and to
be a problem New Mexico and to
really see how we can have
leaders like that let path for
future generations thank you
very much.
Next will have marked and.
Thank you madam chair of members
of the committee.
it's great to be with you here
today and I proudly.
Speaking in support of the
confirmation of John solids are
as the cabinet secretary of the
department of information
technology I DO so madam chair
members of the committee as
someone who has been in the
information technology field for
the last thirty six years myself
I have served as the chairman of
the information technology
commission and I have also
served as the chairman of the
New Mexico telehealth commission
Madam chair members the
committee I think Johnson was
are really represents the.
Of the past in state government
employees we have in our state
He spent a career has spent a
career in state government.
And now he gets an opportunity
to be confirmed as the state CIO
in the field he served a career
reporting up to how many times
does that happen I think it
serves as a tremendous example
of for all the state employees
in government employees of that
don't get recognition along the
way.
Of the lots of hard work lots of
diligent yes lots of years you
can attain the position
secretary Salazar finds himself
in today.
the approach to the Department
of information technology
service specially at this moment
and by the way madam chair
members of the committee and
it's been mentioned as welcoming
gift of as the new secretary
designate us to be able to to
work in a pandemic of and yet
lots of things to overcome but I
think there was low over Alan
the department of lack of
confidence of a lack of
leadership at that department I
think the cabinet secretary to
cabinet secretary designate
caveman and can build up that
confidence turned around the
morale and quite frankly did it
so I ninety nine no he was one
of them.
Because he is one of the.
and I think that that tooth loss
to make that Department capable
of what it is Dawn and what it
is executed on of these very
very trying times along the way
he's he's he's kind
compassionate he has a quiet
confidence he's just a pleasure
to work with
I strongly suggest the committee
and support the committee's
recommendation of course the
confirmation of John Salazar has
of the cabinet secretary of
department of information
technology congratulations John
thank you madam chair.
Next we'll hear from a lot.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name's Mike Phelan
I'm the managing partner of
Deloitte for the state of New
Mexico
in the white farm I also lead a
region where we serve the state
of Illinois Michigan Ohio
Indiana Kentucky West constant
in Minnesota this will be
relevant in a minute.
I first met secretary designate
cells are twelve years ago when
as the C. I. O. D. W. S. he was
procuring services to modernize
the IT systems there which
secretary Ortiz previously spoke
up
since then I've had the
privilege of serving the
secretary designate on and off
over the last three
administrations.
In my work here in the state and
the back to those many states
that I mentioned a moment ago I
frequently work with state C.
ideals.
I can attest to you today the
secretary designate Salazar it's
certainly in the highest
echelons among them.
He is a superior executive an
excellent administrator Sam the
technologist but more impressive
than all those is is unmatched
leadership.
He forms and inspires teens they
become high performing teams
with a sense of mission.
He leads them towards a common
goal.
In a fashion that is where.
His team served the public with
excellence and integrity because
of him.
I'm a native New Mexico I live
here.
With that I can say that I
believe this state would be a
benefactor.
Should the secretary designate
be confirmed thank you for the
opportunity graduations job.
Thank you next we have Andrea
Martinez.
Madam chair members of the
committee good morning
So it is with great honor that I
am here today in support of John
Salazar for confirmation as the
cabinet secretary for the
department of information
technology.
We first I first met John back
in two thousand nine when I was
wearing a previous had a
procurement specialist back then
for the department of workforce
solutions he came war came on
board as chief information
officer we worked on many
projects but the one that sticks
out the most is the why tax
replacement project it was a
heavy heavy list
it was clear to me and to all
that we all those who worked
with him then and now that the
John is a man of integrity
intelligence a wonderful mentor
and a great great leader.
I cannot think of anyone better
to leave the department of
information technology and I am
so pleased to have the
opportunity to work with him
again.
so I therefore at in here today
and ask that you support as I
unequivocally support the
confirmation of John Salazar as
the do it cabinet secretary
thank you madam chair and
members of the committee.
Thank you next we'll hear from
Leo Baca.
Madam chair members of the
committee I'm Leo Baca I'm the
director of government and
regulatory affairs for
CenturyLink in New Mexico
I've gotten to know John Salazar
very well over the past year
we've had several meetings to
talk about yes what broadband
issues and you know I have found
in to be highly competent
listens well he's fair and he
understands how to work with the
entire broadband industry in New
Mexico with the goal of
improving broadband across our
state so how can I add to all
the other glowing remarks that
have been made other than to say
that I support John Salazar was
appointed thank you.
And finally we have.
I'm we have Casey stone.
Good morning.
Madam chair members of the
committee.
Thank you for allowing me the
opportunity to support John
Salazar and his confirmation for
cabinet secretary of the
department of information
technology.
John and I began our
professional career together two
thousand eight he was CIO for
the department of workforce
solutions.
Looking back at our time
together he is a successful
record of solving tough
solutions in tougher times.
Two thousand eight when we first
started it was the height of the
unemployment crisis and last
year when he was named cabinet
secretary you would overnight
yet to support Representative a
remote workforce due to the shut
down for the comment pandemic.
Similar to two thousand eight
when John successfully upgraded
Department workforce solutions
existing on.
Insurance center is now tasked
with the need to modernize the
state of New Mexico so I. T.
infrastructure in my opinion
there's not a better person for
the job.
John is amongst the best leaders
are the fourteen work with his
incredible vision and ability to
set direction and motivators
team and partners to execute on
that vision spot beyond compare.
He holds himself to the same
side high standards that he sets
for everyone else any truly
brings out the best in everyone
that he works with his ability
to cut through the noise and
focus on results and he does it
in a highly collaborative what
John is an asset to the state of
New Mexico we'll continue to
bring new ideas strategic
insight to the organization.
Thank you.
Thank you very much thank you
very much everybody who
testified on behalf of Mr
Salazar and Senator Paypen DO
for your Austin presentation of
this account for you Mr Salazar
thank you so much for your
service to stay in Mexico you
will need to step up and over
the years and continue to
provide leadership in Brighton
different positions given the
A difficult is I'm trying to
find the audio I'm going to ask
Senator Stewart if you would not
mind of presiding over the Q.
and a portion of this this
nomination I will also just to
remind our committee members
that are.
You can also on the floor that
the that the background
information would be provided to
those members who are
participating
in their offices and that we've
had background information of
are provided to folks in the
building and and to be that are
collected at the end of the
hearing today so with that Madam
pretend that you basically is
be so kind as to provide over
the.
My questions.
I'm happy to do that Mr chairman
so I may need some help from the
secretary of finding the
committee members that are
interested in speaking I do see
a center Mark Moores hand up so
Senator Moores the foreshores
thank you Senator Stewart
to get organized here and thank
you for all Senator Ivy Soto for
deliveries to our offices market
really was helpful.
So first off your furnace no
Johnny.
Madam chair Senators yes Sir I
grew up in the Espanola valley
little kid from on call the and
her not just Mexico so are you
really are you related to
County.
Kenny.
I'm sorry can you Salazar are
you muted I can hear you I
apologize.
Are you any relation to counter
decency are was talking to
already.
Madam chair Senator no I'm not
related to make sure if all the
boys must know we're gonna make
sure we're not related somehow.
After all these generations of
their.
If you know I'm I'm a single
guy.
Awesome.
to questions going over your
resume what we always do this
with our confirmations
one talk about your role with
CS W. did you guys when you were
there have any contracts with
the state or any elected
officials of state legislators
stuff like that that we need to
know about it disclosed.
Madam chair senator Morris C. S.
W. was formulated in the two
thousand a time frame of we have
to an individual by the name of
king hamlets what was he up CEO
and the owner of CSW but all her
work was around.
Date software modernization
projects so all the work that
was done for for CSW of was done
on the behalf of state agencies
so that work was done from two
thousand eight to two thousand
twenty R. J. let died in twenty
fourteen I took over the
leadership and ownership for all
of the organization and twenty
fifteen and and ran that till
you know I resigned in twenty
twenty to come take this child.
so can you go over the contracts
that you have a state agencies
and you have any up state
legislators or any other
government officials that we
need to know about disclosed
about and talk about we've as
you well know John with that
situations including I. T.
situations were contracts in
conflicts in the former Senator
Stewart in jail are or have been
in jail so we need to talk about
these kind of conflicts in an
open public setting like this
what caught what contract you
have with state agencies what
are you doing or do you have and
you have any residual income
coming from your investment in
this coming from the taxpayers.
Madam chair Senator.
I do not have any revenue coming
in to the organization basically
well it's been a two man show
operation like I was working as
a project manager on several
different projects and for
several state agencies I do not
have any contracts within the
Senate members or house members
that the contracts that I had
from twenty fifteen Ford spoke.
I did some work for GSD.
I did some work for environment.
And I did some work for more
vehicle those are the contracts
that I had but again since I
took this job all those
contracts were done.
and the only contract that I had
to was open was GSD and
I terminate the contract just
need to take this job
As you know we talk a lot thank
you for that disclosure it's
very important something I ask
all confirmations that we go
through it says support that
we're we're with the taxpayers
and the public about of what
senator right to have conflicts
as long as we are honest and
open about them and address them
in that manner so I appreciate
that
we'll talk about brought down a
little bit it's also something
we've all been talking about it
caring.
What what are your plans or what
what how do you see do it played
a part in increasing broadband
around the state of New Mexico.
Madam chair senator that's a
good question broadband is in
the a difficult.
Our challenge is a challenge not
only for New Mexico it's a
challenge across the world on
because there are two issues
with broadband the first issue
is accessibility what does that
mean accessibility is is
providing services to the home
to the business and some areas
of the state we just don't have
the infrastructure to do that
the other problem that we have
with broadband decision Mexico
as affordability.
broadband is not regulated in
any way ISP.
The vendor guys be vendor
community basically charges
rates that they need to recover
and make a profit so are there
there are some challenges with
broadband let me tell you what
we did and what we're working
on.
In the in twenty nineteen do it
commissioned a study
It was a study on the.
And and it actually give us an
assessment of for broadband was
that in New Mexico and it
actually developed a strategic
plan going forward.
What the study did is it it's
there's a lot of engineering and
mapping that was done in the
state and the study our.
What started the process was
getting the data from the nine
one systems to identify all the
residents in in New Mexico we
also got some data from the
Navajo Nation because those
addresses are potential
customers right there there's of
individuals that need.
Broadband the study identified
that we have about twenty
percent gap.
Of our residents don't have
internet all of it so a hundred
and twenty six thousand don't
have internet they they need
that internet at the homes and
businesses.
they also identify that in order
for us to provide services it's
going to cost about a billion
dollars in in funding to meet
that gap.
And that number is based upon
the number of miles that are on
serve throughout the state and
the promises that it passes
through so they identified three
different strategies number one
lay fiber to areas where you
have clustered communities and
people living next to each other
number two look at all wireless
technology to deliver services.
fiber.
If we lay fiber in the areas
that were identified and they
identified the areas we can
serve fifty thousand
constituents don't have services
now.
If we do though fixed wireless
environment we can serve forty
five thousand that still leaves
another thirty one thousand and
the state that are too far apart
for this technologies to work
but there are some newer
technologies are coming on board
we've heard about.
A Tesla starting program where
there doing satellite longer or
low earth orbit satellites
that's going to be a game
changer going forward so our
strategy is to take the
information from the study and
roll it out to the public we
want to build.
With a grant.
A grant application process want
to be able to help the
communities are apply for grants
that was the other thing that
was identified in the study is
that in order for us to meet the
gaps.
We the state and the federal
government along with the high
speed providers have to work
together and finding the funds
to make it happen we believe the
federal government because there
are a lot of requests out there
can find sixty eighty percent of
the funding that we need we're
hoping that New Mexico can
create up broadband grant
program or we get two hundred
million in there and then we get
another two hundred million from
the broadband providers and we
we should be able to solve the
gap within five years.
so I I've talked a lot Senator
madam chair I hope that you.
if you need additional
information be glad to provide
clarifying areas.
Thank thank you John I I
appreciate that I assume when
you said fifty thousand you're
talking about fifty thousand
households up to two thousand
people correct fifty thousand
premises so that would be
buildings right house residents
or businesses.
In in the U. you brought up the
starlink I know there's a lot of
the different I propose right
now but I understand we're
starlink is that it still
requires lost middle and last
mile of connective itty offer
fiber so what we're if you did
starling.
If you don't you need receivers
a last mile fiber for that.
what's starting because as they
provide past are like mice much
like direct TV or dish to give
you a satellite and it's
automated now it talks to the
modem and the set of the the the
civil satellites to they give
you connects to their satellite
up in the sky from there they
have a home based that that
connects to their internet
connectivity so all of that is
provided through there is no
last mile of wiring that needs
to be done it's a satellite that
you mount on the roof very much
like direct TV.
Okay that's different I
understood that I know that
we've been invested a lot of
money in New Mexico companies
including
Development spent putting legal
money and other money into
programs done Rossel maybe
center pro one a little bit more
about that than I do
doing I think it's a high
altitude what I'm Senate member
of the name of the company note
Rivera optimistic and excited
about that it seems to me Madam
said of if we're gonna be
spending this kind of money we
should be New Mexico companies
can you talk about that
technology what we're doing for
New Mexico jobs in New Mexico
companies I think starlink was
owned by you on must correct
that's correct I want to remind.
I
want to remind you both to go
through the chair on sorry madam
chair messed up yesterday to my
apologies
madam chair
secretary doesn't if you could
talk about what we're doing for
New Mexico businesses The New
Mexico jobs with those new
technologies madam chair.
Madam chair I apologize Senator.
I started it.
So the company is sky right and
they're working through economic
development and what they're
proposing is putting some err
ships up in.
Of course you know up in the
stratosphere that's going to
provide wifi they've been
working on a pilot project that
that B. is being run out of
economic development so I don't
have too many details but what I
can do tell you is that do it
was awarded ten million dollars
and twenty nineteen for
broadband are requests we've
been able to give.
Or a large a seven million
dollars some of that has been
awarded to sacred winds glad to
the co New Mexico to the public
so that money is going back to
them for economic development
and allowing them to lay
infrastructure but the grant
program that we envision with a
two hundred million is obviously
going to be for New Mexico
companies to expand broadband
services with of New Mexico
employees hopefully and that was
part of the strategies we want
to be able to use in combat
providers on to.
Provide services in New Mexico
and of to me you know and the
plan identified this fiber optic
is probably the best solution
going forward fiber optic has
you know a couple of decades
worth of life it'll it'll last
longer when you go with wifi and
even satellite you have to
repair and replace that
equipment on a regular basis it
has a five to ten year lifespan
so investing and in all three
technologies in the future make
sense for New Mexico and that's
our plan going forward madam
chair thank you.
Madam chair John secretary
doesn't how much is fiber to lay
a per mile.
Madam chair Senator we have some
price quotes in the strategic
plan and it depends on the area
but the price quotes are on
thousand to forty thousand per
mile.
So it just economically
politically not feasible madam
chair of the thank you that
we're going to run a fiber line
to a ranch in broad view New
Mexico
assist not ever gonna happen
with millions of dollars of one
person so the other technologies
we'll talk about that are being
developed in Mexico are very
critical for us not only create
jobs but find that internet
service when this passes those
opted by right now but whose us
because we're never late
twenty miles of fiber to get us
many like brought you are so so
sorry Senator are what to
Senators soccer happen.
Be there what I say correct.
It was just director we have
rock band so my point is that I
move the never mind thanks from
expert witness so so thank you
for being my point being is that
this is so expensive so these
new technologies a thicker or
special Navajo Nation some of
the tribal issues the frontier
issues so appreciate your your
responses and good luck I
appreciate your service and your
own doctors to New Mexico for
all these years.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you senator Morris great
questions great answers good
information today next we have
Senator Ortiz seeking now.
Thank you madam chairman and and
Senator thank you for bringing
the center's uniquely well
qualified person before us for
confirmation.
Mister Salazar I just had a
couple of questions for you on
on the broadband issue.
One of the things that we we we
have a place in we spend a lot
of time in Dixon.
I am blue in very close to your
home
and we have excellent to the
internet here through Windstream
is very expensive the monthly
fee is very expensive so is
going to be any use to extend
this to Parkinson's the state.
Where.
Maybe there fifty thousand
pregnancies but only two
thousand of them can afford the
monthly fee.
How we gonna help it become
Karia health families with
limited incomes avail themselves
of this in those monthly fees or
or ski.
Madam chair Senator that's a
good question so the vision for
us and and the broadband office
is that we want to really focus
on delivering broadband services
the infrastructure we want to be
able to address that issue and
as senator Morris mentioned
earlier the
there is some value in investing
and fiber in certain areas again
the study has identified about
fifty seven different projects
where we have close clusters of
individuals that we may be able
to pick up by utilizing fiber.
so as we we build this
infrastructure we make it
available we anticipate that
there will always be some
broadband funding that comes
into our facility if we build
infrastructure the next step of
the process is affordability we
could have a grant office
actually working with different
entities out there to provide
subsidies for broadband for
areas that it's not affordable
so that's division is to work on
the accessibility issues first
and then have that fund for
affordability in the future.
So madam chairman and and Mr
cells thank you an excellent
response and.
And we should leads me right
into my next one.
And that is.
Federal and state money you're
going to be spent building this
infrastructure.
And then what do we do do we
just turn it over to the private
companies to then collect the
monthly fees how will how will
the state.
Private relationship work in in
your in your conception
conceptualization of this how do
we protect from just setting up
a way for millionaires to be
created.
From a few private entrepreneurs
who really didn't put a lot of
money at risk in this initially.
Madam chair senator that's an
excellent question because in
order for us to be able to solve
the broadband gap issue it's
going to require the combination
of funding from the federal
government state funding as well
as the private industry in in to
be honest with the the private
industry as cherry pick the
areas where they look at and
where the concert make a profit
right they've done that already
they know we're going to make a
profit but we can work with them
and identifying areas where we
think they could command and
make a profit there we've had
some challenges with.
Even awarding the the ten
million dollars that we had we
got that in twenty nineteen is
set here for quite some time
because of the anti donation I
can't order do it can't give
money to Comcast to lay fiber
because that's that violates
anti donation right now when I
buy products or services I buy a
product or a service it comes
into my general ledger it's part
of my assets are depreciated
it's it's owned by me at control
at when we give grant money
we're going to give it to
Comcast's CenturyLink's of the
world they're gonna on that
infrastructure so we need some
kind of process were we are
assured that.
The infrastructure is being
built and that they are picking
up customers so we want to
implement a process very similar
to what we do with our software
modernization projects were we
lay out a project and we have
the vendor come in and we give
them money and certain phases of
the project and they validate
that they're doing and
delivering product based upon
their plans we'll probably have
a third I party vendor on like
an IV and the vendor go out
there and inspect to make sure
that they're meeting the
expectations but in the end the
product will be long.
To the private industry.
Madam chairman and and as the
secretary doesn't and so is our
it is there anyway the state can
retain ownership of the of the
channel systems and the state is
paying to lay.
Madam chair Senator I think
that's that's a good question
the problem an issue is that
that puts us in the ISP Services
arena right we would have to
have a billing process we would
have to have people to maintain
the home so all that stuff it
would be a huge burden for the
state to be able to take that on
even if we all the
infrastructure there still.
That's only part of it you know
it's the day to day operation
that is a burden that we
wouldn't be able to control.
I appreciate that answer Madam
chairman and and secretary
designate in this is analogous
to the railroads.
this is analogous to our
providing all the infrastructure
for trucking companies.
analogous to airlines using him
publicly financed airports and
so on and we figured out a way
for the public investment to be
protected in those situations
through.
Lease agreements or through
franchises or Representative is
there some way we can start
doing broadband provision as a
public service that it is.
A utility that is.
Instead of just related we pay
for the cable the federal money
comes in sixty percent of US
federal input in some for some
state money and then somebody
basically for a relatively small
fraction of the total investment
takes it over.
And and then charges we can
regulate the charges these are
regulated are the.
There are these under the P.
Arceneaux C. so we're we're
basically creating monopoly
opportunities for private
business.
To.
Provide a service some people
may not be able to afford if
there were publicly owned.
Initial building only school in
turning it over to somebody and
say will you run it.
The previous job and if you can
admit everybody that's I'm sorry
they just can't afford to go to
school is to me in my mind
infants
We may be creating a problem the
HSA just one they wanted to
plant a seed to the concerned
and see if there's some way we
can structure these agreements
with private operators.
To a protect the public
investment.
But being keeps them affordable.
so that.
There's another analogy for you
know we need more money.
The public in this the federal
government invests enormously in
the research that goes into
pharmaceutical development.
And then the company takes over
the patent.
Ambience charging outrageous
amounts of money for the
medicine the public.
Finance the creation of.
And I I would just if we can
avoid doing that was broadband I
would love to see is find a way
around that so I I know you you
know you you you did a wonderful
job and and I I have great
confidence in in your
Stewardship of of of of the
state resources are going into
this I just want to make sure
that we we take care of those
problems.
Thank you madam chairman of the
secretary had a.
Response or not the need to.
I'm.
Right madam chair I I just have
a couple of things I would like
to respond to so the goal is
also to work with the community
rate with a different a
communities out there we know
that some of the tribes are
interested in providing services
directly to their constituents
we're gonna be working with them
so there's not going to be a of
private ISPs in that we also are
looking at communities because
they all the right ways right
like the City of Santa Fe and
the the different communities
are out there they all the right
away they have the franchise
agreements and are we we want to
be able to include them in our
discussions on how we do this
more efficiently more
economically so that if someone
does a band and that the the
stuff that's out there the
cities or the counties that have
that right away may be able to
pick that up with the you know
public
domain
are areas where they can explore
sort you know that's just
thought but we're we're really
just evaluating all the
different scenarios right now
we're trying to wrap our head
around the different issues and
how we develop strategies going
forward so madam chair thank you
thank you senator.
Thank you so much Secretary
designate next we have senator
cliff Pirtle.
Thank you madam chair and I'm.
Having to bounce back and forth
between Senate ad in here so if
other questions questions I've
already been asked just please
let me know but madam chair and
and senator thank you for for
bringing the secretary designate
before the committee today of my
question is as.
Do it as the department is there
a way that we can bring all of
the departments websites somehow
together where they work better
for the user the consumer which
is the public you know I think a
lot of people become very
frustrated because you have to
have log in information for
every single department that you
want to go through whether it's
Department workforce solutions
or taxes read registering your
vehicle that there could be some
central dashboard that some of
your information to be
automatically populated and
things like that I you know as
we see and and use.
Websites like Amazon I think the
public.
Legislation that out of out of
government as well some type of
user friendly website is that
something under the purview do
it madam chair.
Madam chair senator that's a
good question right now each
agency has their own
infrastructure their own not
what pages their own
applications they they run those
on their own
there is guidance that we
provide to the agencies as far
as you know up security
requirements etcetera but I know
that was a project a couple
years ago when we were there was
an initiative to try to
centralized in one consolidated
portal the problem an issue with
that is that.
This is the systems are getting
modernized on a regular basis so
things are changing constantly
and having that one portal
severed to everyone what is a
good concept this will require
some work to get that done and
architectures in you know in the
engineering to make that all
happen is going to take some
time but it is a good thought
and it's something that they've
looked at in the past but it has
been challenging.
And madam chair and and the
secretary designate Salazar in
your opinion the longer we wait
is gonna just become harder down
the road is as these things
become more complicated system
start to get created in going in
different directions at what
point do we just stop what we're
doing in and consolidate
everything and bring it into to
one area.
Madam chair Senators up that's a
good question as well but you
know we're looking and and I and
all those different issues
because do it sets the strategic
plan for all the agencies to
follow and all consolidation is
part of it but agencies over the
last you know eight nine years
they've gone it everywhere we
have some agencies are on the
call out there using Amazon we
have some that are using
you know Microsoft and then we
have agencies that have their
infrastructure here at Sam's and
some that even have their own
infrastructure and their own
facilities so tying all that
different types of coding
different types of databases
tying that all in one
centralized is environment this
challenging but it does require
Us looking at it and trying to
develop a methodology and our
plan going forward on how we can
consolidated.
but but but that plan has to be
strategic we have to bring the
right partners in here so we can
understand all the different
architectures and what we're
going we're going to you know
what we're trying to do here at
do it is is involved those
policies because there have been
a lot of policies we we need a
policy for when people go to the
cloud we want to make sure that
their **** their information is
safe that is secure that they're
using best practices so we've
got some work to do there but it
is on our radar and when we are
working and going forward with
that strategic plan.
And madam chair cicadas we
appreciate that answer is there
a way that you know do it could
possibly do some audits on some
of these independent systems on
there you know really how user
friendly are they how they could
be improved because the the end
consumer the public I think it's
been given a huge disservice
with a lot of the system and
just how complicated they are
out non user friendly they are
then I think one example is the
new secretary states of campaign
finance system I mean it's so
hard to navigate even as sort of
myself that's done it for for
nine years now that it's changed
you know how do we give
suggestions to these departments
how do we help give them
guidance so that they understand
that you're end user the
consumer is the public and
that's that has to be your main
goals how do we maintain that
that ease of use and and and
create a product that that is
good for the consumer that's one
of the problems with having this
coming in being publicly funded
and things is you know Amazon
has ease of use because they
want to sell as many things as
possible so they want to make
sure that it's really easy to
get in there find what you need
and get on with your day where
with government the websites are
are not that way or they tend
not to be that way how how do we
provide that guidance or is that
something that we can do under
do it.
Madam chair up Senator that
that's a good question we we
don't have that authority as of
now the to the agencies build
their own systems based upon
their business process sees
right now most of the time
they're looking at their
business process sees on the
data that they're collecting but
you're absolutely right is that
some of those systems are not
user friendly it is still have.
The the systems are focused on.
Again collecting the data that
that the agency needs in the
back end database to be able to
process a payment or whatever it
may be but to the right but
you're absolutely right and and
the.
The standards are changing on a
regular basis on what that user
friendly nest looks like so I
think we we can take a bit of a
bigger role and and that process
as projects come to us to get
funding for modernization we can
include those types of
parameters in the technical
architecture review process that
they submit to us making sure
that they have that item
addressed as a submit their
plans to us for approval.
And I appreciate that I think
that's something that we really
have to focus on moving forward
as as state government in
dealing with the internet and
web pages and and user
friendliness so I really
appreciate that and then another
thing that I I ask of our
designees
is just a disclosure and it's
been asked already I apologize
but madam chair and and does me
cells are have have you are of
some close family member donated
any money to the governor the
governor's campaign.
Madam chair Senator no the R.
for both myself and my family
members.
And and madam chair and and
safety this may what about any
sitting members of the
legislature.
Madam chair senator no as well.
Okay thank you madam chair and
and secretariat there's probably
more than one John Salazar and
and in New Mexico so the name
showed up on the report so I
just wanted to make sure that if
if that had been done we were
open it was to close disclosed
so I appreciate the that answer
thank you madam chair I don't
have any more questions.
Thank you Senator Pirtle are
there any other questions or
comments from any committee
members.
It is not I'll just say I want
to thank you so much for
Secretary distant Salazar for
your great work you had so many
great comments about what it's
like to work with you so we can
clear you clearly see here your
focus on organization and
excellence to bring people an
employee is broadband a hot
topic now so you've got the
right sponsor and we really
appreciate you being before us
today and with that I will go to
the committee for a motion I'm
moving to pass.
We have to do passed from a
center Peter Wirth at the second
from Senator Ortiz Y. Pino and
we are on a do passed motion I
am the secretary shall call the
roll Senator Baca.
Yes.
Senator Moores.
Senator Morris.
Senator o'neill.
My apologies just.
Senator o'neill.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator Pirtle.
Yes Senator Stewart yes Senator
Wirth yes Senator Ingle.
Senator do.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Yes ma'am do pass out your
motion passes.
Right thank you so very much
what are you.
Chairman yeah.
Go ahead.
Thank you madam program for for
presiding over that part and
Salazar congratulations on the
do pass recommendation from the
rules committee this will be our
presented to the full Senate
next week well when we have a
four session about five of us I
also thank you members or or.
Nation hearing today
with regard to our hearing on
Monday.
One of the bills being heard
from senator Pat Woods I'm in
the bill bill will come election
changes and my understanding is
that there is a Committee
substitute.
That is been worked on by.
The clerks that words has been
working with as well as
characters Office and that they
have agreed on that and and so
I'm gonna make sure that that
gets sent out to everybody
the probably the next.
I think it just came back from
the from the a bill drafters
well we've been in our meeting
today so all
I was alerted by mistrusted
strength address that office so
I'll be sure to get that out to
everybody this afternoon
probably earlier rather than
later and that people can review
it and we can get it for adults
then take a look at it in the
backyard meeting on Monday.
The October for the committee Mr
chair Mr chair on a point
actually happy to be sitting
here with Senator Woods city is
not seen any kind of stuff or
have been part of that
conversation so we can give that
to him so sentences bill in his
committee so that would probably
be helpful.
But I think that would be my
understanding of from the
conversation in the parking
center would that there would
indicated that that he would go
forth with with whatever it is
the course for us to do on that.
So.
The six years.
I think you said you need to see
the bill is bill
I I do believe it is only about
the others a well.
I do believe it was actually
before I was alerted that it was
prepared I have not seen it yet
but that was with letter to
senator what does a lot.
from eight council service
directly.
Hi speed we now know he has a in
broad view.
Exactly right.
So well thank you all.
and yes your Ivy Soto
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino has a
commoner question no thank you
very much Senator alternatives
you know of the reminder
when we did the bill on fusion
voting.
due to some time constraints
where we were at that point
would not take public comment
apparently there were some our
young people who wanted to get
some of public comment on that
issue and so the question on
that Senator Wirth you know I
had to have posed was whether
not a complaint we could at
least
on engaging some additional
public comment.
so that they can express
themselves on the matter all
thirty three no well go ahead on
that.
We need to schedule to the some
time where we can learn them to
but when it would be appropriate
for them to make their comments
Mr chairman.
So yes so if we could em and and
like Fuhrman about that what's
our is going to be up
We could if we had I think about
over the weekend maybe and then
on Monday at the committee we
can figure out a good time to to
have the public comment allow
them to be able to take a stab
at that like to
with regard to bill even though
the bill is not present for the
fact
but we can figure out we can
have that discussion a point.
I
will choose maybe fifteen twenty
minutes the committee time.
And that will drive.
That.
So far well and with that is
there anything else going to for
the most of it.
No one thank you all very much
and have a good weekend.
