Senator o'neill.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Senator by the.
Senator Pinto.
Senator smitteez.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Senator sure.
Senator Shendo your.
Senator Stewart.
Senator Tallman.
Senator Wirth.
Senator Woods.
the invocation to be led today
by Reverend y'all shop in.
Santa Fe interfaith minister and
to please remain standing for
the pledge of allegiance to be
led today by.
Members just a reminder of those
who are participating presume if
The Spanish to be led by Senator
how to meal.
And the saluted Mexico flag to
be led by Senator Woods.
Good morning everyone in my
becomes this to save the day.
Within the Hebrew word for peace
Shalom is the word Shalom
your whole body and bless you
and your decisions today.
Let peace light your way through
the hidden and the obvious to
the high heavens make peace for
all who inhabit the earth.
Or save some of my own
Then I'll call you straight to
the and they rule
rule the rules say Gendron name
the and move them rural Nadine.
Let us say
Thank you Mr president unanimous
consent we go that our business
announcements and miscellaneous
that order business senator
Wirth thank you Mr president and
moment and reflect and so thank
you for being here.
for the members
Capital outlay sheets are due
tomorrow at the Legislative
to make sure everyone knows
those are due at three o'clock
PM.
And.
Before I kind of outlined the
road map for today are just
And the floor.
I apologize I was not hearing
thank you just get to a motion
you senator Senator Stewart and
announcements anyone wishing to
make an announcement center how
to meal.
Mr president members of the
Mr he'll with the visionary and
a strong advocate for the
village of trauma located in
northern Rio Arriba county
water treatment plant for his
beloved community during his
time in office Mr B. hill also
successfully negotiated Chama
river water rights with the
of homes under his leadership Mr
president the village of Tom I
had its largest economic boom
through the United States bureau
governor David cargo establish
the save the train group to save
the line between Antonito
Colorado and trauma.
a moment of silence in the
memory of Mr Basile a leader who
not only in bodied lettuce Fund
all please rise for a moment of
silence then we can please
remain standing.
As I yield to senator share once
we complete this enrollment
starts.
Thank you Mr president I also am
going to ask for a moment of
silence here we had a W. and San
Juan County die.
duty kind of the shooting or
anything like that but she's
been with the sheriff's
department for.
More than twenty years and
Thank you Mr president.
Senator Ivey Soto thank you Mr
president I rise this morning to
give a word of gratitude.
we are carts rolling down the
the hallway we get something
were asked to vote for it.
Even if it's something where
we've all been able to give
input to it and this morning
highlight of what I had put in
so that I could see it even
before it came and I didn't have
to go hunt and Peck for it and I
just really want to propitiate
the finance committee in the
efforts that they're doing right
built in the places where we
were able to give input this is
very refreshing and and I just I
just want to to our state thank
you very much to the members of
the finance committee who been
appreciated thank you thanks
center desoto center many of us.
Thank you Mr chairman and I just
wanted to reach out to my staff
and tell them thank you John
Gasper Gen Wayne and and
everybody up and Senate finance
inputting your page so when we
do come to the floor there's not
a lot of questions and nobody
can say we made a mistake we
want amendment so please let us
know if there's this mistake
two point one nine oh million
that's the final number plan on
that with your sheets and go
ahead expand that dollar amount.
But what we'll see how that goes
thank you guys and so we're just
remember go through their if
corrected you cannot change your
mind where you originally funded
your money.
But if there's a mistake will
correct that so don't try
changing your funding stream or
where you're going to move the
further announcements Senators.
See no nonsense Senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr president thank you
seven it's not yet been
finalized in finance but it
should be in the next day or
two.
And so I do want to members to
and the public.
seven so I just want to give a
heads up on that.
So with that Mr president
unanimous consent we go to that
our business messages from the
house when that order business
amended by the Senate with
emergency clause and return same
here with respectfully submitted
Lisa M. Ortiz McCutchen chief
clerk the gentle so that the
for House joint resolution nine
in requests the concurrence of
the Senate respectfully
submitted Lisa M. Ortiz
McCutchen chief clerk of the
house.
The journal so that the message
Mr president your finance
committee to whom has been
referred Senate bill twenty nine
Adoption of the committee report
Senator if you would like to
rephrase that you do have
several reports here.
that the journal so direct
funding but.
See no objection the reader to
read.
Senate bill forty three do pass.
Senate bill one hundred twelve
do passed as amended.
committee report Senator have a
motion to adopt the committee
report.
Say no objection the committee
reports of an adopted in the
journal so they're acted upon
same with recommendation that it
do not pass but that Senate
health and public affairs
committee substitute for Senate
bill two twenty seven do pass
and that's referred to the
all the committee reports that
we vote on them with the single
motion in the the journal
reflect erected upon
individually.
The no objection the reader to
read.
not pass but that Senate health
and public affairs committee
substitute for Senate bill two
forty I do pass and that's
referred to the Judiciary
Committee.
pass and it's referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Senator Gerald Ortiz
Y. Pino chairman Senator T.
subpoena I move the adoption of
the committee report Mr
president senators we do have a
Mr president your rules
committee to whom has been
referred Senate bill forty eight
has had it under consideration
and report same with
recommendation that it do not
chairman Senator Ivey Soto
thanks very much Mr president
was president asking us some
incentive to the read the letter
read all the committee reports
of the that they'd be better off
with one motion the general fund
for their act fund Vigil the no
and that's referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Senator Daniel A. Ivey
Soto chairman Senator Ivey Soto
but after the COVID four we have
has been referred Senate bill
three forty seven has had it
under consideration and report
same with recommendation that it
do pass and that's referred to
the Judiciary Committee
committee for has been adopted.
Senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr president's
there's Senator Padilla perfect
so.
Of the the Senator Padilla for
Senate Bill number seventy thank
you senator so right before we
debate in the spirit of the
rules that we're changes within
the body as you know we don't
have any voice votes anymore and
and thanks to some of the
members and that discussions
to get you in here so just to
kind of keep an ear out twin
debate is taking place to ensure
that you are in the chamber for
a vote and I will give a little
bit extra time to have members
seventy on final passage has
been taken and it is now subject
to debate amendment or
substitution no objections set
up of the attacks by the bill
thank you very much Mr president
distribute in four different
pieces of legislation into one
piece and appropriates.
Two point five million to the
drinking water state revolving
this fund mechanism supports
capital projects over time with
the necessity to be without this
necessity of needing new funds
rate the special rates for
disadvantages funding a
disadvantage funding projects
continue and typically again
these bills are introduced
separately but the these funds
are all related to the sums in a
I see no debate center for their
clothes on the bill thank you
Thank you senator by the centers
we are voting.
To your seats.
Senator Brandt yes senator Byrd
senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria.
Senator yes Senator Gallegos
Senator Gallegos yes Senator
Gonzalez yes Senator Gonzales
yes bridge.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto Senator Ivey Soto yes
Senator hada meel.
Senator huh I'm here yes Senator
Yes Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator Padilla yes Senator
Provia yes Senator Pinto.
yes Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez yes senator
senator Senator songes yes
Senators committees Senator
Senator share yes Senator
Shendo.
Senator Shendo yes Senator sold.
Senator souls yes Senator
Stefanics.
Wirth.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
Senator Woods yes Senator Baca.
Senator Baca yes.
The line Senator Lopez Mr
president animus consent to
excuse Senator Candelaria until
he returns to the chamber no
objection it is so ordered by a
and go on to item number three
is Senator about this are you on
the line.
Thank you Mr president.
Senator thank you Mr president I
ask unanimous consent of the
amendment or substitution no
objections Senator on this
explained the bill.
Thank you Mr president Mr
president this bill is a product
of the uniform law commission
you all are familiar with the
intended to have the state of
New Mexico compile all state and
federal laws that relate and
what in related to what we call
collateral consequences these
are consequences that follow a
time they enter any sort of a
plea negotiation or our sentence
and the the law here is intended
to not only compile that
information but then a sure that
state of the right to firearms
in any number of other rights
that are affected following a
plea or conviction Mr president
with that I'll stand for
yield I just expressed strong
support for this bill we work
with individuals or have have
records you know it it affects
people in ways that you don't
even think about such as like
want to thank the senator for
sponsoring this legislation
thank you.
Senator o'neill.
Further debate with Senator
Ingle.
Senator bill Payne was our
delegate to the use.
You see see a.
Meetings and he always amazes me
how you said how exciting there
Mr president Senator I imagine
that Senator Paypen was probably
pulling your leg.
Of the uniform law commission
meetings are not exciting or fun
they're actually very hard work
academia or in law firms and
it's like a two weeks of
Judiciary Committee where
everybody on the committee is a
of the of the mind set and
Mr president center I appreciate
you being on there because I
know that excitement you know
you're able to calm it down and
I know that Senator will Senator
some effort and there's some of
us that are pushing to have
Senator pain appointed and there
are some appointments these
positions are appointed by the
governor by the legislative body
and Republican in a balanced way
thank you.
Present us I would certainly
support that for his sake as he
did he used to just get so so
excited it was just like being
an admiral on aircraft carrier.
Thank you Mr president is
present I thought for sure I
would get Center Ivy Soto to
join the debate with that but
any man I move that Senate bill
one eighty three do now pass and
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
Senator Campos yes senator from
the law via.
Senator Gallegos yes Senator
Gonzalez yes Senator Gonzales
yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Hamblen.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Yes Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
senator Morris.
Senator Moores yes senator
Munoz.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator Padilla Senator for the
year yes Senator Pinto.
Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Sanchez yes Senators
committees.
Senator Schmidt is yes Senator
Sedillo Lopez yes Senator severe
Lopez yes Senator sure.
Senator so yes Senator Stefanics
Senator for fed ex yes Senator
Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Stewart.
Senator Stewart DS Senator
Senator Woods yes.
By a vote of fourteen
affirmative on the negative
Senate bill one eighty three has
passed the Senate Senator about
Thank you Mr president I ask
unanimous consent that the
Senate of the that that the
record show that all of the
action for placing.
Senator Byrd to explain the bill
thank you Mr president this is a
bill that this body seen last
year it was on the governor's
this year basically correcting
those tweaks and so with this
bill we will make sure that we
now bring the New Mexico
fix bill so with that I have on
the line if it's okay with the
president in the body I have my
expert witness on the phone the
Senator Morris thank you Mr
president with my good friend
that I'm still taller than high
yield.
Senator Byrd deal yes I do yield
thank you Mr president
translating to that meaning that
this was vetoed as president.
The bill was pocket vetoed.
Mr president you said that the
administration had technical
believe it was a pocket vetoed
and there was no message if I
remember correctly Mister
president Mr president I don't
doubt that your memory is solid
and accurate so how do we know
volume down it's difficult to
hear the debate Mr president
Senator the the bill sent back
to with some suggestions to the
The policies and procedures that
we're trying to correct today Mr
president of the bodies missing
this and throwing debates in my
criticized the governor for
using a pocket veto I think it's
important that they I know that
vetoes by many different
administrations in your past
both Republicans and Democrats
pocket vetoes a I think do us a
disservice Senator Candelaria
and I've worked on this
behooves the for for the
executives actually tell us
what's wrong with the bill so we
can work together and fix those
issues and senator pocket vetoed
them and we hope these technical
and tell us what's wrong with
the bill if you to refuse to
sign it and hopefully maybe get
a chance to sign some bills are
sure I'm sure you won't sign any
money opens president please
tell me what's wrong with them
Alamogordo extremely well it's
important to issue for your side
of the state I appreciate all
you do Mr president and all of
Thank you Mr president I move
now that Senate bill one forty
six do now pass and I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that the
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Baca.
Senator Byrd VS Senator Campos
Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria Senator Candelaria
DS Senator Duhigg.
Senator Duhigg yes Senator
Gallegos.
Senator Gallegos yes Senator
Gonzalez yes Senator Gonzales
Senator Ingle.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator had a meal.
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
Senator Moores Senator Moores
yes senator money us.
Senator Munoz yes senator
Senator Padilla Senator Padilla
yes Senator Pinto.
Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle yes Senator pope
senator smitteez Senator Schmidt
is yes senators for the Lopez
yes Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator sure.
Senator sure yes Senator Shendo.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Stewart.
Senator sure this Senator
Tallman.
Senator Tallman yes senator
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator Ivey Soto yes Senator
Baca.
Senator Baca yes.
Senator thank you Mr president
and thank you body for
supporting the New Mexico
National Guard.
Thank you senator we're gonna go
back to item number two.
And that Senate bill eighty
Good morning or good afternoon
Mr president as of the Senate I
ask unanimous consent to the
Senate that the rules be
suspended the record show that
amendment or substitution thank
you senator Senator just a
reminder Capitole bills are
capital information must have
been sent out to the chat is
been pretty pretty loud we can
Thank you Mr president
Mr president I do have an
amendment to this bill at all
propose in a moment but this is
receive loan applications from
public entities in all thirty
three counties across New Mexico
entities and the loan amounts as
we all know are made from the
public project revolving fund
which of the new members is
annually appropriated a large
one to Senate bill eighty eight
with the emergence in Costa
let's just take a step first and
we'll have the reader read and
I'll go back to you to explains
good Mister president the reader
to read the amendment Senate
moving explained the amendment
thank you Mr president Mr
president the public project
revolving fund loan program as
we now is administered by the
through a PPRF loan at a very
very low interest rate
they are also work to into to
help those local governments
with the application process
authorization.
It is common Mr president to
prickly every year we do have an
amendment such as this because
our legislative session sort of
is at the tail end of the NMFA
authorization project and so
authorization list now stand
open Mister president thank you
senator Senator debating Senate
floor amendment number one to
Senate bill eighty eight with
emergency clause.
number one to Senate bill eighty
eight with the emergency clause
do now pass and I ask that by
unanimous consent of the Senate
senators we are gonna go through
Senate foreman has been added to
your bill Senator we're back on
the bill thank you Mr president
happy to answer any questions.
We do have debate on the bill
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Neil to Senate kind of deals yes
I will Mr president.
Thank you the senator we just we
just passed another bill and
public projects is Senate bill
projects what could you just
explain for us what the
difference in the two are what
what is this how does this bill
differ from what we just did
twenty minutes ago.
capacity in the PPRF fund for
other purposes managed by the
NMFA
and so both pieces of
making activity which is the
main purpose of this fund the
bill before it appropriates
certain balances from that fund
then what do we appropriate
money into that fund.
So Mister president governmental
gross receipts tax a portion of
uses that revenue stream to bond
against our which is what's able
which will rather which is what
enables the NMFA to get the very
question for for the sponsor
In this bill the the just
looking at it there are a couple
of projects for the City of
Albuquerque for wastewater other
what makes a project get into
this bill as opposed to them
coming and asking for money
directly from individual
appropriations of severance tax
bonding capacity for projects to
either cover the project in
whole or in part
you know that is certainly I
think for the local governments
repay is very very low I will
note that for very very small
units of government yet MFA I
believe is able to achieve a
tax bonding capacity hours
they're gonna try to fund the
project through debt financing
which is essentially what the
PPRF processes.
Thank you very much Senator that
outlay I can always say to them
well don't forget you have
access to this public project
revolving loan fund through the
M. and MFA so thank you senator
I believe for the local road
fund as an additional I think
hundred seventy million for
state roads unfortunately I
think there's a lot of your
marking in the current bill the
thirty second appropriate that
field.
Any further debate senators.
Si no further debate.
tilapia farm in this bill Mr
president with that ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
at the rules be suspended at the
record show that the role as
We're voting on Senate bill
eighty eight as amended with
emergency clause.
The clerk to call the roll.
yes senator Byrd senator Byrd VS
Senator Campos Senator number
yes senator from the lawyer yes
Senator Candelaria yes senator
to run this yes Senator Ron does
Senator Gallegos yes Senator
Gonzalez yes Senator Gonzales
yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivy
Soto Senator resultar yes
Senator hot I meal.
Senator huh I'm here yes Senator
Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Lopez.
Senator Morris.
Senator Moores yes senator
Munoz.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator Padilla.
Senator Stewart I yes Senator
Pinto.
Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Sweetser yes senator
smitteez.
Senator submitting CS Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
Senator Shendo yes Senator sold.
Senator souls yes Senator
Stefanics Senator Stefanics yes
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn is Senator
Senator Woods yes.
By a vote of forty two in the
affirmative on the negative
Senate bill eighty eight as
amended with emergency clause
going to be Sierra.
Thank you Mr president.
been taken it is now subject to
debate amendment or
substitution.
No objection senator Clemente
explained the bill.
approved prescription drug
claims health plans already
let's meet the fourteen day time
frame a Medicare prescription
drug plans however this bill
significantly benefit retail
pharmacists in general and the
especially helpful to the
financial stability of our
locally owned independent
prescription as such they are
constantly ordering and paying
for inventory this is all it's
been a struggle and is proving
lobbyists for the New Mexico
pharmacy business council now Mr
a.
President like to and members I
Novell I want to make sure that
That the any objection to the
expert witnesses been presented.
See no objection.
of this my interest in this bill
has to do with some of the small
pharmacies that exist around the
state most of us that.
I have especially the larger
districts have small towns have
communities over there those
small towns and the among other
things the trying to get the
cash flow right there's no
reason on electronic transfers
and so forth that we can't
picture of a check and it's in
my bank instantly and that's the
kind of technology we have today
it's people pay pay bills by
actually getting the dollars out
the door there's no reason why
we can't per process these in a
expeditious manner and get them
these pharmacies rate they have
tens of thousands of dollars in
president thank you senator
Neville.
Senator debating Senate bill one
twenty endorsed by amended
anyone wishing to debate.
Senator Woods.
great community out reach by
about allowing one of his
businesses buildings to be used
to for comment vaccination.
bill is just a question of
fairness in my eyes to getting
this money to all agency quickly
as possible they've got to put
those drugs on the counter
they've got to have more than
I'm a complete believer in in
this deal thank you Mr president
thank you Senator Woods any
further debate.
bill one twenty four is amended
do now pass and I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
record shows that the role
because when you called.
And all present voted in the
affirmative this of those voting
twenty four is twice amended the
clerk to call the roll.
Senator Baca.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt yes senator Byrd.
Senator Byrd yes senator from
boards Senator problems yes
senator Candelaria.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Gallegos yes Senator
Gonzalez yes Senator Gonzales
yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator Ivey Soto yes Senator
how to meal.
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
Senator Moores.
Senator Moores yes senator
Munoz.
o'neil Senator o'neil yes
Senator need to be now Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino yes senator by
the.
Senator Padilla yes Senator
Pinto.
yes Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez yes senator
Senator share Senator sure yes
Senator Shendo.
Senator Shendo yes Senator sold.
Senator sold yes Senator
Tallman yes Senator Tallman yes
Senator Wirth.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
Senator Woods yes Senator Baca
Thank you Mr president thank you
members of the Senate.
Moving on we're going to item
number six.
Senator Stewart.
two as amended on final passage
has been taken now subject to
debate amendment or substitution
here in all directions Senator
Stewart to explain the bill
thank you Mr president of forty
contribution into the E. R. B.
by one percent a year starting
next year going for four years
until July of twenty twenty
four.
point one five percent.
The second thing that this bill
does is that it extends what we
call return to work.
Continue to receive their
retirement.
They have to pay into the
retirement at ten point seven
percent and the employers have
have asked for this to be
extended for two years the
return to work is slated to end
at the end of this year so this
return to work a year it was
originally enacted to help rural
schools.
Phil hard to higher positions
Senate bill forty two as amended
we do have debate Senator
thank you Mr president and Madam
pro tem.
But I don't think this solves
the problem.
This just kicks the can down the
road again we've already done
that several times we've
extended extended and we're
going to continue to extended
the year that we actually have
some federal money that we could
use this time to go to bias the
time to do some real reform.
That kind of takes the heat off
of the frontier of forever.
Yes to make some changes but I
wouldn't do that to the people
that are already.
In the system.
fix it I disagree that this is
the right way to do this I think
we're in a unique position this
year.
This year.
that we have to do real reform
and not just kick this can down
the road again and again and
again and again and again
forever.
So thank you Mr president thank
you senator share any further
debate senators centered the
subpoena.
it's a great deal of I will vote
for it but did and I and I
apologize if you mentioned this
in your explanation I got
distracted on a couple of other
things but do we have in this
it extends for two years so be a
total of three years that
they'll be able to continue to
do the return to work Mr
president is a very important
aspect of this measure and and
session number of educators and
the return to work provision for
educators I think is a sound one
and SO I really applaud the
Senator for for adding that to
Thank you Mr president I did not
the chair finance is going to
take okay I just rise and
support I had a constituent
turning to Salim Lopez and she
so I think I referred her to
people who knew what the heck
they were talking about and I'm
so glad that it landed in the
programs office because I know
that she has a amongst her many
many areas of of expertise this
positively in the state thank
you Mr chair Mister president
thank you center for the further
debate sentiment us thank you Mr
president you know working on
E. R. B. and P. R. A. N. and so
it's time to start the change
that tied in that ship and and
change the funds.
by slowly and and change in the
right direction you cannot cut
the E. R. B. fund anymore Karia
you still can come back for cuts
and this is the number one issue
in my house so I didn't carry
the RB built between centers
doing to my wife I get a lecture
and people want to fix things
wealth Senators you know if you
got nine extra million dollars
we can fix it.
That'll be a hundred percent
It's the right thing to do it
the timing is right we have tons
of of federal money and our
reserves are high.
here let's fix things correctly
and set him on a path so we
don't have to deal with them on
the floor and then the
Legislature anymore so thank you
Mr president.
is our question about those of
us who actually have a stake in
in E. R. B. through retirement
and at this Mr president all
thrown out there it doesn't
deal Mr president I do yield and
no.
Of there are no increase in any
budget
quick question so if the senator
would yield Mister president Mr
detailed yes I do.
The what is the para right
employer right currently.
Our server places just wait one
second.
twenty three the pair right will
be nineteen point two five
percent.
Thank you Mr the answer but I
wanted the body to hear that
what will be the new
will be eighteen point one five
percent still one point one five
percent less than para after
four years thank you Mr
president senator
haven't been a fan of doing this
but I will vote for your bill
Mister president senator we've
got to do something and this is
this is a tool and it may not be
the best tool but it's certainly
one that puts us in the right
along the lines what Senator
many us is talking about and I
appreciate the bill Senator
Stewart is occurring because
it's it is a a product of bill
that is necessary as a result of
trying to wait until disaster
happens and saying oh my
goodness what are we going to
do.
And and particularly when we're
looking at retirement plans if
we do things early we can make
difference R. I. a huge facts
that actually has a small impact
and so and so this is the way we
need to go ultimately my own
sense and this is going to
plans and one of those reforms
of the retirement plans is is
that retirement is supposed to
be for retirees.
And and that and that at the end
And and you know what I what I
look at as a corollary.
Is I've got my forty quarters
in.
though I've already qualified to
get the benefit.
And at some point.
We're all gonna have to stand
and locked arms together.
together and say you can qualify
at an early age by putting your
years and.
But you're not of the age to
actually retire yet if you're
not disabled.
in your life where we have a
responsibility to take care of
you.
In return for the work that
you've done on behalf of the
state.
collect for thirty five or forty
years sometimes.
And that's not retirement plan
that's a Ponzi scheme.
At some point like I said we're
gonna have to deal with that.
small change that over the years
will make a big difference and
this will help us avert a leader
crisis.
But there's still more work to
be done thank you very much
support of the measure
and I just think it's important
for us to understand also as
part of this debate.
One of the reasons we've
historically had this difference
in contribution rates between a
mostly women and the presumption
was they didn't really need is
full or robust as retirement
because they had a husband at
home.
accurately reflect the world we
live in today Mr president I did
want to point something out for
the body Mr president under the
house bill two that was sent
disability issues funding
issues.
Senator.
Mr president I do yield and the
house has punted to the Senate.
do the right thing for all of
our educators if we are going to
say that we you know support is
frontline heroes who have a
specially gone to work and
continue to go to work not
for the extra point and I kick
that football over the line to
glory thank you Mr president.
Thank you senator Candelaria we
do have for the debate Senator
don't have to do this this is
the only retirement I have
hardships of social security but
to.
The thing about is is what we
ahead and increased benefits and
they don't worry about.
You know where the money's
coming from hasn't happened so
much and education retirement is
having in the para.
extra the extra funds the
council service said that we
didn't use for interim
committees because nothing ever
doesn't pay so there is a budget
to a certain degree to.
Have a let have a retirement
that is
And
Our local are are are in state
producers of oil and gas were
paying into the severance tax
fund.
back and look and see who it
was.
And so what I did Mr president
was just pass a bill that
The.
got of we call it we collect
that five percent.
When they get their check.
It was very simple to do but it
just something nobody thought
of.
And Administration for to to
funded was our legislative
retirement at two million
dollars a year.
But it has so much excess fund
just don't have a tax department
that has the knowledge.
Sometimes of where these things
are the laws been passed but
nobody really she's if
anything's been collected.
books that were supposed to get
fees for taxes for and we don't
get a.
And it's not I'm not blaming
anybody it's just one of those
things that we pass laws a few
certainly one of them and we
could also use this money to
help the teachers retirement to
as well.
But people are in retirement
Mexico's retirement very often
our jobs don't pay as much as
they do in some states but
nobody excels on our retirement
for education or public
can and for things that can be
additional funds for we need
them for this thank you.
Thanks Santo Domingo further
debate sanity.
amazed how particularly and MC a
in the middle of the year any
raise they got was taken by
supported in their retirement as
to where they should be and so I
became a very enthusiastic
supporter of this in committee
and continue to be so and think
Stewart to close.
Mr present I wanna thank the
body for this conversation it's
it's thrilling to me that so
many people understand the
tied to the solvency of the fund
for almost ten years I voted
against that begin with and I
was wrong.
to its educators and I support
and appreciate the comments so
with that Mr president.
I move that Senate bill forty
two as amended do now pass and I
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Baca.
Senator Brandt.
Yes Senator Candelaria yes
Senator serve on this yes
Senator so wrong because yes
Senator Diamond.
yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Senator Ivey Soto yes Senator
how to meal.
Senator Hermio yes Senator
Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes Senator Lopez
Senator Munoz yes senator
Neville.
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neil Senator o'neil yes
Senator TCP now.
Senator Pirtle no Senator pope
yes Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez yes senator
senator.
Sedillo Lopez yes Senator sure.
Senator shared now Senator
Shendo.
Senator Shendo yes Senator sold.
Senator Stewart DS Senator
Tallman.
Yes Senator Tallman yes senator
Wirth yes Senator Wirth yes
Senator Woods.
By a vote of thirty six in the
affirmative six in the negative
Senate bill forty two as amended
calendar Senator or DC Pino.
record show all action for
placing.
Senate.
Indian.
Rural and cultural affairs
See no objections centered
participate out to explain the
bill.
Members of the of the Senate
And the this bill is a way of
making clear of which libraries.
Or that libraries that are
population beyond three thousand
you'll remember that our
definition of of the small rural
libraries.
Use that three thousand
Those libraries won't lose their
eligibility for distributions
from the fund and with that will
stand for questions.
Senator rural cultural affairs
committee substitute for Senate
bill two seventy three anybody
wishing to debate.
Senator Ingle.
president Senator Ingle I would
I would be glad to.
Mr president Sanders the per
callous or library rural rural
I'm sorry I didn't hear that
point other librarian allied it
would be a rural library.
Leave the allied a library is
run for governor on show.
And the you know I can smell the
settings a long ways off Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino and I confess I
can see that that's in the in
Senate district so I'm I'm I am
trying to build a some momentum
behind the candidacy.
Thank you Senator Ingle any
further debate senators.
we talk unfortunately about a
rural urban divide but it's it's
just really important that we
support our rural communities as
a as our urban progressive
communities awesome finally we
will remove you will remember
that we pass the state part poet
laureate program here just
recently and it's being run
perhaps no no never just not
familiar with the that poetic
form so anyway I rise in strong
support of this bill thank.
Thank you senator Melanie
communities will benefit with
through this definition thank
you very much.
Any further debate Senator is
yes we do Senator how to meal.
Thank you Mr president and thank
a lifeline to our communities in
doing so in areas where we don't
have broadband or internet
they're serving as a way and
helping our communities and
ensuring they get unemployment
and ensuring that students to
district thank you Mr president.
Any further debate senators.
Senator Sedillo Lopez thank you
I just want to start a stand in
amount is small it's it's really
important to these communities
so thank you I want to thank the
senator for bringing this
forward Senator Ortiz pain.
Thank you senator any further
debate.
comments on this on this measure
and I I would just underlined
how important these libraries
are to the small communities and
the unincorporated areas that
president I would move that the
Senate Indian rural and cultural
affairs substitute.
Committee substitute for
Senate bill two seventy three
Thank you senator Senator is to
the state chamber.
We're voting.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria.
Yes Senator Candelaria yes
Senators around this yes Senator
should run this test Senator
Gonzalez yes Senator Gonzales
yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen Senator Hamblen yes
Yes Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
yes Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna.
Yes Senator McKenna yes senator
Moores Senator Moores yes
senator Munoz.
Senator o'neil yes Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator Padilla yes Senator
Stewart a test Senator Pinto.
Senator Sanchez yes Senators
metes.
Senator Schmidt is yes senator
serving a Lopez yes Senator
should be a little bit yes
Stefanics Senator the budget
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn as Senator
Stewart.
Senator Stewart DS Senator
Tallman.
Senator Woods yes Senator
Brandt.
Senator Brandt yes.
Forty.
By a vote of forty two in the
Thank you very much Mr president
members of the Senate Senator
I'm gonna go on to the next the
the next bill as well that's
going to be Senator Gonzales
Senate bill twenty.
that V. now subject to debate
amendment for substitution.
Seeing no objection Senator
Gonzales explained the bill
thank you Mr president and
excise tax revenue collected
from the local government round
road fund to the transportation
project fund the bill does not
make any other changes to the
Yes so this is this bill is
coming from
At the request of the department
of transportation.
And the has the support of the
apologies at a much expedited
alright and what the also the
big part that really helps with
this is that right now.
and has solve a lot of support
from the municipalities that
this definitely would have that
outreach to specially the
smaller municipalities and
I see none Senator Gonzales to
close.
Thank you thank you Mr president
has been called and all those
present voted in the affirmative
except voting in the negative
by.
A roll call vote thank you thank
Senator Baca Senator Baca yes
Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt yes senator Byrd
Senator savant is yes Senator
Diamond Senator Diamond DS
Senator Duhigg Senator Duhigg
yes Senator Gallegos.
Hemphill yes Senator Hemphill
yes Senator Hickey Senator
Hickey yes Senator Ingle.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
yes Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
senator Morris Senator Moores
yes senator one of.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
senator for the.
Senator by the a yes Senator
Pinto Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Sweetser yes Senators
committees.
Senator Stewart is yes Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
Yes Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator Kernan says Senator
Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn S. Senator
Stewart.
Senator Stewart DS Senator
Tallman.
Senator Woods yes Senator Pirtle
Senator Pirtle yes.
By a vote of forty two in the
affirmative on the negative
transportation working very well
with our municipalities and
again you know in the best
interests to have of that
efficiency of communication and
also working with the project
of business committee reports
the reader to read.
Mr president your Indian rural
and cultural affairs committee
affairs committee substitute for
Senate bill three eighty I do
pass and that's referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Senator Shannon D.
were acted upon individually no
objection the reader to read
Senate bill three ninety seven
do pass and that's referred to
the tax business and
transportation committee and
the committee report that is we
have a motion to adopt the
committee report all those in
favor signify.
See no objections.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president unanimous consent we
go that our business
introduction of legislation or
that order business the reader
to read.
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House joint
resolution nine.
infrastructure that allows
essential household electric
internet natural gas water
wastewater and other service
connection to to domiciles upon
US resolution nine.
Having been read twice by title
is referred to the Senate rules
the bill was referred to Senate
Judiciary.
Senator Thomas present happy to
address that this is one of
those rural issues
help rural areas with
infrastructure and so when I sat
and looked at it typically we
would have done it the other way
but just felt like this was a
rural bill and Senator Pinto
Senator Pirtle thank you Mr
president.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president unanimous consent we
go about our business
announcements and miscellaneous
on that order business
we will be back on Monday and
we're gonna start just for
committee chairs we're gonna
start eleven o'clock on Monday.
And we will be here for the
members Senate bill three
seventy seven the junior bill
will most likely be heard this
week so that report to get red
in Monday morning and we'll do
house of that order business the
reader to read.
Message from the house of
representatives.
Mr president I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the house
has passed the Senate finance
message from the house has been
received Senator Wirth thank you
Mr president unanimous consent
we go about our business
announcements and miscellaneous
for on that order of Business
senator Wirth thank you Mr
president so this would be the
I'm right there with you Mr
president is present yes so
you're sure will meet tomorrow
we're gonna be a little unusual
and the time.
We're gonna be at twelve thirty
so please take a look at the
so let's let's uh get started on
time tomorrow and take our
weekend off or maybe our last
week in the.
Thank you centers around the
office very soon mean that
everything is correct so you got
a few more minutes to get those
to us remember your capital is
two point one nine OO.
and those guys in Judiciary if
you need help with your sheets
waiting given to us and we'll
help you spend that money sent
Campos would be more than
willing to help the free range
thank you Mr president.
Other announcements Senator.
Thank you Mr president got two
quick announcements here the
first one is any Republicans
would like to make a motion that
the next order of business be
the removal of the fence that's
keeping the people out of the
people's house.
we know there's no threat out
there we know that it's cost us
thirty some thousand dollars
today.
We know that this is the
people's house.
Let's quit pretending like
Mr president and I'm just I
think that's a yes barricade for
the free ranging chickens.
Senator Shendo okay thank you Mr
president your your centex
business and transportation.
Will begin at two PM today and
then also a presentation of on
the house bill as well and I
understand
now that there's been some
conversation between the.
the nine o'clock presentation
Saturday morning so to the state
stay tuned.
Yes there.
Senator Stefanics.
noon and we did let the free
range chickens chickens out
today thank you thank you
senator for the update Senator
Ivey Soto.
it's actually a slope here and
so it's it's merely a an optical
illusion that we're the same
height.
the Senate rules committee will
ready to our present your bills
will also be meeting Monday
morning at nine AM agenda to be
posted at least twenty four
hours in advance thank you very
where we are with things and we
will meet again at eight thirty
on Monday we will not be meeting
over the weekend.
Senator Baca.
session.
I object.
Etcetera etcetera the old.
Mr president I just say you
Miss Mister president senator
Any further announcements
Senators.
President that is about this is
present I I heard there might be
a Cheech and Chong a
presentation is this could you
No answer
further announcements.
that help us and I did a huge
last last week and I forgot one
group that we certainly
appreciate the zoom all the
folks running assumes that has
thank you so much David the
Czecho and all the sergeant at
arms and again everyone else
who's helped.
Make this session go in really
for the way you run this chamber
it's really appreciated with
that unanimous consent we stand
in recess until seven o'clock on
Monday morning.
See no objections the Sentinel
