Because of the committee we are
online.
Well good morning everybody
thank you all for joining the
rules committee this morning.
Our agency to help you please
call the roll.
Senator Baca.
Senator Lopez.
Here Senator Moores.
Senator o'neill.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Senator Pirtle.
Senator Stewart.
Senator Wirth here.
Senator Ingle.
Senator doing here and the yes
ma'am you have a quorum Mr chair
thank you very much appreciate
it are we are going to move to
We're gonna go first two US
Senate bill two thirty five
absent voter Act Senator pope
please proceed to our present
your bill and is there anybody.
Senator over there but if you
would like to have admitted from
the waiting room that you're
aware of Mr chair they've
already been admitted cared
frescoes from the secretary of
state's office and the Dona Ana
County clerk drive us.
One last we're good in that case
I'll please proceed to present
Representative.
You Mr chair Senate bill two
thirty five the absent voter Act
would allow voters to sign up to
be automatically mailed a ballot
each election eliminate the need
to apply every time an election
is held this bill would create
would create a permanent
absentee voter list in each
county statewide it would be
available to almost all eligible
New Mexico voters disallowing
only absentee voters who reside
overseas or military stationed
outside the United States or
whoever meli address outside of
the state regardless of the
pandemic we must ensure we're
giving everyone the opportunity
to participate in our lections
and avoid any unneeded barriers
act according.
I personally have the experience
of being on a military absentee
voter list well I served on
active duty which allowed me to
apply one time and given the
option of receiving all future
election ballots by mail.
We can accomplish lit accomplish
this and still ensure our
elections are safe and secure
and this would all happen at the
county level the same security
standards used for current
absentee applications will still
be in place but we will add
further security measures first
voters would be removed from the
list if they did not return
their mail ballot in two
consecutive elections including
one general election second of
their mail ballot or any other
election mail from their local
county clerk came back is on
undeliverable they would be
removed from the list as well
third they would be removed from
the absentee voter list if their
voter registration is council or
if they move to a new County.
Mailed ballots will still be
subject to the same deadlines
and other procedures for
handling and County.
I've worked with the New Mexico
secretary of state's office on
this bill at least five other
states and the district of
Columbia already have this
process New Mexico voters want
this and as we have all seen
from the last election New
Mexico has experience record
absence Hickey voter turnout.
Voters will be removed from this
list if they did not return
their mail ballot in two
consecutive elections including
general election as I stated
before.
And once again this would not be
handled at the state level it
would be handled by each county
clerk's office.
New Mexicans deserve this option
and we can ensure all checks and
balances our place at the same
time find a mechanism to ensure
all New Mexicans can
participate.
You know yesterday was the
anniversary of Bloody Sunday one
of the monumental moments in the
history of fighting for voter
rights.
I'm proud to live here in New
Mexico we have some of the
safest and secure elections in
the country and not limiting
voter options but I leave I but
I believe we can do more and
this bill does that.
Mr chair committee members I've
to expert witnesses I've Carrie
frescoes from the secretary of
state's office and the Dona ana
County clerk Dr mandate us to
help me ask questions with that
being said that's all I have
Mister chair and we are ready
for a public comment any and any
questions Representative Ecker
much Mister Roberts do we have
anybody signed up for public
comments.
Mr chair we have one person who
is here and that okay we have
two people I have Mario Jimenez
and JT Matthews both for the
bill and that is all I have.
Very well New Mexicans will so
here's what we'll do we'll start
with Mr Kammenos we'll go to Mr
Matthews and then well we'll
touch base with our doctor Askin
and mistrust guests and we'll go
to the committee so mistreatment
this process.
Yes good morning thank you Mr
chair members of the committee
I'll keep this real brief of
money he menace with coming
because New Mexico currently we
do have in the books apps to T.
permanent absentee for members
of the military individuals who
would like to vote in that
manner and I think it's very
important that we do it stand
that two individuals that are Q.
residing within Mexico the way
this piece of legislation it is
right and a does protect we
individuals who as as Senator
put mentioned are residing with
the New Mexico and it we believe
this bill will expand our voting
in encourage members of of of
the elderly community and
individuals who own a home stay
in their home to continue to
vote in all elections moving
forward and again I encourage
this this committee to to urge
this bill forward and give it to
pass thank you Mr chair.
I thank you very much Mr
our humanness Mr Matthews.
Hi Mr chair members of the
Senate rules committee good to
see you again my name's JV
Matthews and with Mexico working
families I'll also be brief we
stand in strong support of this
legislation we think reducing
hopes for voters to jump through
makes it easier for everyone to
participate and this is one of
those simple fixes that's that
will help anyone registered in
any party to participate in our
elections and simplify the
paperwork that needs to be done
not only for the administration
level but also for voters
themselves and so Mr chair thank
you Sanchez thank you senator
pope for bringing this forward
and carrying it thank you to the
secretary of state's office for
making it.
The rules clear and we urge
strong do passed today thank you
Mr chairman rules committee.
Thank you very much Mr Matthews
are we not proceed to drive us.
Hi good morning.
Mr chair members of the
committee
good morning from southern New
Mexico it's going to be eighty
degrees today here today so I'm
pretty excited about that thank
you for providing me the
opportunity to speak on Senate
bill us you've been United.
I haven't heard about the
weather.
Yes I all right let's try again
is that work Mr chair.
Okay my apologies up again the
weather's beautiful but again
thank you for the opportunity.
Thank you for the opportunity to
speak on Senate bill two thirty
five and thank you to senator
poke for sponsoring this my name
is Amanda Lopez ask and and I am
currently service the Dona ana
county clerk I'm here to speak
on behalf of my County and offer
my perspective on what I believe
would be an important way for a
segment of the leaders who
already know have already
committed to building the
absentee ballot to be able to
placed on a permanent less this
of course increases their access
and there is a voting since
twenty eighteen Dona Ana County
has seen a remarkable increase
in absentee voting voters are
discovering the ease of absentee
voting and they like the idea of
creating completing their ballot
and their kitchen table at their
leisure and be able to look at
each candidate and issues and
vote according to the world you
I myself voted for the first
time the absentee with my four
year old daughter at the dinner
table.
The nature of the pandemic
encourage absentee voting but it
also introduced it to so many
voters that I connected with
that.
Didn't know it existed prior to
to this and so it was an
invaluable tool not just during
the general but of course during
the primary Senate bill four
address many of the challenges
that collectively the clerks had
across the state and because of
some of the delays in the mail
system I spoke with dozens of
voters during that time who
expressed a desire to be placed
on an absentee permanent
absentee list and some had move
from other states and we're
curious as to why as New Mexico
is so voters centric why we do
not have that permanent list
antidote early I spoke with a
gentleman who was deeply
distressed seventy two years old
an Oregon plant transplant
recipient of veteran who was in
a wheelchair who would not
receive who had sent in his
application and about five days
prior to the election it's still
not received his ballot these
are the exact kind of voters
that this bill would be
extremely important to serve as
the county clerk of a border
area where we have many rural
voters as the county clerk an
area that also has many retirees
and for those voters who have
just already cited that this is
how they one of the this would
be really an important step in
in providing that opportunity
for them seamlessly so I stand
in support of this bill and I
hope it it moves through and
then you receive a supported as
well thank you.
Thank you very much this
process.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Carrie
fresco signed the director of
legislative and executive
affairs for the secretary of
state's office we appreciate
Senator pope bringing this bill
forward as the other people who
testified before me
stated we really see this as a
simplification of the voting
process for the voter and also
we see it as a streamlining
mechanism for election
administrators most county
clerks already know who what
what voters on their rules are
interested in voting absentee
for every election currently the
way the system works
anyone who wants to vote
absentee including these these
folks that know that that that's
how they want to vote every time
they have to apply before each
election and they have to hit
the hit the deadlines for
applying and then they receive
their their ballot after
applying so and with this
legislation what what it will
provide for is for these voters
who already know that's the way
they want to vote
whether there have their home
bound that's just their
preference they are able to
apply for that first time to be
on the permanent list and then
they no longer have to submit an
application there after in order
to receive in an absentee ballot
so we we appreciate that that
probe oversimplification while
also that the streamlining
effect it has for the
administrators thank you.
Thank you very much
And I will let everybody know
that I did get a message that
the comics parts affiliate
apparently did take a look at
this and as an affiliate I am
told.
Oppose the bill although that is
clearly not
unanimous opinion
B..
Let's go to questions and
comments from committee and let
us begin with senator Morris
thank you Mr Chairman good to
see everyone this will get in
this week thank you Center for
join us rules on March the first
time.
great Canadian thank you Jerry
and madam chair on the porch a
quick question
Kerry I think with that Mr Carey
so I I know it's first one of
the bill says all for qualified
workers are excluded
is that just military folks are
aware we excluded now and is
there anyone else in that
category but I can't think of.
The reason I ask is that
conclude like I remember when I
was I was rational staffer we
have had on we're able to back
in the old days we were able to
do just to balance.
Sure Mr chair senator Morris
thank you for that question so
the
the article sixty the uniformity
in overseas voters Act that
includes our our military voters
and voters who have some sort of
residential print press presence
in New Mexico but the they
actually live overseas and then
sometimes that even applies to
of like first responder type
folks that that have been
deployed out of out of state
so the reason that this bill
doesn't apply to those those
members and that military and
overseas voters is because they
already have kind of a form of
of permanent absentee so this
this bill would provide for our
ins in state living residents to
apply for permanent where is our
out of state out of country
Montoya and resident residents
have their own form covered by
article sixty.
Spence thank you for answering
the questions I think I
understand we're talk about Mr
chair or Kerry Senator pope
maybe Roger each is a brilliant
County the we already do the
staff about a Brooks county on.
This is the practice we did we
have an aptitude voter list
already currently and if so.
Good basic western how are they
doing it legally at the statute.
That's that's a great question
Mr chair Senator Moores so what
happens now in in many of our
counties is they maintain and
and sometimes the county clerk
even refers to it as a permanent
last but what it what it is it's
it's a list of the county
clerk's keep of the people that
they know want to vote absentee
but what they have to do first
is send of those voters an
application so they take their
permanent list.
Send them an application they
fill out the application then
they get the ballot so this cuts
out that application each time
step so they'll just simply keep
the permanent last and they'll
find a valid immediately to
those individuals that are on
the permanent list without that
single use application.
Okay so Mr chair Kerry are
Senator poke so Bernalillo
county as I see were promotion I
was doing that to do more their
own personal list of people who
they think might want to listen
now and it so that wasn't in
statute they were just doing
their own maybe they do that
Dona ana county Mr chairman bill
us the donor climbers coming in
on that one you guys do that on
their.
Since your chair Senator Moores
we automatically send at least
since I've been the clerk
internet we automatically send
applications to all of our
voters although I know
historically I've been told by
long time staff that they did
keep similar to Bernalillo
county an ongoing list of voters
who have expressed that.
Absentee ballot absentee ballot
is how they wanted to vote and
so that we can send an
application it is you know a
continual I think a
clarification it's always
application of the ballot that
that has previously been sent in
law does not prohibit that.
So Mister chair clerk Lopez is
so you're setting up your now
setting up the ballot requests
everyone even before the law we
passed last year.
Correct we have it there is
nothing that in the law was
silent and I think the speaker
but chairman want to jump in.
By pressing if you would listen
to the question sure you just
asked if you're sending absentee
ballot applications to all of
your books.
Mr chair Senator Moores yes
two one and on an account.
I'm sorry to all eligible
voters.
Mr chair when did you start
doing.
The clerk will best.
So so let me clarify I've been
the clerk for a brief amount of
time and we we did send them
during the primary.
So this is last year sure.
Yes Sir.
Works.
What.
What kind of caught Mr Kerrey
Senator what kind of processes
that restraint for all.
Mr chair Senator Moores it was
if I'm not mistaken twenty in
twenty nineteen when we had an
election to not bill pass that
created the election fund and
that Alexion Fund pushes those
state those election costs on to
the state so we're we're still
in the process of getting all of
the county expenses sorted out
and with that with the idea that
the state will pay for all of
those Alexion costs those
mandated Alexion costs.
Great piece legislation Mr chair
well written organized
and I notice on page two one
fifteen am and my our analyst
notes that
The voter voters mailing address
on the stipulate registration is
outside of the state which begs
the question do we have orders
on file on this mailing address
that we're sending to out of
state voters outside of the
federal exemption forms of
Senator over for tour we're.
Yes you to refer to you to.
Sure Mr chair Senator more as I
should be able to help with that
question so so yes we that the
law does provide for a
registered voter so a registered
voter would be a resident of New
Mexico to apply for an absentee
ballot and have that ballot
mailed to wherever they may be
during voting season so whether
they're off to college or on
vacation or you know staying at
mom's house in California you
can have an absentee ballot
delivered to an out of out of
state residents
I think the reason that this
legislation is is written in
this way that you can't ask for
eighty eight ballot to be
permanently sent you know to
California each time in this
situation is because.
Were pre pandemic presuming that
you're temporarily you know
visiting anti in California that
you don't necessarily you're not
applying for at ballot to be
permanently for years and years
and years the sent to California
so that's that's why that's
written the way it is senator
Morris.
Mr chairman Senator pope or
carry our our current work
Some you think about the example
my daughter wants college what
should do see so she program on.
but as you know college kids
move around so much.
Yeah are we Mr chair Senator
poke we pre populated
information on this are we.
On these applications now or on
the so ballots.
So my concern is that correct Mr
chair now there are not the
other bills are records to
properly in that information on
that are we going to do it now.
Mr chair Senator Moores I don't
believe so and and in this
process they will still need to
apply for the initial absentee
ballots need to be put on this
list.
Moores the the the the actual
pressure us is up in Senator
Woods is built but forty eight.
Name of the voter privacy flap
its pre populated no other
information the popular.
Mr etcetera but I was referring
to that other piece of
legislation you're probably not
aware of that we've been working
on
seems like it was you
so so how we're gonna protect
that Mr chair so senator Kerry
for to inspire daughter DC was
wrong are we gonna protect those
ballots when they do have the
the populated Opry data on
there.
So I'm Mr chair Senator Moores
for the simple your you're
speaking up with eight your
daughter residing in New Mexico
registered in New Mexico I'm
living temporarily at sounds
like out of state she would most
college students Mr chair you
carry me college kids or
something like that.
Yes so in this in that case Mr
chair she she would need to fill
out the application each time
in order to apply for the the
ballot Intel Intel if she's
having it delivered to an out of
state address.
Okay Mister speaker stands
center PO box here so if if.
Are you not not and you had no
Mr chair or you're just looking
at something else okay so Mister
arts center will carry so if
they're out of state they can't
be on this permanent
Westminister military like
Senator pope was one of those up
federal qualifiers so they're
out of state like a college kid
it would still have to apply by
application so we in state and
or military folks that we're
talking about.
Yes Mr chair Senator Moores.
Thank you Mr Senator your.
Thank you to all of you thank
you for your your.
Okay.
Thank you very much Senator
Moores anybody else on the
committee at this time.
Where wealth the pass.
I'm gonna much for depressive
Senator Lopez a second.
Senator snorts are before we get
to the vote.
But we would go through a couple
things in the bill.
And so on page one line six.
and then this is really more of
the forces we're respectful
thing the seconds more
substantive issue so normally we
would not say provisions of
article six B. of the uniformly
General Sizzlers Act you know
for military and overseas voters
Act is article six B..
And so we should strike the
words article sixty of.
The second thing is we should
also on page one line twenty two
after the reference to you move
up we should make a reference to
the or the input partner
violence survivors suffrage Tax.
Because that is an automatic
absent see but that is an
automatic absentee operated
through the secretary of state's
office officials basically.
Mr chair are you proposing
amendments of so we can see them
real quickly.
I drove on October now I have
them I have them.
Close.
Yes so yes so so basically then
page one line twenty one strike
article sixty of.
Page one line twenty two the for
your for military state our
after our I'm sorry before the
comma insert or the into a
partner violence survivors
suffrage Act.
Let me start with those two
Senator pope what is your take
on those amendments is that.
Finally I'm friendly neutral.
Mr chair let me just get a arms
up if I can from from Jerry if
that's okay we're gonna go Mr
okay well is there any objection
is there any question comment
about those two moments thank
actuals amounts.
Very well let's see here please
show everybody are present
voting in the affirmative also I
I do want to clarify I tend to
get clarification the county
clerk's position on the bill as
an affiliate out was not
strictly to propose but it was
that there's that they have a
preference of people be sent an
application as opposed
automatically exposed to up to
life with the.
We got but it was so them.
On page two.
R. M. is just right the
structural things one is on both
a line eight and one twenty
five.
We have this language that says
each time there's a statewide
election with them.
Once as my placing them on the
precincts are that's a little
funky I think I think it did
start with them and ought to be
that includes a statewide
election that includes
Representative or St one lesson
that includes the precinct.
And then and then the other
thing it is just on a run on
four subsection B..
Would be on page two line twelve
put a period after mailed
ballots.
And write the words except that.
We have two separate sentences
the first is well well process
that as an application for mail
ballots and then that separates
us with the kind of clerk shall
not accept an application to be
added from the absentee voters
mailing address is outside the
state.
so let me again just real quick
check with not Senator.
Public Education Department
members are there any questions
or comments on that.
So Mister chair those are
friendly amendments thank you
anyone from the committee.
Is there any objection.
Mr help result in everybody of
voting in the affirmative on
that and then the final thing
would be on page four.
Now page for.
It seems to me in provident to
include our subsection B..
R. because that's dependent upon
whatever form one to four press
five point seven which send a
registration states and
and and and it subsection B.
allows people to are up join the
party in a in a primary then
they would be allowed to do that
without this instruction being
present R. and
and if and if it doesn't that
they wouldn't be allowed to do
this regardless of what this
says here but we don't want to
create a conflict at all and so
it just seems to me that that we
should probably not not include
that I'm I'm not really sure
section two at all is necessary
let me just check with with
if I may Sir public with
mistrust guess as to whether or
not it is as to her feelings
device ability of keeping what
is right now subsection.
Which is the the just part that
says that they can get a
replacement Alexander of the law
I think a lot already
Representative.
Mr chair I I appreciate your
point and agree with you it's a
duplicate of of Corona.
Okay in that case yeah so then
the suggest would actually be in
the district section two all
together on the belt although
this care that in in both of
those cases.
and so Senator pope
what is your sense of that one.
That's a friendly amendment Mr.
All are welcome any questions or
comments from committee.
Senator I see you reaching.
Mr chairman if you'll if you'll
just again reiterate what you
just said.
Yeah so this would be strike
section two of the bill.
And we number section three to
section two this so subsection
are section two eighty talk
about replacement ballots but we
already provide for placing
ballots bringing over actually
whether that so so that doesn't
need to be detailed here and
then to be is are based on a
policy that is already in the
same day but that is candidly
the subject of a little bit of
discussion in the house right
now and we don't want to create
a conflict of law but if it were
allowed it would be a lot of
time a lot of would be allowed
and and lex would want to have a
conflict going on.
So so that's what thank you.
Anybody else.
Any objection.
Our office is that objection of
question no.
Okay.
So this show everybody presents
of voting in the affirmative
them on tracking section to.
And so we are now on the amended
bill.
And so are there any further
questions or comments on the
amended bill we are on a two
passed motion.
R. now as amended.
Saying nobody from the committee
seeking recognition.
So SB here please call the roll.
Senator Baca.
Senator Lopez yes Senator
Moores.
No.
Senator o'neill yes.
Senator Casey Pino yes.
Senator Pirtle.
Yes.
Senator Stewart yes Senator
Wirth yes Senator Ingle yes.
Senator doing yes and senator
Ivey Soto yes ma'am.
Legislation center pope on a
that nine one or ten one.
You Mr chair was ten to one our
time to one vote you have a
depressed recommendation from
the Senate rules committee.
All right thank you Mr chairman
thank you committee members have
a great day each.
we now go to Senator resolution
twenty two Senator all then.
Hello or expanding as you have a
you have a committee substitute
present today is that correct.
That's correct.
Okay thank you have a before we
proceed you have the total
number the committee so I just
wanted to we can get up on the
screen it possible.
Yes two two one eight.
Two two oh one eight nine point
two.
Right Sir Morris.
I just want to Mr was just we
wasn't mail emailed out I was
looking at what's online right
now our first time seeing the
committee so.
Was Mr Sierra was emailed out to
us.
I'm sorry I know yes.
Well as you know are you know
also Mr chair slam so Mister
Martin find it in here you know
the email at all Mr chair
Senator.
We know that maybe my at.
Thanks for this those Merial.
He menace that was wow this guy
that was emailed out by Arlene
Lujan on March fifth.
At three eleven PM the.
Official documents.
There are two of the title SRC
meeting Monday March eighth
documents.
Thank you Mr chair.
Thanks.
Okay Senator
Tallman these particular.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the rules committee which
senator Morris says is the best
committee.
bringing this.
I'm bringing this bill forward
and that because I know anything
about election long and doing a
favor for a friend I feel a
little intimidated coming before
Senator Ivy Soto who is a
nationally recognized expert.
On election all your.
Resolution that proposing
To article seven section five of
the constitution New Mexico to
provide the person who receives
the highest number of votes for
any office is declared elected
to that office unless otherwise
provided by law and to eliminate
the authorization for runoff
elections municipalities New
Mexico Alliance provided by law
the original bill mandated that.
Ranked choice voting for all
municipalities however that was
not our original intent
therefore we are proposing a.
This this.
so is the protection it's a
counties in choosing to utilize.
A top two runoff election or a
ranked choice voting which is
already provided by the New
Mexico election code.
Thank you Mr.
Mr chair.
Mr chair with me an expert
witness Merial.
The menace who was formerly the
the chief deputy clerk at Donna
County and is currently.
The director of the campaign
director for common cause.
Mr chair you are muted.
Thank you.
R. ironically people yelling
that.
Okay let me just before we got a
mystery just let's just go over
exactly what the sub is so that
people can see where the
languages so we maintain
paragraph a all election should
be right balance.
The important thing and then
And then some a pair SB would be
the person who receives the
highest number of votes for any
office.
Not be declared to be elected to
that office.
Unless otherwise provided by
law.
So so that would.
Our.
So that is that is the language
that would be that would be
remaining in the.
If adopted as presented so with
that Mr humanness this person.
Yes thank you Mr chairman of the
committee might he miss coming
because New Mexico again today
we bring before you a piece
legislation that again then
article seven section five of
the constitution.
What the legislature with the
flexibility to make the
necessary changes to the
election code as technology and
best practices continue with
that.
Currently within the
constitution we have language as
as a committee chair just
pointed out permitting run off
elections for municipalities and
since the passage of the local
election act all elections have
now been brought under one
umbrella within our election
code and current language in the
election code continues to
permit minutes apologies to
conduct talked to run off
elections or instant runoff
elect she's also known as right
choice elections if they choose
to do so with the addition of
the language unless otherwise
provided by law I'm to the
Senate joint resolution we
direct the constitution to our
election code which again has
existing language that retains
one off type elections for
municipalities with that Mr
chair I I do know we are
strapped for time so I'll just
you know be happy to answer any
questions.
Thank thank you very much Mister
you menace are let me
Mr Roberts do we have anybody
from the public was secretary
state yes Mister chair I have a
rich liner in the way to in the
meeting.
Well Mister Winer please
proceed.
Yes thank you Mr thank you Mr
chair members of the committee
my name is rich Weiner I'm with
indivisible Knoxville
I have been a fan of our rank
choice voting since the nineties
what I know is this it right off
voting it's always seem to be
the fairest most efficient way
to conduct an election.
On many occasions in multi
candidate races I faced a
dilemma who who to vote for in
races where those are run out
even more races with his time to
run off with my favorite
candidate even if I suspect have
little chance of winning or
making it to the wrong also I
watch the polls and based on a
vote at least on those poles
after two more candidates who
have similar views how do I
worry about splitting the vote
and allow somebody with other
used to be elected because our
there's only one of them and
three of the people who share my
abuse
do why you worry about whether
or not it's my favorite
candidate will spoil the chances
of the less favorite candidate
with ranked choice voting all of
these concerns or eliminate our
this is a branch was voting
saves money and people I have to
go and vote once I urge this
committee to go to pass on S. J.
R. twenty two thank you very
much.
Thank you very much Mister
winner of the property anybody
else I don't on this one.
Mr chair I have no one else.
Okay very good questions and
comments from committee them.
Our course and then Senator are.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Center Thomas to see back on
Senate rules on this I'm just
reading this committee so for
the first time and listen to the
testimony as I'm reading it and
all the testimony is talking
about in favor of right choice
voting but outside of the title.
There's not in this
constitutional moment about
ranked choice voting all calls.
So that's not what we're doing
here we're just saying all
options will be about ballot and
the legislature can set rules
by law so as you well know
serving our rules committee in
the past there's a lot of
different ways to how elections
proportional elections we go
down the list as water for what
she systems part in the world
that we could then establish so
this your tend to do rank choice
voting or to throw out the the
the bathwater and start from
scratch.
Well.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator Morris for the question.
Is simply a giving folks a
choice so my
Expert witness Mr MNS can the
exponent that.
Yes thank you Sir Mr chair
Senator Moores so the intent of
this legislation is is really to
bring up our constitution in
line with what we have written
currently within our election
code as I mentioned we do have a
sections within our election
code to be specific with all
within article twenty two of our
election code I we have run off
election thank choice of voting
language as well.
Early established within their
also by removing it from our our
constitution you know it's
providing yourselves are
legislature.
For more flexibility to make
changes to our election code
moving forward as necessary this
is not a you know specific you
know mandate on ranked choice
voting as the senator told in
mentioned when he first
elaborated on the bills the
substitution that is that was
not the initial intent of the
legislation there for you know
we come before you with with the
sub.
Thank you Mr chair Senator
Thomas thank you almost I'm just
but that's the point is the
advocates are asking for right
choice voting this bill
do that this just says the
legislature can do whatever we
want to do in the future.
Come up with any kind of system
we want to do something women in
the store or actual exploded so
I don't think this
this of those where you think it
does it's it's basically
throwing out the bathwater in
maybe the baby needs to be
thrown out maybe not I mean
there's nothing in here that
says that legislature just
passed the exact same system we
currently have a incentive law
we we could do
plus the road different so kind
of systems besides towards
school and so I'm not sure Mr
aren't sure Center almonds this
is doing what you think about so
it's not about right choice for
students constitution this is
about you do a parliamentary
system cited or.
Really want to so thank you Mr
chair is one make sure senator
Tom realize this is about word
choice or.
Thank you very much Senator are
served with.
I thank you Mr chair my point is
is somewhat similar to was
senator Morris of St.
If if the intent of this
legislation is not to take away
their run offs from you Mr
municipalities then what's the
need to pass that's
But but I think this actually is
about ranked choice voting
because by taking away the
language that's in here this
will make it so that the
legislature can can force
municipalities to use ranked
choice voting much more is late
in the future they can just do
that by statute and won't have
conflicting language in our
constitution that would would be
a problem in doing that
so I I I I think that that's
that's what this bill is
actually doing hi and.
And that that's something that
that should be made clear.
Thank you Mr chair.
Thank you very much Center do
had Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Thank you Mr chairman and and I
was feeling very uneasy about.
Tending to agree with senator
Morris.
Then Senator doing is help
survivors in the what we're
really doing here.
All I think it's going to be
very difficult to.
Voters are on a on a
constitutional amendment what
this is really about.
Because it doesn't seem to say
anything now the changes.
So I.
We still.
Constitution reading the way it
is now.
Mandate ranked choice voting to
to municipalities.
And I guess I'm directed to you
Mr chairman.
So are certainly is a
certificate of the way that the
constitution is partly written.
We can mandates right price
voting on all local public
bodies except municipalities.
they have to decide the way that
it's written if they would want
to have up right by voting for
example we could right now just
wanted to mandate reinforce
voting for every office on the
regular local election ballot
accepting this apologies but the
municipality would have to agree
or not agree if they're going to
do it making the ballot
inconsistent if we're to do that
we're also not able to mandate
bring trust voting right now
in either a primary or general
election.
and so if this for past we would
have the option by statutes of
of making those determinations.
And and and I will say the
current language of the law in
the election code allows
municipalities to make a choice
of this for past and we didn't
do anything the new mascot is
what would continue to have a
choice.
I'm here I'm not sure we need is
that I'll need listening to the
debate thank you.
Well and not seeing anybody else
at the moment seeking
recognition let me just suggest.
R. two changes on this if I may
the first is our instead of the
work otherwise just highlighted
on your screen on page two line
twenty four.
That really should be unless a
majority is.
Unless a majority is.
R. because otherwise we declare
that someone needs to have two
thirds vote to elect.
Right and so it's it's either
you have the person who gets the
most votes you are already
unless a majority is provided by
law.
And then all of them in the
title.
I think the time would be helped
by saying bye bye conforming
that to say find person who
receives the highest number of
votes for any office is declared
elected elected to that office
unless otherwise a majority is
provided by law and then I would
put a purely there because we're
not actually eliminating the
authorization for runoff
elections in the nationalities
and so and so I think that is a
misstatement of what this does
because that authorization
continues to exist in fact that.
R. and so so the
so that I would be what would
have a period on line fourteen
after the word law.
Otherwise would be changed to a
major is.
And then page two one twenty
four otherwise would be changed
to a major it's also that it's
motion from the chair let me
check with senator Paul then on
your sense of that motion is a
friendly on probably.
It's friendly if it's okay with
my expert witness merry you want
to chime in please.
Yes Mr chairman and committee
Sierra that and service so that
would be fine.
Yeah we're all other questions
or comments from the committee
on the proposed amendments.
Is there any objection to
adoption the proposed
amendments.
But we show everyone presents
voting in the affirmative on the
proposed amendment I think that
clarifies some of the ambiguity
at which point now is it simply
a policy issue where where where
people can reasonably disagree
so the so the current law does
have
restrictions that's what we're
able to consider statutorily
that's what three up statutorily
and and that's and that's an
important policy considerations
are there any other questions or
comments from committee.
R. as to the amended sub.
And if not what is the pleasure
of the committee on the amended
order.
This will go out clean.
Does anybody want to make a
motion that's not what was going
to the next center point.
I don't chair a motion so move
to table.
Well we're on a motion to table
on on this on Senate Joint
resolution twenty two of the
committee sub.
As proposed amended.
please call the roll.
Senator Lopez.
That
I voice.
Senator Lopez I'm no.
Senator Morris.
a motion to table yes Senator
o'neill yes.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
I'm
sorry Senator I didn't get that.
No.
Senator Pirtle.
Senator Stewart.
No.
Senator Wirth no.
Senator Ingle yes.
Senator doing no.
Senator Ivey Soto.
No ma'am so the motion to table
fails so maybe somebody can.
Representative up the courage to
make a motion and if not we'll
proceed on to something else
store.
Mr chairman I move the do not
pass on.
Senate joint resolution twenty
two and eight to pass on Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate joint resolution
twenty two.
Rules committee.
Raul can be confusing when you
look around to see who is here
yes.
Are
well and
And so we have a motion from
Senator Stewart for a do not
pass on some draft resolution
twenty two and two passed on
Senate rules committee
substitute for that resolution
number of twenty two after in
the point three which would be
the clean version with the
amendments that were adopted.
Are any further discussion from
the committee.
Saying the state help please
call the roll Senator Baca.
Senator Lopez.
Now.
Senator Wirth.
No.
Senator o'neill.
No Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Yes explain.
Senator Pirtle.
Senator Stewart.
Yes.
Senator Wirth yes.
Senator Ingle.
No.
And Senator Duhigg.
Yes.
Senator Ivey Soto yes ma'am so.
you know.
It was also on these of so on a
on a five five tie votes.
That are COVID thank you very
much for your presentation hi
you are almost there and we look
forward to further discussion
about this next year you thank
you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee thank
you very much.
what we are I believe.
Well received we have Senator
arch we have Representative
neighbors.
R. thank you indicated that he
was the public area but I'm not
seeing him in the waiting room I
just Representative Ely eighty.
So
I'm cert survivor Mr chair you
have your place tax to make sure
that he has the proper link and
Representative Eli are you are
you ready prepare to of proceed
on it does so that we don't
believe you to be unkind
disclose location would you mind
turning on a light where you are
please.
The witness protection program.
Senator given sorry about seven
understand that.
You know he wanted to they're
just don't tell anybody where I
am.
While waiting for Representative
nitrogen is going.
Yes so they are either there are
tracking him down
why don't we go on then the H.
B. twenty five and will come
back to you I can start right
now Senator whatever you want so
ready to go and that way
Representative Nibert can be
here when we present that bill
Representative please proceed on
house bill twenty five Mr
Chairman great thank you Mr
chairman committee so this is a
pretty straightforward bill so
it's allowing in expanding the
scope of our legislative
education study committee to
include higher education
currently it doesn't so we're
trying to add that in bill has
been passed the Senate before
has passed the house before in
isolation but never both at the
same time so with that Mr
chairman I'll stand for
questions.
Thank you very much Mr Morrow
and
Mister Roberts do we have
anybody who is
in the waiting room to comment
on this.
Mr chair I have no one
registered to comment for H. B.
twenty five.
Okay okay very well in that case
let us move to questions or
comments from committee.
R. and let me go first to I
believe Senator Moores we don't
have enough.
Representative night works for
he is.
What about this which is.
Mister Mister chair I think
we've seen this build many many
times in the past I'll look
forward to Senator Ortiz Y. Pino
because I was just gonna record
to pass motion center to secure
wants to make comments although
for.
Very well.
Senator Ortiz been.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator Wirth either.
I mean I think this is a great
deal I I do think since the in
Alice's we receive points out
that
Relation of ever with the LFC
will that's occasion every
committee the needs and the
interim.
And
I mean it does demonstrate I
think one of the dilemmas of our
structure and that isn't
committees meeting during the
interim gather information on
their area of concern meanwhile
the LFC is developing the budget
independent of their their input
and so until we can find some
way for the interim committees
to feed into the LFC more
effectively than we do now this
is going to continue to be a
duplication of effort I don't
see this is that I think this is
a way of expanding the the
number of legislators who are
exposed to the issues in these
are in these departments so I I
was just going to support this
and senator Morris wants to make
the motion I will certainly
seconded.
We do press.
Mr chairman if I make thank you
just a quick comment on that you
have.
Motion passes.
You are welcome to talk us out
of that
That number please proceed you
may take the vote if I could
answer that would be awesome.
Restore the did you want to say
something.
You just chairman I would like
to hear chairman Romero's
remarks now please so.
Yeah no I I I think the point
well taken from from Senator TCP
no because I I have expressed
very similar views before I mean
we've I've looked at other ways
of trying to solve this issue
but it's incredibly difficult to
give an the amount of money and
effort it really would take at
this particular point in order
to do that so we have
want to see the infrastructure
and the staff at ESC that can
currently take on this role and
I think it's it's a vitally
important one as we start cross
collaboration between certainly
nine through twelve system and
higher education and the role
results there of with that thank
you Mr chairman.
I thank you chairman of the
floor right do thank you so when
I chair L. E. S. C. for two
years we made a point of meeting
with the LFC we did that
specifically in twenty eighteen
and work together on joint
budgetary matters in fact that's
how we got our moonshot Senate
bill one House Bill five so the
chairs of these committees
can decide to me like that in
the interim and I suggest we
could use that as a role model
because when we began that
session both the house and the
Senate had the same kind of
education bills that we had
agreed upon during the interim
with the joint work we started
meeting together in June a small
group of each committee that
included the chairs the vice
chairs ranking members and
several other members that were
in agreement to work so there's
certainly a ways to get past
this issue with none of us know
what LESC is doing a we did that
at least for a full year so just
wanted to make sure that people
understood that there certainly
away for these committees to
March thank you.
Thank you senator it just no.
Senator are are.
Lopez and senator been.
Thank you Mr chairman and I just
want to say thank you for
bringing this bill forward Mr
chairman
you know.
And your Senator Stewart of
course is been
Around as long as I have and we
know that we've always tried to
have a partially state I think
more input to also from the
legislature with regards to
higher education just as as the
system Representative P. crow
Dennis pick wrote was chair of
and interim committee that
lasted for two years Mr Chairman
And if they kind of disappear
very quickly I was on that
interim committee he's trying to
figure out how we can work the
relationship between K. twelve
well as higher ad and how that
that system could flow even more
so so Mr chairman I think this
is a good in wrote for us to be.
Access thank you.
Thank you very much Senator
Lopez synergies people.
Thank you Mr chairman I would
just respond to senator Seward's
suggestion that I think it's it
is a little disingenuous to well
maybe we were under a federal
the federal ministry for mandate
to improve education and crime
which in a little extra impetus
and I was supposed of health
care reforms under the Martinez
Yazzie type of the situation
where we have come up with
something real fast that it
would be a lot easier to
convince the LFC that they
should share some of their.
And that budgetary authority.
But all of that.
I thank you very much and and
I'm going to this way in real
quick on this Madam I plan to
vote for it because it's the
structure we have right now.
In our statutes I happen to
believe
And and actually think
Representative Ely in my part
have worked on this little bit
as well acted to believe that.
none of our interim committees
ought to be in statute they
should all be in legislative
rule and
you we have this interesting
situation as we put.
Our committees in statute where
we effectively have to ask
permission of the governor to
make changes to our legislative
process because you have to sign
the bill that we want to change
it we have to ask the governor
for permission to make changes
to our legislative process I
think personally that is an
inherent violation of separation
of powers but it's one that we
ourselves have fallen into.
And and so you know I do want us
to find a way and and this is
one of the things
As I think we we we start to
take a look at the legislative
rules what we may want to take a
look at so right now within our
rules.
There's he sure has the rules
and then we have the joint rules
of the legislature the drug was
the legislature take a two
thirds vote so people tend to do
things statutorily because it
requires a majority vote along
with the governor which can
often times be the path of least
resistance and and one of things
I think we should take a look at
within our rules is may be
allowing for a rulemaking
process either within
Legislative Council or where we
could do
Joint rules for things that
happen outside of session by a
majority vote or something along
those lines so that we actually
move all of these legislative
procedures that are in statute
into
the legislative branch of
government much like the Supreme
Court has all of their rule sets
for what happens in the court
system.
R. and and and they maintain
those as opposed to having all
that in statute so
so I I really think that is
ultimately where we need to be
but given the current procedures
that we have I do I do plan to
support this at this time while
we move towards I think eight of
a system that actually keeps the
legislative purview within the
legislature so with that we do
have a due we're on a deep pass
motion that has been duly
seconded the Senate the house of
the committee.
Thing else on the committee
misty he'll if you would please
call the roll.
Senator Baca.
Yes.
Senator Lopez yes.
Senator Wirth yes Senator
o'neill yes Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino yes Senator Pirtle yes.
Senator Stewart yes Senator
Wirth.
Senator Ingle yes.
Senator do yes and senator Ivey
Soto yes ma'am what was the
hopes attendees
Regulations Representative
Romero on attendance or vote to
have a do pass recommendation on
the Senator.
Great thank you Mr chairman
thank you committee thank you
very much
very well so we now have
Representative Nibert.
Joining us off from the capital
we have Representative Eli
joining us from a place that he
would prefer not to disclose.
And we have is Mr Ferris.
Representative Garratt asked Ms
process is joining us very good.
Now now the gang's all here and
so let us proceed with House
bill two forty four and for our
tradition in this committee
representative Nibert as the
sponsor of the bill we always
start off with the sponsor
reading the bill if you would
please proceed read
begin with and you and
representative of the life and
such off on the participants.
If not you can just Mr chair R.
I will be happy to put everyone
to sleep right so forty two page
bill one and I'm fairly boring
so you guys could get a good
that judge up one sleeve R. but
if that's the way you wish to
proceed I am happy to oblige Sir
why don't we start off with an
explanation of the bill we'll
see if we need an actual right
okay up for first I I certainly
Mister chair I owe you an
apology for my lack of technical
skills I'm I was watching and
listening amendment was trying
to figure out how to do it and
and couldn't the can do it by I
found out I know that two four
so I apologize for my delay
Mr chair committee house bill
two forty four is a bill that is
not unexpected.
The ethics bill that we passed a
couple years ago contemplated
that the the ethics commission
would review how things were
going and would report back to
us with recommendations as to
maybe tweak some a law that
there would be necessary for it
to really fulfill its role and
to settle into the job that we
are granted to it through the
legislation and that the people
of New Mexico branded to it
through a constitutional
amendment so this is a this bill
is a bill that works to do some
tweaking to the to the.
Ethics bill and one of the major
components of this bill is to
more.
Fully defined the relationship
between the secretary of state's
office and the ethics
commission.
And what this bill provides is
that basically the secretary of
state's office for for most are
are violations of of things that
there were subject to is
economic benefits our political
parties lobbyist and political
committees are is that the
secretary of state's office will
have a fairly short time to
secure voluntary compliance if
that voluntary compliance cannot
be secured.
With a fairly quick time then
that matter.
Move over to the
ethics commission for further
handling because the ethics
commission has several
components that are lacking in
the secretary of state's office
Matt is number one and
investigatory arm and the
ability to subpoena and and
share the matter forward so
we've we define the roles of
those two offices with respect
to that issue couple other
things that this bill does yet
It allows
the issuance of advisory
opinions by the state ethics
commission it also puts the.
Ethics commissioners under an
obligation to file financial
disclosure statements similar to
what we file as as candidates
it maximizes the fines that can
be incurred by candidates and
and others
subject to campaign financing
laws and yet
Also
Gives the secretary of state a
little more forty two to deal
with number one the state
political parties and securing
information from the state
political parties as to the
local political parties are.
Particularly.
Concerning the duties of
treasures of such organizations
and making sure that they
understand the duties that they
are
subject to and and trying to put
some some of
disclosure.
Provisions in there that these
parties recognize the important
work that that they're signing
up for when they're made a
treasure over campaign or party
or or another into the subject
to the.
Champagne walls it deals with
the four acts
in the secretary of state's
office political parties
candidates lobbyist and
political committees and better
without all turn it over to my
my co sponsor Representative
Ely if I miss that there may be
less there are are Jerry
frescoes from the secretary of
state's office and damaged just
the executive director of the
ethics commission but may be
more fully to provide some of
those things that I may have
overlooked Mr chairman and
members the committee on the
rules for you
the chair were member because
she championed this the ethics
commission that this was
expected this is not something
that we're correcting it was
expected that as the ethics
commission got up and going that
there would be conversations
specifically with the secretary
of state as to whether
respective
rules are and so that's what
this does and then the only
other thing I would add is is
that
you know I I think for both
chambers it's important to
recognize that we try to
approach this from a bipartisan
way it's why Representative
Nyberg and I are together on
this is because we want to
continue that effort to make
sure that the ethics commission
does not become partisan in
anyway for one side or the other
and so with that Mr chairman
members the commission unless
I'm with actual turned back to
Representative Nibert if you to
one of our experts which is to
say anything if you would
indulge us we would have them
your comments thank you Mr chair
members the committee.
Mr chair if you like to hear
from our server for our students
are are experts from the
secretary of state's office now
would be a time for her to give
you the overview from that
office and we'll turn the Mr
Ferris with the average
commission no matter how
refreshingly brief
Representative Eli west we what
we have time to hear from
mistrust S. and then this press
but.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
members of the committee carry
precedence the legislative and
executive affairs director for
the office of the secretary of
state we appreciate that the
work and the effort and the
collaboration that's been
several months
in the undertaking and working
with our R. Sanchez and Mr fares
from the state ethics commission
and all all focus on some of the
items that are that are very
specific to the secretary of
state's office and I want to
share our perspective a little
bit we we really appreciate the
the bills attempts to actually
not attempt at what it really
does is it delineates the the
administration aspects of the
bills that we share governance
over
and then the ethics commission
becomes more I have in in line
with doing the enforcement so
it's really hitting on on the
the aspects of our offices that
you know our districts in our
respective offices
administration remaining under
the secretary of state's office
and enforcement moving more so
over into the state ethics
commission.
I'm and while that said it's
still retains the voluntary
compliance aspect allowing for
any any type of complaint under
this campaign reporting act the
lobbyist regulation Act for
someone to first voluntary
comply voluntarily comply before
before any F. additional
enforcement is issued
additionally a couple items
important specifically to our
office that we we think will
help with improved compliance
are and the the aspect in which
the state political parties are
required to provide that
information about the county
political parties to our office
in so that we can keep our
records current regarding who is
that the treasurer who who are
the responsible officers at the
county level so that if there is
a compliance issue we know who
to reach out to in order to help
with with compliance oftentimes
what we see now what with with
some political party up
political committees and
particularly with some of the
county political parties is that
the turnover in the
organizational officers is such
that we don't necessarily have
in for the right information on
hand and so we start we we call
and send letters out to to folks
that are actually no longer
affiliated with the committee so
we think a couple of the
provisions of the bill actually
help keep our records current so
that we can more effectively
seek compliance and not
necessarily let the let the
fines get out of hand what we're
we're chasing down the wrong the
wrong people so thank you for
the opportunity to to point a
couple of those items out.
Thank you very much mistrust
persists.
Thank you good morning Mr chair
members of the rules committee.
I just want to thank the
sponsors representative Nibert
Representative Ely for caring
additional in house I I also
wanted to thank the president
pro tem for sponsoring this bill
in the Senate Mr chair I don't
belabor the point that the
sponsors have already made so
with that all I'll be happy to
assist with any questions thank
you.
I thank you very much appreciate
that Mr Roberts do we have
anybody.
Who is waiting to give comment
on this Mr chair I have they
need power is in the meeting
registered.
Well miss yes please proceed.
So sorry and I was having some
problems taking myself off meal
thank you Mr chair and members
of the committee Sydney Taos
with common cause New Mexico
I'll keep my comments very short
since the bill's sponsors and
the experts have covered this
bill very thoroughly we'd like
to think that the secretary of
state and the state ethics
commission for their joint
efforts in crafting this
legislation and for the bill's
sponsor support in bringing it
forward just a few things we
have seen proof recently that
entities and organizations
spending in our state elections
have been hesitant to disclose
properly and follow our
governing statutes that ensure
transparency with those
influencing our elections and at
times it seems that failure to
comply with our governing
statutes has been seen as a cost
of doing business for groups and
organizations who are wanting to
play political ball in our state
and not as a transparent effort
to keep public confidence which
is what the statute our our Ford
sent you know pulling
transparency with the public
and so ensuring rulemaking
authorities in this legislation
allows these agencies to update
and enhance our current statutes
to ensure that the rules are
clear to the public lobbyists
and those who are required to
disclose according to our laws
so you know what that the public
always wants to know as much
information as they can who is
spending money to influence
their opinion and who is
spending and to influence their
vote and for all those reasons
and for everything that the
Sanchez and experts have listed
above we hope that you supports
house bill two forty four thank
you so much thank you very much
on the status of miss Robertson
what else.
I had a Juliana group but she is
not here.
Well
so in that case let us proceed
questions or comments from
committee.
Better do that.
Thank you Mr chair this is maybe
maybe a question for mistrust as
of.
Currently it under for both that
the campaign reporting act and
voter action act.
When does the secretary of
state's office have had a
blackout period.
Before an election for those
complaints and and if so what
what is that like a period for
the secretary of state's office.
We Mr chair members of the
committee that that maybe a
better question for for Mr
Ferris in regards to the
complete package blackout
period.
And Mister chair I guess my
question is.
Because one of the one of the
things in the the state ethics
act that.
I don't love is the sixty day
blackout period for addressing
those complaints before I think
that's just a really big
blackout period my understanding
was that the blackout period
Andrew this is just within the
secretary of state's office was
was a much shorter what.
And but I don't know if that's
correct.
Our.
Mr chair and senator the the
blackout period is something
that was highly negotiated a
couple years ago and
We we came up with the sixty day
blackout period there were
substantial
Turned
our from my end to make a longer
blackout period there was a
substantial tarred by my co
sponsored maker shorter blackout
period about so essentially
where we we ended up our
concern was you did not want the
ethics commission to be
R. A..
To be politicized during a
campaign
used as a political tool and so
that's why if there's a
complaint filed during that
period no action gets taken
during that blackout
period actually if I may of what
we have is actually two separate
standards Senator which which
raises important issues what but
it's it's it's important
understand the which is our
standard so the standard for the
state ethics commission is that
they can receive or I had a
complaint and in the top.
They simply cannot adjudicate
that complaint during the sixty
days prior and I'll allow Mr
Ferris to do both result is that
the secretary of state's office
they're not allowed to receive a
complaint so they have a
blackout from people filing
complaints during the what is of
the five or seven days maybe a
little more prior to an election
so I think somebody has done
something wrong I'm not even
allowed to file a complaint with
the secretary of state's office
during that period of time so
it's it's actually there are
there two separate provisions
they both get get idle this
blackout but they're dealt with
differently with process could
you just report that one issue.
Sure and Mr chair and senator do
it yet think thanks for that
up the section I think you may
be referring to says eight days
prior to an election no
complaints from the public may
be filed within eight days and
that's in one dash nineteen dash
thirty four.
Thank you yeah no I and and and
I get the distinction between
not educating them not filing
I'm I'm Mr chair I'm supportive
of this bill I I do I am still
of the opinion that that the
sixty day blackout period that's
that existing language that I
understand was negotiated is is
still too long of a period and I
would love to see that not
shortened at some point but
that's that's not something I'm
I'm gonna be looking looking to
do in your bill thank you chair
if I may.
The the ethics Mister chairman
Senator to the ethics commission
blackout period and and section
ten sixteen G. fifteen be the
sixty day blackout period under
statute that that blackout
period does not apply to
complaints alleging violations
of I the campaign reporting act
for the voter action act implies
to all the other statutes that
the commission adjudicates thank
you Mr chair.
Yeah and and actually stress I
can for that districts have
forgotten part of it so thanks
or do it for us for the
questions are doing.
I don't have anything for the Mr
very well other questions from
committee.
Very well
I have a few things that I'd
like to address Senator Stewart
and Senator Ortiz.
All right let me go to Senator
first or two to get on and off
fall off of the server I was
just going to move to do past Mr
chairman.
Right well to pass up from
Senator Stewart let me see if
there's a second from Senator
Ortiz you you know.
And then senator Kennedy drive
any questions comments no I was
just going to second the motion
very well so let me just address
couple things in this bill I may
be getting on page nine.
One of the purposes of this bill
I think is to is to clarify who
has responsibility for what and
to make clear whose
responsibility is what and I
think generally speaking between
the secretary of state's office
and the state ethics commission
you all have done a good job
however it does seem to me that
it is the job of the Attorney
General or district attorney do
criminal enforcement it is
exclusively the job of the state
ethics commission to civil
enforcement
as we are proceeding here and
currently certainly it should be
and so therefore on page nine
lines at ten and eleven.
I think we should strike the
Attorney General or a different
attorney.
and that way then it's clear and
subsection E. that is a state
ethics commission that does a
civil injunctive or other
appropriate order to the
Attorney General.
And then if you notice down
below
Actually then also on lines of
twenty one and twenty two.
We would have the similar
We would have the Senator
language from the come up online
twenty one through district
attorney online twenty two.
R. and then also on page ten.
The same thing on lines two and
three.
There was several actions.
HM lines eighteen and nineteen
also dealing with civil actions.
And where it's a criminal
violation I've left in the
district attorney and the
Attorney General because they
are the appropriate ones to us
today it from election in terms
of are over for all of them to
follow up on that.
So
let me check with
representatives my part and you
lie and then
As well as as the expert on the
real quick representatives.
Mr speaker I certainly do not
have any objection to that that
serve our language in the
existing statute lasts are more
co sponsor would have some
objection director.
R. I think you're.
So falls in line with the
jurisdiction of each office.
Yeah well I agree with
everything except Mr speaker
part.
For.
If I get I hate to the boat the
the the the chair of rules to
the building just a more speaker
of the lower house.
We will also look at the when.
Mr Burciaga act okay does that
work for you to to clarify those
lines Mr chair that that's
that's neutral from the
perspective of the ethics
commission I I I don't have any
comment with respect and will
jobs will have the option that
you always proceed and when you
come and things are very well is
there
so that being a friendly
amendment are there any
questions from committee.
Senator Stewart.
Thank you Mr chairman I thought
your change on page nine.
Page line ten eleven twenty one
twenty two I've got it on page
ten.
Two and three and eighteen and
nineteen I think you mentioned
one other.
Bills that would that would that
was a all right right thank you.
You very much anybody any other
questions from committee.
Any objection to adoption
amendments.
Thing that Miss Vigil please
indicate all members present
voting in the affirmative on
that amendment number the next
thing and that's I I I would put
on the networks cleanup really
would be language that is on
page eleven.
And others by all we have the
exact same thing on page pages
sixteen and seventeen its exact
same language as well so I'll
just look at it on page eleven
but it would it will go there as
well and that is that we start
off on page eleven line I with
on and after general one twenty
twenty.
What we past that date.
And and so I don't need to say
that and then when I look at
subsection B..
It it's a virtual make
recommendations to us during
this session and you're just
simply leaving of that you're
make recommendations to
legislate from changes that are
necessary but I think an agency
always has the authority to make
the suggestion just
R. to the action so I don't know
that that's really necessary and
so my suggestion for section one
dash nineteen dash thirty four
point eight.
Would be the the strike
the language on line I.
Right subsection B. and then
make paragraphs one and two and
two subsections a and B..
And then it would be on pages
sixteen and seventeen this is
some of our action packed in for
section one dash nineteen eight
that fifteen point one to do the
exact same changes.
So that so that we can and
likewise this on page six games
right line thirteen page seven
teams right subsection be back
to pay sixteen make
Representative wanted to and yes
a and B. R. I want to
Representative by reports last
time I'll go first
representative Ely on this one.
About thumbs up from him.
Representative.
You Mr chairman and members the
committee I do that makes
perfect sense to me our problem.
Mr chair I I agree with that but
on page seventeen at the top
you'll have to make that to see
so change be to see if there are
paragraph one essay are rough to
is B. that will then change be
the state are gonna strike.
Our existing be on page
seventeen because they always
have the opportunity to make
okay so you're not strike that
as of in total okay so I'm I'm
fine with that all okay no gate
Very well is are there any our
questions from committee on this
ammendment the from the by the
Sanchez.
It is friendly.
Is there any objection to
adoption amendments.
Staying on it is adopted and
then I am informed I mistrust
give us but I may have missed
something on the first amendment
that we did.
This process.
Miss Mister chair thank you and
the district attorney and the
Attorney General are in this in
a civil enforcement provision
under the law this regulation
Act so I'm not sure if and where
where is the is that where that
in the bill that is in I believe
page eighteen Mr chair.
The scene had it and I lost.
In the state.
Want to make sure.
I thought I went through the
lobbyist regulation act that.
The provision that we have on.
Subsection being filled with
with a criminal behavior so that
is appropriate to go to the DA
and the AG.
So
if you want your chair yes we'll
at page twenty three.
One
six seven seven.
Yep you are correct thank you
very much.
So actually and and I also miss
the of the summer language in
this regulation Act on page
twenty three as well on page
twenty three combining the last
two things that we just that it
would be line six right from the
com up the line seven attorney.
And also line twelve strike the
designation of subsection eight
make paragraph one and through a
and B. and then sprite
subsection the that goes into of
page twenty four.
When that is consistent with the
other two changes that we just
made
And so is there any objection
from the committee on making
those changes.
Seeing no objection R. that is
done as well and then I do have
one final one since since we're
here and so for dealing with
enforcement of the of the
at the very beginning at least
on the campaign reporting act we
have a provision in article
nineteen that I are I believe to
be unconstitutional and if
everybody would get out your
election code your election
handbook for quick.
That should been delivered
everybody's office and turned to
one dash nineteen dash one.
Those who are really along at
home I will read this to you.
Which is basically it's
monitoring the whole thing but
basically what it does is that
it makes it a petty misdemeanor.
For a political party to spend
money in a primary election on
behalf of the candidate now
while the rules of my political
party prohibit the party from
getting involved and I believe
the rules of other political
parties prefer them getting
involved I don't believe we
constantly have the right to
criminalize the internal
behavior of a political party.
and and so what I would like to
suggest because we are dealing
with enforcement issues and as
long as this remains that is an
enforcement issue that would
fall on the secretary of state
as well stand up this commission
and potentially a DA for a need
to repeal section one dash
nineteen dash one
and I recognize that that is not
the the primary purpose of the
bill but that is that is I think
close enough that we can do that
within this bill.
So let may.
Let me while they catch up on
that.
Are you able to R. Sanchez in
just a moment.
And while they're thinking about
that let me actually yield to
mistrust because and Mr Ferris.
Thank you Mr chairman I just
want to note that the state
ethics commission doesn't have
any jurisdiction or enforcement
authority for one nineteen one
the which is which is not part
of the campaign reporting act
thank you Mr chair.
That report actually starts at
section twenty five everything
else having been revealed part
of that.
This process and it's awesome
that will be Sanchez.
Mr chair I I don't see any any
issue with your proposed change
so will will keep a neutral
stance on we are when we go to
the US the house sponsors real
quick.
Representative night partners
and if Ely.
Mr chair I.
I too would agree with you the
the that's an internal political
party matter and really should
not the state.
Matter so I would agree.
Very well.
Realizes life to me yeah I'm
looking at this yeah it's an
interesting history
I and I think chairs right given
the history of what's happening
campaign financing yeah they
should be in there anymore I
think that's right.
Thank you search for.
My comment on the proposed
amendment.
Mr chairman I would just like
you to repeat it or is it
essentially that you want to
repeal one nineteen dash one
that is correct state so it
would just be an addendum
somewhere in this bill to repeal
that that is correct yes okay
thank you.
Well for the questions or
comments from committee Mr chair
would would just consider adding
that section twenty three of
this.
The bill that's what we would do
okay why are I would I would
agree that the that in section
twenty three of the one batch
nineteen dash one would be a
frontline.
Are well is there any objection
to adopting a certificate and
senator we'll go to discussion
question.
Certainly
objection Mr Chairman just will
have to add that to the title as
well.
Yes thank you very much yes.
Your.
Mr Chairman course you know how
to do this but I don't think it
it's a section twenty three I
think you have to put it be four
section twenty three which is
the effective date.
You might even want to put it be
before the two rulemaking
authority sections or afterwards
but anyway you can figure that
out.
What now any one also the
committee.
Saying that is there any
objection to that it's being
objection that amendment is so
ordered what is the pleasure of
the committee on the amended.
Of bills they do pass as amended
a motion for center store to
pass as amended with the second
from Senators I do hate are Miss
Vigil would you please call the
roll.
Senator Baca yes.
Thanks.
Yes and I have a question after.
Senator Moores.
Yes.
Senator o'neill yes.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes and
I'd like to make a comment or
two Senator Pirtle yes yes
Senator Stewart yes.
Senator Wirth yes.
Senator Ingle yes.
Senator.
Yes and Senator Ivey Soto.
Yes ma'am congratulations
representatives on an eleven to
one Representative
boat you have a do pass
recommendation from the Senate
state Senator Moores and then
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino the
central bank Senator Lopez and
then Senator.
Thank you Senators just to make
sure I think for clarification
when I know we can't to a
committee substitute with
regards to a house measure that
will there be something I can
mock up as this progresses with
the amendments just to make sure
because sometimes it's hard when
you're on the floor and trying
to flip through whichever and
however so just a something that
helps for those of us who our
little challenged on the screen.
Okay yeah for sure.
Circumstance thank you Mr
chairman and and I would just
like to say that you know I
admire the the effort and the
energy and the and all this time
has gone on to continuing to try
to improve our campaign
reporting act but it is still
remains the same we do one of
these that we're improving the
protection against
Representative colognes and
Qassem's attacking is black
bears dark money and the for
rent or nations.
We can.
And so we're protecting
ourselves from what amount to
minor problems compared to the
big problem which is the
incredibly increasing.
In this of outside contributors
no they go totally unreported.
In the end date your those are
safe works thank our our very
well date.
The very last thing to do for us
to consider
is that how straight Memorial
number four and I would just
suggest something we need to go
to the floor for two minutes
over do senator Morris you have
a motion yeah I do this is great
our memorial center
Representative some sit with us
the speed are all defer to
Senator Mimi Stewart or Linda
Lopez they wanted to do past
incidents ninety members how
are are you wearing today.
That's what Martin from the from
the approach I'm wearing whites
with the second from Senator
Lopez.
Is there any further discussion
seeing yes therefore you must be
color blind this is not why it's
kind of gold or tan.
I'll show you on the floor.
Very well and
The clerk will call the roll
Senator Baca.
Senator Lopez yes yes Senator
Moores yes.
Senator o'neill yes.
Senator TCP note.
Senator Pirtle.
Yes.
Senator Stewart yes Senator
Wirth yes Senator Ingle.
Senator do it yes then Senator
Ivey Soto yes ma'am I'm
recognize a yes vote from
Senator Baca as well on a test
on a eleven to zero vote
graduations Representative
Stapleton that is the best
presentation we have have this
