have to be paid for the interim
you have this bill before you
hear any of initially
appropriates from the very
beginning you will see eight
million four hundred and eight
fifty nine thousand six hundred
dollars for the Senate this is
the amount of eight million four
hundred eight thousand includes
the three million eight hundred
expenses and it also includes
one million three hundred ninety
four thousand five hundred for
the Legislative Council Service
the mail room and the
Legislative switch for.
Additionally the bill includes
the annual appropriations for
the permanent legislative
committees and the expense of
the legislative department for
nine hundred dollars in for the
interim legislative expenses is
one million dollars.
Then for next year session
that's forty seven thousand five
hundred dollars that is for our
college
employees that we hire is in
National Council of state
legislators and I just given
that is one example we have four
hundred nineteen thousand five
hundred dollars in there for the
for years twenty twenty one and
twenty twenty two we're
appropriating one million
seventeen thousand one hundred
dollars and for the Senate rules
committee it's at thirty five
down some specific numbers
all the way to the end for a
rural infrastructure study we
have one hundred and fifty
two thousand eight hundred
dollars to help it with its
operational needs and expenses.
The legislative education study
if not all are familiar with the
this season perhaps the new
members
may not be that we are working
to be as as detailed as possible
Senate chief clerks office and
the Senate leadership staff
office one million seven hundred
sixty six thousand eight hundred
ation Commission.
In the south publication of the
New Mexico statutes annotated
those are the statutes the books
that we get every year that have
the statutes annotated NM and
right now one million four
hundred eighty four thousand
dollars is what's needed for
that for that security into the
department of military affairs
hundred dollars and one more to
the administrative office of the
courts for increased litigation
costs due to the COVID nineteen
pandemic we have two hundred
thousand dollars.
much Mr president and I have
Raul Burciaga here with us is
the director of the Legislative
Council Service and he is John
is here today for any questions
the sponsor yield to a couple of
quick questions centered you
thank you Mr president Mister
president senator of it could
gonna have to have we made other
provisions for that.
Thank you Mr president thank you
senator Ortiz Pino one second
please.
for that particular expense when
it comes up.
My understanding from my
provided me a separate bill in
this Mr president and senators
so it'll be a separate bill in
this session just for that.
My understanding is that there
will be a redistricting.
Interim committee created here
Mr president if if if I
understand correctly then
Senator.
There will be another.
Another piece of legislation
Si no further debate Senator
Rodriguez to close.
Mr president I move that house
Senators we're voting to your
seats.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
Senator combos yes Senator
Candelaria.
Senator serve on this.
it goes.
Senator guy ago CS Senator
Gonzalez yes Senator Gonzales
yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivy
Soto.
Senator Ivey Soto yes Senator
Hermio yes Senator had a mere
yes Senator Kernan.
senator Morris senator Morris
yes Senator among us.
Senator manos.
Senator one LCS senator Neville.
Senator for the year yes Senator
Pinto.
Senator printer yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle yes Senator probe
Senator smitteez yes Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
Yes Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator sure.
Senator sure yes Senator Shendo.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Stewart.
Senator Stewart DS Senator
Tolman.
Senator tall man yes senator
By a vote of forty one of the
affirmative zero on the negative
house bill one has passed the
Senator Ivy Soto for Senate.
I'm sorry Senator Lopez my
apologies I wish I knew Ivy Soto
had the committee report Senator
Still trying to get in the mode
here so please excuse.
Mr president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
rules be suspended that the
record show that all actions for
Lopez to explain the resolution
thank you very much Mr president
members of the Senate
I bring this resolution in front
of the body
Republican and Democrats have
been working on rules that we
can adopt this evening that will
allow members to participate
remotely.
Their should be available on
line as to what Senate
resolution one is.
but Mister president if I may
Mr president I do not find it on
the website as to this point.
So what I will do Mister
Mr president sent Senate
resolution one is a resolution
and acting as suspending certain
Senate rules to allow for remote
participation of members in the
legislative process and allow
Corona virus disease twenty
nineteen.
The governor declared that a
public health emergency exists
in New Mexico under the public
health emergency response act
and invoke the governor's
spread of Corona virus disease
twenty nineteen in New Mexico
with more than one hundred forty
one thousand cases documented
that over one thousand three
department of health to limit
the spread of Corona virus
disease twenty nineteen within
the state including limitations
on gatherings of more than five
one in five of the constitution
of New Mexico require the
legislature to convene at the
seat of government and on the
third Tuesday of January and.
allowing for the functional
presence in full participation
of members by simultaneous
remote electronic means during
the current Corona virus disease
And for as any staff and members
of the media that will be
working in the state capital
will be required to be tested
for Corona virus disease twenty
present in the state capital and
for as article four section
twelve of the constitution of
New Mexico requires that all
sessions of the legislature be
comments via electronic means
for committee hearings and.
Whereas the Senate recognizes
that the following rules may
only be used during declared
implemented changes throughout
the Corona virus disease twenty
nineteen pandemic to safely
carry out their constitutional
rules of the Senate may be
amended by a two thirds majority
vote of the members of the
Senate or by a majority vote of
the members of the Senate upon
the recommendation of the rules
committee.
sessions of the fifty fifth
legislature held in twenty
twenty one during the pendency
of the Corona virus disease
Four dash one dash one.
The presiding officer shall
ensure that all members staff
employees and guests who are
persons wear a mask that covers
the mouth and nose and not
consume food in the Senate
chambers and.
The sergeant at arms shall
hallways show follow proper
social distancing including by
limiting the number of persons
physically present and ensuring
that those persons wear a mask
that covers the mouth and nose
the purposes of establishing a
quorum doing business or voting
during a floor session or call
of the Senate if the member is
physically present or
For purposes of a call members
who are present must vote on the
legislation that is the subject
of the call.
Please.
business or voting during
standing committee meetings only
if the member as confirmed by
the committee chair is
participating by simultaneous
remote electronic means and is
representative was tested
positive for Corona virus
disease twenty nineteen within
ten days before during a session
over or who has actual knowledge
or whip.
Senator shot either be excused
or sell self isolate outside the
capital in the city of Santa Fe
and participate by simultaneous
remote electronic means and be
isolation until advised by a
medical professional that self
isolation is no longer.
Necessary.
shall then add that member's
name to the list of senators
desiring to be recognized and
seven dash nineteen members of
the Senate staff employees and
guests are we're facemask
rules and violators are subject
to disciplinary action and
removal from the chamber or
committee room and senator
removed from the Senate chamber
committee remain participate
remotely from the member's
participation by the committee
expert witnesses and members of
the public the chairman
determine the duration of public
comment allowed each standing
committee may also accept public
least twenty four hours in
advance of the meetings provided
the during the final two weeks
of a session notice and agenda
shall be posted as soon as
practicable in advance of the
meeting.
eleven dash twenty one dash one
committee reports on a bill
resolution memorial then maybe
digitally signed electronically
transmitted from the committee
And twenty three dash eight dash
two if at any time during
standing committee hearings or
floor sessions a live audio and
video streams in the state
resume and be it further
resolved the Senate rule twenty
three dash three and twenty
three dash four dash one be
suspended effective for the
remainder of the Corona virus
Senate rules now that we've read
the full bill.
On page five line fifteen we did
strike personal contact and then
inserted in lieu thereof close
word the and insert in lieu
there of for four sessions.
Comma the.
On page six point twenty two
eighteen strike the word and and
insert in lieu there of war.
M. and Mister president that is
On this resolution Senator
Pirtle.
Mr president I move from Senate
floor minute number one to
Pirtle allies Amanda I apologize
cliff R. Pirtle Senator to move
explaining amendment.
You Mr president I move Center
for minute number one the Senate
resolution number one as amended
essentially what this amendment
practical practicable.
Of it actually puts a concrete
time in there without knowing
really what that means the
concern is is as many members
you basically run up to the
change to the committee room
just to see what bills you're
going to hear and so the public
is left out a lot of times they
and have their voice heard so I
think this is a huge concern you
know we've decided that we're
going to keep the public out of
the capital and then now we're
to be heard and so I think
that's that's of great concern
this would put a concrete time
so that we have something that
we can hold the committee chairs
accountable to thank you Mr
president.
you know that the measures that
we are debating at this point in
time but you know quite frankly
having served as the chair of
the committee it is very hard
times a day depending on the
committee assignments that we
have but it is hard sometimes as
legislation moves quickly to try
and get an agenda out up to
in and entering of the regular
time when we call regular
session our chief clerks staff
works very regularly with the
chair and the constantly calling
now and also Mister president
you know I think what we do have
right now of course is access
even more so to the web via zoom
is what we have done by
traditions so at this point
Mister president I believe as it
says as soon as practical is
something that's very workable
for chairs and of course for us
take care of that and so with
that Mr president
Those are my comments.
Thank you further debate on the
amendment.
Senator Morris thank you Mr
burden of being a chair of a
committee there probably never
will but I think it's important
that in these trying times and
we have a really really good
conversations in this task force
we know this is a roadblock to
have the twelve hour minimum but
we think that's a very to
minimize roadblock the
efficiency during the the this
the side of transparency we have
a lot of issues to deal with
from COVID relief health care
all the other issues that we ran
on the last selection and this
it is against what we normally
do in this chamber and then this
body it is with much less Mr
president and we require the
subdivisions of the state's the
boards and commissions with the
limit is very to minimus and
does provide us on some
protection to of what the public
is demanding we've all received
Allstate are on that side of
openness.
I just think twelve hours is
very demented agency it's not
seventy two hours that we
require of other bodies in the
state that we passed a law
saying you have to have seventy
to make a little bit more
openness president these are
trying times we get it we're not
trying to
make it harder for all yes we
are trying to make a little bit
harder on the prod the chairs
the your sponsorship will always
be more chair
and reliever enjoyed working
with our last number years we've
done a lot of good work together
the rules we put together I do
think make for a safer session
media people don't criticize us
for not being as open
transparent as we should as
president thank you thank you
senator Morris center we're
still debating.
Senate floor member number one.
We've had some real
are I at least have had.
You know hundred fifty emails.
have to be as transparent as we
can yeah we're in a we're in a
heck of the shape you're trying
to get this thing together.
But a twelve our rural.
We have been in here in regular
times where people would come
into this building and dang near
camp out to in order to hear
bill.
amendment and I hope the house
sees that transparency is is is
important.
As the time that I was
Our rules present rules and we
have sent change that rule.
And I was criticized the by
everybody saying well you're
just not transparent.
Thank you Mr president thank you
senator was further debate on
the amendment Senator Brandt
thank you Mr president in the.
Yeah I have been on some
committees we're.
And I'm concerned that's what
this is going to bring in this
is going to continue to
perpetuate.
The fact of the matter is the
public cannot be here.
The people don't trust us.
I don't trust the work that
we're doing we have to rebuild
day refreshing it so they can
see when our agendas are posted.
We're gonna give five minutes
notice.
That's what this rural setting
in rural.
Rose the other things that were
being done we're just done
pretty much in violation of the
Representative here to do the
people's work.
Revert to do.
The work that they elected us to
do.
We need to make sure they know
deciding whether or not we're
going to let the public know.
Before we have a meeting.
Because there's no limit.
Literally.
Before.
How's that transparency.
How's that letting the public
know when we're gonna hear bill
that they're interested in that
they're concerned about that
they want to hear what we're
don't support this bill please
don't vote for this bill and all
the folks that are new here
haven't had that experience yet
to will when you're sitting in
committee.
We're not letting them even know
when we're going to hear bill
are they gonna let us know how
they feel about it.
We need to make sure that we're
as open as we can be with the
Let's make a six do we agree to
anything.
Other than soon as practicable.
What does that even mean what
isn't going to work for the
public to know what we're doing
up here for the public to for us
to restore the public trust in
us and in our government thank
you Mr president thank you
support of this and and mainly
because when we look at wording
such as as soon as practical
full.
practicable is really not defied
and I believe that that's
something that we need to move
away from and define it in
tenable it's not a defined term
and I believe we can do better
and I asked that the body
consider that consider this
amendment and let's do better
present with the sponsor of the
amendment yield to some
questions and the fertility
yield a yield.
Senator Pirtle if we were to
adopt your amendment are we
hours notice for posting on the
general adding an item to agenda
less than twelve hours want to
go on the rules that we specify
a consequence that we were to
committee report that's the body
saying that the committee
operated in good faith and
operated within the rules and
that the work that they did was
within the rules so Mister
president senator I think that's
adoption in committee report is
there anything in the rules that
we were to adopt your rule there
would be a consequence for
violating.
And Mister president senator as
you well know there's a lot of
to be on the floor here and
raise their concerns and and
hopefully have the colleagues of
that Senator that chair
have them start following the
your colleagues the gesture that
it would be a slap on the wrist
perhaps you know that I
understand the jester here
understandable it's a good goal
I think we all supported but but
really is no consequence.
Once again this always strikes
me as one of those debates I
have we're we're really talking
about a memorial which is
aspirational aspirations are
to express here on the chamber
so thank you.
Thank you centers around the
Senate further debate on the
amendment.
other members of of my caucus is
was just a huge concern
especially members that that
have been here in the past and
and really enjoyed the
participation of the public you
some take it for granted I know
but there's quite a few of us
I really appreciate and
understand what it means to take
time off from work time away
from your kids to have your
voice heard.
that that gives you that ability
that you have that freedom to
speak.
In a situation where place such
as the capital in the state of
New Mexico so I think it's
people that we're not willing to
listen I mean you go outside
right now there's a twelve foot
fence around this building.
What what does it look like what
message that says you know we're
going to do things in a way that
that doesn't allow for you to
have prior notice in a lot of
people have kids have jobs so
that says you know the committee
report came out you know you're
going to put it on your agenda
for the next morning's meeting
get it on there in a timely
manner so that everybody has an
As the day the bay was happening
Mr president members of the
body.
I was thinking back to some of
the wise things that my father
told me over the years.
like you know son if it's if
it's a good deal tonight it'll
be a good deal tomorrow.
Don't make a quick decision take
your time.
Think about it.
That's when those bills come up
in and votes are taken and two
years down the road here we are
fixing it because it came
through.
At one in the morning.
session operates but is it the
right way to do it.
So I think this just puts
forward that you know what we're
going to slow down the speed up.
I know it does make a lot of
something or you didn't give the
time to go over it.
So I know probably where this
vote is going to go but you know
I think it's the right thing to
do and this president I move
Senate floor minute number one.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Byrd yes Senator combos
Senator combos no Senator
Candelaria.
Senator sure on this Senator
Senator guy a goes yes Senator
Gonzalez no Senator Gonzales now
Senator Griggs.
Senator GRID GS Center Hamlin.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivy
Soto.
Senator we still don't know
Senator Hermio Senator had a
meal now Senator Kernan.
Senator Morris yes senator
Munoz.
Senator won you know senator
Neville.
I'm sorry.
Senator by the end no Senator
Pinto.
Senator Pinto no Senator Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle yes Senator pope.
Senator Sharif yes Senator
Sedillo Lopez no Senator Sedillo
Lopez now Senator share.
Senator sure yes Senator Shendo.
Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn no Senator
Stewart.
Senator Stewart noted Senator
Tolman.
Thank you very much as president
I just a.
Yes.
Thank you Senator Ivey Soto go
ahead.
The the members of the rules
committee Senator Pirtle center
Moores.
And and also Senators fit is all
those out on the rules committee
I do want to say thank you to
that and and also as to US
senator Wirth confusion as to
who to call on usually in this
have Senator Lopez a present in
the rule of the in the committee
and and and getting her wisdom
through the process and we thank
you very much.
Thanks service other any further
debate on the bill were back on
this this section on the
building on about line or what
Levin talks about what happens
when a Senator may be tested
Raul brought seventeen says a
Senator shell either mixed use
commercial self also it outside
the capitol in the City of Santa
Fe for those on and I know we
I from what I since outside the
capital in the city of Santa Fe
so that means you got to be in
the City of Santa Fe but outside
the capital when you do that
self isolation and if so that's
that I'm in the City of Santa Fe
but not in the capitol the
know I'm Senator Ivey Soto this
point something to me.
and I want to participate in the
four sessions is the right what
you're saying but I have to find
a place in Santa Fe
to participate remotely this is
reside as a positive comment to
participate as I as I would this
is intended to say outside the
capitol but in this in the City
of Santa Fe or is or is not
meeting outside the capital and
the Senator shall either be
excused.
Or subshell self isolate outside
the capital in the City of Santa
fe's Act is that what you're
referring to.
through that really is the
reason I think there's an
ambiguity there it may not be
but if you all can assure the I
just wanna know what your intent
is and then make sure that the
language is clear what I want to
sessions do I have to stay in
Santa Fe
and find a place where I can be
COVID positive to do that.
Mister president senator I
believe that we actually had in
Lopez so she was able to
participate from her office she
didn't have COVID not tested
positive but she came into
contact as you know through
contact tracing.
isolated or if they so choose
they can stay in their hotel
room and I hate to use the
that example but Senator Sedillo
Lopez had actually started off
in her hotel room to participate
This presents are appreciate
that's fine but I don't have
effective that's what this says
again I want to make sure that
I'm reading a program to do it
what it says here is it says
additional self honestly outside
the capitol it's it's pretty
clear outside the capitol but
this is in the City of Santa Fe
for the question is you don't
have to stay in the city of
Santa Fe so a tough positive
constitution the way we're
interpreting it but but realize
for some of us from Los crucis
or something I'm gonna have a
tough time finding one of you to
want to get through if I was to
test comment positive or really
just even if I was exposed to
somebody who **** but positive
only way I could do that would
be to find someplace in Santa Fe
outside the capital want to get
into so I just try to build
character my call someplace or
an RV or someplace and and
participate in my call as long
The every Senator be tested.
We're asking senators to please
get tested on a weekly basis to
honor our staff and others are
in this building.
also Mister president senator
the that that to sentence before
if you've tested positive.
So let's say someone lets me
know that they have tested
positive.
Then the option.
Then they can come up here and
park their cars someplace
although the rules don't allow
the voting for the car you would
have to be in of as it mentions
here.
So you're not in the building
but then again you are still in
the capital city with the A. L.
here in the capital city of
Santa Fe.
But if you alert your floor
conversations that I've had
in trying to figure what we can
do because we can't mandate
ourselves that we have to stay
home.
I cannot mandate that you
Our current service presence on
appreciate that appreciate the
information I think that the I'm
reading what you're telling me
you're in taxes which is again
that's the goal then that's what
I think the seven I'm seeing a
lot and yes and so that sounds
like what you want to do that's
what we'll do.
I'd I'd ask one question try to
tie and on to Senator sure
vantage.
Currently we are supposed to be.
Is that Mister president senator
that what we're trying to do is
if someone is here in Santa Fe.
They come in contact.
We're absent this language they
have no means to participate in
the four session because
currently we're requiring
senators to either be on the
Thank you Mr president and
senator Griggs any further
debate.
On the resolution.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
comfortable but I was required
to be in my office and I think
that this expands the
opportunity for people to
participate so I stand in
support of the of the
resolution.
savant as you'll notice about
the detailed.
It's my birthday.
All of the old agency processes
happen shall you shall do this
and there's it what's the
penalty of someone doesn't fall
those rural Mister president
senator Sanchez.
I think this goes back to our
last debate and I don't think
there's a consequence.
senator thank you senator Morris
any further debate Senators.
Si no further debate Senator
Lopez to close on the resolution
thank you very much Mr president
do not pass and I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
record show that the role has
been called and all those
present voted the affirmative
except those voting in the
negative by a show of hands it
Senator Baca.
Senator Baca now senator Brent
Senator Brent no senator Byrd
Senator serve on this yes
Senator diamond.
Senator diamond now Senator do
hear you.
Senator Senator do hit yes
Senator Griggs now Senator
Hamlin Senator Hamlin yes
Senator Hempfield yes Senator
Hempfield yes senator Hickey.
Yes.
Senator huh Amir yes Senator
Kernan.
Senator Kernan Now Senator
Lopez.
Yes.
Senator Munoz yes senator
senator Neville.
Senator Neville now Senator
o'neill.
Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle no Senator pope
yes Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Yes Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator sure.
Senator share no Senator Shendo.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Stewart.
Senator Stewart DS Senator
Thoman.
Senator Tolman yes senator Wirth
excuse Senator Candelaria.
I see no objection so ordered
thank you.
as amended as passed the Senate
Senator Lopez.
Thank you very much Mr president
members of the Senate.
An act relating to liquor
control amending and enacting
sections of the liquor control
act to permit certain persons to
deliver alcoholic beverages
transferred out of a local
option district intact allowing
certain dispensers licenses to
reinstate retail privileges
Senate bill six.
transportation committee and
Senate Judiciary Committee
Senate bill six Mr president.
who's a sponsor that Sen Moores
with senator Wirth is a sponsor
of this bill for U. S.
Representative Ferrary and
senator pope.
A joint resolution proposing to
amend the constitution of New
Mexico by adding a new section
of article two that provides the
people of the state with
benefit of all the people and by
repealing the current pollution
control provisions of article
twenty section twenty one Senate
joint resolution three.
resolution three Mr president.
I knew you were waiting for me
to talk Senator.
So Mister president.
Earlier I talked about this
dot org take back our democracy
websites and the and while the.
The amendment.
Itself.
Mexico outside of a laboratory.
I don't know what clean air
means.
This cleaner me no dust.
Because in case you all had
And so we want to put in a own
amended to our constitution this
is the only water that we can
have we can have water in a lake
or river it is not purely for H.
Information the organizations
put out thank they explicitly
say.
Part of our US president.
in terms of what what committee
it's going to go to work for for
the the debate is limited to
those issues regarding whether
it should go to particular
exactly right that's exactly
right it should go to finance
because.
It says the right of New Mexican
are under constraint are under
If you intentionally decide to
turn off.
The funding for schools that is
Oil gas and coal.
And for decades have paid about
a third and most recently forty
Of everything in New Mexico.
Recently thirty percent
historically.
And what this does by their own
This is simple.
Just let it go to finance let's
debated in finance let's look at
it let's see if we can't
here our grandchildren live here
and we want clean air clean
water the pure water is not
possible.
Outside of a laboratory.
balance that needs to be taken
here and I think we can work on
that in finance.
We want clean air and clean
water.
pretty long step there.
One giant step for the amendment
one backward step for mankind.
How do we make it so that we all
have a job we all get to live
indoors and we still get the
breeze pretty clean air.
So that's all I'm asking Mr
president is that we that we
consider letting this thing go
to finance.
Because it does have.
is Senator Lopez thank you Mr
president this joint resolution
does not have any budget
allocation nor does it call for
clear you made a motion to
consider moving it to Senate to
adding Senate finance to.
Mr president.
should consider.
This is more than pure water.
This is economic suicide.
So I'm not going to ask for that
motion.
They're all information sheets
say shut down oil and gas.
Which equals shut down schools
in New Mexico.
senator Wirth thank you Mr
president so that's it for the
day ideal to committee chairs to
let everyone know I guess I
should say up front kind of a
so again so folks on outside
understand on this week's going
to be used to print the bills
there's got to be FIR is fiscal
back on Monday the first to
introduce more bills to move
Committee reports messages
etcetera so I want to just lay
out the roadmap and at this
Senate Education Committee will
have the meeting on Monday that
meeting may just be
organizational informational the
exact time is still to be
meeting Monday Wednesday Friday
mornings the exact start and end
time we're not sure yet with
zoom we can kind of schedule
those a little closer because we
because it's not meant to to
keep you out of but which could
take awhile for us all to get
used to doing this so education
we will have a virtual meeting
Monday Senator sells Senator
the exact time yet it could be
eight or eight thirty or nine we
will determine that after the
chairs have a committee meeting
and training tomorrow but we by
Veronica Ortega is the committee
secretary she will notify each
member of the committee of the
Indian role in cultural affairs
will meet next week Tuesday and
Thursday time to be determined
on zoom that will be published
on line at the end of the week
and Rebecca Martinez is the
committee will meet Monday
afternoon it'll be a zoom
meeting the exact time will be
posted in the zoom link will be
posted on our website that's
eliminate the ban on abortions
in the state so it's going to be
a very important meeting please
make sure you you check for the
senator participate all centers
around this.
The judiciary will keep weapons
for distributing funds Monday
Wednesday and Fridays in the
referrals to many of the bills
here today but we don't have
we're not a first referral on
anybody so we've got to get the
bills from the other committees
to us first before we can do any
time will be posted by zoom
thank you.
Senate Shendo.
Thank you Mr president you
Senator tax business and
transportation committee will
meet in on Tuesdays and
notify all the committee members
hopefully by the end of this
week of the first committee
meeting will be an organization
no meeting so of Laney Renfro
rules committee will be having
its organizational meeting on
Monday this soon beginning at
nine AM.
The two things on the agenda.
presentation for the secretary
of state's office regarding
we're we are elections in New
Mexico.
And senator Soto Senator among
out to you tomorrow and then
we'll come to mention the for
next week and we can meet every
day at the call of the chair so
Senate finance a little
Senators Senator o'neill okay
Mr chair the permission to make
an announcement it's somewhat
different than what we're
talking about Hey no objection
proceed Senator okay as many of
will be doing a reading from my
new novel called short session
which is and it will be virtual
and it'll be at collected works
link but the novels basically
all about running for office
it's set in two thousand five
after an unsuccessful run for
the state Senate and you'll
really I'm compelled to do two
things want to thank everyone
who made today say for all of us
and the security around the
capital down here for the third
it was snowing and those guys
father of three daughters I
really I really cannot miss the
moment that tomorrow we will be
slowing and a woman vice
president of the United States
that though the spas twelve
allowance or we go to the
there's just all about this year
my wife walked into the front
lounge there's a lot of guys
that are and then the there were
we have so many new women to
this chamber.
As a father of three daughters
it's exciting for me to live in
these times but I'm most excited
gone different ways I certainly
would I look forward to putting
the election behind us to
progress restoring our faith and
our democratic process and to
celebrating what we should all
president thank you Senator
office.
Senator Stewart.
Mr president I wonder if I could
ask Senator o'neill to yield for
since several things we have
never seen before I have in any
way in a committee every member
of the committee read the bill
Senator o'neill if he would read
just the first paragraph.
Of his book or maybe two just
this is tired thank you Senator
chapter one.
I should clarify that I was not
exactly invited to run for state
Senate district ten.
People like me who feel such an
gerrymandering the bad votes.
There is always a justification
deep down that we as advocates
can do a better job than they
I wanted to play in the house
Senate basketball games I
admitted.
The I admitted the annual event
complete with uniforms coaches
homeless shelter it just had me
imagining what I could do if
given the opportunity to play
there watching these people on
the floor from the bleachers.
But of course you had to be a
plugged into that referee as
well I have visions how many
baskets I could score.
Three pointers even but I needed
to be elected first.
reason why I decided to run for
office I have no idea why
processing that Representative
license plate had such a poll
for me it just did affirmation
that's that's the first two
paragraphs.
That's fiction.
Any further announcements
Senators.
Center how to mail.
Thank you Mr president thank you
Senators we couldn't let today
go by without the freshman being
black senator in the state of
New Mexico so if you can help me
in giving him a round of
applause and welcoming him to
the New Mexico Senate.
Same amendment Senator Wirth
thank you Mr president we have
one more message from the house
paper to be able to print out
bills at home so you're welcome
to take a couple of reams of
paper with you through the next
couple weeks and just before we
go to messages and wind it up I
The law enforcement outside
Legislative Council legislative
finance committee legislative
education study committee it
took a humongous effort to get
reader to read message from the
house of representatives Mr
president time directed to
inform the Senate that the duly
enrolled in a gross copy of
house bill one has been read in
the house of representatives
journal show the message from
the house has been received
before I go to senator Wirth I
just wanted to say thank you.
want to thank each of the
members each of the person who
presents have been here in the
chamber for today today may be
the longest opening day in the
history of the state and we made
into the plexiglass a little
more often than than people may
realize we thank you for staying
safe and just wanted to sit can
set the tone and the content of
that going forward for the rest
of the fifty nine the session we
Senate will send recess till
Monday February first.
