Mr chair members of the
committee we are alive.
Thank you very much miss Roberts
good morning everybody welcome
happy Monday morning to all hope
everybody had a good weekend.
We are beginning to date with
our to our matters that will be
dealing with them said rules
committee today the first as the
consideration the confirmation.
Does not number of your Romero
for the department of finance
and administration and the
second one is dealing with the
to districting
Bills are.
That no been sitting in the
rules committee and some
discussion with farmers I think.
There is there's a path forward
that incorporates elements of of
each into them and we can I have
a discussion about that at that
point so in the meantime
Senator Wirth I believe you are
the sponsor of secretary
designate Romero and so please
of course it welcome to the
rules committee and please
proceed to a presenter
conference on thank you Mr
chairman
I am honored this morning to
present to you the confirmation
of Deborah K. Romero for
appointment as the secretary of
finance and administration for a
term commencing June first
serving at the pleasure of the
governor this is pursuant to
Senate executive message number
four dated February twenty six
twenty twenty one.
I have known the secretary
designate for many years during
my seventeen years serving in
the legislature are sales in
comparison to the experience
that she brings to this job this
really is someone who has a
details.
Knowledge of state government
the budget process over forty
years of government experience
thirty eight of those working
directly with state agencies
higher at miss Patty's County
tribal special districts and
courts she has been acting
secretary since June first prior
to that was the deputy secretary
and state budget director
of the state budget division and
may still be wearing multiple
hats I'm not sure about that I
would be surprised at all
from twenty eighteen to January
twenty nineteen was the deck
deputy director of the state
budget division and then during
the prior administration from
October twenty twelve to October
twenty eighteen laws and
executive budget analyst on
capital outlay thank many of us
work with her in next passively
as well as the the capacity
she's had since that time
from October twenty ten to
October twenty twelve she was
the administer administrative
services bureau chief and chief
financial officer of the
department of homeland security
and emergency management.
From July two thousand seven to
October twenty ten she ran
boards and commissions as the
director for the office of the
governor.
prior to that from September two
thousand one two July two
thousand seven again was at DFA
in the state budget division
executive budget analyst doing
capital outlay and prior to that
going
back a ways back all the way
January nineteen eighty three to
nineteen eighty six was in the
governor's office dealing with
boards and commissions so again
as you can see from her resume
this is someone who has
dedicated her career to
governments and specifically to
public finances and we are lucky
that she is willing to step up
yet again as Senator Lopez
always would say these really
are these are big big jobs and
incredibly important jobs and I
am honored to present her today
for confirmation so with that Mr
chair I'd be happy to yield to
our secretary designate for some
remarks and then we can proceed
as you would like.
Thank you very much madam
secretary designate.
Does it this proceed.
Thank you good morning Mr
chairman and members of the
Senate rules committee first I
want to thank you for the honor
of appearing before you today I
also want to thank Senator Wirth
never would I have thought that
sitting on the bleachers years
ago watching our daughter to
play volleyball that he would be
my Senate confirmation sponsor
us so thank you senator Wirth I
also want to thank them or do
Lujan Grisham for giving me this
opportunity and pointing me to
this distinguished position I'm
humbled that the gun governor
has chosen me never did I
imagine that a latch key kid
raised by a single mom would be
appointed DFA cabinet secretary
I think of the people that have
been appointed before me and I
am humbled beyond words.
I come from a long line of
public servants my father was a
state New Mexico state police
officer killed in the line of
duty leaving my mom to raise
four children my mom retired
after a distinguished career as
service to the state witnessing
my parents sacrifices they
taught me to be strong you work
hard and that we have a
responsibility and the power to
be a positive influence on our
community and state I've been
married to my high school
sweetheart Bobby political for
forty years and I have been
blessed with three beautiful
children one granddaughter and
another on the way I have felt
the pain of loss with the tragic
passing of my middle son and I
know the struggles of a single
mom because I just watched money
race for kids while working full
time I have witnessed what it
takes to be a small business in
the state watching my husband
and his brothers built their
company what it is today it
didn't come easy.
I believe that my personal
experiences and the example of
my parents their dedication
hardwork and passion to get back
in service help me to be a
better public servants I did the
math and I've worked for nine
governors can if I include my
summer as an intern.
I've been around longer than the
furniture in that round house I
was a DFA employee when it when
it when it was renovated.
Most of my state government
career has been with the
department of finance
administration as pointed out by
Senator work I had the
opportunity on two different
occasions work in other
departments both times I came
back I feel DFA is the perfect
place to make a difference we
get to work with state agencies
higher education institutions
and small little.
Special districts like
executives and land grants well
DFA is technically an oversight
agency I believe we have a
responsibility to provide
support and guidance to everyone
we Sir we are better when we can
help them be better.
Our responsibility for
overseeing all the state's
finances is both a challenge
like it has been this year and a
blessing because we can and do
make a difference in the lives
of the citizens of the state.
I believe I have the skills
knowledge and passion to do this
job I'm not afraid to work hard
and long hours.
I remember It earlier in my
career working until two three
sometimes earlier in the morning
tracking everything that the
legislature get that was before
technology.
I have flashbacks and re live
those late hours this year when
the pandemic yet and we were
getting good set up for children
and seniors.
Wiring PPE E. for health care
workers and a hundred other
things.
I have not been you're standing
of the operations and the
financial needs of agencies we
Sir I work hard every day to
ensure that approachable and
responsive.
If you ask my employees they
will tell you that my believe is
that we are here to serve and I
hope I lead by example.
I also feel that it's my
responsibility pass along this
knowledge I will retire someday
not soon my work is not done.
I have had great role models
some of them will speak on my
behalf today they open doors to
me to grow and I want to provide
that same opportunity to DFA
staff.
I want them to love working at
the FAA and serving our
constituents as much as I do.
If given the opportunity to
confirmation by this respected
Committee I will continue to
serve with compassion and
commitment and love for our
great state thank you Mr
chairman and members of the
committee.
Thank you very much I'm
secretary does that and we are
going to go to public comments
and and as I know there are
several people who are lined up
to speak I'm gonna turn it over
to Miss Vigil to manage the the
the speakers on your behalf and
let me just say as as we go to
them now actually I'm have the
committee thank you so much for
for your willingness to serve
and continue to serve out the
state of New Mexico given up the
years that you put them in the
skills that you have developed a
you have options so we know that
you have options and
really actually with the years
of you put in one of those
options is retirement and that
but but you choose to continue
to serve and we very much
appreciate that so thank you.
And so with that Mr if you will
please leaders through the
various people who would like to
speak
are on this
country.
Yes Mr chair we're gonna start
with chair off of them and
those.
Hello.
Is my speaking out is the maker
you are speaking I yes thank you
I wasn't sure exactly where
we're at.
Mr chair
committee members
that this because under section
to speak on behalf be half of of
of the V. Romero.
I'd like to say that I've known
Debbie all for quite a long time
and she is actually a relative
of mine and she's part of my
family.
I know her husband and her
family and all their caring the
kind of.
They're very respectful on the
generous and they have a very
great all work at the.
We when you have those things in
your family it up usually
translates
to.
To be very very passionate and
hardworking when it comes to
your career I can say that about
Debbie Romero.
Her family has a history in
Santa Fe.
And her family has a history of
public service to include law
enforcement which is near to my
heart obviously.
The pride themselves on public
service and Debbie has spent a
lot of her career in finance.
And and I think she brings a
valuable resource and knowledge
to the state of New Mexico.
I personally have had experience
with the Debbie and her
financial knowledge and
expertise and so I can speak to
that
as being very professional
very.
Retail oriented and again on she
is very dedicated and
compassionate about finances and
the state of New Mexico to
include Sappey.
So I would absolutely
recommend
Debbie Romero
or position and I I would hope
that the.
That.
You take my comments into
consideration thank you.
Okay Mister chair we have next
secretary can Ortiz.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee I stand before you
in
To support and very proud to
recommend Debbie Romero I've no
Debbie for a number of years
while her time at the FAA I
reached out to her often the
state budget director and and as
acting secretary for
professionals for guidance what
I could say about her issues
extremely responsive and I trust
her guidance and recommendations
whole heartedly another aspect
that I've seen working really
closely with DFA at during my
time as GST secretary is the
team that she's built around
from DFA analyst to local
government I I think quality
responsiveness etcetera so I I
just ran stand strong support I
think she's a great leader and
need to recommend her for
secretary of DFA thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee.
Mr chair we next have W.
secretary Duffy Rodriguez.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members.
I'm here.
The company.
As secretary of the department
of finance minister.
I have known for many many years
and I will do what we need to
figure out how we both are.
The.
One
you know.
As we're.
Over the years the speed that.
Thank you for all after the.
Keep on she does so with.
Yes.
Property.
All.
The help those years service.
On the previous that.
Yes the system and where are.
You are confirming and excellent
public service will represent
the state.
possible.
One more thing Mr chairman well
actually.
Was.
Thank you Mr chairman.
And next we have the director of
local government Donnie can
kinda.
Just wanted to speak in support
of the combination of ms Debbie
Romero as cabinet secretary of
DFA over my thirty six years of
public service with the state
federal and military I have had
the opportunity to be exposed to
good not so good and great
leaders one thing common good
and great leaders possesses
excellent leadership attributes
values and ethics I can tell you
that Mr Romero is a great leader
that possesses such strong
attributes values and ethics I
is doing is with some of the
other speakers this morning have
known Debbie for a good number
of years we were of the first
original grandfathers if you
will of the infrastructure
conference so I had plenty of
years of opportunity to work
closely with Debbie and great
and get to see the results the
tech person chooses the
dedication to the state of New
Mexico the valuation brings the
care she has for the citizens of
New Mexico and I think
she would be an excellent
candidate for the secretary of
the department of finance
administration so with that I
solicit your support on her
confirmation and know that once
confirmed that he will continue
to be a great value to the state
of New Mexico citizens and more
importantly she will work
diligently and hard effortlessly
to ensure she improves the lives
of each one of the New Mexicans
out there so with that thank you
so much.
Mr chair next we have been able
to go.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is to enable
but we stand in full support of
the confirmation of Debbie
Romero for the DFA secretary
and I worked together for over
twenty five years in state
government in in different
capacities within the department
of finance Debbie has great
qualities she's a great leader
she she leads by example she
doesn't ask for staff for any
body to do what she is not
willing and capable of doing she
understands the balance between
family and work she's competent
she doesn't need on the job
training because she has served
in so many of the capacities at
DFA including capital outlay
budget division local government
HSD secretary's office along
with working in governor's
offices she's dedicated she
loves her public service life
she puts other people before
herself it just works and shows
people what what it means to be
such a hard worker she's a good
manager she's respected by her
employees and her co workers the
one thing about Debbie issues
got that institutional knowledge
which is such a huge.
Contributions to the position as
Mr can Thomas said she was one
of the first to work with the
infrastructure finance
conference and started that
whole process for local
governments she also was the
first to work with the I. C. I.
P. understanding the need for
planning the capital project
tracking system she did that so
being co worker for over twenty
five years I also need to tell
you that she has been part of my
family for forty years forty
years ago we had a double
wedding ring she married my
brother Bob so I can also vouch
for her on a personal basis
being family comes with lots of
struggles but the one thing I
could tell you is we agree to
disagree we always respect each
other and for those qualities
that Debbie has I would stand in
full support and I would also
ask you to please support her as
the DFA secretary thank you.
Mr chair next we have mark
Duran.
Good morning Mr chairman mark
Duran you know Mr chairman and
members of the committee I
represent several clients at the
New Mexico legislature but today
I am here speaking as of Santa
Fe for supporting us Santa Fe
girl
and I'm thrilled to testify on
behalf of Debbie Romero
at her confirmation for cabinet
secretary of the department of
finance and administration.
You know Mr chairman members of
the committee I have a no
problem as a matter of fact it
Miner of people who have
attained a high high
professional degrees many times
come from different parts of the
country to conservation of
positions like this but I think
it's also very very unique when
people work their way up through
the ranks like Debbie Romero
has.
She served a career about
practically a lifetime Mr
chairman I think you pointed out
of forty years in state
government.
As miss board echo mentioned in
almost every position in the
department which she is now
going to head up I just think
it's a very unique I think it's
a great example for all those
other state government employees
are quite frankly a great
example for all Santa Fe in and
especially all New Mexicans that
with hard work you can achieve a
position of like this I think a
Debbie took the position of
acting cabinet secretary in
early June and her welcoming
present was to get ready in just
about ten or eleven days for one
of the most difficult
legislative sessions and one of
the most difficult times in the
state's history and that was the
special legislative session that
was held in mid June and she's
performed ever since just like
she's always performed and that
is admirably and competently
Debbie Romero is more she's
tough she's dedicated she Sappey
I can't think of a better person
to serve in this position
include oaks to the governor for
when the position became open
instead of looking around
looking right in front of and
selecting Debbie Romero to be
the cabinet secretary I like to
think of Senator Wirth for
bringing this confirmation
forward and I would urge the
committee support Mr Chairman
thank you.
Mr chair next we have keep
Gardner.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
thank you senator Wirth for
bringing forward this nomination
you know when we came in as
freshmen we get to know a lot of
amazing people as we came in
that freshman class and Debbie
Romero is one of those basic
people and I'm here because I've
actually had the pleasure of
working with or not only during
my time as a legislator but also
in the executive branch of
government.
And you know if you if anybody
that knows Debbie no she's one
of the most kind and
approachable people you'll ever
meet which is also a strong and
dedicated public servant and we
all know group in this been
spoken widely about eight years
of service to DFA.
The part that that really gets
me on Debbie that always
impressed me as to how tireless
years and it doesn't matter if
it's two in the morning trying
to do Budget overview.
Corporate six in the morning
trying to get something ready to
go to a legislative committee
has a smile on her face looks
like she's been up for hours
totally in in great shape she's
ready to go and I don't know how
she does it but I'll tell you
what if we need somebody as we
do right now to help make sure
that we stay on good financial
footing I can't think of a
better person.
you know.
During the tenure of while I was
in the executive that you went
through some really tough
personal trials as well and I
think some of us are aware of
that and I'll tell you you
really see character when
someone goes through some of the
most unimaginable things
possible in their lives and I
watch that we balance that my
heart broke while I watched her
struggle personally but also
continue to grow professionally
and that really is the true
character of this lady she's
amazing and she puts all before
ourselves we're lucky to have
her and we should all be
grateful that she's been willing
to hang in here she started when
she was two as we all know
because she's not very old but
she's been here forever she's a
walking walking encyclopedia of
knowledge when it comes to
things finding us and so I'm
really grateful that the
governor recognize talent that's
sitting in front of her and
appointed her to this position
to those as mark said kudos to
governor Lujan Grisham for for
finding someone within the
agency that really can't
conceivably this I really ask
you to please confirm or and
really am grateful and humbled
by the opportunity to speak on
her behalf today thank you
Senator Wirth Dale for caring or
nomination and thank you members
the committee and Representative
and Senator Ivey Soto for
allowing me to speak.
Mr chair next we have Steve
Coleman.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee Steve Coleman
executive director New Mexico
counties I've had the pleasure
of working with Debbie over many
many years and I have to stay is
the leader as a great public
servant she really part of my is
is I think the the most valuable
traits communication she's a
excellent communicator she
follows through she collaborates
and works really well with with
all the different folks in with
county people and respect she
exhibits such tremendous respect
for people she listens to other
opinions I work with Debbie over
the years in my capacity working
for counties and again you know
she stepped out with the our
conference is doing
presentations on Capitol issues
budget issues and the thing that
really impresses me the most is
how she is willing to put as
much time as necessary and to
working through issues and
problems
again I I whole heartedly
support her I was very I'm very
honored to speak on her behalf
and I can't think of anybody who
is more deserving and we'll do a
better job in this position
again this is maybe the most
important position I am working
with county government and I am
just delighted and thrilled to
be able to work with her and
strongly strongly recommend her
approval thank you.
Mr chair next we have marks of
Asia.
good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee thanks for let
me speak today and my name is
mark sementara and I'm the
executor to the Mexicans
universe presents but I'm I'm
actually I'm just speaking on
behalf of my I'm twenty five
years of knowing Debbie and
actually consider myself more of
a student of of Mr metal because
my start as a baby Alice twenty
five years ago and now that's
when I first met her DFA and was
about the privilege to learn a
lot from her and grow from from
watching her and listening to
her and the information that she
provided the guidance that she's
given me and so I can't you know
expressed in terms of how
blessed we are to have her to be
the secretary in terms of what
we're going through but also
what she's also experienced the
government whether it's the big
mac of the bottom falling out
whether it's the you know the
Great Recession our in the
pandemic and she's been a leader
to all of that got us through
I'm a lot of it and seeing some
of these folks today seeing
doctor the and James Jimenez
Renee just all these you know
big dogs and budget over the
years says a lot about the
company that she keeps I also
just want to point out that when
it comes to Capt Ali when it
comes to the construction
economic development of the
state of New Mexico she's been
behind or been a leader with a
lot of that for for like she
said you know in terms of all
the she's been working state
government so I just want to
just let the committee know that
I'm fully in support of our
based on all the years of and
then just recently like mark
mentioned working with or to the
special session I mean that was
just session again what thank
all the members also for your
support for your leadership and
your hard work but for her to to
get us through what we got
through and where we're at now
says a lot about.
Your leadership at the end so
I'm again want to thank the
sponsor for bringing for
sponsoring her today and it's
good to see everybody Mr
Chairman good to see you as well
members of the committee and
with that I stand in full
support of just an incredible
leader and I think going to be a
continue to be a great secretary
department of finance
ministration so that's it thank
you Mr chairman members of the
committee.
Mr chair next we have Ricardo
Representative.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee our records
with the New Mexico State
University and I strongly
support her confirmation here
today I have known of the
secretary doesn't for many years
and have had the pleasure in
working with our and many of the
positions as she is held in
state government she has many
years as others of expressed of
the experience and knowledge and
working with many agencies in
other state agencies throughout
the state.
She uses a common sense approach
in dealing with difficult
situations while working within
state and federal laws.
Acting secretary Romero is a
very approachable individual
very caring and responsive to
the issues are brought forward
to her and she's very dedicated
to everything that she does
signature is an example of what
all public servants should we
will live up to and including
myself and I learned a lot from
us secretary Romero's works
major just mentioned as well.
But I strongly support her
appointment and confirmation as
a secretary of the department of
finance and administration and I
want to thank you for allowing
us and made a speech here today
as well thank you.
Mr chair next is James Jimenez.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members the committee Senator
Stewart thank you very much for
sponsoring confirmation of my
good friend Debbie Romero.
Debbie and I I know the day I
met W. September nineteenth
nineteen eighty six that was my
first and state government so
that would be in Renee induction
I go back many many many many
years of course she was much
younger.
Much much younger than me.
But
many of you know that I was a
former DFA secretary.
I'm biased I know but I believe
that the effects secretaries
job is the most important one
for making state government work
you the governor could not have
found a better person to really
understand the depth of the
importance of the way state
government functions and the way
that it doesn't function
Debbie staff experiences as pin
pointed out through all aspects
of making state government work
whether it's working with
universities are capital or the
state budget or working with the
legislative branch.
Various times Debin  I've been
colleagues and other times she
has worked for me and other
times we.
Just been friends actually been
friends throughout the entire
time but I will tell you one of
the most important things that I
found in working with Debbie is
that.
You know it sounds trite to say
but she's not a right to speak
truth to power she has a away in
in the as more pointed out very
kind and gentle kind of way of
saying things that need to be
sent she was never afraid of
correcting me when she thought
that we were moving in the wrong
direction and I really respect
that the doctor during the
continued to respect that.
Well I would say that the
The the most important thing is
thanks for the DFA secretaries
to be a person of high integrity
much of the technical aspects of
state government you can learn
but you can't learn integrity
either have or you don't and
that I think is really at the
heart of who Debbie is as as a
human being is a really
wonderful person you can tell
from all the things that people
have been saying that she has
touched many people and we
remain friends with her for that
reason because she is just such
a wonderful human being I
applaud the governor for thank
you Mr chairman Dacian to
elevate for to formally to the
position of deputy secretary and
I have no doubt that she'll go
wonderful job for the department
and for the state of New Mexico
and continue to make sure that
state government function so
Senator Wirth there's a
committee thank you very much
for consideration of I strongly
support Debbie's confirmations
W. secretary.
Mr chair our last speaker is
Marquita Russel.
Thank you a good morning Mr
chairman and members of the
committee my name is Marquita
Russel I'm the CEO of the New
Mexico finance authority and
this morning I'm standing in
support of the confirmation of
Debbie Romero was secretary for
the department of finance and
administration I've known and
worked with Debbie Romero for
more than twenty years during
that time I've known her to be
straightforward collegial honest
hard working and exceedingly
competent I believe she's an
excellent choice to continue to
lead DFA and I whole heartedly
to to recommend her confirmation
thank you.
Thank you all very much
appreciated it very much the
COVID sent everybody has made
this morning
and
So we now move to the committee
and questions and comments from
members of the committee.
Senator office.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
and senator Wirth for presenting
Our soon to be secretary Romero
and I just wanted to say thank
you so much for your work over
all these years Mr metal
I've seen you in your different
facets of work here around the
state government and what you've
been able to educate myself and
I know many other of us of the
others of us I'm here at the
roundhouse about the function
and the role that we do have
that you have on the
relationship between
DFA and the budget and you know
that the kudos that have been
given for it to you this morning
it's just kind of like to me it
just shows exactly who you are
I'm just not just from us here
in government because we do all
have a bias in that facet but
you for you have community
members and family members who
are willing to come forward and
speak on your behalf just to me
just kind of goes across on
of who you are as a person and I
know that the role to DFA is
very important not just within
state government but also how it
works with local government yeah
that's so important as to how we
work to try and help from here
helping our local governments to
make sure that there's a flow
through of support and sometimes
with our budget monies to make
sure that we're kind of
continuing that trail of help as
to what I think government's
role is also to I just wanna say
thank you to the governor for
appointing you you've done a
wonderful job just as an interim
as as your designate now and
seem to be the secretary so just
congratulations and I look
forward to continue working with
you.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
very much locus other members of
the committee.
Senator Ortiz you know.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
and thank you senator Wirth for
sponsoring.
Our next to the secretary of
finance administration
thank you.
Secretary designate Romero for
offering to me was the I regret
I wasn't able to shake free
enough time to that we could
the.
I really didn't the feeling
terrible need to to talk about
any particular issue because
it's clear that you're very
qualified and very committed an
incredibly talented for this
position.
I just wanted to come in about
one thing and then ask you a
question the I'm just struck by
how many really talented.
The people from within state
government into this
administration has been able to
to find and recruit and
appointed to key positions and I
think that's a sign of of a of a
really healthy organization when
much to leadership can be
developed from within and and
and the crucial departments can
be headed by people who've got
long experience working in those
departments it's a lot easier
than when you have to bring
somebody in from the side.
I I do have a question for you
though and Mr chairman and and
and secretary designate Romero
we had a bill on Friday the the
actually it was a joint
resolution a constitutional
amendment.
That would do away with the
thank you to our nation close
and while we have you here I
just thought I'd ask to what
extent do you find
the NGO nation because as as as
it's been operating in the state
for the last hundred.
Eight years.
Eight hundred nine years
actually.
Comes in a barrier to the
Association and operation of
state government and I know that
we we run into it with capital
outlay when we have to.
Appropriate money that's
ultimately going to be used by
a.
A nonprofit entity they've got
to
we've got to appropriate into
your local government division
they then send it to the local
government and the this entry to
to work with that group the the
the the contract with that group
a lot of times there are various
delays involved in each of those
steps
becomes a rather Byzantine
approach to.
Just getting money to where it
needs to be in order to go to
work for the people of the state
that was the.
It is behind the joint
resolution we considered on
Friday I I'm I'm been struggling
with this myself with the for
for several years and and just
wonder what your take was on it
whether it's is being deal as
soon as I'm making it out to be
or whether in fact is a
protection that we are to
retain in our in our
governmental structure.
Cool so Mr chair Senator Ortiz
you know I think I think that
the anti donation clause
serves a purpose because it is a
protection you know I think that
to ensure that we safeguard
public monies and that they're
not used for purposes that they
should not be used for for.
You know private individuals I
but I also see how it has
impacted you know.
Some of the good work that needs
to be done you know a lot of non
profits that the organizations
that are affected by the anti
donation clause you spoke to
about capital outlay but there's
also services that that these
organizations that can provide
but because of the anti donation
clause there are lots of hoops
that we jump through to make
sure that we can do the work
while complying with the
constitution while making sure
that we don't violate that that
loss so it's really hard you
know in in on one side I can see
the value of it as a protector
of our find their public
finances but on the other side I
think we need to look for ways
that we can make it easier for
us to be able to work with
nonprofit organizations both
through capital outlay or
through services.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
and the secretary designate
Romero I really appreciate your
your the the efforts you made to
streamline that process and I
know that it is going a little
better than than we had to when
Mr Gardner was up at the
governor's office and was in
constant to source of the.
Frustration for many of us but
the.
I'm delighted to the supporting
your nomination as well because
I think you know with which to
Representative is the best of
public service somebody who
knows the ropes who's learning
the ropes who is committed to
serving the public and is
willing to do so but with great
integrity so thank you very much
for being willing to serve thank
you Mr chairman.
Thank you very much Sir to the
piano and and we're hopeful
that.
Despite Mr Gardner support we
may be able to get this our
nomination through
Yeah other members of the
committee.
Right well what is part of the
community center with.
Thank you Mr chair I would move
a do pass on the nomination of
Deborah K. Romero as cabinet
secretary of the department of
finance and administration.
From all over on to pass motion
from senator Wirth with us
second from Senator Lopes's.
and us nobody else us the
recognition at this time.
The clerk will call the roll
Senator Baca.
You've just muted by accident.
Senator Lopez.
Yes Senator Moores.
Senator o'neill yes Senator T.
C. Pino.
Yes Senator Pirtle.
Senator Stewart yes.
Senator Wirth yes.
Senator do it yes in Senator
Ivey Soto yes ma'am.
Both of those yes you madam Mr
very good senator Morris and
Senator Baca we did not hear
your response Senator Pirtle.
The one of you is in a position
to build on mute.
Your mind Mr.
It yes.
With senator Morris added seven
eight to zero point rate of
growth congratulations madam
secretary doesn't lead on a vote
of eight to zero you have a do
pass recommendation for this.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee I'm honored.
well so that will be heard later
today on the floor and at at a
time to be determined by our
Senate majority floor leader if
you could not fit you and and
and
and then we'll we'll
hopefully be able to drop it
does it next by the end of the
day.
All.
Thank you very much thank you
all for being here to testify on
this issue.
Very well we now move to
consideration of Senate bill
fifteen and Senate bill one
ninety nine.
And
and so the committee was passed
out a the proposed Canadian
suburbs of Senate bill fifteen
of one ninety nine.
But
let me let me you know first so
to Senator Ortiz in you know to
make up a presentation if you
would like and then we can also
go to our public comment and
then address the
Our address the the proposed
committee stops and Senator do
it if I can ask you to preside
over this
east of those I would appreciate
it very much.
Terms.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
I would noted to senator Morris
will probably he is the co
sponsor of this Senate Bill.
One ninety nine and he would
probably want to say some words
as well and we have to expert
witnesses who would speak
briefly on on on what this.
Effort in creating a commission
to deal with redistricting it is
all about in the process by
which it was developed of those
injustice the.
This and the former appeals
court judge of run Kennedy they
were part of that effort.
what we got in in one ninety
nine is a is an effort into
doing.
Pretty much what.
Several states and and and each
year one or two more are added
to the number of states that
tend to deal with the the issue
of reapportionment and
redistricting it's called for in
our constitution every ten years
and we've we've we've had a
situation in New Mexico where
litigation following the
legislature's attempt in dealing
with this has become
A very
loose.
The
side business for many of our.
Lawyers who were able to
challenge the the process by
which the legislature is tempted
to redistricting selves and in
the congressional seats and the.
No relation to go Public
Education Commission.
So this is an attempt at finding
a way to to.
Avoid litigation by making the
process as publicly involved as
possible.
While retaining the
legislature's final authority
over the whichever maps are
ultimately adopted
Turn it over to Senator Moores
and our expert witnesses to say
a few more things.
Thank you Mr thank you senator
it was a Senator Ortiz you know
so we had a really good summer
and fall working on a bipartisan
group of New Mexico first there
were state legislators all
Republicans senators some house
members
Democrats will so parties was
really good meeting with
justices and a lot of community
input from tribal leaders
watching experts from state
was very informative we came up
with a really good plan and I
think Senator Ortiz you are
proud to sponsor this effort too
much needed reforms and I will
leave it at that I think most of
us know the issue and I will
turn it over to justice Travis
or judge internet surfer because
we're comments.
First.
Yes describing the process but
basically this is just a
citizens commission that seven
members and the design is to
allow the commission.
To adopt some apps it would be
recommended to the legislature
and based on specific criteria
that would allow them to then
take into consideration I plans
for Congress the house and
Senate the Public Education
Commission the act makes for
really an efficient and
economical way to handle
redistricting in New Mexico is
it provides deadlines not
withdrawing and submission of
plans to the legislature but it
also allows a direct appeal to
the Supreme Court so that the
legislature will know which if
any plants adapted by the
commission are being challenged
and if any are challenged which
is in a sense for how long it
would take a Supreme Court to
decide whether or not they are
valid I've spoken with the
Supreme Court justices and we
proposed in our legislation a
way to get that done in a very
efficient and economical way and
in a way that gets the court's
ruling to the legislature in
advance.
Of the Legislature opting.
Matt it desires the.
What I need to alert the
committee about is that the on
the house side there are
supposed to equipment and I
don't know madam chair we would
like for me to go through the
amendment so basically being
important ones are to adjust the
dates on which the commission is
formed into a tie the
commission's work to when we
receive federal census data most
recent report we received.
from the bureau of census is
that they will not have the data
redistricting to the states
until September thirtieth that
being the case it is difficult
to no need for us to begin in
April so we moved the date to
July first that eliminates the
need for emergency costs
but it also specifies that
hundred fifty days from when the
census data is submitted a plan
will be adopted in order to do
that.
We also have a provision that
would allow the minutes of other
statutes that require the
legislature to decide in the
same calendar year that census
data is received
Redistricting it may not be
possible for the legislature to
actually adopt plans until the
year twenty twenty two which
case administration.
I I also point out that we
require compliance with the open
meetings act in the state record
state rules Act reason for that
is to allow for the appeal to
the Supreme Court that's
basically the essence but we
also have specified criteria
that we should the commission
shall consider may consider
additional not consider it's a
very detailed in section seven
that's the essence of.
The bill that is currently
before this committee.
Just kidding.
Mr chairman members of the
committee.
some of the things I wanted to
to to point out about the work
of the task force.
was that we concentrate very
hard and nationwide best
practices for drawing districts.
And
The legislation that was
proposed and Senate bill one
ninety nine talked about that
and fairly great detail of in
terms of specific criteria that
the the needed to be adopted for
for instance contiguous District
compact districts
and also the allowing of units
of.
Other than precincts to the
determine the boundaries of of
of a district of the tribal.
the tribal representatives we
had on the task force
particularly we're talking about
the fact that precincts do not
always track.
Of tribal political divisions
particularly in in the northwest
part of the state well with the
Navajo tribe but also with the
also with other tribes up and
down the Rio Grande with the
pueblos sin that even as far out
as soon.
The up.
And that and use being able to
use census blocks which are
which are not exactly.
Which are not per se census data
and other demographic
information was considered to be
critical for.
For drawing the most compact
districts and the most under
districts that would be most
reflective of of the true
populations in their.
Are in them the other thing that
that we consider to be extremely
important and and put into SB
one ninety nine and just a quick
reading of the of the substitute
that we saw today.
Was the was both the appearance
to the open meetings act.
Of for both the for both the
commission which is now called
the committee and the
legislature during the special
session.
also appearance to the state
rules act in terms of state are
in terms of the way the
legislature would would be using
the wraps and and adopting the.
It seems that the open meetings
act of provisions of the state
rules act provisions for the
legislature.
Hello I have perhaps been passed
over.
also the requirement of
justification for departing from
the from the commission's maps
of the commission has to justify
why its maps are are acceptable
using the extensive criteria
that the there were developed by
the task force
and at the same time if the
legislature's departing from
those maps are based on the
directly based on best practices
the substitution of of good
practice should be a matter of
folks open discussion by the
legislature.
all these things are extremely
important in terms of the
transparency.
And and the process that that
should be followed and
And and developing our our
redistricting of also the as
justice Travis mentioned the
extension extensive provisions
and and Senate bill one ninety
nine for how yield should be
taken and and disputes resolved
both quickly and economically I
was something that was
critically important sure is
everybody's aware of legal fees
since twenty eleven around
somewhere between six and seven
million dollars of of state
money and
And that seems to that seems to
be a decennial cost for the.
For the state including
back in the nineties the cost of
defending.
Right state's department of
justice actions of the voting
rights act and all those things
are things that we were trying
to trying to avoid with the
adoption of best practices for
New Mexico we thank you very
much for including most of those
most of those things and I think
close attention to our
suggestions and that we hope
things will be worked out is as
time goes on Mr chairman members
of the committee thank you very
much.
Thank you I just kind of the
interest Chavis and.
Madam chairman of I believe that
we had an amendment.
The prepared that was the right
committee but I'm not I'm not
into the committee got and to do
that Representative amendment
right did receive.
Madam chair senator we have a
committee set up but I don't
know if we have an amendment.
The amendment was was the one
that the justice referred to
the.
Including the the the dates the
changes in the case in the bill
that were were adopted in this
on the house side when they were
considering the the the the bill
on that side.
The twinbill on that side.
Maybe they were delivering his
sentiment wasn't delivered then
we can just deal with this and
and include those change dates
as we debate.
For center
and and and.
Those amendments were to near
the house action.
I'm sorry center I you're you're
cutting out for me I don't know
if you are for others.
Really Senator Moores.
I think we did but nonetheless
we should we should let's let's
go ahead and go to public
comment first and then we can
have a discussion on the
committee chair and and for for
folks who are watching and and
waiting to be let in we will
will let folks in as the person
before you finishes when you're
let in please be sure that you
turn off the webcast otherwise
we'll get you and all echo so
will begin without Mary Smith.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee I am
very H. Smith in Albuquerque
attorney and league of women
voters member I speak this
morning on my own behalf and not
on behalf as a look at of the
leak.
I have been quite interested and
to varying degrees in
Involved in in redistricting
efforts in New Mexico since the
year two thousand I have not
seen a committee substitute but
I do want to express my strong
support for Senate bill one
ninety nine and it's well
thought out plan to structure.
And to guide fair and
nonpartisan redistricting and to
ensure that the people and the
voters at the state have a
sincere in meaningful voice in
redistricting plans.
Lucien of that two thousand one
in two thousand eleven
redistricting process sees that
both ended up in court with
results that disappointed and or
excluded.
The voices of many New Mexicans
I saw for myself and I heard
from many others that we needed
to do redistricting better.
The many court cases that flowed
from the fights over the two
thousand one in two thousand
eleven maps unnecessarily cost
New Mexico taxpayers millions of
dollars.
Today in twenty twenty one is
when we have the best
opportunity to fix our fix our
past failures with the
redistricting act as set forth
in Senate bill one nine nine and
hopefully in the committee
substitute.
You have just a Senate one
ninety nine and thank you madam
chair and members of the
committee.
Thank you very much Jim Smith
and just because we are all
we're going to the floor in
about forty five minutes I know
there's number of folks who
would like to give COVID if
everyone can just keep their
comments to about one minute two
minutes Max next is Laura right
down.
Laurel you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Laura IDL and I'm with retake
our democracy I'm also a
constituent speaker a gust
District.
Seventy percent of New Mexicans
want independent redistricting
because it allows voters to
select their representatives
rather than allowing incumbents
and party leadership to select
their voters it prevents the
party in power from
gerrymandering districts and
that is good governance retake
our democracy urges you to vote
do passed on SB one ninety nine.
Thank you Mr dell I'm John
house.
Mr house if you could go ahead
and on mute and.
If you're able to turn on your
camera and you can perceive.
Sorry about that
Sorry about that I was listening
to the hearing through the word
the web cast.
Yeah I'm I'm John how some Santa
Fe resident and president of
will represent us New Mexico.
And we and all of our colleagues
are our peers in the Cola twenty
four member coalition.
Based.
Under districts in New Mexico
and league of women voters
strongly support this bill it is
very well thought out the
complete and thorough and would
you know look eliminate the
partisanship in that work that
has plagued our redistricting
part process for much too long
It would allow voters to pick
their elected representatives
rather than and their
representatives picking them.
It would and it would greatly
reduce the possibility of
protracted expensive litigation
between the two major political
parties.
Like we have seen in the last
two redistricting areas which
cost New Mexico tech's taxpayers
more than seven million dollars.
Last it will create greater
transparency and fairness in
this process so we strongly urge
you to support.
Sewage of.
Just be one ninety nine thank
you.
Thank you Mr house Kathleen
Burke.
Mr I think you're on mute.
Thank you madam chair Kathleen
Burke project coordinator for
fair districts New Mexico good
morning ladies and gentlemen of
the committee fair districts for
New Mexico and it's twenty four
partner organizations are
advocating for fair
redistricting process in our
state we total nearly forty
thousand New Mexicans seeking
redistricting reform since
nineteen ninety nine New
Mexicans have been bringing the
plea for fair redistricting
process to our legislature New
Mexicans are again asking for
our legislature for a
redistricting process which is
free from racial discrimination
fair and transparent New Mexico
St districts belong to the New
Mexico people and should be
determined by such
gerrymandering hinders the
democratization of our state our
Republic to this very day with
redistricting happening this
year the forty thousand New
Mexicans in support of this bill
are asking you to make history
by removing this unjust process
from our backs and yours by
bringing us into modern
redistricting out of the same
post colonial rigging which
continues to undermine the power
of voters.
Thank you madam chair thank you
members of the committee we are
to do past.
Thank you Mr I lily Irvin but.
Madam chair committee members
and co sponsors thank you so
much for the opportunity to
speak today my name is lily
Irvin Vitela and I'm the
president and executive director
of New Mexico first and we
staffed other redistricting task
force and really appreciate the
places where there is alignment
between the task force
recommendations that are based
on national that.
But expertise here in New Mexico
I'm gonna just referenced a an
important study the doctor gave
Sanchez did about redistricting
in New Mexico he reached out to
over five hundred on New Mexico
voters and what he learned from
New Mexico voters thirty nine
percent of whom were liberal
thirty one percent for moderate
and twenty percent that we're
conservative is that of among
all of them eighty nine percent
were in strong favor greater
transparency in the
redistricting process and ninety
three percent were in favor of
an independent commission
through the course of our task
force discussions one of the
things that we really worked
hard to do was to consider
implications from the voting
rights act communities of
interest and the needs and
interests of sovereign nations
and so considering those need
strongly both in the independent
commission and and the hand off
to the legislature I think I
really critical to avoiding
constantly medication it was
referenced before and also to in
doing confidence in our
processes in the legitimacy of
elections thank you so much.
Thank you and next Mario
Jimenez.
Yes good morning madam chair
members of the committee of
monarchy equipment with coming
because the and also a member of
the New Mexico first registry
task force
I had the pleasure of serving
alongside our two judges who
presented with yourselves as
well as many of our our sponsors
of the Senate bill and and would
just urge you all to it to
support this piece of
legislation and it also like to
thank our our sponsors for
coming to to agreement on a
committee solve I have had the
opportunity to take a look at it
and give it a read and I would
you know I I think it's it's
well right in it does maintain a
lot of what we are requesting
for having an independent
commission to review our our
registry process I would only
ask for that as we move forward
that we look into including
transparency for the legislature
and also for precincts for our
our native American tribes or
pueblos to ensure that we
provide them a fair
redistricting efforts moving
forward as well thank you madam
chair members of the committee.
Thank you and Mister Mason and
Mr Mason I'll be our last
commenter yes.
Madam chair chair of women and
members the rules committee my
name is Dick Mason I'm sure the
action committee of the league
of women voters of New Mexico
you have a good you know I want
to thank the jam to jam and and
Centers Moores anticipate out
for working together to develop
this committee substitute and we
are to do pass on a committee
substitute but we are concerned
much like common cause it
doesn't specifically exclude
consideration of political I do.
Political concerned political
parties and addresses of
incumbents which we have an act
by Terry although it doesn't say
that we should consider that I'm
in a band like common causes
stress to tribes of expressed
concern about precincts not
conforming to tribal boundaries
and that is why we had language
to use less than tracing about
data I'm and have like coming
because we'd like to see
transparency choir men's for the
special legislative session
considering the recommendations
of the committee so again I want
to thank the chairman and I to
Sanchez are working together and
we do our job two passed on the
committee substitute thank you.
You Mr Mason and before we go to
questions from the committee Mr
chair did you want to.
To speak on the on the committee
sub.
I thank you very much of Madam I
do and so let me let me present
the rules committee our
substance percent of those
fifteen and one ninety nine let
me also by way of explanation
explaining kind of the process
and where we are and the and
what some of the the constraints
are that we're working under
I it I want to start by saying
that about a very much
appreciate a lot of the work
that's been done by New Mexico
first and for districts New
Mexico on this issue I do think
that those organizations would
have benefited by checking the
constitution every now and then
I also think that they would
have benefited by having a
better understanding of
legislative process
and because I think both of
those were for failing and quite
candidly I think there's some
real judicial issues that come
up here that are of tremendous
failing in terms of what was
proposed.
Our.
You also want to say I'll be
perfectly honest I take a little
personal some of the comments
that have been made.
About about the perspective of
the legislature in the
districting process particularly
when it comes and and and
particularly as it relates to
this committee and the storage
of this committee
up up New Mexico First impaired
districts New Mexico has not
hesitated to use my name as some
kind of a barrier to independent
redistricting.
She.
We're doing that and pardon my
anger on this issue.
However.
If you would have actually.
Taking a look at the history of
independent redistricting
attempts in New Mexico you would
have seen that not only was I
the co sponsor of a
constitutional amendment done in
two thousand and eighteen what
Senator Moores.
Our and others.
You constitutionally we move us
to an independent raise process
indeed not only was I a co
sponsor that I wrote that
constitutional.
The judge of that I'm somehow
some kind of a barrier to
independent redistricting.
Frankly I defense.
However that was not passed
through the legislature.
It did not get through the
house.
What you have a compensation
chairman of the committee that
chose not to hear what's.
We received Senate bill one
ninety nine which
representatives.
I know as I look through Senate
bill one ninety nine.
That's number one ninety nine.
Our first of all six by statute
restricts the ability of the
Legislature to consider.
Matters before the legislature
and how that is consider.
That cannot be amended by
statute
only be amended either by the
constitution.
Our biggest right can only be
constrained either by the
constitution what I legislative
rule.
And so when you say and and and
and the original Senate bill one
ninety nine the legislature may
select one district plan from
each set of different plans and
select the different the
selected district plans without
amendments.
Do that by statute you cannot
restrict our ability to consider
something I meant something I
statutes.
This is our I find the logic in
the very next subsection that
those if the legislature does
not so lax one different plan
the legislature shall select.
What a member of the to the
governor the proposed district
plan I'm not sure if we if we
are not able to select a plan
how we select a plan given that
we were able to select a plan
which was the predicate of the
first part of that sentence and
yet somehow we're supposed to
select a plan when we cannot
select a plan some day you all
will have to explain the matter
to me on that.
What also you're directing a
certain level of up.
In the legislature.
That we shall select that plant
the only way we select anything.
In the Senate by twenty two
votes.
The house five thirty five votes
the project falls.
Agrees on the same thing.
So that's the statement there
seems to belie the legislative
process.
And frankly unenforceable
Charley Anish statements
that bears no retaliate in terms
of of the legislative process.
I'm.
Restrictions able to appeal
eight a proposed plan.
So only a person who submitted
data so nobody else I guess is
able to appeal.
And then you have that appeal
happening before the
legislature.
Mexican federation of the
plants.
You.
This is really I mean I was
surprised because I know how
this Freeport has reacted to
statutes that say things like
the Supreme Court shall not
permits.
Our acts the Supreme Court shall
have no power to modify I you
know the Supreme Court has
actually interpreted the those
those statutes as as not being
enforceable statutes and violate
the separation of powers.
Then we have during the pendency
of the appeal the Supreme Court
and its discretion may state or
suspend adopted by the
legislature of any district
plant subject to appeal I'm
pretty sure separation
principles separation power
prohibit the Supreme Court from
stopping the legislature from
making a decision.
Instead of passing something
that is so patently
unconstitutional.
And that does not take into
consideration the legislative
process.
What we have here that is
our a committee set up for the
two way Senate bill fifteen was
not introduced as of them
suggested as a response to
Senate bill one ninety nine.
Our office will will will will
gladly explain to you guys that
Senate bill fifteen is the exact
same bill.
The chair of the rules committee
has carried.
Every single back at eight.
In terms of the process.
Right that's.
This is something that that that
is a standard part of the
process and that in that regard
it would be nice if you all
would have actually understood
the legislative process a bit
more before criticizing as if
somebody was trying to stand
back or undermine the efforts
that you're trying to make
a call out somebody who's
actually try to be a champion on
this very issue.
Let's take a look at the Senate
rules committee substitute for
Senate bill fifteen one ninety.
So does create the purpose of
redistricting committee.
In terms of the membership of
the citizens for different
committee has generally follows
what you all had in Senate bill
one ninety nine.
we do in addition to requiring
that that the members be
qualified electors we also
require that the voters there's
a difference between the two.
I'm like what you have.
All in this substitute the
rebels have seven members in
your bill you allowed for
members to be from the same
political party I'm not sure how
you have an independent
districting Committee where you
have where you have a majority
of the committee thank control
by one political party so this
one on page three line twelve.
Section three Garcia says no
more than three members of the
seven.
Probably members of the same
political.
We also included language that
would have worked on this
committee over the years.
That when we're talking about
members of political parties
with some of his natural stretch
in the two years next preceding
the members appointment and such
a matter of the members property
registration will cost one
political party to have more
than three members and that
nobody wants once appointed can
change in such a way as to
contemplate a party of more than
three months.
We are in fact a pluralist of
moralistic state when it comes
to political parties.
Our duties of this commission
adopted through the stop that
they would submit no later than
October thirtieth twenty twenty
one point in their office
practical.
This group we're not gonna get
the street level data until
right about that time.
But that doesn't stop this
redistricting commission from
holding hearings regardless of
what of of where particularly.
Foundry happens to lie the
question as to whether not Zuni
should be in one congressional
or Russell district to wrestle
districts does not require us to
wait.
Or I think at the street level
data from the census bureau.
So that's commissions the way
this is written.
We'll be able to during the
summer just are holding hearings
to talk about communities of
interest to get ample.
We do follow the the the
schedule you guys have laid out
of state six hearings before
proposing any maps and six
hearings to explain the proposed
that.
But we do have instead of three
to five.
We have that you would that the
that the committee would adopt
three district plans for each of
their congressional districts
the house of representatives the
Senate and other offices
required to be distracted.
And the reason for that is
frankly if you do three plans on
each year already adopting tall
plants.
And so that's a fair amount of
work already.
R. and it's appropriate that
that be done.
And and that because of the
starting point for the
legislature to do its work.
Until we change the constitution
as I have proposed.
We are not allowed to limits how
the legislature does its work.
What is not a political
consideration.
That is a legal and
constitutional consideration.
So we respect that aspect of the
laws of the state.
In this and this proposed
committee order but we do
provide as the starting point
for our work the work of the
citizens redistricting
commission.
Thank you very much and madam
chair I'll be happy to join in
rest of the committee in terms
of questions and madam chair.
Your
job in a state of a bipartisan
and and and friend Senator Ivey
Soto and echo what he said I and
I work very hard on this issue
over the years he was a co
sponsor of a constitutional
amendment three years ago I know
in his heart he is a passionate
advocate for reform honest I
want to say that publicly in a
bipartisan manner anymore so as
a friend you see has worked hard
on these issues for number here
so thank you Senator and Daniel.
Senator
is Senator o'neill I saw that
your hand was up previously did
you still want to speak.
Can I speak.
well and I would echo well first
of all thank you Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino injustices Chavis and
Kennedy are for your hard work
on this and I would echo senator
Morris comments right there I
guess I can assume that chairman
Ivey Soto doesn't exactly like
this bill so I I got that you
know all I know is that I would
echo he's a passionate supporter
of of independent redistricting
commissions but it has to be
done right you know but but that
being said can we get back to
the bill okay so gerrymandering
is the root of our political
dysfunction does anybody dispute
that I mean it breeds extremity
it breeds polarization at at
fosters distrust on the voting
public about the legislature now
just doing backroom deals to
choose their own constituents
and veterans center that's where
this bill is coming from you
know the intention of the bill
doesn't carry the day so we need
to really really deferred it
Senator Ivey Soto is expertise
and others in this area at the
same time as a part of this
districting commission in the
matter of the summer I was
really impressed with the
sincerity the practicality in
the real world approach to this
very charged issue of
redistricting you know I can
only say I you know I respect
justice Chavez and justice
Kennedy bipartisan all the way
and I was just really impressed
with with how seriously they
went about their work
all I know is that you as far as
any personal tax I don't know
anything about that that wasn't
my experience you know of the of
this whole efforts so okay you
know why on earth would we fear.
Sarah districts drawn and common
sense way you know.
Factoring in communities of
interest and so forth why it why
would we fear that.
I I don't understand I mean it's
basically
Many people have talked about
the cost of litigation you know
that in the past with these
redistricting efforts you know
it's just.
What we choose the way it is now
as elected officials we choose
our constituents with
additional.
And so you know that's just not.
That just isn't right okay I
mean and at the same time
there's no way that you can take
politics out of redistricting
there's no way but we can do
better in New Mexico we can't
you know I mean I don't think
what we do our best what we I
don't think we're any worse and
many many other states you know
we we really are serious in our
past attempts with hearing
throughout the state and in been
doing a lot of hard work and so
forth and so on but the bottom
line is the has the ultimate
authority of of you know.
Drawing the lines and so on that
and I would just like to ask a
question of the sponsored so
tell me.
Would be the who is this
redistricting commission like
who are they.
With your bill.
Senator o'neill some of the
district commission the citizens
district commission.
is as described here
is is the same as was suggested
and
in Senate bill one ninety nine.
not only like I said with the
with the modification that I
don't allow a political party to
control the commission.
But in order to qualify.
For the commission
you have to be at this is the
section for the Bill Page four
which is to qualify for point
you have to be qualified elector
of New Mexico and a voter you
cannot be in the two years prior
to appointments a public
official candidate for public
office a lobbyist or office
holder and a political party at
the state or federal level nor
can be a relative of the other
part in the purpose we're
consanguinity of a member of
Congress a state house
representatives the state Senate
of the Public Education
Commission.
Norway very I'm an employee of
Congress legislative branch of
government or other state office
required to be registered to by
the committee so those so so
those people are not allowed to
serve on this commission so this
commission
removes people who have
a vested interest in the outcome
of the of the districts are
based upon who would be serving
so that the focus on who serves
on the commission our people
have a vested out of vested
interest in the outcome based
upon who does the a lot taking
not who's gets elected which is
appropriate that is what we want
to lay the groundwork for in
terms of an independent process
because because it should not
have the people with the most
vested interest and probably I
will I will not that that in the
constitutional amendment that
Senator Moores and I work on
together and and and you to US
federal mail you know I think we
took the legislature out of the
process altogether which is
really the ideal situation and
where we all need to try to get
to
for the next district in process
thank you how many people are on
this redistricting commission.
Madam chair ceremonial seven
seven and then I know it's not
one of my first efforts in this
area I had a bit of the judicial
nominating commission was the
body the the you know basically
you.
Where we gave our power as the
Legislature over to but I I but
I but anyway yeah I just
how does this differ from
Arizona you know Arizona they
were a they had they tried and
they you know they did a pretty
good job I think but if they got
political but but.
you know that like it could you
contrast at the Arizona is that
too in the weeds that was back
to back in a way what should
matter.
Sept arnelle actually it let let
me contested both a result and
California thanks and and and
really California I think is is
the preferred way to go between
the two Arizona has a five
member commission you have to
members that are of of political
parties
each and then one person who's
not of what they found out this
last time is that that one
person that was not a one of the
major political parties
consistently sided with one of
the political parties every time
there was a decision to be made.
And
But that was the commission that
went
that was the the structure of a
commission that went to the US
Supreme Court right because the
the question went before the US
Supreme Court is that when the
constitution of the United
States of America says the
legislature of the state.
All part of to the districting
of children in the district for
members of Congress and and and
for such a process is necessary
that that that but that then be
done by Senator image to an
independent body and what the US
Supreme Court determined is that
yes expanding that that that was
within the contemplation of the
US constitution to allow
that to happen if it's done
under the structure of the state
government and this was is that
a a services.
Our cabinet up a ballot
initiative and
result of that change the
constitution so then their
prosecution and therefore it did
pass muster as far as the US
Supreme Court was concerned like
wide out fourteen of their
processes in their constitution
have had we put our process in
the constitution removing the
legislature from the process
sample program would have
comported with our the the
various on our
a case once.
The in in California what they
do is interestingly is a high
people
apply right they remove
everybody who would have any of
these conflicts of interest that
are being discussed here and
then and actually what they do
is they just simply scrawl on.
The actual members of the
commission on.
And and and and regard it is it
is truly a randomized process we
don't have anybody putting their
finger on the pulse of what on
that commission and the
commission actually end up
working out really well a good
friend of mine from a Donald was
the chief demographer for the
California.
A redistricting process and and
and it and it's really was I
think a very independent process
that that operated as we all
would have been tended to be I
think it's one that should be
emulated in fact of the
doctor macdonell has.
Oakley has offered to come out
to New Mexico and talk to us
about how we should implement
properly independent process is
this and and and she's offered
to do that free of charge.
Thank you thank you senator and
thank you madam chair and just
committee just couple things
you know I just think this is an
important bills to pass as as we
all know we're all on Judiciary
just about thank you as I
understand it this would go to
Judiciary.
you know I just think it's
important to keep the
conversation going and just as
an aside in a related way you
know regardless of what we
ultimately decide on how to go
about redistricting.
Coming up this year I would just
say quite forcefully that we
need as urban Democrats we need
to X. respect our rural
counterparts and not over reach
very we really need to do that
so that's all that's all I'm
saying I mean it's just
important that we The New Mexico
that we Representative the state
and we have an urban state and a
rural state and I think it's
increasingly clear all right
persons trouble by the urban
rural divide we share about
constantly it's real and as
legislators we really need to
set an example to try to.
You as much as we can and this
is one way that we can do it
redistricting thank you.
Thank you senator Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino.
Thank you madam chairman and
I just wanted to add for Senator
o'neill's benefit the the the
way it is seven commissioners
are appointed.
Is involving the ethics
commission three of them would
get appointed by the ethics
commission the chairman has to
be.
Retiring justice or retired
judge of the court of appeals.
The other four members are
appointed by legislative
leadership Republican and
Democrat in both the house and
the Senate so the the changes
Senator Ivy Soto does of saying
At least no more than three can
be of any one party means the
ethics commission and probably
be the the group that would have
to find a seven member who is
not a Republican or a Democrat.
And I think just this redundancy
sound.
changing and I think.
I would agree with Senator Ivey
Soto as socio to to bill here I
think the retains the core of
what we were trying to do is our
with our task forces summer.
While dealing with potential
challenges around the
constitutionality of it.
Ideally we would like to have a
commission those who made the
decision itself but we didn't
have time to do a constitutional
amendment for the session of the
legislature so we were soon
seeking you know some kind of a
workaround and you know that's
where we had a lot of Liz
judicial.
Presence on the the task force
working on this trying to find
some way that would walk that
fine line between being really
independent and and and also
trying to live with the though
the letter of the constitution
says the the legislature as to
make the final choice.
And and and Mr chairman Madam
chairman and and and and it's
it's all right I would like to
move in for the I do not pass on
Senate bill one ninety nine.
Into the sun.
Senate rules committee
substitute for Senate bill one
ninety nine is proposed by
Senator Ivey Soto second Mr
chair.
And madam chair I could just
help out with the with the arm
of the motion itself it's it's
completely do not pass on Senate
bill fifteen and do not pass on
Senate bill one ninety nine and
a do pass on the Senate rules
committee thank you for Senate
bills fifteen and one hundred
and.
I will assume that that is
Senator Ortiz Pinos motion
second I second to Senator or to
secure peace you know the.
This does.
Miss Vigil would you please call
the roll Senator Lopez.
Yes.
Senator Moores yes.
Senator o'neill yes.
Senator TCP note yes Senator
Pirtle yes Senator Stewart yes
Senator Wirth yes.
Senator Ingle.
Senator Ingle.
He's on the phone.
The state S..
Thumbs up Senator Ingle.
Senator.
Yes.
Senator Ingle one more time.
Senator Ivey Soto yes yes.
Okay.
Senator.
Yes ma'am.
Ten zero.
Madam chairman thank you very
much I just want to thank the
justice and the judge Kennedy
for for the incredible amount of
time.
I was just struck by the hours
of times they've put into
working on this and getting the
input of Watson lots of people
in and from different
organizations different
communities of interest around
the state so I want to thank
them for the work they've put in
on this and thanks and gentleman
Senator Ivey Soto for for
pulling it all together and
getting something that we think
we can defend.
That you know the judiciary the
issue of the of the day will
have to be dealt with I know he
he believes he can get started
in.
Right away but until we have
some of the census data the
that'll be limited in what they
can do however let's move on to
Judiciary thank you very much.
Madam chair on also echoed those
comments I just want to thank
all the.
There's a lot a lot of people
involved in the process of New
Mexico first judge chair Mister
chair justice John research.
We're just amazing leaders and
all process and a real was great
our first by Camelot for thank
you Dan right so for us we move
this forward.
Thank you and and secretary over
or this part of it and and just
as a formality on a vote of ten
to ten and I think the the
committee stuff for fifty one
ninety nine.
H..
I thank you members of the
committee for the for the our
conversation today and I believe
we Mr cemetery for later are we
starting on the floor and six
months.
Mr chair we are very well in
that case the rules committee
will stand in response.
