Okay for that for that so.
What we go ahead and and again
with the confirmations for.
And so we have we have four.
It also just to confirm.
during the session so far that
we're aware of so.
Yeah so we have we have forget
officers that we are to confirm
during the session so far so we
figured we would start small and
move up from there.
And and so we have with us
John Garcia cabinet secretary
designates.
For the General Services
departments.
And the
And I might notes.
Given the current make up of the
sitting here the rules
committee.
I remember correctly that Mr
Garcia is.
Your Republican right yes Sir
yeah that is our motion before
we begin our.
Okay we're going to see Senator
Hickey please present your.
Thank you Mr chair and fellow
senators is a pleasure to be
sitting here with this morning
and thank you for the chair that
sinks down my light weight sits
on it so forgive me if I can
just barely peer over the table
but I I I I is that what makes
it such a pleasure to present to
John Garcia for the secretary of
the General Services Department
is that he is shorter than I do
so
But taller than the governor
yeah we have that in common yes
the in any event
you have his resume their it's
very well put together a resume
I would say and I think that in
the first few lines of the
introductory paragraph born and
raised in Albuquerque and
absolutely a passion for New
Mexico if you look at that
multiple positions he's held
both in the private sector as
well as in the public sector
he's been through confirmations
before as having been the head
of economic development here in
the state the city and what have
you anyway I think particularly
for General Services an
individual like this who has
extensive business experience as
well as state experience is
going to make an outstanding
candidate for this position I am
actually looking forward to
working with him on the risk
management Division and of work
with them to give a
that the program that really
does promote health and and as
well as certain cost
effectiveness and I thankfully
has a business background in
that regard so I will conclude
by saying there is only one kind
of dark mark on his resume he
told me that growing up his best
friend was Jim Hinton.
And if if you know I I I was
rand loveless and Jim and I both
bank has been passed a lot of
significant actual federal
legislation together but in all
seriousness Jim did a great job
and
I hope you can bring that same
kind of business accu men and
listening to it thank you and I
would like to present him to the
committee.
Thank you very much appreciate
that
And I do agree it's a very
impressive resume I think we
might like to confirm the person
who wrote the rest.
the
I also note that in the
reservoir this resume he is
currently the executive vice
president of the home builders
association of New Mexico I'm
not sure what the ethics are
having those two jobs at the
same time.
But
Mr chair.
No I no longer unemployed now
that yes I need to update my
resume all as of two months
that's that's not accurate not
today not care about drug lied
on it.
Very good is there is there
anybody present we would like to
speak in favor of this
conversation.
Big surprise nobody is there
anybody.
I think that president I meant
in the room.
Is there anybody present would
like to speak against the
conferees.
Okay I'm not sure we have enough
time.
So let's let's go to people
online instead of the folks in
the room and so do we have a
reserve master Meister a list.
Associate.
Million dollars for your first
okay and then also as each of
you yes I would please let us
know.
If you are a paid witness or pro
bono.
for this property and we'll
start with the Lillian monthly.
Good morning Mr chairman and
committee members I am going to
ask John to buy me a Cup of
coffee later's from pro bono but
I wanted to say thank you for
allowing me a couple minutes to.
About John Weber known for well
over twenty years both
professionally and personally
our professional history goes
back to my work at the regional
development center where we work
on economic development and
workforce development efforts
for the state and region and
then we both served on the UNM
alumni board together city had
not didn't turn it into a lot of
fun things representing the
university and I can tell you
both personally and
professionally in the projects
that we discussed and taken on
together John has always been
incredibly collaborative really
honest and I've always
appreciated his forthrightness
as Frank style because I'm very
much the same and his incredible
sense of humor which he still
needs to work on.
Thank you Mr chairman make a
note of that thank you very.
That Mr George brought.
It's going to help out for us
think runs.
But I'm you on the.
I guess if I follow directions I
could get this done could not.
Hi good morning Mister chair and
members of the committee.
My name is George crux time
former coach for the university
of New Mexico ski team and
presently the executive director
of skiing New Mexico.
It is my privilege to stand in
support of Mister John Garcia
and I do you stand taller than
he is for sure.
Our job as a man of high
integrity and honor and
dedication.
I have watches accomplishments
both in the private and the
public sector.
Hi he is been very effective in
everything is done as secretary
of tourism secretary of economic
development.
And fair manager.
Is also serve the City of
Albuquerque and the University
of New Mexico.
He is always exceeded I believe
any expectations anyone had in
the private sector and the state
I believe is going to be very
lucky to have Mr Garcia again
stands and service state of New
Mexico.
And personally I know John forty
years so maybe I get the the
brown eight point here for nine
the longest from time to ski
instructors at the time he is
serve the state of New Mexico.
I thank you very much Mr brought
us up now when he gets his he is
the one of the adults are going
to the.
We wish we still Senate Mr chair
we still send them to little
boys place he asked that short
skis and small business.
Are we won't we won't go there
are.
The property.
yes good morning of.
Committee Senators Mr Chairman
I'm Bob Murphy.
Executive director of the
Albuquerque economic forum prior
to that the last fifteen years
prior to that long time
businessman in New Mexico fourth
generation education
along the same lines everybody
also known John for quite a
while maybe twenty five years or
more we work together on a
number of projects both economic
development and especially
around the home builders
association over the last seven
to ten years John put some of
significant effort into of doing
the best we could bring back
retirees to New Mexico and work
towards bringing remote workers
are ex wire to seeing the
pandemic and such surge along
those lines it's been a pleasure
working with John we provide
managed at a great skills
engages well with the.
Current problem.
Of course.
Issue in front of like I said
it's been a pleasure to work
with them I highly support his
nomination is role as secretary
general services.
Thank you.
Thank you very much this is a
the number of cars we have so
you're Yamada.
Mr chair she's waiting to be
admitted to the as a panelist I
think.
Okay.
Yes.
Yes good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee
Siberian monitor the public
service company of New Mexico
and I feel very honored to be
able to be here today to speak
in support of John Garcia I
think I've known him for almost
twenty years and I remember when
he was cabinet secretary of
tourism and Gerry Johnson and he
was this is kind of person he is
he's always very inclusive and
it you know he it doesn't matter
about titles and I remember he
was kind to offer to go running
with him in the governor because
back then I used to run but I
just knew right then and there
that he's gonna always out run
me and Mikey continually does
it's been so much fun to watch
him you know in all these
amazing positions throughout the
state he truly cares about New
Mexico is very passionate about
New Mexico New Mexicans with
high integrity trust dedication
and overall collaborative
efforts has really my honor to
be able to stand in support of
Pam.
Thank you Mr chairman members
etcetera I do have one quick
question for you since you're
from PNM what is the carbon
footprint differential of
heating the air above Mr Garcia
when he's in rural versus other
people.
We are really bad connection
here I really.
A few years ago this.
Okay I thank you Mr Garcia if
you would like to say a few
words to talk about it with the
confirmation you're welcome Mr
chairman thank you members the
committee I appreciate the
opportunity present today I'll
be short.
In my comments will be brief.
Up I believe that before so
Mr chair thank you I want to
thank my sponsor to great to get
to know my my Senator in my
district and I appreciate
everything he's done we had a
great conversation recently
about risk management I he's now
my unpaid expert when it comes
to the respond best to.
Mr chair I I grew up in
Albuquerque New Mexico one of
seven kids went to college was
the only one in my of my family
to go to college it took me
seven years to get my undergrad
degree I think the greatest
accomplishment I had in my life
to this day will be that I got
my college degree of.
I had two great kids and they
both have doctorates ones of
medical doctor wants to Ph.D and
they would not got that it had I
not gotten through the
university Mexico get a lot of
support for that ever since then
it's been it's been a great
career I I worked in the
hospitality business
work at new Chinatown restaurant
for ten years they paid my way
through college and so up with
after that I went to merry at
corporate
I worked at Bennigan's
restaurants managed to thirty
units in the east coast came
back when the restaurant
association
a good friend of mine Gary
Johnson City wants to run for
governor helped him I became
tourism secretary for him I
became economic development says
secretaries second term and
and then since that I ran a few
other cultural affairs around
the state fair
I think the only ones to make a
profit and history the fair so
Paul might the debate that I
guess but
I was honored to serve I got
ahead of presidential
appointment George W. bush to
service the adviser for historic
preservation the White House I
did that for four years
president Obama kept me for two
years I was honored to be able
to serve the federal government
in that capacity.
We we managed all the grounds
all the historic grounds and all
the economic development on
public lands it was a great
experience
When the governor asked me to
serve I was honored I I have the
friendship relationship with the
governor we both work together
in the past
as usual I came up to
is passionately try to sell an
idea about attracting retirees
to New Mexico it got into a
heated debate
in the military she said I think
you should be my G. as the
secretary I thought about it for
a couple months and first of all
it's a great honor to be asked
by any governor to serve more
importantly I love the state and
it's just it's just an honor to
be able to ask to serve again
and so I won't belabor it Mr
chair ask for your support and I
can give you I can promise you I
will do my best thank you.
Thank you very much and we will
be going to to questions from
committee in just a moment there
are other what I just what I
just programs for use that is is
that you have activated by to a
number of residential yes Sir Mr
chair yes the White House for
the pain and what.
Alright Mr the White House
should be painted white.
Mr chair with that that wasn't
that didn't come across our our
committee.
Got it thankfully and the and
then the I I do want to ask
before we go to questions but I
do want to ask one thing that
came up in your background
checks.
And it was the little matter of
you they arrested for
impersonating Sierra.
Tell us that story please Mr
Chairman yes hi I would actually
want to contest a nasty the
national invent with the Sonny
bono look like contests so yes
and I'm which chair I I think
you know better than Sonny bono
and so I won't put you through
that today.
Can't say yes Sir and and who is
your share.
it was a a friend of mine Bonnie
that happen to be in San Diego
at the time and I recruited her
and I had a for of us and no
shirt underneath and it wasn't a
pretty sight.
There.
For about very good questions
from committee Senator.
Thank you Mr chairman John thank
you it's been a twenty five year
ride twenty here for you since
you first came here in twenty
five years since we first met
you have one of the greatest
this assistance up there a GSD
to.
First time I met John he was
secretary of tourism and I was
at been working across the
shipment passed away in New or
for Steve Alford for a couple
years before fee to start for
the takeover of broadly and
you're always a gentleman you're
you're you're Senator your best
your best is damn good are you
do live in my district I away
that's right so little little
toy right now or if you but
you're good then you're great
New Mexican and justice governor
are are honored to have to your
service so thank you for
stepping up once again.
Mr chair Senator thank you and I
did move actually in the state
of care yes but my well what
everything I just said that.
Thank you Mr thanks John Mr
chair Senator thank you for your
support over the years.
Senator.
I thank you Mr chair and I would
echo Senator Moores and
certainly are a bit from my own
perspective in terms of working
with job
in his capacity with home
builders down Albuquerque we
work on the sustainable building
tax credit which had been put in
place in two thousand seven I
was carried go with senator
Feldman and and it was kind of a
big environmental environmental
flooded and home builders were
pretty spooked by the whole
thing but you know what happened
is that also there was a
realization Hey this is an
extraordinary opportunity to to
build green greenhouses and
that's exactly what happened and
so when that bill came up for
renewal because the tax credit
was expiring
John was part of a
collaborative religions million
monthly use that word and I I
wrote it down because that's
what we did you know groups that
haven't really talked to each
other all of a sudden will work
together and again he was right
in the middle of that I was in
love that and we were able to
get that extended and I think it
was one year the last bill that
governor Martinez signed a
program of fifty five on the
final day the extent that tax
credit and allow that program to
continue and it's still in place
and I just thank god for me it
was indicative of the type of
person you are it's not about
party it's about getting the job
done and so I commend the
governor for for selecting you
and wholeheartedly support your.
Appropriations position.
Mr chair Senator I just wanna
thank you also and I have great
respect for you and I appreciate
your support.
There was a nice things about us
and a lot.
Top Senator Lopez.
There.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
and good morning thank you again
Mr Chairman
Mr Garcia you know this is the
department that you are overseen
as I have said for many who have
sent in that position that you
were taking it's the heart of
state government.
GSC is without GST and
ordination and everything else
that you do
You know state government
doesn't function GSD is the poor
and the heart of what we do as a
state again I just wanted to
mention that because I firmly
believe
The in your your service that
you've got to the state of New
Mexico
just not here in the positions
that you health but also the
national level
exemplary.
And for you to be here with us
again and choosing to to work
once again for the state is so
appreciated because you do have
another life we do have many
other endeavors that strong
but as you want us to continue
with is so appreciated thank you
thank you Mr chairman thank you
very much Mr chair Senator thank
you service.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
the Senator Hickey thanks for
sponsoring Mr Garcia and John
I've I've been confused for so
is who is Jim Garcia the Mr
chair Senator it did that's my
alias and so I think he's my
older brother by two minutes my
brother Jim Garcia this explain
I mean your your resume is
incredible but I think she used
by as many times and around the
community has is this resume
reflects the fact so so he is
thank you finished college and
he didn't correct.
Okay
The U. N. M. as a program for
returning students.
Mr Mr chair Senator I I will I
will let him know that as long
as he pays his his his way
through college I guided thank
you
Mr chairman and and and the jun
Mr Garcia what you've been at
the GST just for a couple months
but I I have you developed any
any thoughts about what
legislators ought to know about
the department of a I mean I I.
For a long time I've been here.
Worried about the the the level
of maintenance of the of the
public buildings and we're able
to to find the reform the any
opinions on that are you have
any recommendations for us Mr
chair Senator thank you yes and
thank you for the question the
challenge for me is that I've
been I've been asked to.
Lead an organization that is not
broken it's easier if there was
something broken to fix so
Mr chair Senator I think I look
at the organization I think the
talent is there great respect
for Duffy Rodriguez who's been
in a lot of agencies but she she
has a great background in
understanding the finance and HR
part of our business which hi I
need
my priority is to get the right
people the right place quickly
with all of our divisions of the
building R. M. D. is it is a
very big this big place and the
governor would like us to focus
on.
Quality buildings as we move
forward and we look at how long
they can last energy efficient
buildings and that's it that is
a challenge to the governor
asked me to make a priority the
rest fund.
Is right now and it needs help
it's been subsidized this year
we've asked for a large subsidy
to support that so my challenge
this next year will be getting a
handle on our prescription drug
prices getting a handle on that
Fund
and shoring it up so that the
premiums
coincide with cost of living
inflationary things so I think
that will be my top priority I
need a leader in that position
so I've been interviewing and
looking for a risk management
director and deputy director my
chief counsel is not doing that
I have a great friend and
partner in Lindy who is of my
assistant and I think she's more
as Mr chair you know she's more
than just somebody that gets
things done she helps us around
the office so
I value a lot my team my
management team
so I think there are some
challenges there and I look
forward to taking them on
governor as Senator Lopez
brought up it's the backbone of
government and its the is not
sexy there's not a lot there but
without those things a lot of
the other agencies don't get
their jobs done buildings cars
airplanes
risk fund
so I I look forward to the
challenge we have made a few
priorities risk will be one how
we do buildings to how we can
make all our buildings energy
efficient with simple the esco
project that we started
great return on investment for
investing in solar and energy
efficient buildings so will over
the years try to the.
Get the building stock that's
their energy efficient when we
look at new property projects
we're gonna look at how they can
be they can last for twenty
thirty forty years I think my
experience with building and
business will land to support
to help that that agency itself
but I'm honored to get to be
asked and that it's a roll up
your sleeve and a big job and I
look forward to the
responsibility.
Well Mr chairman you you've been
so successful up and your other.
Endeavors in and out of state
government I look forward to the
to the work is going to be doing
and revenues made a great.
A great choice in in us Johnson
thank you Mr chair Senator
thanks for your support.
Other questions from committee
of this country.
Part of the one asking the
questions here well okay they're
not.
Okay so the question is what was
the as I wrote down it's not
sexy there's not a lot of their.
The HSD yourself.
The the chair is the agency
agency.
R. so the
Is there a motion from the
committee.
a motion from Senator Moores
second Senator Lopez.
No objections program older
please.
Very good that case corporal
Senator Baca yes Senator Duhigg.
Senator Lopez.
Senator Moores absolutely
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator Pirtle yes Senator
Stewart yes Senator Wirth yes
Senator had a meal yes in center
I'm just of the.
Yes.
Thank you madam it also is this
your service impeccable and
thank you so much for being
willing to give it back to the
station with the chair thank you
I appreciate your support as
well thank thank you Mr chairman
just one thing we will do this
confirmation on the floor today
okay and you are welcome to come
sit down on the rostrum if you'd
like it's not direct questioning
it's just the members discussing
but I think that would be
can't bring family I again I do
think it's appropriate in this
case to have our families if
you'd like you would care center
it would be an honor and thank
you I will be there.
But we got a poster saying.
I wasn't sure officer did you do
the first two times your refund
with that.
Four Mr chair that.
Yes what we look for dissing
inception thank you thanks.
Okay much
Let so what we're going to go
and opposite borders the rest of
the bills.
Six.
as we.
Playing down.
Where Mr Garcia was sitting.
For the.
Okay.
Senator Stewart and that the
I actually have a witness
because the.
so
Thank you Mr chairman this isn't
chart resolution tends I have
with me today Mister Paul
Blanchard who is the owner of
the down in Albuquerque.
Of the downs in Albuquerque
basically was forced to close
for just a couple of weeks shy
of the year during our force
leisure I've been using that
because just to term I've just
learned I really like it.
The the so Mr Blanchard has of
talked with the state fair
commission but his yearly rental
of the downs and other parts of
the state fair is.
larger than three point six
million and the two of them have
a negotiated how he will pay
that even though he was a year
without income and it was closed
and he's done this by agreeing
to pay all the money he owes the
state fair and what we are
suggesting here is that we allow
them to
proceed with their agreement by
extending the lease another ten
years so that they can pay off
this funding over a longer
period of time so that's really
the only thing we have to do is
agree to extend the lease his
negotiations with the state fair
are between them we can't be
part of that but I when I was
presented with this are I was
just very impressed about the
fact that they have worked out
this negotiation that he's
agreed to pay this off over time
and that we are before the
legislature to approve the
extension of that lease and if I
can turn it over to him first
make a few comments and then
we'll be ready.
Thank you chairman sometimes so
the the as you well know we love
this pandemic quite some time we
were probably
as a New Mexico on business
closed longer than anyone and
Bernalillo county just shy of a
year
in our lease we do have a force
majeure clause which would have
precluded us from from having to
pay of the the rent and lease
and.
That would have been a
substantial hip I think the
state fair which we get along
with very well
we worked out an agreement
signed an agreement of lease
which is allowed under a.
Under state law for them to
negotiate leases but if exceeds
twenty five years and has to
come back to be ratified.
with the legislature so frankly
this is in the I'll many
businesses and and properties
we've done this throughout this
whole pandemic period with with
all of our tenants place tenants
we've done that.
I think it was done in
Farmington what the with the
racetrack casino in Farmington
they actually the county owns
that facility that actually
abated ran out there and we have
in this agreement that we have
with the state fair there is no
abatement this.
The state fair gets one hundred
percent of their money we lost
about seven million dollars in
that period of time ourselves on
hard costs that we couldn't
avoid paying payments to the
bank for the building and things
like that we lost we lost right
at seven million dollars or
nothing to do with loss revenues
yes hard lost so I by doing this
we sat down this gave them a
chance are gave us a chance for
us to pay them back over time
and gave us a chance to be able
to some of our loss so that's
pretty much the gist of it it's
not it's not anything out of the
ordinary it's it was done I
think Senator Baca may nor may
not know that that that
the county commission up there
actually did the same thing with
the racetrack casino with their
I was in the basement there as
well but here's there's no
place.
That was a little confused
everybody else is getting
involved in a thank but thank.
And it will discover that is
everybody in the audience would
like to speak in favor of just
your tend.
There everybody in the audience
would like to yes our concerns
about a service that.
Nobody here is there anybody.
On zoom.
Would like to comment.
Other favor against us here are
ten.
Saying nobody questions from
committee senator if you know
Senator Moores.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator stored for bringing this
for itself like a good idea they
just had one quick question for
you Mr of elector did the down
to get any of the federal of
assistance money that that so
many businesses qualify for Mr
chairman Ivey Soto.
Senator no we did we got
We got in the first in the first
half plied for the pay back
protection program we got a
million eight.
And that and then the second one
we got nine hundred seventy two
thousand.
our PPE funding was spent on two
point five S. so it's probably
two point eight million total
our payroll costs that we paid
for two million five of the two
million eight we had we had
utilities of a hundred thousand
that we couldn't not we had a we
had worker protection equipment.
Sanitizing plexiglass everything
for the workers that were there
so
this was presented to IRS
pursuant to the the enacting
legislation it's already been
this is sort of been forgiven as
the as the US the program was
meant to be so it's it's done
they've reviewed our read our
expenditures
I I don't get a salary I didn't
take any of it so it was all too
we kept sixty employees on
payroll for the whole year we
have four hundred seventy five
but we kept sixty on the whole
year we kept all of them on.
For a number of months and then
it just got to be where we're
just losing too much money as
well as some thank you and and
Mr Chairman just one follow up
in a as as.
Have you been able to re open it
all and and has I was business
been we we re opened we re open
and and we have really a very
difficult time because we could
get our points back employees
really and we still are probably
at about sixty percent of what
we were prior to the pandemic
now that we've had a promise
it's even drop down a little
more
business is good but as
everybody else opened
it's.
Dropping down I think this
across has hurt us again about
thirty eight percent.
But it's it's we're open and we
were we are we are have always
made our lease payments to the
state fair so we we have no
there's there's never been any
any time we haven't filled all
of our obligations there please
but we pay them about three
million dollars a year in rent
we send the state about twelve
million dollars here and and
gaming tax money in another two
or three million another gross
receipts tax and fees to the
gaming control board so we've
been a pretty good ten and I
think to the state and the we've
always fulfilled our obligations
we the the only reason we didn't
pay and that that pandemic years
be under the lease we had a
force majeure that and we
immediately.
put our force majeure and says
stop payment but this graph of
this your of cures that and it
gets a small for I think we need
to be.
But I would just note that Mr
chairman that the in the.
Then the FIR is at least in the
yeah and the F. I. R. of the
COVID that the the the LFC is
budget recommendation does
include five million for the
state fair to try to make up for
some of the lost revenue to the
fair with the thank you and that
this does of a complete solution
thank you
Thanks R. fifty about senator
Morris thank you
Mr chair Senator all are
personally being here
Senator Ortiz POS what questions
alternates with the PPP
initiatives you address and some
like you burn through that we
like most of the rest of us do
appreciate keeping those
employees are as long as you
could
the concerned only concern I
have is I this is the first part
of this bill I'm just nervous
about because we all know what's
about the license of a racetrack
license and everything else and
some of the factors in the past
Canadian license in the issue so
my question is who of the state
fair board who also added this
report.
This is the first time and so it
makes me little nervous and the
only the in the initial initial
discussions were with state fair
on how to remedy the.
The.
Force major issue and how we can
get by that so nobody would lose
money and and that they would
lose money it was agreed upon
between the the state fair
management and and myself and
then sent to mac Arsia and and
Matt Garcia ask questions about
it and that was it.
Mr chairman I should also say
that the.
The first agreement had to be re
done several times because
Legislative Council pointed out
that we could not.
We could not have anything to do
with the approval of the lease
between the state fair and Mr
Blanchard and so it was written
in a way that didn't work at
first so Legislative Council has
look through this and figured
out that really the only thing
we need to do that that the
legislature is in charge of is
the lease and because they want
to have these payments go out
and over time so they're not to
participate that's the purpose
of this assistance to extend the
lease ten years that that's all
this stuff.
So Mister etcetera PicsArt
Chicago in the clear for the
fourth so we're not dealing with
the a license for the of the the
racetrack or the receipt no now
we're only dealing with the the
of the lease of the land that
the corner of of the State
orders not otherwise be so
Senator Moores the licenses
belongs to two thousand
Albuquerque to us so what we
have is.
Basically nothing but a land
lease with with the state fair
so all the licenses for us the
state fair does have a gaming
license
The license are all our.
So it and then having to do this
has nothing to do little by
little the gaming racing license
are expected clarify some of the
the nervousness of the first
part of it that I want to get us
involved in the Cayman licenses
the racetracks of the State
racinos and all of them this is
only the land.
Thank all thank you senator
thank you secretary.
Federal.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
madam for ten thanks for being
here today I do have a few
questions what other licenses
does the downs hold of the sites
of racing.
Will the racing license we all
came lice's withhold liberalize
and and Mr chair and remind me
of your name I apologize all
Blanchard the budget of what
would happen is there anything
in the lease if if for some
reason see the gaming license
was revoked for liquor license
was revoked are there remedies
in there for resolving that with
that result in the least being
terminated is there anything
there because this is a long
time to forty seven
is there anything in the least
protecting the state that for
some reason you lose your game
license that the the state would
be protected at least maybe some
of the different tenant.
Chairman Ivy Soto said I I think
the the.
The lease itself is a as pretty
thank Anna spent proved by this
body so when we did it first it
was approved by the by this body
it has everything in there from
ethics clauses and that to to
all sorts of default provisions
in a
we are.
we are.
Heavily invested in in the and
this business and so
there would be if we lost our
game Lysons that would that
would be a violation of lease
and and that would be the fault
of the lease if we
We have scanned with money that
be a violation and the we we be
in violation lease so there's
many default provisions in the
lease that if we didn't comply
with we would have a problem.
we're pretty cognizant of the
fact that we have to run because
of the gaming control statutes
and we have to run pretty clean
ship
in order to make sure that that
licenses never at jeopardy so we
do have quite a few.
But if you licenses involved to
be able to do this and as such
we get for audits a year from
gaming control board every every
quarter we are not actually
gaming troll board at the end of
every year we get a third party
audit that we pay for that goes
to the state fair and most of
the racing commission goes to
gaming control board so we get
audited probably yeah we're
we're probably more we're
audited probably more than the
the banks are out.
That that so there's a constant.
Overview of our of our business
our business practices and thank
you for that Mr chair Mr
Blanchard did the downs at
Albuquerque donate to any
legislative legislature's
campaigns recently or governor
of the governor's campaign for
any tax related to elections the
dances never doesn't make.
Appropriations thank you Mr.
Mr chairman I feel so so that
this so the the downside is ten
years into their current twenty
five year lease all this does is
add another ten years they are
to have a lease until twenty
thirty seven.
So this adds ten years on to the
end of that so they can spread
that.
Millions of dollars over a
longer period of time.
It is kind of.
Senator Paypen.
I thank you Mr chair I just I
was curious why
it seems that a part of this
joint resolution deals with the
or good part of it deals with
the rented basement but at the
at the same time Mr chair and
tackles the lease extension of
ten years I'm I'm curious about
why after such is difficult
period of time just by the
wording in this resolution that
went through the in the past two
or three years that they would
at the same time in which to
extend the lease by ten
additional years.
This so Senator Baca
the business is a very good
business that our business is a
profitable business in a very
good business so the there was
no problem with business being
profitable or paying a tramp for
paying its taxes or or any of
those things it was a pandemic
that had us and shut us down so
in that process
we weren't because of the force
majeure clause that was put in
in the lease we were required to
pay rent.
If that is a pretty significant
blow to the state fair if they
are not going to be able to
receive three point six million
dollars.
In addition the seven million we
lost a substantial part money so
the way we work it out was there
is no abatement in any part of
this there's no basement of any
money the state fair receive one
hundred percent of their money.
And and we get time to be able
to pay it off with this
extension in addition we'll get
some of our money back with that
extension as well.
So there there is this is a this
resolution and the said remove
to amend the lease which we've
done multiple times on that
please
was only to get everybody to get
whole and to give time for
everybody.
Thank you Mr chairman I've you
know I I understand what you're
saying about the payment only
reduce your language or the
language is present in the.
it says
parties agree that fifty percent
of the April twenty twenty rent
for the rent paid under school
follow us sections at least will
be abated.
That's.
Chairman of the so the Senator
Bob.
We paid all of March's rent we
pay a hundred percent of marches
right but we got shut down in
the middle of March so our our
rent gets paid on the first day
of the month in advance so the
reason that that was there was
because we paid it off in full
but we only got half a month of
the abuse.
So that was the reason that.
Thank you Mr chairman the other
thing that I would just comment
on is that the title of the
joint resolution says proposing
to extend the lease for the
downs at Albuquerque
incorporated but if fails to
really mention the majority of
the issues that in the caresses
and purpose of the title I just
think for transparency sake
maybe I'm gonna propose an
amendment to make the sponsor
would consider
of of working on the title page
is there some disclosures there
as far as for with this
She actually represents.
Mr chairman Sir Bob I'll I'll
only talked Legislative Council
Service I I just have to say
again that you know this is
explanatory of how it's
happening but we don't have any
say in that so I think the put
the title in because the only
thing we have to say is the
extension of the lease but but
I'll talk to them about your
concern.
Thank you Mr chair that's all I
have advised the scope of all of
our.
So the I don't understand the.
Part twelve most try resolutions
that's a that's a good one about
this is not going to walk around
now this is what we've been done
pursuant to provisions of law
where we have to prove exactly
and.
And the other thing is we are.
I promise we're giving the state
fair permission to extend the
lease former extending the
lease.
Presenting blue but again
they've got the contract with
the state fair we are the ones
that say yes you can lease this
land.
So we don't get these
resolutions very often right no
they're not on the ballot there
are just weird because we're not
used to this but this doesn't
give us anything to do with
anything except for extending
the lead up.
I yes chairman Ivey Soto at a
couple things I think are
germane to this I think that and
it's really good question the.
The state fair under attorney
general's opinion done in New
nineteen eighty seven which I
could quote if you want my
compare raised whichever you'd
like
allows for the state fair to
extend currently uses and allows
it to extend them to twenty five
years or more
if they extend that for less
than twenty five years then I
can go to part of the finance
for pro will if it goes for more
than twenty five years it has to
be approved by the legislature
but they are allowed to do.
there and I can read it the
probate of in addition I'm a
force majeure clause in our in
our lease that was approved by
this body the force majeure
Committee your claws and allows
for
as part of a resolution to under
any issues with force majeure
allows allows for an extended
period to lots of a performance
of such obligation can be that
can be extended for a period of
such a delay but because of the
way in the the procurement laws
work and and because the state
fair's applause a governmental
agency they they can they can
can only get approval I'm twenty
five years or more.
From the legislature so they
couldn't delay this if we had a
small issue and we want to delay
it well I lost here
Representative to begin with
I've lost two year lease of my
lease to begin with and the
pandemic so if they said okay we
want to give you a year back it
would still have to come here to
get the year back because it
went past the twenty five one
last question yes so you already
negotiated the terms with the
state fair if they cancel the
fact unless we stay right there
it's been signed it's already
been signed by the by the state
for an hour and ourselves with
the cabbie out that
we both recognize that it it
can't go into full force and
effect until it's been approved
by the legislature so we're not
just work and I guess what my
question is yes.
So we're not we're not simply
give the public Jack view of the
state fair will now go through
something you may not know
what's happened.
At the
just have to go through this
process yes it it's it's a
little bit of a conflict between
retirement and what the state
there's a lot to do as a cause I
government agents
let me just what what Senator
Baca did you want to go back
hundreds and for those following
but you don't know okay Senator
Senator Senator Wirth.
One of the things I guess.
Mr I was remiss on I usually
just a question ever since the
famous previous Senator and
resolution got some people just
this chamber trouble I was asked
this question when we do do is
but it's only used it once or
twice a year that we do these
ones as any were any legislators
are family members of a living
legislators involved in New
Mexico Association for real
estate deal or anything in this
no.
Okay
I thank you appreciate the
question certainly just focus
our portals question perfect
transparency whose question was
hasn't doesn't down Donald give
it a donations I think you
should have access to have you
given any violations of the
partners given installations to
include political.
Yeah I've I've I do
contributions and have for years
I want to make sure that is
question to answer because I
think you said the downs for
transparency to support those
Prescott watching so you
projects question what will you
give money to with everything
else.
I'm not sure and do you want me
to say who I've.
Plumbing at I'd.
Donate to.
Any legislators donated the
governor a donated to twenty
general I I mean I've I've I've.
Personally now this is a
personal basis I don't like to.
To many candidates.
And have for many many years and
I was aware of that yeah I want
to make sure yes experiencing
his question was answered in
instantly document questions
while I I've I've the question I
believe Senator problems are
term was whether the downs as
The Dallas or make our doesn't
make contributions.
Thank you Mr.
The word is because we have your
contributions are bipartisan or
four forty six of one part I've
I've been I've had bipartisan
contributions yes.
I.
it'd
Thank you Mr chairman I
appreciate senator Morris
clarify that I was going to re
ask the question because I
realize I didn't ask if any of
the owners of the incorporated
business have donated but so I'm
trying to wrap my head around
this we're we're doing we're
extending the lease essentially
to help.
Recoup lost money from the
governorship down is that
correct Mr chairman.
Mr chairman Ivey Soto Senator
Pirtle I think what what it is
is that just like I stated
earlier it's been done.
All across New Mexico both
privately and
we're trying to figure out how.
We don't get into legal argument
over whether force measurement
is that what it is and and how
it is
we just said look will agree
that.
You can't make claims I can't
make claims on the state fair
for our losses.
They get to get their their
money back for the year they
lost on rent and so it it's just
the
as a business negotiation and
again as I say at I believe the.
you can look it up of the that
it was the same thing was done
with the county of San Juan
Sunray park racetrack casino in
San Juan so there was actually
abatement of rent there.
So it's it's not fair Mr
Blanchard yes or no.
Yes no the question I'm sorry
could you the the is the
extension to help recoup lost
revenue from the governorship
down.
I guess the answer that would be
yes.
And thank you Mr chair and I do
have concerns you know I don't
necessarily
disagree with this standing on
its own
but you know I we have plenty of
businesses that were shut down
and and are going to remain shut
down forever
lot of small businesses in my
community and you know I I think
I'm going to have to to vote no
to stand in solidarity with
those businesses that don't have
the ability to come before us
and and get something like this
to ensure that they can someone
else recoup their money my
family lost quite a bit of money
we still can't get parts for
tractors to to feed this country
and feed the people of the state
because of the shut downs and we
suffer every single day because
of it the tractors the price of
fertilizers going through the
roof because ships can't get
into the country because of that
backlog there's not going to be
fertilizer for our food people
are going to go hungry this is
going to get even more more
serious because because there's
there's no real long term plan
or goal with any of these
shutdowns and so I I think one
of I'm going to oppose this
today just because you know a
lot of my small businesses are
able to come here and and get a
sweetheart deal like this thank
you Mr chair.
Thank you hello Sir working over
the past I got a little bit to
pass that are worth secretary
and I will I will levels of that
by your very very clearly what
fees are vital aside I also see
very clearly Representative to
us is that what you're asking
for is an accommodation not to
be forgiven from that that but
to pay that that.
And that I just hi that's that's
not the narrative that we have
with most folks will been
affected for.
Reasons that I completely
understand economically but I
really appreciate that you've
come before us to.
Yes but the nation to pay that
that
with that.
quick call the roll Senator Baca
bill Senator Duhigg yes Senator
Lopez.
Senator Moores notes one of
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Senator Pirtle no.
Senator Stewart yes Senator
Wirth yes Senator had a meal yes
Senator Ivey Soto yes ma'am for
the vote of six to four you have
a do past our divorce it's been
thank you all there was a voting
issue
I am concerned about the public
perception of what senator
Bernie was saying.
Face it you're powerful man in
the state was given a lot of
money politicians in on and a
lot of small businesses operate
and
by two hundred four hundred
fifteen employees weren't
working right now a surprise for
everything from sprint for about
on supplies for the thousands
and tens of thousands of small
businesses from New Mexico to so
I think the the public
perception are given favor for
you would increase start so I
sympathize with your your
situation I also a lot of
sympathy for the people can't
come here Santa Fe and do this
so.
Thank you
very much Senator Brandt like.
Thanks and we'll go to ask your.
Senator.
Of.
Thank you Mr chairman and
The half of the.
Myself Senator Moores
Appreciate you hearing Senate
joint resolution six.
I think really simply and.
just to be sure this removes the
partisan.
designation from our judicial
elections it does not affect the
magistrate or the municipal
because those aren't covered in
our constitution that they have
to be partisan so that can be
done three.
Bill.
So this really just removes the
partisanship from
the judge elections for our
state it does allow.
Affect the matter is that our
judiciary should never be
partisan they need to be of as
of you know they need to not
have predetermined decisions
before they stuff on to the
bench they need to be as open
minded as can be.
And rule on cases on a case by
case basis and not not be
partisan individuals so why do
we have Harbison races we don't
want them to be part of some we
don't want the mac partisan but
yet we ask them to run on the
basis of their party I think
that's a mistake and I I I think
that we get better
accountability.
and we get better judges by not
having that designation.
Representative thank you Mr
chair
as many of our personal
conversations the last two
years.
No public comments about about a
separate bill we did the other
day I'm worried about the future
of our democracy is a lot of us
are
And and I have to tell myself to
sit down with the Democrats and
working on bills that are going
to be roasted on social meeting
all four because I think it's
important we start coming
together and working together
and this is a you know we we
look at the heart of marks in a
Republican the undermining of it
recently and I think one area we
can do some better job this with
the judiciary because quite
frankly I don't care if the
judge who was sign off on my
divorce years ago was Republican
or Democrat doesn't really
matter all those issues but the
fact is in certain parts of the
state of your Democrat you can't
get elected as a judge servers
the state you care if you're
Republican certain parts that
you can't electors a judge of
your Democrat
now I think of one branch of the
three of us I mean we signed up
to just toss the parson bombs at
each other and that's part of
what we do and that's part of
what our districts processes
about in Judiciary think should
be above that you're seeing that
undermining of our Republican
democracy and I think this is
one area where we can move past
that and on care of.
Lucario have the credentials to
run for judges in general be a
damn good job thank and but
right now you could not do that
if you're removed down there and
I could never win a race in my
old home town where everybody at
this point because I have
Republican or after my name so I
just want to move back with this
branch of the three branches of
government that should be above
the partisan bomb throwing that
we all.
Sign up for thank you Mr.
For a further.
I work with.
But I think both of those are.
I would like to wait on this
resolution.
Rolled up part.
Third of.
Thank you Mr chair Senator from
what I.
Re that
you more.
And in all areas of government
the better
I do have concerns about how
this could practice work
Yes I was that sick working City
of Albuquerque and I'm familiar
with what have helped
nonpartisan elections tend to go
and a lot of people running and
so if we are making all of these
offices on cars and we are going
to have really all about and
when folks are voting and
because there are no physical
health protection from office to
meet ensure the ultimate winner
hi is someone who has a major
that and I I think that.
The the.
One of the most important parts
about elections is making sure
that the majority is position is
respect
We would not have such a rough
provisions for something like
this nor would there be
unnecessarily rainforest and
something like this so you could
very well have situation one
where first of all you have a
ton of people about which is is
making it harder for voters and
to make it harder for them to
get through the valley it's
impacting down dollars is also
making it harder for them to be
able to really assess who those
candidates are because they're
so much fun in fact there was
just
Last session Mr chair at on how
to build staggering the
nonpartisan elections one of the
perks policy reasons behind that
was to allow voters to have a
better ability to assess those
candidates elected having so
many on one ballot.
So there would be that problem
with this but the other problem
is when you have that many we
have a whole bunch of people
running for something at once
whoever ends up winning could
win with fifteen percent of the
vote you are not getting the
ultimate winner is not someone
who reflects the will of the
majority and so.
I have a lot of.
Well I like the idea behind
this.
I don't I think it would.
Make it harder for voters to
adequately assess campus
judicial candidates
and and we have a result that
that is not what should be one
of our tenants of.
Of elections which is respecting
the will of the majority
And also.
Yes yes it is a personal
actions.
I I don't think that it is a
reasonable inference to make the
because our personal actions the
of judges for being elected now
are not behaving in a partisan
manner are not assessing each
case each case on a case by case
basis I think they are doing.
I I understand your point but we
don't want to inject more
partisanship into into judicial
processes but I think there I
don't think it is reasonable to
assume that if they get into
that position through personal
action the tools behaving in a
partisan manner when they're on
the bench so for those reasons I
I'm gonna I'm gonna vote against
thank you Mr chairman Mrs
western I I respect everything
you just said for good discount
or the the longer this just
allows us is Legislature compact
figure out those questions that
you just pointed out because of
our legitimate issues about long
ballot and how we process that
but that this allows the
legislature and quite frankly we
have some pretty good morning to
this legislature on how to run
elections so I'm very confident
after this if this passes would
be able to figure out a process
to address those issues that you
mentioned
so I would just present that you
that that does not this is not
prescriptive hello Alexion's
happen dispersed brings it back
to us as a legislature or future
legislatures to figure out how
the selection tap to address
issues you're having you right
what product
and I in you know the perception
on the last point is that the
justice here it is part of
student Anna you have more
interaction unicenter work
workcentre highest totals are
Baca have more options in the
rest of us so you see a probably
more closely than we do on a
daily basis so I respect your
were your point of view is
but the point of the the public
is that here we have a bunch of
Parsons will partisan hacks
that's what we sort out for but
they don't really see and all
the polling data shows that the
public doesn't want the judges
to have to go through that part
was and when you're running
hands are parts of the state and
you're like the only because of
the the or they are a hundred
names that does leave that
perception of the judge judicial
branch should not have that
perception it should be higher
than that so.
My thoughts to your thoughts.
Gentleman the the process is
really simple the constitution
requires that the parts.
So you have to fix the
constitutional issue before we
can address how exactly we would
do that so you just take that to
the elector and the major rules
on whether they want this to be
state partisan or become
nonpartisan
right now all of the polling
shows that that the public
believes that having judges bi
partisan as an issue.
So we put that to the voters
they get to choose when we come
back as a lecturer at and we
would do the next session
because that would be
when that would be done in I
would think that we can get
together a good bipartisan group
that would be able to come in
six of how do we address some of
those concerns that you brought
up in their legitimate concerns
but we have to deal with the
first step first yeah we we
can't get the cart before the
horse and bring the bills that
tell you how the June race is
going to be run until we know
what the public wants those
races to be nonpartisan
I think there is at least a
perception that running based on
the fact that your Republican
for judge or running based on
the fact that you're a Democrat
for judge.
Does put partisan bias in their
whether that's true or not that
is the perception and as we know
in politics perception is
reality so I I think that we
have to do this so that we can
come back and and change some of
those things restore some of the
trust and faith in our judiciary
unfortunately they're being of
their the public faith and trust
in them is being hit just like
with us
But even if we look at what with
our races
you know we can have five or six
people on the on the ballot now
in our.
There's nothing to keep that
from happening you can have a
independent today
libertarian you can have a
decline in the state you can
have a you know there's all
having fun that can be.
This story.
You can have hello again
accounted for.
And.
But do we already have that and
see that so it's it's possible
that someone could get elected
even to one of our positions
without having fifty percent.
And there is a question I
intended to ask about to ask get
around that have you have you
talked to the judiciary about
this have you gotten the
position of AOC or at what how
much involvement of the
judiciary had in and what we see
before us today.
But I've talked to one judge
yesterday
in the he's speaking with the
the office of course if you can
actually the expert witness at
this move forward from this
committee.
but no I I don't tend to do that
it's it's you know I I think
that we set the laws and the
judiciary interprets those
that's their job but it's our
jobs Legislature rifle and sent
and we didn't see them here.
Eminem Mr submitted by sure you
have the same conversations
about which I just I don't like
raising money of course your big
of a kid of the
The judicial public financing
and and that's the perception is
that I want to we don't want our
judges and you guys owner judges
threw out there raising money
because of the the tank that
that process house on the
judicial
so I see this is a very similar
that same argument that we want
that just that that right wrist
tend to just be Republican
Democrat on the same thing on
the same on the second part is
right having judges want to
raise money this is on the same
page I think we'll see that and
and it does undermine the
judiciary so you for those car
I'm sure shin so you have home I
have so many of us have those
private conversations with
judges Roy I would rather not
have to go through the same
process you guys go.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator Wirth I look forward to
you helping me ensure that the
fund for public financing for
judicial.
This is fully funded searchers
Center both for this will have a
conversation.
We learned today I think with
with if this was to pass and
become of artists we probably
would need to look more at the
public financing for those races
because right now all of the
judges come to the political
parties and raise money which
all again puts that partisanship
into those races at least
also you know.
The you know the the concern of
the partisan elections is a
concern that's been expressed
for years and especially by
justice Sandra day o'connor she
was a big proponent address
where this originally came from
is I was in in C. L. conferences
she spoke and seven think about
this for years and then of in a
few weeks ago
actually I was.
Senator
serve on this was on the news
talking about crime bills we
have coming in he said one of
the issues we need to deal with
is the GS here and not just look
at everything else when it comes
to the crime issues and that
kind of brought it back to the
forefront of my mind that you
know one of the things we need
to look at is whether judges
should be part of some and I
think we get the best laws are
the best application of the laws
the best Judiciary we do not
have questions such as.
Thank you Mr thank you very much
I love.
What one is that in your on page
one nine eight twenty two.
You know this of the fan on but
I think there's a lot more
flexible process as provided by
law which goes to the.
The office address having with
Senator to about about what the
process if you have a lot of us
to address those.
also noted the.
The federal district that is
that.
Better so again I did was not
exactly receive friendly by the
district judges yet we thought
of with the right policies.
The along with our local
okay other questions from
committee senator Ortiz thank
you Mr chairman and and thank
you senators for the floating
this idea the I I I like it I
probably will vote in favor of
it I I just want to mention
though that when we think of
some examples of nonpartisan
elections the one that comes to
my mind immediately is the mayor
of Albuquerque which well
ostensibly nonpartisan couldn't
be more partisan effect and each
of the last five or six times
well done to basically to in
this lesson since three the
candidates it is the the issue
is not about the proliferation
of candidates is that.
It is just really expensive to
wage a major campaign without
the assistance of a political
party so you get this whole
thing of.
Okay we have public financing to
try to temper that and yet the
public financing.
Is dwarfed by the amount of
money that comes in from the the
the outside committees the the
you know the the end regulated
outside committees and and that
so I I like the idea I think as
long as we're electing judges
are still going to have some
thank the partisanship involved
one way or another but you know
ultimately Senator survive this
is mentioned eighty times in my
hearing we've we've it the issue
is not that we have so many of
us.
Contested partisan contested
elections for judges that we
have so few people willing to
serve as judges
you know that's that's the
bigger bigger problem
If this takes just a little bit
for the idea of a selection on a
very on the basis of merit said
and.
What I voted for judge I have no
idea who these people are I'm
not a lawyer I'm not in the
courtroom there's very little I
have to go on other than what my
party supplies me as information
on that.
And and you know without that I
I don't know how I would be able
to pick between one from column
a and one from column the
amendment is just like going to
a foreign you know of the
restaurant that features for the
cuisine of never tasted any of
it before how do I select the
that's I think you know the only
concern I have I like the idea
of taking the partition chip out
of it this is a an effort that
I'm not sure it's going to work
I think our analysis we have an
analysis that says it promises
more than it can deliver and
that's probably true.
Given the other things that I've
brought up but if you have a
comment about any of those this
Mr chair Senator and I've shared
with you just that so
That's good
Sure Sir I I think that those
are some of the things that we
can address as we go down the
road and we get the nonpartisan
alright first in the
constitution and we do need to
come back addresses one you know
we we had a I was just on the
phone with one of the judges and
there's a opening in Dona ana
county for judge and no one
client.
And no applied because they fit
they're all going out and
getting their signatures to be
on the ballot.
Instead of going through our
selection process so there's
some things we need to fix we
need to fix the pay for judges
and I
because you know we only pay
ninety thousand a year well on
internet.
Save in a bad attorney can make
ninety thousand a year so real
there are no why would why would
the you know why would a good
attorney want to be a judge you
know they make way more than
nine thousand years so we have
some of those issues within our
to this year we're not going to
get good judges and so those are
all things that need to be
addressed and I am more than
happy to sit down to work with
anyone addressing some of those
issues because I do think part
of our crime problem is the
bench I agree with serve on to
us on that and so we need to
address some of those issues
we're not gonna get the best
judges when we pay them way less
than the committee.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
very much I hope that this isn't
over on on the general.
Thank you that
the
That's about it would go the
committee house that does.
Our with part of the American
revolution.
Representative leading us part
of point remove judges that was
one of the reasons as mentioned
that question so this is
this is an issue that is
probably with some conversation
Senator for your
thank you Mr chair and thank you
senators for bringing this
forward and and I don't
necessarily disagree with with
some of the things that my
colleagues have said with regard
to you would doesn't pull out
the partisanship but I I can't
tell you in the mayor's race it
does force the electorate to
seek out a little bit more of
what each candidate is going to
be like who they are because it
doesn't have that right next to
their name when they go to vote
I have to educate myself a
little bit more and it's almost
laughable when you go to some of
these infants were judges speak
and they basically get up and
say hi my name is J. Miles
Hennessey and vote for me
because J. Miles Hanisee and I
can't say anything else.
Right I mean it's just one of
those things or whatever I was
first running I just thought all
this is so ridiculous that we
have a partisan election for
people that aren't allowed to
even say much about themselves
because they could be
a perception that that the
they're showing that they're
going to rule in a certain way
so I think it's somewhat
embarrassing that that that they
have to stand up and say that
and and run a campaign and say
vote for me because I am who I
am.
And
you know what it is it's
ridiculous I I think but you
know the the interesting thing
about state the the race and
wrongful what makes it really
cool that its nonpartisan is
that the voters so a lot of time
to get to pick between two
Republicans.
And so it allows that the the
entire city state is not going
to lex a Democrat but at least
the Democrats have a state in
which Republican is going to be
more and so I I really think
this is a concept that that we
need to even move the state to
our share of sin and other
elected positions we're so much
of the electorate is left out of
of these elections and so I
think especially down in my area
it be nice to pick which
Republican was going to be
instead of knowing that whether
Republicans government because
they're just gonna win and so I
I think that would be the
interesting part about the
nonpartisan aspect of it and and
I also wanted to clarify a
little bit too I mean it was
stated that that the majority
has selected these these
partisan judges but no statewide
not one party has the majority
registration yes they do perform
away but usually just because
there's only two candidates to
choose from and so I think this
would really open it up and I
think our elector it would
really appreciate us us doing
this and allowing them more
choice because having more
choices is always a good thing
when having elections especially
with judges so hopefully we can
support this get the first step
going and then work on the
legislation thank you Mr.
Thank you Senator for members of
the committee I do have a couple
of things real quick I.
Online I seven.
And a lot of.
I would simply suggest that we
strike the words at the general
election in each of those three
places.
The law still have the judges
elected of the general election
but it would give us the option
to talk about whether or not
judges should be elected.
at in the nonpartisan election
on the eve on the other number
here for in this even numbered
years and.
And I could see a scenario for
example remain decide that much
policy judges should be elected
on partisan years and different
judges and apologizes on the.
On the even numbered years or or
or or or having the the of the
appellate judges.
Of the leave a number of years
of the different judges on on on
number two years or for whatever
you would just give us the
option to have that conversation
student from that far that fast
is there any objection to that.
Very well we'll call the roll
and
Representative like I said this
would given what's in our
statutes approving this would
not change anything but it would
let us look at our fashion you
want to.
Yes.
Senator with this with that then
lead to yet another staggering
of of things that clearly not
for attention but for the
initial.
It is so yeah so if we were to
prove that would not meant
anything.
But I would allow us to the side
for example maybe them
Bernalillo county because we got
all the different judgments for
judges every single election
maybe one of them should be on
the regular local election one
of them should be on the.
General election.
Senator that would allow us to
take a look at that but would
not make that change back in the
control the legislature this
would be the easiest had a
collective gasp from the
judiciary around the state and.
Yeah and like I said if so let's
be clear.
Statutorily that would not
change it I understand the
subject thank.
This photo Senator Baca yes
Senator Duhigg.
Senator Lopez.
Senator Moores yes Senator T. C.
Pino yes Senator Pirtle yes
Senator Stewart.
Senator Wirth.
Center how to meal yes Senator
Ivey Soto yes ma'am.
Well so that is amended in those
three places.
and I don't think because we
already have the nonpartisan
elections process as provided by
law in their I don't think we
need to.
That means you mentioned.
although if there's some of that
we need to change the title of
the would be something along the
lines of the following
selections to stuff I'm all.
but I think we're okay with that
but I will do is that if
somebody else wants to reserve
concert response to the
initiatives that impact benefit
is that the next.
Is there any other I just.
Okay
I will I will I will tell you
all that
Judges often talk about their
role there unfortunate role
often times resolving disputes
between the political branches.
And that's how they referred to
the.
Legislative branch and the
executive branch.
And I would suggest to me that
the judges see themselves as.
Part of a non political branch.
Of government.
At that is how they see
themselves then perhaps that is
how they should be selected as
well I personally would like to
find a way.
To be honest I I would like that
is what we whether or not
subject to election.
About but I don't have the
proposal and I haven't figured
that out yet.
And so then the issue becomes a
how do we how do we then make
the elections as good as
possible we've got to
resolutions which don't
complexity to other this one and
senator survive this is that
we're getting here just a
moment.
And that I think both of them
pushes in that direction so
thank you for bringing this
thank you Mr and up for that for
drugs yes but we have more for
the past Senator.
Moores a second for the chair
and
also that somebody would get
service about us okay very good
portable Senator Baca yes
Senator Duhigg.
Senator Lopez.
Senator Moores yes Senator T. C.
Pino yes.
Senator Pirtle yes Senator
Stewart.
Senator Wirth.
Senator had a meal.
Senator Ivey Soto yes ma'am.
On a seven to three you have a
few passengers Committee
procedure thank you thank you I
just and also by the way if
Senator Bob.
We may want to take a look
whether make sense to combine
these to keep them separate
either way would be fine.
Usually yeah.
Well
so we now move.
Resolution three.
If we have.
That are provided to us.
Photo from the fourth.
Right.
Mr Chairman multi that that's
what it sounds like I was paying
rapt attention to the last
presentation and so sounds like
the committee.
Understand some of the issues
well.
Yes start so please proceed this
is I think your I.
These are maybe maybe
The the issue here is tied to
the last discussions in the
looking for their Senator Ortiz
Pino your comments and rants and
others.
This this legislation would
require that before a judge
stance further retention
election for the open attention
retention election which takes
place where it's an open it's
essentially it's an open
election every judges appointed
by governor has to stand for one
or two words of free for all
with anybody it's all it's all
comers helpful takers and then
we have to do that one time and
then after that it's effectively
to life appointment.
The representative I appreciate
your glass comments and we are
try to find ways take politics
out of the process of all funded
you think and talk a lot about
how we do that but this is
that's particularly important at
the appellate level I gotta tell
you remember the This bill
relates only to the appellate
levels of court appeals and
Supreme Court and.
There's but I find no
correlation with my between an
effective politician who can run
a statewide election and and
just the scholarship that's
required of the public core
level in the court of appeals
and Supreme Court and I can say
that I'm looking around the room
I run a statewide race you know
it's it's a grind it so it's a
great deal of work so
hypothetically here's what
happens right now if there's a
vacancy today on the court
appeals or Supreme Court the
governor would name a
replacement that individual was
stand for election this November
and then it would be of get a
free for all anybody can run
effectively for that race and
and then act there whoever
I suppose six seats in that
election this November
essentially sets for an eight
year term.
for for that office what this
bill does quite simply is
requires that the person who
stands for that vote election
have served a year on the bench
before they do so so for example
a vacancy that might be created
this summer this fall the
nomination gets put on the
ballot for November and once
they're done with that it's it's
over and that doesn't make sense
because frankly the only people
that are getting appointed then
get elected or are somebody who
are people who have hi state
name identification for who can
win a statewide race.
Once again in my mind so that
has no correlation at all to the
the competency of an appellate
judge the other thing that that
happens is because the judges
have to make that first
statewide run.
What inevitably occurs
understandably as they spend
their time running for statewide
office which is a tremendous
burden a tremendous expense in a
lot of work.
So the goal here is to have
judges sit on the bench you work
for a period of time before that
first election give give the
public a chance to evaluate them
on something more than just
partisan grounds and synergies
if you know your pointing out
the fact that you you don't know
these individuals and why would
you
but but the idea is to be able
to have the the lection with
somebody who has some time on
the bench.
The other thing that this
accomplishes is that right now
what happens is that the people
who apply for and take these
positions are oftentimes people
who who came very quickly move
from a private sector or public
sector really public sector job
introduce a pilot positions log
giving example of your private
practitioner and you get pointed
now today you with the fact that
we have to make the decision to
closure practice terminate your
employees so your assets your
equipment your furniture get out
of your lease advise all your
clients have to retain you
Council reassign all of your
files to somebody else on the
chance that you're gonna get
elected in November.
What happens we don't get those
people applying for these
positions we get what we get
these days are typically either
lower court judges who don't
have to do that for what we are
public defenders and district
attorneys are others of the
public sector to move very
quickly right back into their
job and again I'm not in any way
attempting to minimize that
experience for the importance of
those people serving on the
bench but were taken out of the
out of the realm of Canada's
those who are in private
practice very frankly and
particularly those who have
small private practices Senator
Duhigg imagine you know imagine
very Senator Wirth others
etcetera every sort of shut in
on our practice on the chance
we're gonna get reelected Center
Baca right imagine that and so
we we don't get those applicants
and and understandably so who's
going to take that appointment
on the chance you're gonna get
reelected all right front office
where we didn't have to set up
with this is that that's exactly
right in and of so so in any
event these are some of the
goals of this legislation we
were is very most of language in
there that you see other than
this.
Policy objectives just clean up
things were changing to gender
neutral terms and we're making
some consistency so that you see
some small technical tweaks but
but from a policy standpoint the
goal here is at least at the
appellate level to have
individuals untitled and have
the opportunity to serve for a
year or longer before they have
to stand for election and and
not put them to work to become
politicians immediately upon
their appointment Mr chairman
that's the bill
I hope it's not been six times I
don't think it's quite that many
but you see the before I don't
remember with you
Representative I think I have a
look what is giving Mr chairman
the example there was of this in
mind
very simple example of this
former senator Misia's who's a
friend and colleague but what
happened in that case is the
party had to fill a vacancy
another chat about vacancy
because the timing of the
appointment the election was
coming immediately and so the
parties Democratic Party county
committee met to name the person
on to take the judgeship right
so hyper political entirely
political we all have support
are really active on this side
of active in the Democratic
Party it is that the democratic
Central Committee of the county
who put the person on the ballot
to serve on the judgeship you
know and and so your your
politics at warp speed there so
I think whether we want to make
sure that the individuals who
serve on the Supreme Court
imagine that have have frankly
been through the nominating
committee ideally they've there
and people that have been passed
through nominating committee
process and ideally of proof of
the governor those are all good
things what the system we have
right now allows anybody who can
get the most votes to get on to
the Supreme Court.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you very much are there a
of.
there any comment from people in
the room the four against.
Very common.
Or against.
What we might.
The other one I something
promised people.
Okay we have a Jessica of malls
and.
as well as an.
I.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Jessica malls and and I'm the
campaign manager for the fair
courts initiative that common
cause New Mexico we think
Senator Cervantes for sponsoring
this bill we are in support of
this bill and believe it will
allow the electorate to be well
informed if you just will
behavior on the bench prior to
an election this information
will enable voters to make an
educated decision on retention
thank you for allowing me to
speak thank you very much
there's more of them
We we we missed your hand on the
last one.
The.
Yes are very good
so before we go to press for
committee I do want to clarify
something on this and later on
what.
Yeah I later on would have some
of.
Conforming from members but I
don't want to get ahead on that
yes but.
I would so this is to a proposal
then article six section thirty
five which is specific to the
public judges however if
everyone will plot the
constitution.
And look beginning on page
eighty five.
You'll see that on we have
section thirty six the next
section says there's created the
District Court judges nominating
committee very special does.
Each and every provision of
section thirty five.
But six this message shall apply
to the district judges not.
Just so the the rest of these
provisions towards timing of
elections in thirty five would
be required to district judges
if you turn the page to section
thirty seven.
The metropolitan judges
nominating committee there is
created the metropolitan for
judges nominated Committee
perfect policy for.
Each and every provisions of our
our section thirty five of
article Census prostitution
shall apply to the metropolitan
court judicial nominating
committee.
and then they just talk about a
couple changes in the committee
but not in the timing of
elections and so
I hope we can agree that this is
that this process member to pass
it would not apply only to
apologize.
It discusses amendment would
were to pass it would apply to
all judges who are appointed
that would stand later for
retention after the first
election.
Senator services so Senator I
could see that could
interpretation might be made at
I'm not sure that I would agree
that it's it's it's black or
white and I think a court
looking at that with with
perhaps say that there was a
very specific enactment here
related to only appellate courts
and that that was intended to be
by the legislature be specific
to a public courts and that that
would exempt it's more the more
general language that you're
reading from the other sections
regarding at the District Court
and appellate court for more Mr
courts but I hope to always be
consistent here my goal is not
have to have the courts
interpreting anything we do
appear my goal is to be clear
and what we write drafts of the
courts don't have to interpret
what we say and do anything you
know you know better than
anybody Senator Ivey Soto you
know we we you you been spring
court appointed time to talk
about what the legislature
intended by of legislation that
the court ultimately finds
unclear or ambiguous so so I I
agree with you that the better
solution would be to figure out
a way to make specific that this
is only intended for appellate
courts that the intention
clearly and I again I I think it
of the court reviewing this
would make that determination
would conclude this was very
clearly and only could be more
clear in the language of the
title that is intended to apply
only to public works but you're
right you do have language in
other courts it's every
provision of section thirty five
shall apply I don't know how
you.
Fix that easily without going
through every one of those other
two sections in the district
courts in the metro court the
state except for the you know
the election procedures of
adopted in Senate joint
resolution with three we can do
it that way and I and I probably
prefer to do it that way to to
make sure that we don't have
litigation okay well and and and
that is certainly something I
think we should talk about as to
what the scope of the should be
let me go to senator Wirth first
on that point and the center
Bob Huff on the resolution and
then we can return back to the
conversation etcetera thank you
Mr chair so I can't I guess I'd
like to know why you want to
limit it just to help judges
because I believe you carried
four was district judges well I
remember correctly and having
had a district the current
district judge was a partner of
mine I don't understand why
there is a difference between
the two quite frankly you know
switch gears and become a
district judge you're dealing
with all the same issues you're
given a practice it's all the
same things I guess I'm curious
why you just want to limit it to
a palace Susan where the rate in
the past I have done it more
broadly to all judges and I'm
open to that I agree with you I
agree how to percent the the
the center every sort of point
out I haven't been successful
this the past so I I try to
limit it to the more this
courts in in the reason for that
is because the the court appeals
and Supreme Court when they have
to run for election entrance
statewide which is I just got to
is is mind boggling to to expect
that appellate court judges
Supreme Court judge to be doing
their job and running a
statewide race at the same time
it helps a we should be Frank
about this it helps explain the
backlog there's a tremendous
backlog of cases in the court of
appeals in the Supreme Court
they've made some progress I'm
told with the court of appeals
but it's taking two three four
five six years to get through
our public court system and some
of that is explained by the fact
that we're expecting to be
running statewide races at the
same time we're expecting to
writing opinions and in doing
how it works of summer that's
the reason I had you know some
basis for the.
Narrowing it to the appellate
courts the District Court judges
as you pointed out would be a
good example to although they're
not running a statewide race but
but I I I don't disagree with
would be great for this apply to
them as well Mr chair I would
just say that I I will tell you
it's mind boggling for any judge
to be running.
You know even a district race I
mean this is that and again I
know because I'm a partner who
did it
I mean seem like to be a pretty
easy fix here just to leave the
word hello in the in the title.
And and again we seem based on
the language center I've still
to point out that that would
have attracted the other
sections and and I just.
I supported you when you did
this I remember distinctly the
debate in the Senate Judiciary
Committee thank you got through
the house I came to Senate
Judiciary Committee didn't come
out of the Senate Judiciary
Committee so again I I I that
would be my suggestion because I
I just think that having a one
year period for all point to
reasons makes makes a ton of
sense for for all our judges and
every level there's no
difference between the judges
and and so I would just be my
suggestion madam chair I would
consider that favorably with the
the I think it's a good point
and then you're fortunate
because your partner in your
example new the price come back
to a private practice you have
to shut down because you'd still
be there in his circumstance but
if you're you're right we're
we're we shouldn't make
politicians are judges and and
it I I would enjoy the
observation one of my colleagues
made earlier I think a center
pirtle were you go to if you go
with the judges running for
political office and they're
they're very clear I can't talk
about my position on any issue
or any potential case or
political philosophy but I'm
really great person and and look
at my dogs you know
but so we just so we end up let
the people with high name ID
frankly and and good political
connections are more.
No political skills Mr chair
does that work and then to make
sure this if you just leave the
word appellate from the title is
that get us there I mean so that
tracks the other sections on
that issue would that would get
us there I guess but let's let's
have someone special on before
we go there are we going to
survive I thank you Mr chairman
I was going to wait to comment
on that until we got to the
resolution itself but on this
point you know I I don't think
it necessarily does
would draw and the district and
magistrate judges you know to
read the constitution it says
the bears created the District
Court judges nominating
committee the magistrate
provision Rita denticle ever
each and every provision of
section thirty five article six
of the shell apply to district
judges nominating committee that
applies to the committee itself
Mr chair doesn't seem to me that
it it refers to the appointee it
just refers to the committee so
it are you really couldn't apply
each and every provision that's
in in thirty five in section
thirty five to the nominating
committee itself you can only it
seems to be a match that section
to what the nominating committee
is capable of and obviously
they're not the appointees
they're not the one running and
so how then does that apply to
the appointee I wouldn't think
it would ever think that
provisions separate that's just
you know I'm just offering an
alternate alternate
interpretation of what that
might be so I don't think it
because could drive and make
that.
That sort of amendment and I
think that we are drawing in the
district and magistrate judges
as well that distinction
certainly could be made by
by the Supreme Court or other
states would decide the
interpretation of of what
exactly we right here.
Thank you Mr chair other
comments on the resolution
locally I don't think very much
of.
By and this is one of these I
mean there's some of the parts
of this we can discuss and.
And maybe so that has has to go
through the committee process up
stairs as well as our the
process of the prince of the
Senate Judiciary for the next.
center doing says we'll go back
to the reserve for the whole of
provide technical suggestion I.
Thanks for thank you Mr chair
and thanks Senator for brains
and I I I agree with senator
Wirth to the extent that you're
talking a lot about that the
burden this places on judges
doing this also makes it a lot
easier for voters to be able to
appropriately assessed your
digital cameras again so
anything we can do to be able to
give them more opportunity to
informed decisions on to their
victims their judiciary is that
that that and so I would wait
anyway we go about it if the new
agency to to those other
questions I think with thank
yeah and and let me just say
that I
have this discussion I I've I
went back and re read thirty six
and thirty seven.
I think actually Senator Baca is
point is well taken probably
what we should do.
And we can do this and Judiciary
probably should do is to
especially incorporate section
thirty six and thirty seven and
just Adeline.
About the election process that
matches the the line direction
process for our state the
sections related to the
commission and the first
election channel line so that is
so that it's clear what we mean
and putting those into section
thirty six thirty seven correct
correct yes and so and so but
like I said we could prepare
that for
What this year and then the
other thing just to be
consistent with what we did on
the last one would also be that
I would suggest is that was
trying to work general so that
it would be I first of what is
also Fund tells the first.
Alexion following one year after
point probably as provided by
law.
All right and then and then that
way.
Of the gives us the option of
what we want to do.
and be consistent across the
board.
In terms of that but again
that's something that we could
bring into the.
The
the shares Committee and have
that discussion so that it's we
take our time with the
centerpiece panel I'm sorry
maybe Mr before recognize CENIC
on just that last point just
because I have a good
understanding if we strike the
word general is there a
potential that the thinking
would be that any other election
would trigger that one year deal
and I was with that include
local elections or other things
that's my only concern right and
that I want to make sure that we
say it's provided by law so that
is so it's clear that that that
is we're talking about of what
whatever it is it's a bi annual
election and as one control
thank you for.
So Mr Chairman but it would.
As I read the section thirty six
and thirty seven it doesn't
really specify anything about
have the situation that we're
dealing with here would be
covered by reference to thirty
five SO program will eight well
I understand that it does talk
about the district judges
nominating committee.
It also includes I think it's a
seal places mentioned have of
these other vacancies are dealt
with that and and I will tell
you Center party's been of that
is been the the general legal
and friends.
But if we're going to fix
something we might as well be
clear as we fix that.
and so particularly for making
the changes where there may be
some question about how that
change would be applied okay
yeah absolutely.
but I would but I was going to
rest of the course that they
should I think of light
alternative.
I so
Let's go to the resolution.
Although we may have but we're
gonna have a that puts.
Thank you Mr chairman thanks
Senator for again for bringing
this forward I think the other
issue that that I would see in
there would be
the name ID in in a sense this
kind of a further politicize is
the process in a way because Mr
chair you're providing an entire
year of name recognition towards
one candidate that would
appointed that would be
appointed and looking at the
make up of the commission the
commission consists of
individuals who are let's face
it political that are that are
not that are placing these
individuals on the list for the
nomination and so I I would you
know I I I I tend to like this
but in in a sense it almost
gives an unfair advantage to the
appointee to a further degree
than they already have because
now you have this individual
especially in smaller and
smaller if we're talking about
going to the magistrates and at
that level now we have a local
newspaper caring appointed
magistrate judge for an entire
year before the election the
election comes around so it
extends that time and my next
question all of which respond to
all of this is that you that is
if
If Mr chair they are elected in
and the require a a year to be
in that seat and during the time
frame of that year a general
election lapses are they in that
see now until the following
election so conceivably you can
have somebody in there on a six
year term or four year term
starting on here one and then
the general election occurs six
months later and now they are
kind of stuck in that sea of the
remainder of the term until the
following general election.
Mr chair if you could respond to
those okay so there's a couple
things Center first the first
your first point is that you're
thinking is there's an unfair
advantage by the appointment so
that cuts both ways if you're
poor judge and and your server
here then that time on the bench
is sort of the gives the point
that was made by Senator doing I
guess the voters an opportunity
to really evaluate the judge of
so yes you're going to get some
recognition by being in a going
to come in but you're gonna get
that anyway
even under the current system
you're still going to be an
incumbent and then the
difference is that you're going
to have a record when you run
for that one election to to run
on and so I I think that's
important to back to the an
informed electorate which is I
think the point center of doing
was making
your second point again etcetera
who was a little unclear to me
which is about how the terms
working and when you're coming
in a partial term and if you
look at the proposed a joint
resolution the of the language
the very last thing was that we
would be proposed to be added
would to strike the original
term and keep that the term of
based on the time of the
election itself so that what
what happens is right now we
have staggered positions and the
goal here is not to eliminate
that staggering in other words
if you're sick of you to be
reset every time somebody serves
at your goals and I selection
we're going to eliminate that
whole staggered terms the
scenario or or scheme that we
have in place now which is a
good thing so that's where that
language is their senators to
vote addresses your question and
your concern but that's the
that's the goal there and
and I'll just go give you back
to the the points we made about
should the supply district court
over probably what is the right
now we have a vacancy on the
third district Dona ana county
where I'm from judge more
retired at the end of the year
the judicial committee met on
January the nineteen nominating
committee they sent only one
name to the governor.
Understandably the governor
wanted to make a choice in the
committee commissioned and given
her choice of your so one name
so my understanding is she has
asked the commission to
reconvene and reconsider and
perhaps even take additional
applicants but realize with the
pressure that's happening right
now is there's a ballot that has
to be prepared and there's a
deadline I think it's March the
early March first week of March
or something like that.
Second to the March there's a
deadline from of so the governor
sent it back down the commission
has to re meet reconvene the
dean has put her together
nominations applications and so
with all of this is being driven
by this pressure of a deadline
for election it doesn't make a
sense we're we're rushing to to
put somebody in a in a bench
position that may hold for life
for the remainder of their lives
so I hope that answers your
question.
Five months but we in this case
that's right that's right but
but if they if they're appointed
now and they stand for
successful action in November of
this year there there were for
all practical purposes there
there for life it's so rare that
we ever hold a judge against a
retention I.
Handful and it's because it
requires a super majority number
one number two because there's
no opponent running against them
so you're you're right Senator
we should really be three
thinking the entire process of
which we we put judges together
and I'll just tell you to your
point earlier when I've heard
before the New York the only
argument I've ever heard against
this bill that has prevailed at
times is that we should make the
process more political that we
should go back to the system
where judges are always standing
for election it's always an open
election anybody can run and
that's the only argument that's
ever been advance and you're
right that's why we passed the
house and this behind the Senate
because some people believe and
I respect the belief I disagree
with that that that we should
have a free for all.
Thank you Mr chair I I guess I'm
still not clear on the terms
okay that federal giving example
Mr chair so all use a magistrate
simple down to Valencia County
magistrate came available of
approximately I think it was in
April prior to the last
presidential election Mr chair
and so there was an appointment
made to that magistrate position
of.
Being this resolution is that
that person would have had to
been there in their one year
which would place them passed to
the general election into the
next election cycle and that
that's my concern.
So you're right center by your
by your scenario if there was if
we were to expand this to all
judges which is that seems to be
the favor of the committee and I
support if we were to make this
applicables to the judging here
Maria the vacancy was in April
of twenty twenty and we require
them to serve at least one year
before they stand for election
and you're right they would
stand for election in twenty
twenty two now the the fact that
you're not giving me in your
scenario is when their term
would have normally expired in
other words what when that
vacancy came do where they at
the end of the term that year or
was it in the middle of a term
that up there right that term
expired with the presidential
elections so so it would of if
they had to stay and they
would've over and Mr chair the
that election and building into
the next term which is not the
same term that that person was
appointed to and so you're
saying that from what I
understand Mr chair you're
saying that the would be there.
Not not just to look through
twenty twenty one but now they
would be there almost three
years it sounds like I'm not
sure what the term is a
magistrate judge Senator Baca
Dino is a for for your for your.
For but for for you from all
directions for different paid
here for public and I will point
out that there's an issue that
we have to address in the past
are going to look at page four
line seven and eight.
You will see actually you raise
an insightful points you'll see
actually that they shall hold
office until the expiration of
the term data back to the time
of the election because that may
not be the results are you're
absolutely correct someone could
get appointed.
In the last year of a six year
term.
And that the one year would take
them into the next term.
That election then would be for
that next six year term.
As opposed to right now.
Their election maybe.
Baby for the last two years of a
term that to run again or could
be like it all depends how it
all falls but there is a
recognition of this that that
that the date of your
appointment and the date of your
election maybe different terms
of office.
You're correct about.
So under that scenario then
would that person be looking at
a four and approximately half
year term before they have to
actually run.
No that would not that if if I
if I if I may.
Senator Representative often so
so let's say let's say there's a
vacancy on the first year.
A four year term.
Then then that person what's R.
for for one year and to the next
general election which will at
four four year term will either
be than a mid term election.
Or would be at the end of that
term but they would not go past
that.
Now somebody is appointed in the
third year of a four year term.
Then they would end up going
past that and then they would
stand for a mid term election.
And then would have to stand for
election again so so so there's
there's no place where they get
a term and a half.
But there is a little bit of of
which tribe you're in at the
professional so they could
exceed just over somewhere
between two and three years on a
four year term correction of the
next election okay okay so that
that's the point I was trying to
make Mr chair is that someone
getting appointed under this
resolution could spend a good
long while in that position
before they potentially face in
the a true election not douses
the point I I would make and the
and I would say would be one
drawback for me but anyway
that's all I have Mister chair
thank you for answering my
questions madam chair Mr
chairman of the Senate just
because a good long while
nobody's ever going to serve
more than than the next election
cycle all right so that so very
good long while to you maybe two
years on the.
You know maybe I have to give
them access yeah that's right
the for the for this outside
possible.
Help our well
given that we know there's some
changes that need to be made
is there I think it may be
appropriate if it's okay that we
do have a motion for the rest.
From the committees of the
Fisher providing the changes of
the Fisher Committee have that
be the pleasure of the committee
but it is whatever the.
What are the most of the
committee.
Yeah Mr chair on I'm fine with
moving in with a do pass I mean
I think the concept here is good
and typically we you know
typically in the sixty day
session if we were sitting here
at this stage and say let's get
it fixed right here but because
of the timing I just think I
think you do get the sense of
where the committee is
so I'm happy to make a motion
for to pass I don't want to seem
like somehow we didn't support
this.
So that would be my sense much
for disaster Center works like a
presenter doing and
For what I will say that as it
suggested Senators Brandt and
course that they may want to get
together with you and we might
want to look at a committee set
up between the two or may not be
on chair on that point I would
suggest that you do think very
carefully about that these are
two very different issues and
hate to lose this by combining
the two so I don't know if it's
valid discussions but just that
would be my sense agree center
and and just so you know in
years past the judiciary is
support of this pretty strongly
and and I understand whether it
may not want to be here on this
because this would affect some
of the recent appointees
including those to the Supreme
Court so I can understand
whether gonna stay out of this
one but we've had former
justices just before I'm not
sure about the the preceding
legislation whether that would
have the same favor.
corporal Senator Baca yes
Senator Duhigg yeah.
Senator Lopez.
Senator Moores yes.
Senator T. C. Pino yes Senator
Pirtle.
Yes.
Senator Stewart yeah Senator
Wirth yes Senator had a meal yes
in center of the circle yes
ma'am on a ten zero zero to do
thank you Mr.
dispatcher was aware that the
Senate committees committee
supposed to be a live in thirty.
I have a long okay turn out for
the was I was going to this
group has failed to two of.
To a Monday but
okay very good that's a.
This one is
is it possible.
Five six.
Would be sufficient.
Yeah.
Okay very good the service is if
you can.
Senator Stewart please proceed.
Thank you Mr chairman I bring
you Senate Joint Memorial to it
is requesting our federal
government establish a national
biodiversity strategy with the
support of Congress it was
really fun to do this because I
have found out so many things
that New Mexico that I did not
know the for including that we
have about four thousand five
hundred eighty three known
species that's the fourth
highest of native species of any
state.
we actually have over a thousand
native bees in the state it's
more than all the other western
states come fine disinfecting.
We have a hundred sixteen
wildlife species that are state
listed as endangered or
threatened we have seventy
wildlife species that are on our
federally listed endangered
species act we have pollinators
native bees butterflies that are
in decline.
Studies show declines of sixty
to eighty percent and insect
population decline colluding
insect pollinators.
So course it's our our human
activities that are threatening
species extinction of causing
population sizes of wild species
to decline by an average of
sixty eight percent for mammals
birds fish amphibians and
reptiles putting the loss of
nearly three billion birds in
North America since nineteen
seventy so this memorial is
asking for a collaboration at a
global national regional state
and local scale we certainly
have many countries all over the
state that are doing much more
than we are they are part of
national conventions that
advocate I've got
just gonna mention a couple of
those.
I can find my email.
Yes so
But most of these citations that
I just said are from the
national international
statistics intergovernmental
science policy platform on
biodiversity and ecosystem
services.
so
New Mexico is just very unique
in this country for the amount
of species we have but we're in
trouble along with every other
state a with this basic die off
so this is a national diversity
strategy that we're calling for
and to set conservation and
restoration and biodiversity
goals for the US to protect our
wildlife and with that I'll
stand for questions.
I found this bill for gas.
Workers and president of New
Mexico cattle growers
we regretfully we understand
the intent of the sponsor.
Has been bringing this forward
currently we stand in opposition
to due to the language in terms
of the American people plans
New Mexico cattle growers
believe Mr chairman of our
natural resources we rely and
that biodiversity it's how we we
at gauge the health and use of
our.
Ranges all over the state.
We do believe that a blanket.
At level.
Of the conservation for or
species being declared
endangers.
Can cause significant issues to
those communities in the state
that revolve around economies
revolve around natural resources
such as that some of our rural
areas at this not only affects
our tax base our communities our
schools all of that we did ask.
Or if this resolution is for and
the same thing asked to so maybe
you want to introduce the
handheld water naturally.
That we do have a seat at the
table if this moves forward on
some of these comments thank you
for that have a very significant
issue to our industry as well as
our communities perfect example
of that is the Mexican gray
wolves in the southwestern part
of the state we experienced so
much loss due to that and a
large part of that is is
actually management of that
plan.
So thank you for your time
federal sort of and and the
processes this is your question
yes.
That so those of followers of
help level in seconds up
basically yes that.
That doesn't work for that is
that the IAD's falls all capital
do have produce methane
what has been discovered.
Is that last the population of
the cattle.
No actually grow to methane
cycle within the methane from
cattle is different from the
program because it stays in the
atmosphere profitable within
years back out of the atmosphere
and those in the school.
But like a green methane or
blue.
Right because.
Actual level of gallon
population increases which it
hasn't.
There's no increase in the
methane production from myself
for not thank you Mr chairman I
feel to tell you that I do have
an expert online from UNM so
when you're done with this if
you could call on him at peace
on this is professor Subhankar
Banerjee so professor of arts
and ecology at UNM do that'll.
Yes but.
Mr Chairman.
Members of the committee my name
is Ross corn and immediate past
president New Mexico what we're
we stand in opposition of the
Senate Joint.
Memorial two as well in New
Mexico federal government owns
thirty three point eight percent
of the lands and in my.
To be honest with you we we have
a chair they have issues
maintaining what they have now
if it wasn't for us that lease
these lands.
The wildlife would not be there
wouldn't be anyone we haven't
had any rain in the last ten
years we go we don't have any
any service for if it wasn't for
us going out on a daily basis
and making sure that our phones
have water removed there would
be no wildlife in a huge
majority of New Mexico.
Because of the.
Sorry there is a no speaking on
on behalf of America the
beautiful well there is no
constitutional or statutory
authority of the president or
the department of the interior.
With the department of
agriculture right federal agency
to set aside and permanently and
put a permit thirty percent
lands in New Mexico.
New Mexico ranchers and stewards
of the land one for state to
creating more federal land.
And rules and regulations will
only impact consumers it's going
to drive up the cost of our
living costs for food.
More or less get pushed out the
less we produced natural natural
us find then comes into play.
I thank you for your time and
for those reasons I
stand opposed to Senate Joint
Memorial.
Thank you Sir for comments
anybody else in the room anybody
on zoom of them the expert
witness.
So while you're working on that
Mr Chairman I respond to some of
things he said.
Let me go down the list real
quick and then I'll give you a
chance response.
Janko.
Can you hear me yes we can.
Okay good morning everybody
thank you for this opportunity
to speak thank you chairman
legislators
I speak with to have on one is
that I am the wildlife chair for
indivisible sos of Santa Fe New
Mexico we are an organization
that had a serviceable Santa Fe
County I happen to live in a
rural area.
Is as it and educator with the
state of New Mexico we support
this legislation.
that we support conserving
reducing and reversing the
threats to biodiversity.
Climate change loss of habitat
and pollution have impacted our
world in ways that we couldn't
even imagine.
the declines in any one of our
species affects all of them all
interconnected this is this with
Senator Stewart reference to the
bee population.
this is a memorial aligns with
Brianna Bivens national thirty
by thirty.
To conserve three percent land
and marine violence by twenty
thirty.
And I speak for the future
generations of all of my
students that would like to grow
up in the whole world with
biodiversity with lots of
wildlife and lots of fluoride.
All healthy
so thank you for your time
please vote yes for S. J. M.
number two.
Thank you.
Britney balance.
Hello can you hear me we can.
Create and Mr chairman pleasure
to be here in the committee
today in support of Senator
Stewart initiative I am sent to
my employer New Mexico while but
I'm also speaking on behalf of
my colleagues at the Rio Grande
chapter of the Sierra Club who
could make it here today as some
of the committee members now hi
and a khichdi wildlife biologist
and you may not know that that I
left my research professor
position at UNM to work in the
policy world because I was
exhausted by watching the
species that I studied become
increasingly threatened and that
is to New Mexico as well as
Senator Stewart noted where one
of us finding our seats in North
America the species are
extremely threatened by over
development and climate change
and I believe that they play a
role in New Mexico in our
economic and cultural
sustainable future as people
come here Lujan session bird
watcher what have you and this
memorial will help New Mexico in
long term planning so that we
have asked the stable future for
ourselves and that the monks and
happy to support.
Thank you for Fallon Brian
Burke.
Good morning Mr chairman I hope
you can hear me I'm here thank
you I am Ryan Stewart and
southwest program director for
defenders of wildlife and I'm
here today to represent our
seven thousand members and
activists in the state of New
Mexico on in favor of Senate
Joint Memorial to as you may or
may not know we are in the
middle of what some are calling
sixth mass extinction and
biodiversity and species in the
diverse species support all of
our economic religious spiritual
recreational basically
everything we know on earth is
supported by the web of life and
the diversity and I think it's
really important this point in
time the state go on record as
supporting a national
biodiversity strategies to
reverse this incredible
extension we're witnessing now
thank you very much for your
time Mr chairman thank you for
separated out of.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee thank you for the
opportunity and sorry I am in
opposition so I ate a lot I will
preceded my comments.
I don't go right ahead.
All right thank you like I said
if any Rivera registered
lobbyist for New Mexico farm and
livestock bureau thank you for
the opportunity to comment we
extended respectful opposition
this morning
the America the beautiful plan
as well as the proposal poses
many concerns for the
agricultural community
we request that we work
collectively to ensure that
when working with these types of
goals are lands continue to
remain working lands we have to
make sure that we are
approaching these types of
things for a conservation
approach and not from a
protectionist approach so that
our producers can stay on the
line into that we can continue
to manage for beneficial use and
continue to produce food so
thank you for the opportunity
this morning.
Thank you very much Mister Vera
Jessica Johnson.
And.
Good morning Mr chair and
members of the committee this is
Jessica Johnson I am the chief
government affairs officer for
animal protection voters and
animal protection New Mexico
thank you for the opportunity to
speak in support of this measure
the drivers of biodiversity loss
especially habitat loss and
climate change affect the
welfare of animals as well as
the people who care about and
care for their animals and we
see it every day first hand
whether it's families reaching
out to us for financial
assistance when they can no
longer afford to feed their
animals due to the skyrocketing
hate prices caused by the
drought or someone who calls us
about starving wildlife that no
longer have for ages food supply
in their area or simply watching
our landscapes changed
dramatically as keystone species
populations deteriorate we also
recognize the big picture that
our entire ecosystem needs
protection to ensure that
everyone has equitable access to
healthy and clean land and water
that's needed to sustain all
life in the future so we
respectfully ask for your
support your support for SJM to
to issue a strong call to action
to the federal government for
collaboration and solutions
thank you thank you Mr Greg
Peters.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Greg Peters senior advocate
for lands water and wildlife
conservation voters New Mexico
you can support us Joint
Memorial to.
I'm a changing habitat loss
affects life in global scales
across systems it is a special
concern areas such as New Mexico
that are disproportionately rich
biological diversity and units
Senator Stewart noted however
with the changing climate and
over development this
biodiversity is being threatened
at an unprecedented rate this
loss all disproportionately
affects communities of color low
income and tribal communities in
other populations that rely on
nature for such a service.
These reasons and many others
mentioned by other testimonies
it is essential to establish a
coordinated and comprehensive
national responsible protecting
marketers miss more will call on
Congress yes that.
Will I ever see strategy would
be in line with governor Lujan
persons executive order to
protect Mexico's land's
watersheds wildlife which echoes
the fighting ministrations more
national call to action for a
wide range of stakeholders
including impacted communities
private landowners soft nations
to work collaboratively to
conserve restore the lands
waters and wildlife sports
estimation strategy would also
promote sustainable job creation
by funding system programs that
best conservation invasive
species control renewable energy
infrastructure the Princeton
activity for a while.
We respectfully urge G. passable
for SJM to grateful for the
opportunity to provide content.
I think the fares tailoring its.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Taylor regions and I speak on
behalf of my family and myself
ranch in one of the B. County.
As a rancher in a land steward I
oppose the state and to due to
lack of scientific evidence that
supports the president's Brianna
Bivens goal of conserving thirty
percent of US land and water
under the America the beautiful
initiative.
In New Mexico the federal
government currently owns just
over twenty six million acres of
land and they have significant
issues with maintaining it
instead they depend on producers
who lease land for their
expertise and stewardship of
land livestock and wildlife.
Natural and undisturbed state
lands are highly susceptible to
wildfires insect infestation and
disease which is degrading to
both the natural and human
environment designating land is
not sure it's preservation.
New Mexico ranchers are the
original conservationists and
are critical components to
biodiverse environments our
presence an intentional
management decisions ensure
varieties of animals grasses and
water resources thrive.
In addition we follow strategies
and protections in effect under
the Endangered Species Act to
take action to protect
threatened danger and that was
easy for their employment or
speak and and we take that very
seriously these reasons my
family and I stand in opposition
thank you for your time.
Thank you very much this
rigorous that is the the extent
of the public comment that we
have the senator just so we know
that you do have a an expert
witness available what is the
name drugs for what a second.
The
a professor cent higher Banerjee
but okay I thought we were out
of.
Will not that's okay the the I
just want to make sure K.
anybody have any questions that
we knew that you an expert
witness thank you to go in that
direction in the meantime what
is the point of this committee
this time.
Senator.
All
the best okay very well so I'm
not for the past from thirties
if you know second from Senator
Duhigg.
is there any further discussion
from the committee I will I will
simply note before we go to the
vote that that what we're asking
for.
And this is for those that would
like to have a table this is not
that the state level.
We would be saying who just sit
at the table this is simply just
calling on the federal
government to do something.
On a on a broader scale.
Yes Mr chairman we're not asking
for any more species to be
listed as in danger we're not
asking we're not forcing the
thirty by thirty that's
voluntary says about
conservation agriculture will
flourish if we save our wildlife
and our have bio diversity okay
very good so with that
convocation then if there's
nothing else for the committee
the clerk to call the roll
Senator Duhigg yes Senator
Lopez.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino this and
like this we move Senator
Stewart yes Senator Wirth yes
Senator had a meal yes Senator
Ivey Soto yes ma'am seven two
zero on the memorial and Senator
Ortiz pitted explains a real
briefly Mr chairman I'm
currently reading a book that
I'd like to recommend to
everybody called ratings we just
it's a it's a
There is a stories based on the
work of a woman who is a native
American who became the Ph.D I
miss work with plants and
different species of animals as
well and and is incorporating
inner philosophy and and and her
view of the world both the
indigenous wisdom and scientific
knowledge and and it it really
does make very clear that was
being asked for in this in this
memorial is precisely what we
need if we're going to sustain
life on this planet human life
on this planet we need those
animals in those plants we can't
just rely on kind of and she
thank you.
Thank you very much thank you
