Yes here.
Madam chair did you get that
know how we are online yeah
okay.
Right thank you well good
morning everyone I thank you for
your patience while we're
getting a quorum we're gonna be
doing.
the confirmations on.
The for the UNM board of regents
first off this morning and we're
gonna be doing all three at the
same time so of the.
Sanchez will go first and
Senator Wirth if if you would
begin with admiral thank.
Right thank you madam chair good
morning everyone
I am.
Smiling this morning to see my
good friend that are good for
and Senator admiral paying up
for nomination to the board of
regents of the university New
Mexico this appointment is
pursuant to a Senate executive
message number nine issued on
March fourth by the governor and
it's an appointment for position
to the board
beginning upon confirmation
through the end of December
twenty twenty six so it is a.
A good term and Senator pain is
stepping up yet again
we of course
For many many years had the
great privilege of serving with
him here in the legislature I
actually go even farther back
with the Senator pain he and I
were.
Last minutes at the University
of New Mexico School of Law and
good friends many years ago so
it was particularly fun to to
have the chance to serve with
him in leadership on both sides
in the Senate we really you know
do work collaborative Lee in the
Senate and senator Payne was a
huge part of that he was raised
in Albuquerque and has both
undergraduate and graduate
degrees from the university of
New Mexico so perfectly
appropriate as he worked his way
through an extraordinary career
to come full circle back to you
in and entered the navy in
nineteen seventy five and during
his first eleven years of active
duty service up in the
underwater demolition team
eleven seal team one the United
States Naval Academy the joint
chiefs of staff the naval
special warfare unit one he also
was sent by the navy to
Georgetown we're hearing the
masters in governments and a
certificate in national security
studies came back to Albuquerque
in nineteen eighty six we both
started law school together in
nineteen eighty seven and
graduated in nineteen ninety at
law school we also both service
editors on the the natural
resources journal so I forgotten
that tell I saw his resume.
So certainly an incredible Mabel
career then back to law school
where he was licensed to
practice law and then ran for
the Senate's I in nineteen
ninety six and for many many
years was ranking member of the
Judiciary Committee served as
minority whip for twelve years
and just.
You know thinking back to his.
His good bye from the Senate
last year I think there was
real friendship and recognition
for the extraordinary service
that he has done to our country
to our state and now of course
is stepping up again and
German Lopez I think is in a
different committee but she
always and Center pain or member
that she always goes out of her
way to thank people for being
willing to serve.
Just one final thing bill is
married to the extraordinary
Deborah Payne who is a retired
commander in the U. S. navy and
retired manager at Sandia
national labs members of the
rules committee I am.
Again incredibly honored to
present to you my good friend
our good friend Senator admiral
Bill pain for appointment to the
UNM board of regents and I
really appreciate the governor.
Kind of making this appointment
so with that says senator Payne
the floor is all yours.
Well thank you Senator Wirth and
you know I appreciate that very
kind introduction and you know
I've been a lifelong Lobo and I
used to tell people you know
whenever I was overseas I spent
many years overseas.
Everybody.
I dealt with our own live with
was worried about how their home
schools were doing and they
always look at the athletic
department's I don't care where
you went to school everybody
always looks back and say how
are my Lobo's doing our our my
whatever's doing and and I never
lost touch UNM because there was
always some good news somewhere
out there were everywhere in the
world about your all modern
going on and then it always
tweet your interest and
everything else so I I really
appreciate the opportunity to
come back as a region I know
there some difficult times but
your name isn't the only
university facing difficult
times there's a national trend
both the demographic trend and
you know the the pandemic
certainly is affected every
school on the athletic
department's everywhere not just
you and amber facing
difficulties the health Science
Center obviously keeping the
funding and research grants
going there is tough the
academics UNM's in our one
research institution and
certainly I'm aware of the grant
money that is brought into the
university from outside for
research projects so there's a
plethora of issues that are
facing the university but I
don't think they're insoluble
and I think there's been some
consistency in the leadership
now some stability that hasn't
always been there and pass on
I'm very much looking forward FY
if confirmed to working with the
administration to help them with
their issues and do what I can
to influence on both the the
provided a import to the
university as well as the
broader community support for
the institutions so I thank
senator Wirth for the
introduction I thank you all for
listening to me today.
Thank you thank you senator
Wirth US senator Neville to
introduce our Jack Fortner.
Thank you madam chair
I got to trying to do the math
while ago and I guess I've known
this guy something like pushing
forty years sometime back in the
eighties we got together some of
the civic organization so I've
known Jack Fortner for a long
time I've been training him all
those years and he's a slow
learner but
He's he's coming along I think
maybe he can he can do a good
job as region to give you a
quick background on Jack Jack is
a or she's a local he's a
graduate of.
You any back in nineteen seventy
eight with a major in political
science minor in psychology in
psychology and then he attended
law school university of
Michigan where he graduated in
nineteen eighty one is early
jobs were wins set there back in
eighty one to eighty three it
appears there are no other
couple years in the governor in
Anders after that he came to
Farmington who joined the firm
of.
Local firm there I entailing
Fortner to and then together and
then after that he went out
pretty much on his own with
other associates so and he's had
his own practice of since then
Jackson served on the board of
regents previously he was first
appointed I believe in the Gary
Johnson has served terms under
other governors as well since
then including recently governor
Martinez the object
when I first got into politics
back in the county commission
days back in ninety six of when
we ran and we served that first
two terms check came back later
and served as county
commissioner and he just
finished his term I think the
he's so.
I guess that gives total sixteen
years on the county commission
and then pretty much about that
many of the board of regents as
well in the past so remember
more than that maybe so anyway
Jack very accomplished the local
person from Farmington New
Mexico his wife Jerry I think
was with the mobile arm talking
and Terry has succeeded him on
the county commission and I hope
that she can correct some of the
things that Jack messed up so
with that I'll turn it over to
Jack and you can make a few
comments as well.
There are yes thank you Senator
okay thank you.
Thank you senator Neville I'm
nose Mr Senator Neville I served
on the county commission
together years ago.
And I'm trying to well enough
that he was able to become a
senator and
I know it's hard for him to say
nice things about me sometime
because we always seem to be
he's an ad in a local I think
that says enough.
I grew up in Farmington my
family owns a Mexican restaurant
here and I grew up working in
the restaurant my mother's the
forced a first generation born
American both her parents were
born my grandparents were born
in Mexico my mother dropped out
of high school as a sophomore in
high school and then began
working in the restaurant
industry my mother is eighty
five my uncle operational law is
eighty three and they still work
in the restaurant and they the
one thing that my mother taught
me was a strong work ethic and
the value of education.
And so I went to university in
Mexico and then went to law
school.
And do the guide Education I
have two daughters of both of
them have undergraduate and
graduate reach university Mexico
my wife after we got read went
back and got two more degrees
one at university Mexico in one
Mexico state and she's a
psychiatric nurse practitioner
in a senator Neville said.
she succeeded then the county
commission and she's now the
smart Commission Fortner as
opposed to the funny
Commission for
but so I I learned the value of
education one of the reasons I
enjoy be on the board of regents
so much is to help students not
all not only from San Juan
County all over New Mexico
however grown Farmington I know
often of the difficulties that
native Americans have leaving
home tenants University
and so my wife and I reach out
to students sometimes we
actually
For students who are trying to
apply to be a in the program my
wife tutors people that she's
actually a nursing instructor up
here also at San Juan college.
And we know the value of
education I love you and I'd
love the opportunity to serve a
fourth term I believe her on I
think I'm the only reason to
ever have been appointed by
three different governors now
hopefully fourth and wholesale
be confirmed
like senator Payne said I'm very
much aware of the post pandemic
universally in the challenges of
they'll be fine they'll be
facing.
You know and again you know I
don't I was on the health
sciences committee for twelve
years very familiar with without
the health Science Center
athletics with Popejoy what we
call the porches to the
university for the outside
community and I'd like to
continue to put my efforts and
and and continue to make UNM a
great universe and not ask for
your support thank you.
Thank you Mr Furner thank you
senator Neville Senator Sedillo
Lopez to introduce Randy Mexico.
Thank you it is my great
pleasure to introduce Randy
Mexico he grew up in my district
and he is such an example of of
what we can produce here in the
state of New Mexico he is
parents are first generation
immigrants and he got his MD and
PhD in is a PhD candidate at the
university of New Mexico he has
also gotten his bachelor of
science in biochemistry at UNM
and and he did that while he was
getting his bachelor of arts in
east Asian Studies with the
chemistry minor this is she is
an extraordinarily an
extraordinary individual he's
one of fifty recipients of the
bear what Barry Goldwater
scholarship from UNM since
nineteen eighty six
he's received it was of course
the UNM presidential scholar he
was the Chinese culture and
language club president
and he has published at the at
his young age he has many
publications already this is a
young man who is just started
stellar career and I can hardly
wait to see where he's going.
And on a personal level his
parents operated a restaurant
one of the first Chinese
restaurants in Albuquerque and
that restaurant his as been in
in service in the district for
twenty seven years host pose
restaurant and I'm I'm just so
proud of everything he's
accomplished and I should also
mention he's a graduate of
Albuquerque high school which
isn't in my district hi lenses
but we forgive him for that
he is I I he's just
extraordinary in the short time
that I've gotten to know him the
size introduce jam he is such a
delight to work with and the
contributions you will make to
the regions I'm especially in
the area because of his
experience in the medical
medical field as well has a
cultural studies field like
Chinese studies is going to
really and rich the board of
regents and with that I'm just
delighted to introduce Mr Randi
Thank you Senator Sedillo Lopez
for your time sponsoring my
nomination for the kind
introduction good morning Mr
chairman members of the
committee so I was born and
raised here in New Mexico
specifically in Albuquerque I
seen a couple family businesses
now my family's owned owned a
Chinese restaurant in town for
twenty seven years in
Albuquerque right now all we
only teach up on the west side
and so my parents did not go to
college I'm a first generation
college student however my
brother attended the pharmacy
school at UNM and he's working
hard to the pandemic and along
with my sister who is updated
and Seattle now.
And so.
To be a quadruple Lobo I just
realized I got past years in
science in biochemistry advice
of arts in east Asian Studies
specifically Chinese I learnt
just learned Mandarin in college
we predominantly speak Cantonese
at home which is the Chinese
dialect in southeastern China
and Hong Kong
so as an undergraduate a serves
as an ECM Senator on various
committees such as the finance
committee student publications
and the student the review board
by the same time I worked at the
UNM cancer research facility
researching pathways for male
and to self resolvable melanoma
and.
Along with that I I worked at
city national laboratories with
the global by risk management
curriculum and I also
transferred to the center for
integrated nanotechnologies
where I worked under doctor
George Bush signed
mainly with biomolecular motors.
And so this led me to my path as
an MD PhD student at the UNM
School medicine and I tend to
medical school with my wife
except I just I've heard it into
my PhD program we just completed
the first two years medical
school together and she's off to
our third year and we both hope
to practice in New Mexico at the
end of the day and.
As a graduate student I served
on the U. N. M. learning
environment office committee and
specifically the race and
ethnicity based mistreatment
subcommittee along with the UNM
School medicine curriculum
committee and so what I
understand the role of the board
of regents I feel that we should
operate at a birds eye view one
policy and strategic planning
budgeting and offering general
advice for the direction of the
university we're not really
involved in the day to day
university administrative roles
they do a great job at that and
we're here to support that and
so specifically specifically me
as a student I know I need to
serve as an advocate for
students I'm the one that goes
on campus every day and listens
to the constituents of my
students and speaks with student
leaders and bring that
perspective to the board of
regents and and it's important
that I feel that being on the
board of regents I want students
to see the needs of the
community so that we can have a
retention of the workforce here
in New Mexico thank you.
Thank you Mr ko thank you
senator and just like our chairs
axle in the back of it and thank
you thank you thank you thank
you thank you thank you thank
you thank you thank you thank
you thank you thank you thank
you thank you thank you thank
you thank you thank you.
Anyone else here the chair thank
you no it's on a loop course
thank you notes over and over
again.
Thank you thank you thank you
thank you which I appreciate and
thank us much.
Thank you thank you.
Thank you thank you thank you
thank you thank you thank you
thank you.
The chair is is figuring that
out
let's begin with it Miss Vigil
is that heard public comment for
a real pain.
Yes madam chair there is we're
gonna allow marks of Asia Max
the Baca and I'm I'm thinking of
local tell is here to speak on
behalf of Senator pain as well
so with.
Madam chair just a question are
are we going to do public
comment for each individually or
all three of them together.
you know I think.
That's a good question
the I think we can we can do all
three together since we're doing
all right otherwise thank you
thank you.
It is we are.
So Miss Vigil yes let's let's go
ahead and and let everyone and.
I guess for public comments for.
For all right okay madam madam
chair will start with marks of
Asia.
Okay good morning Mr chairman
members the committee marks of
federal and I'm I got a little
late so I believe were asking
for supporting universe New
Mexico regents that correct and
I'm I'm here specially support
to more on a personal note it's
region border Jack Fortner I
worked with him at UNM since two
thousand six and was able to
work under his leadership and
good to know we terms of films
we is is is immersed in New
Mexico and also just in terms of
how much the government students
at the university Mexico and I
just use
really region and help continue
to be a great reason so I just
want to send support of Jack
Warner for your region senator
bill Payne admitted paying I
have known him probably not
working in state government and
so he's always been some of a
mentor always been great in
terms of has access being
available in terms of his his
leadership and just how we went
about building a Senator was
always just incredible
discretion and he was always
willing to listen and
everything and and then just
always make the right decisions
and I think he's also going to
be just incredible regents
university Mexico and so I want
to thank the governor for
bringing these thank you for the
Sanchez and I can tell you in
terms of what solid people that
you have being recommended to be
regions so with that I just and
status for both these gentlemen
to be regions and course the
student I don't know but I just
working here in New good luck
and there's anything that I can
do to help please feel free to
reach out thank you.
Thank you for.
Thank you mark Mr speaker since
you have the the list and I
don't all all let you just call
people up as of the sitting in
my chair madam chair next we
have next.
Okay good morning madam chair
and members of the rules
committee down rules committee
I'm in support of Senator pain
I'd work with him over the last
decade or so he is such a
statement such a wonderful and
intelligent person and I think
he'll be a wonderful act to the
border regions of the universe
New Mexico and I've had
interactions with the with the
Mr farmer again wonderful
qualified and I think the
governor for more support for
nominating the staff find it the
gentleman and I won't take too
much time because I know you got
a large dinner thank you.
And madam chair I believe Mr
Otero are you here to speak on
behalf of any of these
companies.
Yes I am can you hear me yes.
Right thank you madam chair
members of the rules committee
you know one of the pleasures
and honors at dean Santa Fe and
lobby for over thirty years
every now and then I get to.
Learn some words of support in
the rules committee for
confirmations and today I'm very
honored and pleased to to say
some words on behalf of our good
friend bill paying.
He and I have known each other
since he came to the legislature
we have continued to be friends
our family friends and that that
will always go on but one thing
that I can tell you committee
members and that you already
probably know but I'm gonna re
iterated is that Senator paying
adult paying is his love is for
you and and and New Mexico so
he's going to give everything he
can as he always has to this so
I think you senator Wirth I
thank you members of the
committee the madam chair for
allowing me to speak on behalf
of my good friend bill pay.
You madam chair I believe that
everyone for Senator pain with
us so next for Mr Fortner in
support.
We have a Rick Tetro.
Well good morning Committee her.
We can hear you okay madam chair
members of the rules committee
good morning it's.
And it's a pleasure to see you
guys I wish I could have seen a
lot more
but we know what we've been
dealing with but it's always a
pleasure to see you all and it's
real pleasure to be here today
to speak on behalf of.
Well I'm here to speak on that
project Fortner but as soon as I
saw a group rate was on this I
was wondering if I could switch
my support of them all.
It's a pleasure to see one here
and seen in over here and you
talk about one of my favorite
people over there in the Senate
it's just a pleasure to see you
but I will get back to the
pleasures of knowing for.
I'm Jeff were law partners
together we've known each other
for over twenty years now
he likes to tell people that he
fired me on December thirty
first two thousand eight.
And he says it's because I got a
job as district attorney the
next day but I'd like to point
out that he wrongfully
terminated me and so you'll
remember that one when this when
the lawsuit comes up.
But I'm.
Is an incredible guy you have
for those of you that know on
you know where his heart lies in
that life.
We love to share stories about
going to school at UNM even
though I was many years.
Later at UNM we always have some
great time sharing the stories
but I will tell you this is for
just lies there with the locals
and so it's a pleasure to see
that our government has made
this appointments Jack has never
been a disappointment for UNM
and all the years he has served
as a commissioner and I
guarantee he will continue to
continue to serve as a local
arts integrate commissioner
Steven and I stayed up all night
last night coming up with the
pros and cons of why Jack would
be a great commissioner and you
know we started we were once
listed as you can see
We'll see you know we have all
these funds was come up with
some programs and so we came up
with some pros.
And this is what he still has
his hair so
Those ballots out so Jack I'm
glad to see you're on here
members of the committee.
Of the strongly stand in support
of Jack returning to the
region's.
I'm proud to call him a friend
and with that I would just
simply say thank you to all of
you thank you for this
opportunity and the and the
confirmation of Jack.
And.
All right if that was Ivey Soto
that was being the thank yous
that's the most thank you as
I've ever heard from from
Senator Ivy Soto ever in my life
so you're welcome those were
directed at me and I appreciate
Senator but.
I really would like to stand
here and strong supporter Jareth
rejoining the regents at UNM and
thank you for your time.
And madam chair Mister chair we
have Cheryl Willman.
Good morning everyone can you
hear me I'm Dr Cheryl and I'm
director and CEO of the UNM
comprehensive cancer center
madam chair Lopez and members of
the committee it's a pleasure to
see you this morning I'm here as
well Center to support senator
Novell's nomination and speak
obviously in support of Jack
Fortner but like everyone else
I'd first like to congratulate
and real pain for his nomination
I know will be a tremendous
region at UNM and Dr ho who I
know as you can all see from his
testimony and nomination will be
an absolutely outstanding
student region at UNM so welcome
Dr and and Senator paint but
turning to Jack Fortner we all
know and love Jack it is he said
I think you will be the first
UNM regent who has been
appointed by for governors for
his fourth term and I got to
know Jack Fortner very closely
in his wife Terry as he did such
a wonderful job leading the
region's health Science Center
committee for so many years I'm
helping build the UNM cancer
center at the UNM health
sciences center our health
systems statewide focused on all
of the challenges and
opportunities of our missions
including delivering great care
to all The New Mexicans we serve
our research missions are
education and training missions
and our engagement missions
around the state Jack is an
honorable man with great
integrity like the other
nominees and I can attest that
all of the physicians scientists
faculty and staff at UNM
standard very strong support of
his nomination so Jack I play
that straight know jokes I think
you deserve that for me
congratulate sure.
And Mr chair next we have Paul
Roth.
Can you and mute and you can go
ahead and proceed.
Can everyone hear me okay.
Wonderful but Mr chair of.
And vice chair do hit members of
the committee.
my name is Paul Ross and it's
great to at least virtually see
all of you again.
It was a delight to see that
admiral pain.
Is also being recommended.
For regent at the university
he will be he will make a an
outstanding regions and of
course Randy Mexico.
Is a student that I've gotten to
know and and he'll like why
should be extraordinarily
valuable member of the board.
as as folks have already
mentioned
Jack has I think he is either
the longest or one of the
longest serving regions in the
history of the university around
eighteen years.
In all during that time I had
the privilege of working with
them very very closely.
I got to know him very well and
as long along with his wife
Terry and two daughters.
And I can say that goes through
all the years I have served in a
leadership position prior to my
retirement last year Jack stands
out as one of our great regions
while on the board of regents in
his role as its president.
He helps set very important
strategic directions for you on
M. as has already been mentioned
his his love of the university
has always been evident.
And in his considerations and
decisions for the future of our
great university that's been a
prominent.
Aspect of of Jack's role.
in that respect he was both an
advocate for the institution but
at the same time he demanded
excellent performance and
accountability of its leaders
which is another important role
for members of the board of
regents he conducted himself
always with the utmost integrity
and professionalism and so I am
extraordinarily enthusiastic and
honored to speak then on behalf
and in support of Jack Fortner
is nomination for U. N. M.
region thank.
Thank you all.
Mr chair and madam chair next we
have someone representing the
United graduate workers of UNM
and they are in opposition to
this appointment.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the Senate rules
committee my name is Lindsay
around and I am a PhD student
and teaching assistant at the
university of New Mexico I
propose the appointment of Jack
Fortner has been a detrimental
influence on U. N. M. and has
previously stepped down as
regent after ethics violations.
His appointment represents a
lack of oversight and concern
for the well being of the
institution and the students it
serves.
Regarding all the nominees for
U. N. M. region I urge our
senators to consider the
importance of workers rights in
the future of our university and
ensure that we're confirming
regents will protect the rights
of all workers including
graduate workers.
What is a public university the
right to graduate workers to
collectively bargain in good
faith with their employers must
be upheld the board of regents
and UNM administration denying
their employees this rate would
not just be an injustice to over
fifteen hundred public employees
but to the rights of all labors
in New Mexico as a graduate
worker voter and member of the
UNM community I want to make
sure that we're confirming
nominees who are ready to advise
the university to bargain with
the graduate workers to improve
low wages health care benefits
and working conditions I urge
our senators to ensure we are
confirming UNM regions that will
take action to address long
standing issues of low stipends
for graduate workers and ensure
UNM is competitive with peer
institutions with regards to
graduate worker pay and benefits
is important to know where these
appointed officials stand on
advocating and looking graduate
employees international students
and all marginalized members of
the UNM community thank you for
allowing me the opportunity to
comment today.
Thank you senator Morris.
Are are we ready for questions
Mr chairman chair.
The committee ready Senator no I
I think we are still on public
comment yeah so I thought.
So madam chair next we have
NIKIL ready the group to speak
on behalf of Randy come.
Good morning everyone and thank
you madam chair and members of
the committee for the
opportunity my name is a new
case for the Nagu and the
president of graduate and
Spencer and Association GPS in
I'm here in support of a student
isn't nominated Mr Randy go and
grantees an amazing candidate to
so as a list with inclusion and
he has he has being a student at
UNM throughout Houston was to
have an education and he was
involved in many extracurricular
activities since he joined UNM
but that doesn't seem to sixteen
classroom and he also ran for is
to in the president's office
during his undergrad with them
even though she was not able to
secure the this bus his
commitment and and and his
condition to while the media's
strategic programs at UNM late
certain publications board at
SFI board shows that he's
committed to so students no
matter what office that he may
have.
As a medical students Yeltsin it
is to inject programs as the of
the US members mentioned and I'm
she's expedience or far makes
then ideal candidate to serve us
at SS to inclusion and she knows
the life of of the a local board
that's an undergraduate and
graduate and which is very
important
and I believe she's one of the
building and of important value
to the board of regents team and
also his nomination without the
help us as GPS it to reach out
more to north campus students
who are what a new wave of
distracted from GPS is
involvement by including that's
going on and encouraging them to
get more benefit out of us and
also encouraging them to.
GPS offices and it gives us some
under the of opportunity and if
they are under the a point for
GPS it to advocate and and and
to encourage the students on our
campus which we are really they
looking on and and thanks for
the opportunity and I hope what
I do COVID appointed SLO
students using thank you for the
opportunity.
Thank you madam chair next we
have sunny Christopher Keene.
Conference and while he was an
issue with them Senator and I
let a student organization I
turned to him several times when
students came to me with an idea
or an issue and so I was elated
to learn that he was being
nominated for student region
because in each of those
instances and among many others
I've I've always been impressed
and frankly inspired by his work
ethic he's is dedication and his
compassion for those around him
and humanity overall.
The quintessential public
servant and I can say without
reservation that I believe he is
not just the right person for
the position of student regent
but someone who will honor the
responsibilities of that office
and utilize its privileges to
the benefit of both UNM as an
institution at and to the
students on this campus is
across the state.
And and since of course that
position you know the student
region will have its its own
unique challenges and tough
choices again this is a post
pandemic world and education is
is going to go through some
changes no and no person can be
expected to know everything what
makes me confident and
enthusiastic about my support
for PED is my assessment of his
his character his experience in
his judgment on his experiences
I think just looking at his
resume it it speaks more than I
can say
but he understands the
undergraduate and graduate
students struggles and
opportunities because he's been
through
and with each of those
experiences I've I've seen him
go above and beyond his own
course work which you know he is
he is an over achiever by by
every state by every measure and
and so you know even even with
his own course for going beyond
that to to actually try and and
support his contemporaries and
and the university in both of
his his undergraduate graduate
student capacities.
And no his character I can see
you know in every instance where
I work with him she has
consistently displayed a
dedication to integrating and
uplifting the voices of everyone
involved in a given matter and
he always does so in a way that
both fosters inclusivity without
losing sight of the best
possible solution and in fact
finding the latter is as a
result of the former and so he I
think he really understands that
the value in the in the power of
inclusivity decision making and
finally on his judgment she I've
had many conversations with him
philosophical worldly policy
wise and and in she has a
distinct ability to see the
bigger picture.
And and this is important
because there are a lot of long
term factors associated with the
decisions that student regents
and boards are a regents of make
that affect the university which
in turn because of the the
profound effect education
affects the state and so he's
also demonstrated that the the
courage to act on what is right
and that's important
Even when it's not popular so I
I think I just care you know to
put it all on and I care deeply
about my my alma mater I I I did
my undergraduate UNM and I know
how important education is for
state truly the university is
the the crucible of of all all
good ideas for the future and so
you know grantees is a dynamic
problem solver and an effortless
diplomat and so I'm just beyond
grateful to to have the
opportunity to offer my support
in support of a Rico for
students thank you.
Thank you next we have media I
mean.
Hi good morning Mr chairman
madam vice chair and senators on
this committee my name is mia
mean and the undergraduate
student body president I'm at
the university of New Mexico and
I'm here to support ready close
appointment as the next year
regent I believe that Randy is a
great fit for this position
given his previous involvements
with the undergraduate and
graduate student government's
among many other things as we've
previously heard he's committed
to representing the students and
hearing from our constituents
which is something that I'm
really grateful for because
ultimately the student voice
needs to be reflected at the
board of regents level
additionally I'm confident that
Randy will represent the student
voice given that his nomination
a very earlier on in the process
came from students themselves
like myself and the graduates in
body president Mikhail thank you
for your time.
And madam chair next we have
Melissa Henry.
Morning chair in the entire
Senate rules committee thank you
for allowing me to say a few
reports and supporting
University of New Mexico student
region augmentation Ranco my
name is Melissa Henry and I am
the current even and student
regent soon to be former and I
was presented in front of this
committee two years ago in
February two thousand nineteen I
wanted to speak in support of
grantees nomination I've had
such a privilege of building a
relationship with them within
the court last course of the
semester and these move through
the process is a very
accomplished graduate students
already have demonstrated
ability to manage multiple roles
at UNM while also engaging in
the very highly competitive in
D. Ph.D program there are many
conversations building up to
this confirmation he has
communicated to me a strong
commitment to UNM yes on this by
actively engaging and learning
everything he can about the
university the leadership the
ministration the needs of the
UNM community yeah show me
dedication and awareness of the
role student regent and I
believe he is the best possible
candidate that could have been
put up for nomination I have no
doubt that he will composition
many things during his tenure
and show grace in his role
please consider this statement
is my sincere and genuine
support that Meyer Paul an
exemplary UNM student regent
Randy Mexico thank you.
And madam chair I believe that
everyone we do have one other
person in the room under TRD
honest I'm not certain
Which region he's going to speak
to.
I am Madam chairman members of
Senate rules committee my name
is Ralph ID I'm just I'm the
chairman of the spot around
tables New Mexico where a
coalition of over fifty
different Hispanic organizations
or fifty seven thousand members
statewide at the local state
national level.
I'm here to support Jack Fortner
support is candidacy.
Jack has been outstanding
regent.
The longest serving region in
the history of your ma'am and
his work has touched every facet
of your M. Jack former and I
work together on UNM
presidential search committees.
you've been very supportive of
the school of medicine main
campus UNM and I and all the
satellite sites so you NM to
include your name Gallup rents a
County House songlist and other
areas Jack has been a strong
voice for diversity equity and
inclusion at UNM.
And he's been very supportive of
a program that I personally
started off in New Mexico and
lasted program.
We have facilitated the
graduation of over two hundred
twenty five thousand high school
students since year two
thousand.
The ninety seven percent
graduation rate less strong
rate of those students going to
college I would say that the
majority of minority students at
UNM right now advances in Lhasa
program or were supported by the
Alaska program in one aspect or
another and and Jack is is a
hard working person he he
supports UNM athletics supports
everything about UNM use a local
through and through as someone
mentioned earlier is a great
friend and he's always been a
voice or the other
representative person he's using
voice for the everyday New
Mexico I just those are big
donors are those that walk with
with with our full folks Jack is
a French everybody.
Is a friend of mine is the
furthest back roundtable is a
friend of Hispanic community and
the minority community I would
say that the office of diversity
equity inclusion will probably
not be there as it is today
without the leadership and
support a Jack for for that
office so Jack for for
representative all students all
workers at UNM and the spot
around till New Mexico is one
hundred percent behind Jack
former in his nomination from
regent will fort worth with him
for many years to come thank you
very much.
Madam chairman Senator Ivy Soto
Mr chair we are complete on the
list of UNM regent public
comment.
Very well thank you all very
much I am on a different
computer for just a moment while
my computer does some unexpected
updates.
And and so let's go to questions
and comments from committee and
will begin with senator Morris.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
are grants the bill and Jack
sendo bill Randy extremely well
and to individuals who love
University of New Mexico is
almost as much as I do it's not
equally as much as I do so I
can't tell you how pleased I am
I do want to jump into a that
saw over those stronger to
consume our love fest there Jack
I didn't catch true the person
was like our top that someone
with the graduate student
association so I'm not sure if
they were speaking on behalf of
the graduate students this I
don't know if you still on the
line what was the state official
position of graduate students
are who was that so anyone knows
and I would like to address
whatever I were met what they
were talking about I want to
actually address that right off
the bat and Senator Moores that
was Lindsey Marone and she's
with the United graduate workers
of United of you in a okay so
it's is up to you the new you
are Mr chair anyone.
Miss World.
She still want yes sorry I was
just kicked out that that was
me.
Okay Mister Mister on is this
the official position of of the
graduate you orders a raise your
personal.
This is this is a position
that's coming from our unit
graduate workers you okay so
there was an official both
position taken.
We have an we didn't have an
official the this is what what
we collect will collectively
decided to say today.
Okay so leadership the
leadership of the union decided
service yes okay Mister chair
are Jack would you address those
whatever issues she's referring
to so somewhat familiar with the
markets or not jump in there and
deal with this right off the bat
sure
Slide up already served three
terms and then after my term
expired.
I served a little longer the
Senate did not confirm my
successor so I resigned reserve
after my term there was no
ethics violation there was an
Essex ethics charge the sitting
governor was at odds with may in
fact in one of the members of
this committee of the Senate
members the committee was signed
things untruthful things about
myself Senator and I actually
have ask for investigation be
done at the university heart of
actually retired federal judge
it said there was it was
basically bogus things being
said
and so I understand the
enforcement saying center Moores
is that honestly this world into
were
our reserves in my first term I
was one of the few regions that
voted for the place are you
pleased actually you are just.
my father was a member of the
locals you six eleven for thirty
five years and I was presented
with
I your kids are from the you
find that passed away for every
five years.
So what just as distraught
honest said you know I'm
exporter workers union workers
so I'm sorry that she was
misinformed.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Jack and so
again I'm not familiar with
these allegations so they were
investigated by UNM we're we're.
Cleared of anything correct
whatever she's referring to.
You
Thank you more for pros
obviously
I have a passion for UNM and so
the three of you are very
important dear to my heart to
you I know extremely well
already I'm gonna chance do you
have look for talking with you a
little bit
but there's some water concerns
and abilities apples thank you
bill whatever I wanna call you
today
you mentioned UNM needs to a
ball for a change during your
testimony and I've you know I've
had these conversations over the
years.
And Jack and you're not of the
conversation to I have a lot of
concerns about your membership
started in nineteenth century
bottle in the twenty first
century of education are always
seems to be the higher education
virtual complexes been refusing
to of all of the get into the
modern age the COVID expose UNM
and I read in general throughout
New Mexico or throughout the
country
and the challenges that are
facing to be relevance in the
next hundred years and it seems
to be a strong.
Opposition within what I call
the higher rate the school
complex to reform and changing
the route and be responsive to
what student needs are for the
next couple
hundred years for that matter
and you know I'm speaking as a
our child to to college
professors whoever Dr it's our
group on chamber college
campuses so I've been around for
fifty years and so I want you
guys to address what UNM in
particular what higher as to do
young more relevance with the
declining enrollments Fund
funding issues that we out of
the way we are.
Demographic changes that are out
there that don't necessarily
have the same
I read you it says that the
previous generation myself and
others.
And I guess bill you you brought
up so once you start.
Wealth thank you senator and
yeah and I have been discussing
in this within it anybody in the
administration these are just my
observations when the governor
staff interviewed me but
obviously when we get the new
census numbers demographics of
the state are to look that great
we we haven't grown in ten years
the pandemic has contributed but
isn't the sole reason for
declining enrollment at UNM and
we need to address some of those
issues and and what I would sort
of throw out there is is I think
as Randy said the bird's eye
view or that thousand yard stare
or is is there some things we
need to be looking at as far as
best practices.
Following the pandemic and that
is every university and college
in the nation's faced same
issues with remote learning how
much of that can we integrate
into a future model for the
university as far as what
courses are really should be
looked at as remote learning
opportunities where we can save
and bricks and mortar budgeting
maybe some of the faculty and
staff issues can be consolidated
into a more efficient use of of
their time in the states that
obligation from the university
so that's one thing I'd like to
look at is one of the best
practices going on nationally as
far as these type of changes
occurring in try to integrate
those are at least discussing
with the administration as
approaches to solving some of
the issues
I'm another concern I have is is
you know I know the regents are
responsible for degree programs
and I would like to talk to the
administration and find out what
engagement do we have in New
Mexico twenty percent of the
population are government
workers.
What percent of those workers
require a degree to to be
efficient and their functions
and and then what particular
types of degrees would say the
state the county the city that
the tribes the federal
government what are they looking
for for UNM produce to to fill
that workforce because that's
going to be important in New
Mexico for as long as we're
around I'd also like to find out
what the community involvement
would be.
The commerce the associations of
commerce and industry this panel
chamber those types of
organization what are they
finding their educational needs
are for their members going out
and looking for jobs when they
get out of the university and I
suspect there's a there's a lot
of opportunity for two year
certificates which we need to
collaborate maybe with the
community colleges a little
closer
but you know I'd like to have a
better view of what exactly it
is a community looks for the
university to produce as far as
functioning people I'll stay in
New Mexico and work here
Those those are sort of some
high level things but it seems
to me we want to align the
students coming in with the the
actual programs that we make
available and and we might want
to look at a consortium of other
universities I know for a while
there New Mexico state was
looking at being a engineering
center of excellence UNM would
do other things I think we
falling off of that but to the
degree were duplicating
Resource efforts in the state we
need to to make sure we
understand where we can change
that with the other four year
degree granting institutions and
lastly
I always been a little concerned
the the number of incoming
freshmen who require remedial
education and and that's always
been an effort should the.
Secondary schools be responsible
for ensuring that students are
able to to do freshman work at
universities are universities
requirement to ensure that
someone with a certificate
saying there are a high school
graduate but they're not able to
do college work exceed the
university's responsibility and
that's a huge budget issue with
the lower hundred level courses
so those are just some broad
strokes I would wants to talk to
the administration about see
what they're doing I'm sure
they're doing some things in
that regard but I I need a
little more.
Input on that also the health
sciences center you know there's
a huge expansion going on there
right now that's going to
involve an awful lot of federal
money coming and I know Randy
knows a whole lot more about
that than I do and you know I
look forward to working with
them and finding out what kind
of support the health sciences
centre needs because that
certainly is one of the jewels
of the crown in New Mexico and
we need to ensure that that
ended the stay strong and and it
supports communities statewide
community so those are some of
the things athletics I am.
Concerned about athletics might
not concern that it's being
mismanaged or they're the things
aren't going well there for any
particular management issue I
think this is a national trend
again on that you know certainly
this last year I don't think you
can hold the athletic department
to a budget.
Constraint saying well you
didn't bring any gate receipts
so therefore you get you got a
call roll back the athletic
program so we need to find a way
to ensure we have a healthy
athletic program because frankly
Lobo's are the brand of U. N. M.
U. N. M. to a large degree is a
brand for the state of New
Mexico we want to make sure
that.
Hello brand is out there to the
largest rate possible with that
I'll leave it senator Morris
missed Mister chairman Senator
thank you as usual Mister
chairman Senator you answer
pretty much all my questions
are ready so hopefully yet
you're the right person to do
some cities are going to water
to demolition over there you
would have to get it moving
along the right person to ask
the right questions and hold
people accountable so you so you
outside I am for you to be there
because you you literally took
off a lot of the questions I was
gonna ask you also should move
on to Jack.
Thank you Sir Moores we lot of
what
senator Payne said I agree with
us I would add that indeed the
post COVID university the still
being still trying to be in
figure out especially the
virtual learning the virtual
learning has existed for some
time my daughter played softball
for the universe New Mexico for
four years and it was having
virtual classes that was
actually
enabled her to travel sometimes
our travel Thursday Thursday
through Sunday and still
participate in our classes and
so
I think that as we educate our
students on the value of virtual
learning
that don't realize that they
don't need to discount on
tuition because there were two
the learning virtually because
it's still a good education.
I know that there were issues
regarding we had students had to
move off campus whether not they
should be entitled to a refund
or a pro rata I think those are
issues that we will still be
dealing with if we're not able
to enroll on campus full time in
the August.
The other thing are in my role
of junk commissioner of the last
eight years I've been very
involved in economic development
up here from the energy
transition back into working
with the city of Farmington and
that carbon capture technology
and I think that the university
Mexico it can be an important.
Part of the engine working
collaborate with the city are on
economic development no one of
the regents reject or also on to
see is very involved in the
economic development not look
forward to working with her and
continuing that so and then of
course as a Senator Moores knows
I've been for involved in
athletics oversight
My daughter to the law school
another daughter attending
graduate school and played
sports but on that on the house
science committee for twelve
years so I'm very familiar with
all parts of the university and
look forward to being able to
continue to help.
Thank you Jacqueline thank you
bill and I'll go to Randy on
that with the star of the chair
in my concern on those issues
are on this committee for last
nine years of the talked about
the changing needs for you and
and others universities to get
more modern what's how we
deliver health care COVID expose
that on an example use more
personal experiences my
undergrads from UNM in my
masters in business from your
amendment where my wife was a
lot better looking and smarter
than I am as you all know she
got her MBA through George
Washington
without ever stepping Capital
campus of the State and so you
know I think my MBA is very
mark both your Mexico
international you're actually
look at it you W. M. S. March
more valuable I think so that's
the world that we're about you
did you did an MBA at Harvard
from our.
Is and so that's what I think
the competition about is for pre
COVID impose COVID worse but if
you and Ms are competitive
against a Harvard and George
Washington University students
tuition
small group for our branded you
have any thoughts on that since
you are sick of what we're
talking about in your
generation.
Thank you senator Morris and
members of the committee I think
that is a great point and I
definitely agree with Senator
pain seem to be region paying on
this topics now remote learning
is near and dear to my heart as
a result of being a medical
student and I'm taking online
classes as an undergraduate
student as well now the COVID
nineteen did accelerate
The implementation of online
classes and what this does is it
allows for more equity for
higher education because not
everybody can go in person at
certain times of the day if
they're working family or if
they are have a different socio
economic status and that is an
important that we are valuable
and and offer the services and
expand online learning now as a
result of this acceleration I
agree with senator Morris that
we need to be able to competing
at a national and international
level and delivery of our
services because ultimately the
mission of the university is to
engage student faculty and staff
in our educational research
services and do a good job at it
as the flagship institution so I
think it is important to see
white.
Options we have available I
understand the board of regents
recently did
Do you improvements to the
online implementation of
learning and that was a very
recent at a very recent meeting
and so.
And I am just going back to I
think in addition could sick
because of your question with
growing demographic changes and
becoming more relevant I think
it's really important that we.
Cool as much efforts into those
services that help students
which succeed freshman classes
aren't easy.
I I remember going to my first
first year and looking my
brother who was in pharmacy
school they how did you do this
and so it's really important to
have those programs such as the
center for academic program
support peer instructors in
those things that help students
succeed because it's it's a
rough transition from high
school and and so ultimately in
addition to that we need to be
happy we're going to university
so increasing the discussion on
diversity equity and inclusion
is important and you know having
served on the learning
environment office for the UNM
School medicine people are
afraid of speaking up about
certain things that make them
uncomfortable coming to the
university or retaliation and
really uncomfortable topics such
as that we need to break down
those barriers and make sure
people are happy because
ultimately if you're not happy
we're going to university you're
going to drive it and we need to
make sure that people are having
a great educational experience
and they can succeed in their
education by being included and
dress the way that the needed
and how they can receive their
education.
Right right answer right that's
exciting that you're you're
you're answering your patience
on that since Ron you Randy the
sun on yourself your resume is
just.
Through the roof I'm so proud of
you and what you've accomplished
already we're not gonna let you
go you got to stay here in New
Mexico
so but the next time it isn't
based on here which is more of a
more common to the governor's
task number governors have this
to this this trend twenty
student regents was right you
know I wasn't there when they
struck the constitutional member
to be a student region usually
means of undergrad I think
that's what they had in mind are
you gone through UNM as
undergrad and might my comments
does not certified used much
since especially since you spent
your whole life you're New
Mexico with the rise in this
this this this.
Pattern lately of getting
graduate students
you might not have gone to a
number of the school of their
about going to be the regions
are to be the student regents
talks you mentioned in your
introduction how are you going
to keep in touch with all the
students your available harder
with you down in the south I'm
sorry the north campus and so I
want to make sure you are there
representing the undergrads also
because your your job is to
fight for the students are not
so as not to faculty not for the
administration about the
legislators awfully long your
job is to fight for students I
want to make sure you are
prepared to do that.
Absolutely thank you for the
question on senator Morris.
So I will plan on having
frequent meetings with leaders
student leadership I understand
the S. U. N. M. elections are
happening now and the and so I
want to make sure I reach out to
those that will be serving
within the next year and so on
in addition to that
collaborating with student
leaders such as GPS say the
graduate professional student
association in addition to any
anyone that really needs to just
talk to me I I'll be open to
that and having frequent office
hours is I think will be really
great because it's.
I think the best problems to
hear about our win.
People it's hard for people to
plan and.
Address and bring up their
issues sometimes things just
happen right away so I think
it's important to hold those
office hours and to be able to
be in connection with students
in addition to that exploring
with those individuals that
understand
what those issues are for
students I would like to reach
out on to leadership at the
university and be able to join
Sir and meeting such as
GPS a council and it be a
sentence that it weekly meetings
here being a sense senator I'm
I'm aware of what resources are
available on campus and who I
should be reaching out to and
all and I don't by no means know
everything I'm always a learner.
Thank you Representative and and
and one of the concerns I have a
lease again out with you we're
not what you look like you're
not graduate until twenty twenty
six correct that's what's as I
rest assure gonna be there for a
while so long term school friend
but you know that I think
they're about for complaints
probably previous graduate
students who are gonna regents
two concerns one is at the end
of graduate moved out state yet
they're still on the board of
regents dancing that's going to
be an issue with you and so I
think that's always been one of
my concerns is that they're here
for here that they graduated
still bored with that stuff so
other colleges to the second is
just the insurance in the
process of those two regions and
so more comfortable with the
insurance conflict of interest
you now have in previous student
border regions at is now it
looks like you're an employee of
the university New Mexico
receiving some sort salaries.
And that's been the case in
previous student regents and so
now you're basically your own
boss and you're gonna have
faculty and other departments
want to curry favor you're
potentially give you our job
offers in the future
you're gonna be voting on your
own funding for your projects so
I really want you to walk
through that with us how are you
going to handle that aren't
called Sliq where you gonna do
about it and have you thought
about that so complicates up
front I have product so posted
regions I haven't really been.
Satisfied with previous student
regents who have been in the
same situations applicants not
to court I think it's more
mostly a generalization talk
about.
Thank you for the question
Senator Moores yes so I thought
about this a lie and I by no
means also know everything about
the situation but I'm willing to
learn by the position of the
student region is under article
twelve section thirteen of the
New Mexico station that one must
be a student so.
I in in addition to this I've I
would be looking for advice from
the office of the university
council absolutely and so from
I've also already checked in
yesterday with them and
ultimately the bottom line is
that I don't think a region
should be benefiting financially
from my service to you in about
well ultimately that my E.
graduate assistantship is
couldn't very much connected to
my professional education yeah I
understanding my program
building and DPAC program
is a long program I'm a little
crazy to do it by
I'll have been at UNM for twelve
years and so being a graduate
assistant at the moment.
It's it's connected to my
professional education because
this is what my dissertation is
gonna be based on working with
that the division of molecular
medicine in the department of
internal medicine with Dr
because that's that's important
for me to ask provide to the
questions
moving forward in my career as a
physician scientist and my wife
and I do have plans to be here
and long term and so we've
always talked about that it's
never been a question I'm only
by two university New Mexico as
an undergrad and for medical
school as well.
Right so I just occurred to me
that when you're done you'll be
Dr drive.
That's the point right.
To drive home I I could I mean
I'm I'm gonna move on this
circuit a lot of time I would
like to I do Jack in bills phone
numbers I did get an email Jack
on that ethics thing that said
that you were cleared of that
there was something about some
desire for more transparency on
the report that was released on
what that's about but are you
getting emails from
saying that that that was
rescued whatever was was so was
so clear but that is there was
no better about transparency get
out but what that's about sure
that with the committee
last issue that's been a the
stock market following a little
move on this chair is that we
sent so the legislature passed
memorial our good friend of five
of those in our Google years ago
to our ask the engineering
department to name a building
after Larry Larry R. ducks it's
all through the cracks me Frank
with the the three of you it was
reported back to us again this
is just rumors that it was going
to be named after Larry because
Larry was a Republican a
conservative Republican.
I got we just got a letter back
from the president very good
letter Y. street speak have a
lot of respect for the president
Senator we're gonna name after
all these years state auditorium
after Leri Senator I just think
that sends a half that kind of
messes were not systems that
showing showing thanks to all
those of us who are Republicans
who are very explores the UNM if
sure not a like to get more
information that's actually what
happened the star Department
they don't want to name it after
years to.
Love you and you more than bill
and myself and did a lot for the
universe for years and just
because it was Republicans or
Republican I think that's a not
a position that UNM wants to be
the also if you through to look
into that we have our
conversation offline and I know
you guys would be concerned
about that as well so I would I
know billion burglaries marches
are so are appreciate looking
into that.
Mr chair serve taking so much
time and I will have more hours
of conversation with you to
review individually as we move
forward go Lobos.
And I think that having some
technical difficulties so I
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Thank you madam chairman and
actually if I may just real
quick.
Although I'm having technical
difficulties let me just make a
couple of very quick
announcements.
The first is response to go to
the floor at eleven o'clock this
morning I think this is a very
important discussion that we're
having so first of all for those
who are logged in waiting for
the.
Rigid candidates for New Mexico
tech we're going to reschedule
them we will get to them.
I believe sometime this weekend.
My intent at this moment is for
us to continue the conversation.
Until eleven o'clock this
morning.
due to my technical difficulties
with the vice chair continue to
preside.
And then for us to recess this
hearing and pick up with the UNM
regent candidates.
Are probably this weekend and
finish the conversation.
These are really important
conversations dealing with the
flagship institutions of our
university I've been of our
state.
And I don't want to rush the
conversation.
Please proceed.
I'm.
Just with this group of the
region nominees and I think it
continues a pattern that we've
seen at the university of New
Mexico the the the nominees that
we confirmed and in the previous
go around we're we're we're just
super and this group will
continue that I I'm very
impressed I want to take note of
the specially on on something
that Mr Fortner introduced into
the discussion and that is
university's role in the in the
economic activity in the state
the development of that economic
activity.
And I think I just region of the
state is in the hello hello
inexpressive the.
Generation.
Thank you and Jim had become.
The.
Rainforests the.
Facility with the incredible
emphasis on entrepreneurial
inventiveness right right I just
think that this is something
that the state of New Mexico
will provide as we look back on
it.
Of the
Indian really building a future
for the state and I just want to
encourage the three of you to to
continue the the level of
support increasing impossible
for those programs to spend on
the research findings into
something that actually produces
jobs in the state.
And I know when we talked about
this in this committee in the
past.
The concern is been.
Well we we create this this
really great start up company
Brittany gets brought up the
line.
And the jobs in the.
Investment in the capital all
move elsewhere and then the
produce for California or
Massachusetts or North Carolina
and we were still here as the
there's a great innovator that
the number you realize the
benefits of that so I just
wanted.
That's foremost in your mind as
we move ahead and if any of you
had any comments about ways in
which we as legislators could be
fully supportive of that.
That aspect UNM's role in the
state and look to your loans
maybe we can start with you Mr
Fortner and go to Randy and and
and and senator paint.
Thank you senator
the economic development this is
our.
Really important to me one
because living in San Juan
County
we're facing some real economic
dire consequences where are
you.
It has intent to shut the power
plant down here but the idea.
Of being in compliance with the
energy transition act and then
converting the plant.
to a plant that has carbon
capture and sequestration
technology.
and therefore be income doing
two things being compliant with
the energy transition
and cutting the carbon and
saving jobs the other thing that
that I've been real involved in
as a county commissioner when I
was on the commission is are we
reached a memorandum of
understanding with the Navajo
tried to actually they agreed to
work with the county and the
city
to have to go for the real world
purpose of the railroad yes I
have to recruit the possibility
of a petrochemical plant we have
an abundance of cheap natural
gas here in that would we
actually got that idea from the
speaker and Senator Jake
Candelaria body or a half ago
and when we met with them all on
ideas and so I'd like to the
ideas those collaboration the
university can't by itself the
City of Albuquerque can't do it
by himself the state can't and
so working with the university
and I think part of part of what
the Senator Moores.
Saying about his degree is we
have to continue to talk about
you in New Mexico I believe it's
a great university
was certainly we're known for
great law school great medical
school but you know we've got
great engineering we got great
undergraduate programs and I
think it's it it is going to
take the collaboration of all
all of them working together
To go forward with economic
development ideas I was Act
played a strong role with the
president about Frank starting a
beach you innovate which became
or enforced and so
My history of supporting
economic development I'll
continue to do that Sir thank
you.
Thank you.
Thank you for that question
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino
yes so to comment on it.
Making sure we're fostering
economic activity at the
university I think it's not a
couple things to come up with
the top of my head and we need
to make sure we are engaging
students in active work that
they can see long term and see
the needs of their community
here in New Mexico so for
example I heard about the our
was reading about it.
Hello Netflix's expanding into
in New Mexico and we need to
make sure that the department of
filament and digital arts at UNM
is prepared to provide that
report and in addition to that
we need to make sure we are I
agree with
Jack Fortner regarding talking
up you in New so for example the
university nexus formula society
of automotive engineers recently
placed in the top five in the
world for two recent
competitions there is a
extremely innovative work that
is done here at the university
and it's important that we need
to collaborate with the city in
addition with the legislature
and I'll be sure to be in touch
and when I can see and have the
information and how we can work
together.
Mister chairman Senator again I
guess my next.
Please Gary thank you I center I
appreciate that question and I
alluded to earlier but I I think
the university needs economic
development.
The university needs to align
with what the state business
community a government entity
community military community.
Federal research labs local
governments state governments
all at what is it they are
telling us they need and then we
need to director curriculum
process to to meet those needs
and and I think Randy gave a
perfect example Netflix is going
to put a billion dollar
expansion just down and and
Mason also all.
We have a.
Right program at the university
that essentially deals with
those types of.
Opportunities economic
opportunities but is the
university aligned with what
Netflix is going to tell us they
need in the way of technicians
are managers are out and serve
people understand that industry
that's just a subset of
everything else Sandia national
labs need certain types of
people to go out there and work
and medical community who do we
need more PTA's do we need more
nurses do we needed all school
there's a whole plethora of
issues related to health care
that is State University meeting
the needs what the communities
are telling us they need are we
thank you Sir more sensor stuck
in sort of a lock step with that
their infrastructure and
programs we've developed so I I
can see a lot of opportunity for
for discussion bringing in a lot
of outside people to tell the
the the university what their
needs are and then trying to
work with the administration to
to address those issues.
I think this is going to be the
main challenge for New Mexico in
the future because it's pretty
clear the.
Extractive industries
I use the term need to vent but
that does seem to be in the
future that we're not gonna see
increasing levels of the
opportunity from the extractive
industries so we've got to find
other ways of the.
Paying the bills and exciting
are you incentive offering
opportunity and and so the
university investment.
I think is is is.
Allen's religiously Jr and I I I
would just offer this that
We we haven't done a great job
we haven't really checked of our
into the deal and what's
happened is the region so that
to raise tuition.
In order to maintain your
budget.
And that is what actually.
The students so that it becomes
more difficult to attract
students when they realize that.
There is going to be a.
Sizeable impact on their
shoulders when they do graduate
in limits there's more there.
Interest in tackling feels it
won't have immediate pay off.
The register short changing
ourselves by constantly
squeezing the budgets for the
higher education institutions
that's on us not on the region's
but I would I would hope that
as.
As the as the budget continues
to develop here in the states
that we focus on the full
spectrum of education we.
We certainly increase K. twelve
funding we need to do more and
early for the higher end.
These budget is one we're we're
I I think we've been we falling
down and and I would challenge
all of us in the legislature to
to more we look at countries in
Europe.
They understand very clearly
that every dollar they spend on
higher education and and
American student single year of
and many of those countries have
free college education.
Because they know that their
retail down the line they're
willing to invest.
Very reluctantly somehow
considered it to be a college
education to be a personal
privilege.
Rather than a public investment.
And.
So I.
I'm hoping we can work arm in
arm with the regents to just see
a fuller investments are
probably donor recipient higher
education I just do you and and
and all of our facilities.
But it certainly is a flagship
institution you and them is the
one that.
That I think was leading the
way.
I'm very excited about all three
of you joining the board of
regents.
And I look forward to your
rating system as we work our way
out of this pandemic thank you
for being willing to serve.
Thank you madam chairman Mr
chairman.
Thank you Senator Lopez was next
it looks like she has stepped
away out there she just Senator
Lopez.
I thank you madam chair and I
think it's just good to see each
of you here Mr Fortner it's good
to see you back in front of
Senate rules committee.
We appreciate you know.
I'm here representation on the
board of regents over these
years the benefit of our
committee numerous times
I also appreciate to of the work
and commitment that you have to
UNM and I know that you are
listening to the concerns of
course that are raised here in
this committee
And you know with the Senator
pain is good to see you
participating I know you NMAA is
near to your heart as it is for
many of us.
but I know that your your
commitment to your amendment is
and will be welcome and of
course to the students regents
it's just it it always warms my
heart to see that with our our
leadership of for the up and
coming generations
what you will bring to the table
and as we've always said madam
chair and members of the
committee is that our student
regents of course are an equal
member of all of our boards of
regents and date you to bring to
a very important perspective to
what I think our our
universities need to pay
attention to so I appreciate
everybody's willingness to
participate in a always
remember.
That we are here to help you and
work with you
it's not just that you come in
front of us and go on your merry
way but we are here also is part
here's to to help in any way for
any changes that need to take
place happen within our our
higher ed institutions and what
I will mention Mr chairman is
that you know my son of course
goes to a community college and
granted but his a gradual
movement item will be to
of course the University of New
Mexico or our other University
down south and I'm just here.
But what I've been learning and
I just wanted to bring this up
for our.
For our regions
Is that for persons who have a
learning disability they are
very intelligent and able to
participate but I think what is
shown for me Mr Chairman is that
there is still much work that we
have to do not just virtually
but also when you look at the
fact of
How the state media the whole
aspect of of how we do outreach
in oversight and working with
for tutoring for our student
population.
So it is one thing that I may be
contacting University not of
course to the Regis but I you
know please keep that in mind
also that I'm are support
services student support
services are very important for
our or the population that we're
serving and granted there's a
middle aged contingent that does
exist within our higher
institutions and I think they
just it is important to
What I say
function we're we still.
Work with and make sure that
that transfer of information all
those who have a learning
disability that we are working
with them I just wanted to bring
that to the attention
And and look forward to working
with each of you and Jack if you
would please tell your mother
hello for me to I will thank you
I just to see her in different
places of of you know in our
traveling throughout the state
but I have Mister chairman madam
chair thank you.
Okay.
Thank you Senator Pirtle.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee this is pretty
standard are questioning that I
do with every country that comes
before the committee
go ahead in I guess we'll go to
the order that you guys were
presented to the committee I
just want to know if you or any
close family member donated to
the governor the governor's
campaign or any of her packs.
No
I don't know of anybody put it
that way I will.
My mother is a good Democrat and
Although I'm a Republican and
she donated to our governor
Michelle Lujan camping.
This is Randy no I have not
donated and I am not aware of
any close family members
donating.
Well thank you I appreciate that
and Averell it's good to see you
again thank you for for your
willingness to serve Mr Porter
thanks for
you know being willing to serve
and and your expertise and
everything will be appreciated
Mr coats
awesome to see you know
homegrown Mexico or of New
Mexico student regent so excited
to see what you can do and
hopefully
you know moving forward.
U. N. M. Kinh thrive and we can
get that Larry Leri Jaga
building named might hate to
have to spray painted on there
so let's get something going
thank you Mr chair or madam
chair.
Thank you Senator Wirth.
Your muted Senator.
I thank you madam chair and
again I just wanna did
our thanks the governor for
three just spectacular
appointments I think one of the
things.
Having.
Been here for seventeen years at
the best thing that can happen
is to have a functioning board
without the legislature being in
a position of needing to feel
like we've constantly got a kind
of take that step that's always
a fine line as the appropriating
body and and that over site stap
which we have a roll for sure
but you don't want to
micromanage and finding that
balance is a lot my question
I'll just ask one question and
has to do with you know senator
Payne you talked about the.
The role that sports do play are
kind of as the brand for the the
university and you know I know
the the the very.
Controversial decision that was
made to eliminate certain sports
including soccer which was
particularly challenging given
kind of the start of New Mexico
United and what we've seen in
the state with respect to that
obviously there's a a new
opening for a basketball coach
we have a terrific football
coach but I just I just wanted
to get a sense from you you know
my one question is.
Not on going issue and finding
that balance of how you put that
brand together in such a way
that it's meaningful and it's
prioritized to really work with
respect to how those dollars are
spent so if you could just give
a couple thoughts about each of
you a couple thoughts about that
that's really that that's my
question thank you.
Well I'll start in again I
haven't discussed anything with
the administration but.
I'm sort of a process person and
we're remember the mountain west
conference in remember the NC
double a and I think there's
going to be a lot of shake out
in the next year on athletic
programs nationwide and we need
to be well it turned to that and
I'm sure a vice president you is
and present folks are going to
be but for instance Senator
Moores as a bill to allow
athletes to.
Profit from their imagine and
and I I don't know fund forward
against I don't really have a
position in CA right now is
dealing with I believe trying to
do a preemption of states
setting the roll roll I
understand why he's doing I
think the intent is is admirable
but to the degree if we wind up
getting preempt and we got to
come back and change our statute
you know I I.
I'm a little concerned you and I
might get caught in the
crossfire but certainly will
follow the law the uniformed law
commission has a bill right now
that they plan to present this
summer dealing with this very
issue of student athletes and
all because obviously your
question Senator Wirth is a
little tangential for this but
obviously if you introduce
outside money into the athletic
programs in Europe for state
that other states there's always
going to be a question of
you know I don't know what does
it say that the numbers of that
are but I I think we just need
to be very careful we protect
our athletic program to the
degree possible and and yeah I
limiting skiing I believe you
said or did you say soccer but
that Moxon mentioned yeah
obviously soccer and skiing
revered very many people starts
my argument for the ski team was
that that the tourist industry
New Mexico raises billion
dollars here from skiing and I
have Red River is the home of
the NCAA championship UNM ski
team have some value marketing
wise baby beyond what it costs
the same with the soccer team
the soccer team was spreading
local brand but they were
spreading within the mountain
west conference so I think
there's probably going to be
some issue amongst the mountain
west conference to determine
which sports chair of the
conference support or not
support and that you know I will
stay very closely in tune with
that and I know Center Marshall
statement closer to non my
factor I don't.
You know you athletics is
difficult thing right now for
everyone nationwide not just
your now but I think we need to
be careful we don't make any
steps that that diminish our
brand nationally if we can that
take prudent steps to ensure
that their funded as well as the
rest amount illustrious least in
the middle of the pack for our
programs and that I think is
what resulted in losing soccer
was that the funding issue it
came down to we can't support
that many sports and something's
gotta go and those were not west
works but I'll I'll leave it at
that this this.
I appreciate that and
commissioner Fortner you know
your daughter softball was a
huge part of her experience and
it just shows again that some of
these maybe the last flashy.
Big big time football basketball
but they have tremendous meaning
for the students and for the
state so just just quickly here
your thoughts on on that thank
you center you're right I I have
a personal involvement in the in
the sports because my daughter
played for four years at UNM and
I'm sorry I have to brag she's
the all time saves leader for
the university she also owns the
single season site leader she's
also the second single season
lately and the third so she has
a number of records at at UNM
and she was a walk on she it's
Senator state championships for
paper based and then walked on
after sitting out a year so
water make sure she would be a
good student then walked on in
order for a full scholarship
and so I I realize the
importance that athletic have
has to Mexico it actually
provides a way for many under
privileged students to get an
education that may not otherwise
be able to and the minor sports
baseball soccer tennis except
for that's where we get a lot
more of the New Mexico players
involved and I also think
that's.
Very important so I'm a big
supporter of the minor sports
but especially women sports
because of my daughter's
involvement I also think that I
thank you athletics is one of
the three very important
questions two of the state where
people become interested in
universe New Mexico one is
athletics to is Popejoy and
three courses are medicals
medical hospital and medical
school and I think funding all
of them is important but like US
senator Payne said we're going
be in trouble a budget wise
because work of basketball
wasn't able to bring in in the
funds no we're not we're not in
trouble like the big big ten
schools that are counting on the
hundred million dollars that
they would bring in for home
football games but all the same
we're in trouble and I you know
I would hope that.
The legislature takes language
inspiration when they don't be
budget this year that is just
not gonna happen but it's it's
very important and plays a very
important part
both to the interstate and to
the state of New Mexico in us
also that part but enhances the
reputation of the university.
Yeah I agree just drive co
before I go to you you know
sometimes when you have such a
fundamental kind of uncertainty
and changes a real opportunity
to revisit and rebuild and
retool and I I really pre I
think you you both are certainly
and and doctor call I wanna get
your thoughts but it's going to
be that this will be one of the
many many things that that you
would be facing a doctor called.
Thank you for the question
senator Wirth thank you for the
title but I will be graduating
later not I can just hold my
bachelors at the moment so when
I think about this the roll of
intercollegiate sports at the
university of flex the integral
part of the university and
athletics I'm I'm really
interested to learn more about.
How athletics brings people from
out of state that would
otherwise not meant not come to
New Mexico I have classmates
that medical students in New
Mexico from athletics that
otherwise wouldn't have been
here and I think something that
is also interesting I've I've
been really researching more
about athletics because it's not
part of my personal personal
life but it is part of many
people's lives in the state and
so there's very few activities
that you'll have twenty national
exposures annually on it for the
university Brandt and also you
mathematics is generally self
generating I think I I I don't
want to say specific numbers but
I think about sixty to seventy
percent of the revenue is self
generated and unfortunately
COVID really exacerbated that it
was like the worst thing that
could of really ruin their
budget right when they're about
to make a I think that's what X.
director has worked really hard
to be really difficult decisions
to restore at the department and
unfortunately this was sort of
one of the things that just.
It's hard to recover from and I
think it will be hard to look at
that budget and make sure that
we are still delivering the
mission of the university but we
need to I I don't have all the
facts to understand that but
those are my thoughts on.
Right what I appreciate that and
there's so many different lanes
that we could talk about this
morning I'll just say one of the
best decisions I made in my life
was to come back to the universe
in New Mexico for law school and
again and our former professors
Sedillo Lopez is right there and
just the incredible I mean a
phenomenal education but the the
relationships that one point six
of the ten of us on Senate
Judiciary we're all you and then
law school grads and and so
again it's such an important
piece of our our state in the
fabric of our state and I feel
very comfortable with the three
of you that you are tremendous
appointments to really move our
flagship university forward self
thank you madam chair.
Thank you senator Wirth and
thank you everyone we're gonna
go ahead and recess at this
point but we will pick back up
