Thank you very much good morning
everybody welcome the rules
committee.
This Friday morning I think it's
a Friday we lose track of days
at this point
And the
it seems like a month ago we
were here with the regents for
the university of New Mexico but
apparently that was just two
days ago.
So at the rate.
welcome back everybody we we had
a fairly comprehensive
conversation in our last meeting
with the region candidates for
the universe in New Mexico we
ended at the time of going to
the floor I didn't want to cut
off for the discussion so there
is for the discussion or
questions that members have
let us go ahead and proceed with
that and if not we can consider
much.
Once.
Thank you Mr a procedural motion
I but to pass on one but one of
the time Senator Jr all right so
just to move to pass on bill
thank you for you for right
regents at their you need to do
individual our motion three
great emotional three goal
second winter months I'll to
move pass on apple paying to
pass on Jack Fortner ended two
passed on ready co for UNM
border regions and a second us.
Very well.
Let me just make sure that
nobody else is seeking the floor
to ask further questions we do
appreciate very much on the
discussion we had I thought it
was actually very substantive
discussion on and really very
much appreciated
all three of you the the the
nature of it and and I wanted to
say before we go to the vote
that you know served with with
bill payment and prior to that
worked with them as members
uniform law commission and and
so we we spent a fair amount of
time together and and I know his
standards of service and and
appreciate and respect them and
Jack Fortner and I have had the
pleasure of working part of it
together as well as
this this was awful time
together and and and there's
just a great connection that his
wife has family in my family
have had both of us in the in
the mission service at the same
time in Latin America and and
and the Terry having gone to
school with the to my cousins
and all Salvador as a kid and
and and what not that was
fabulous Mr koh I did not having
met you I will just tell you
looking at your resume and and
what you what you've done so far
I realized that I'm an
underachiever and
and that is I would but but but
your answers
I have been spot on in terms of
how to address a variety of
issues and I really appreciate
the perspective that you bring
to the to the regions are going
forward on this and so with that
Miss Vigil if we could call the
roll on admiral paying for as
a regional candidate for the
university must what rates.
Senator Morris.
You speak first yes absolutely.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes.
Senator Pirtle yes Senator
Stewart.
Yes Senator Wirth yes in Senator
Ivey Soto yes ma'am.
Graduations on a was a six one
or seven one eight six two six
eight six.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee thank you very
much and
Will you give this Senator was
was a was a drain on your time
welcome to the results.
Very well Miss Vigil please call
the roll on Jack Fortner for his
lifetime position on the UNM
board of regents.
Yes Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator Pirtle.
Yes.
Yup.
They were yes Senator Wirth yes.
And Senator Ivey Soto yes ma'am.
This partner congratulations on
your return your rightful
position very much appreciated.
I am not Miss Vigil if you would
please call the roll on Randy
Mexico and
candidate for the a student
position on the board of regents
and help otherwise said the
student position not the student
region you are a full region.
On that point.
Senator.
What for for yes.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator Pirtle.
Yes part of the year Sen Stuart
yes Senator Wirth yes in the yes
ma'am today everyone's a level
congratulations Mr koh on your
confirmation.
Thank you Mr chair and centers
to the of the many really great.
So these are three will be a
report out to the floor today
and I anticipate will also be
doing the confirmations today
and and so Mr koh of the on the
Senate floor there will be
and introduction of Utah
everybody and and for Mr Fortner
and and Mr Payne you both will
get to hear things that are
normally not set until
somebody's funeral.
when we when we do your
confirmations so congratulations
Paul.
But we now move to the
confirmation consideration of
John Bingaman of for the state
investment council.
John being amendment is
R. for a chief of staff to the
governor Lujan Grisham.
And he is one of the
gubernatorial appointees the
state investment council and
with that Mr work Senator Wirth
I believe this is your country.
It is Mr chair thank you and
good morning everyone
as the chair mentioned and we
had a good discussion about this
with our last state investment
appointments this is a
governor's appointment to the
state investment council and I
think we are very lucky to have
John being a man
Agreed to put his name back into
the mix for public service so
John is someone who has had
tremendous status access in New
Mexico the world of New Mexico
entrepreneurship and private
investments and he's also dived
head first into state
governments and so it is someone
who comes to this position with
kind of the perfect mix of of
background of experience and
understanding and I think Steve
always will be lucky to have
them on the board when we get
through this process he began
his career on Wall Street as an
investment banker at Solomon
Smith Barney and then moved into
private investments where he
managed a three billion dollar
fund based in New York.
Three billion in funds space in
New York and London focused on
investments in private media and
communications companies in the
US and Europe.
In two thousand and nine he
founded his own firm iron creek
partners in New York.
And then moved his firm and the
family back to Santa Fe in
twenty sixteen.
The firm has led the acquisition
and development of over a dozen
software companies over the
years generating strong
financial returns for investors
and good outcomes for the
employees and customers of those
companies are one of those
companies but safety is a
homegrown Albuquerque success
story that's a grew its employee
base and financial results by an
order of magnitude under John's
leadership so you can already
see that with the state
investments councils are unique
management of our portfolios and
and the sliver that involves New
Mexico funds this is someone who
has been there done it and will
be a tremendous asset.
In January of twenty nineteen he
was appointed as governor Lujan
Grisham's chief of staff and
served with distinction during
the first two years of her
administration are stepping down
in November of last year to
refocus on iron creek partners
well serving as chief of staff
he worked with many of us
senators of both parties and
really established a reputation
as someone who is extremely
intelligent but level headed and
that kind of perfect mixture of
of calm and understanding that
you need to navigate the world
of being chief of staff but also
navigate the world of being on
the state investment council.
So I think.
You know John Benjamin comes to
this position very familiar with
the strategy and operations of
the state investment council has
good relationships with the
staff with members of the
council and certainly with all
of us so this to me is just a
continuation of the full journey
that the state investment
council has been on and and I'm
just absolutely honored to carry
Johns confirmation and just
think again this gives a Steve
always in the board a very very
valuable asset and really
appreciate Jon's willingness to
step up so with that Mr chair I
was able to John Bingaman.
Mr Chairman.
Mr chair members of the
committee thank you for allowing
me to appear before you today
and I'd like to thank senator
Wirth for sponsoring my
confirmation and thank you so
much for that really generous
statement and I'd like to spend
a very few minutes just talk
about why I think the work of
the state investment council is
really important and why I would
be honored to serve.
I think we don't talk about it
much but we're very fortunate in
our state by the very fact that
we even have the permanent funds
rate we're one of the very few
states whose leaders have the
resources but also the foresight
and intelligence to establish
these funds in the first place
and these are trust funds in
every sense of the word and I
believe that the council members
are trustees are working on
behalf of every child and really
every person in the state of New
Mexico every generation you have
to come so I think it's an
awesome responsibility and I
think it's one that the members
of the council take very
seriously our department funds
today I think contribute just
under fifteen percent of the
general fund budget over a
billion dollars a year it's
about fourteen hundred dollars
per household I think those
monies are going to be even more
important in the years and
decades to call that money needs
to be there is a rock solid
foundation.
For our schools for early
childhood for all of the
important purpose out of the
general fund that's why I think
it's critical that New Mexico
continue to manage our permanent
funds with the highest degree of
integrity prudence and
professionalism I also strongly
support the governor's vision
that the permanent fund
specifically the severance tax
permanent fund has a big role to
play in economic development for
our state I was very proud under
the governor's leadership last
year the council voted to.
Double the portion of the
severance tax funding could be
allocated to investments in New
Mexico companies so that's going
to free up hundreds of millions
of dollars over the coming years
for permanent vestments in the
next now will for the next
RiskSense or frankly the dozens
of other companies that have
been on the front page of the
newspaper that it benefited from
that program and and that is
only that's a program that's
consistently make money and good
returns for the severance tax
fund I was also very proud and
privileged to work with senator
Carlos is narrows on the
governor's bill that he
sponsored to double the portion
of the severance tax fund go to
small business loans in our
state and those loans are made
through community development
financial institutions they
target underserved borrowers and
that's been a very successful
program that also has
consistently make money for the
severance tax fund and so I
think those are the kind of
things of the council can do and
should do you know utilizing a
relatively small portion of the
overall part of funds but in a
way to really move the needle
for jobs and growth in our state
Mr chairman and members of the
committee I have attended
fifteen or twenty council
meetings as an observer in
recent years you will sometimes
find me on the **** I see
website downloading investment
committee materials and reading
them for fun I really just enjoy
this stuff and I would be
honored to serve I'm grateful to
the governor for nominating me
upgrade this committee for your
consideration thank you.
What we want and
Miss me he'll do we have public
comments on this country.
Mr chair we have Steve Moris and
then next we'll have Charles
woman both with the state
investment council and has to
welcome Mr Modi's.
Thank you Mr chair.
It's absolutely my pleasure to
be with you this morning.
Hello being no or I am honored
to serve as your state
investment officer.
Yes I see staff.
We endorsed John maintenance
confirmation to serve as a
member of the investment
council.
John very carefully followed see
related matters during that time
he served.
As council chair governor Lujan
Grisham's chief of staff as he
is just mentioned as senator
Wirth mention.
He is so uniquely qualified to
oversee and help us to our
department funds.
Based on his knowledge of
investing is understanding of
the various rules which the
funds are intended to fulfill.
Yes No here do with our very
investment strategies.
And his commitment to helping
the funds play their important
roles in New Mexico.
Thank you for the opportunity to
endorse Johns confirmation.
What.
Good morning thank you for a
that the opportunity to speak I
I don't have a whole lot to
speak about from staffs
perspective I would volunteer
that our time with with Mr
chairman as chief of staff he
was our liaison with the
governor's office and I observed
a very high degree of integrity
and engagement and I think
that's what you get when when if
you approve again as a member of
the council thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you very much this woman
and and Mr voice may now move to
to questions and comments from
committee and we begin with
Senator Moores.
Thank you Mr chairman I just to
confirm I think John said this
is John here are are are you are
appointment or the governor's
appointments Mr chair.
Mr chair Senator are I am the
governor has nominated me as one
of her appointees okay well I
thought so I just want to make
sure there's no problem that
complicates your are point each
John walking back it's good to
see you you're obviously a
radical partition the need for
that but you are immensely
qualified for this job since
you're the governor's
representative with regard to
settlement calls for two million
so and we'll put you through the
ringer a little bit first
especially has a us I don't know
your Sidwell friends so I have a
state program you know what I do
Well friends very much in high
school so I do I do not know
that about you all this time I
do want to talk
you know you see these various
reports on what you wanna talk
about conflicts usually what I
try to dive into we're
disclosure reasons are working
else.
What is your immensely qualified
which I think will lead to death
some conflicts because you're
qualified and the investment
community in your.
And how you how you handle
complicate things is more
important than thank you have
conflicts those want to jump
off.
The was.
Steve you listen Steve as a
personal reference I think we'll
have a lot of respect and
admiration for Steve on your
things but it is are you
personal friends raise
professional reference.
Mister chairman Senator I I
would describe Steve as a
professional reference site ID
He's someone I've also known
personally and looked up to and
admired for a long time but
but yeah I wasn't quite sure how
to fill out that section of the
application of the forms on a
based on that it correctly yeah
that's what I kind of figure to
it I think we all look up to
speak to but it was a personal
friend my question was going to
be maybe assessed anyways would
you be willing to fire
throughout your.
Mr Chairman said are absolutely
I mean as I say I think members
of the council our trustees for
the entire state of New Mexico I
think that has to.
So too many personal
relationship than any of them
have any member of staff thank
you for.
This CEO you answered all a lot
of your complex thank you on
your your question ten you did a
fantastic job listing some of
your best friends
and so I appreciate you the
those local have any conflicts
or none of those ones that you
listed on section and for Miner
creek
Sliq softwares etcetera etcetera
number one you said you do any
work with the state of New
Mexico correct or do we invest
in any of those companies.
Chairman Senator now that that
is correct.
All
right just one more question
I'll go back to how you would
handle schools with you.
On your other section that you
listed in your.
Financial disclosure the listed
another list of companies some
of which are known to have
interactions with the I think
this is your personal
investments minority investments
a list that you put in the
financial disclosure Erro head
at wallet Sir Senator of the one
that jumped out at me was me out
well for you mentioned during
your introduction
I know me I will has received we
to funding in the past thank you
for this governor was elected
part correct me if I were you
you were chief of staff Andrew
me out what got so we don't
money where you to go to fire
Mister chairman Senator I
believe it was prior I did
recuse myself in the governor's
office for many discussion of
now will legislative talks as
well.
Yes my question that
How would you so that gets me
down to the crux of my questions
I think I know the answer are
you gonna handle any conflicts
of interests that do come up and
disclose it to make sure the
taxpayers are aware of those
conflicts are as you know this
is a touchy are.
Order commission Senator Wirth
mention earlier New Mexico
conflicts are handled
appropriate and professional and
then with a lot of integrity.
The chairman Senator I
completely agree that's why try
to find a really full some list
in that disclosure I will update
that each year and certainly I
if anything arises either in a
committee I serve on or the full
council that may pose even the
perception of a conflict I will
very quickly reviews myself and
disclose that to the full
council.
Sir John it's exactly what I
wanted to just here and I got to
say that did alleviate any
concerns I had not and many
concerns like that without
transparency work on this
important.
That we have so I appreciate
that was your Republican we
should sit well friends but are
still both for your.
Thanks a lot.
Very well are there other
ringing endorsements of those
candidates.
Our work.
Yes Representative friends
absolutely arts.
What do our our
Senator Ortiz.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
thank you John for your
willingness to tackle this and
that anyone who does for fun
which you described as a as a
fascinating me occupational is a
the investments of the state
investment council will make a
major member of the council but
I wanted to I just wanted to
take this opportunity to get
some of your views on when the
Mexico's economy basically our
economic future what you see is
as things that the legislature
might want to do to make sure
that.
That we are able to truly
diversify our economy and and
then we know ourselves from our
over dependence on oil and gas
which the future is not.
You know it is by no means
certain about that particular
industry so you need to share
some of your thoughts about what
policies the legislature of the
supporting that would that would
lead us to help your economic
future.
Chairman Senator thanks so much
for that and you know frankly I
don't pretend to have any secret
sauce or special insights that
others haven't thought of it in
such a big and complex topic you
know I I there is a very smart
venture capitalist in Santa Fe
New you know I was talking to
about this you said you know
there's sort of three things to
sort of build this ecosystem is
we have to have ideas you have
to have capital you have to have
talents I think we have a lot of
ideas in the state I think we
are starting to get some capital
I think we've been capital
constrained I think frankly
that's up somewhere where the
responsibilities severance tax
fund under the authority granted
by the legislature constructive
and playing a board role as I
alluded to and I think we have
tremendous talent but which
needs to be further developed
and and invested in and I think
that's exactly what the
legislature is working on right
now in terms of early childhood
and
impact aid and funding for
schools and so I think that
there's you know just a those
continuing to invest in all of
those three areas I think will
will yield results.
And just in in in a in a broad
and
Description.
Well you see us slowly reducing
our dependence on oil and gas
revenues or are there ways in
which you know which we might be
able to to foster
with you know we we certainly
don't want to reject money from
the oil and gas industry but.
That reliance that over reliance
on it is let us to to
Questions are out of balance
maybe would be and we're.
Economy and and do some things
that we might choose to have
director I that for
Representative just something
that will help them develop on
its own through the application
of.
Ideas and talents and and
capital.
Mister chairman Senator again I
I thank you for that but I I
don't think I have any I think
that is you know a huge question
that everyone is asking looking
out decades in the future and I
I don't have the answer to that
I think it's going to be a mix
of things I do think the the
permanent fund's complain
important role there you know
and that the nice thing about
that revenue is it's it's stable
and steady and it will grow and
so I think that's important job
of the council has to make sure
that we staff piece the state's
revenue streams of stable and
growing well as.
Very good.
The the area issue focus a lot
of your own personal investments
in Mr chairman would would would
seem to be
area of real opportunity for us
that is the the whole software
development and and technology
field.
I know we can legislation in
downtown Albuquerque there.
Literally dozens of start ups
etcetera.
We should go ahead and
struggling to find a market
trying to find the talent trying
to find the capital to really
make of their ideas reach full
fruition
what I do I love what you said
about we need the permanent
funds being able to foster a lot
of and no so thank you I I
really look forward to your
service on the investment
council and and
I think the future is very
bright for New Mexico we just
have to avoid some of the
mistakes we made in the past
thank you John.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you very much Senator is a
panel Senator Pirtle and then
Senator strict.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee.
Thank you Senator Wirth for
bringing forward this.
Nomination I do have my standard
line of questioning Mr building
then do this with.
Every high profile confirmation
that we do and the question is
did you or any close family
members donate to the governor
governor's campaign or any
packs.
Mister chairman Senator yes I I
certainly was proud to support
the governor's campaign as an
individual.
And and Mr chair and and
mistreatment how much did you
donate.
Mister chairman Senator you know
I think it was I think it was a
lot of thousand dollars which I
think was the maximum and I
wanted to Max out to the
governor's campaign because I
strongly support area I support
or agenda for our state who she
is as a leader and what I
thought you could do for our
state and respectfully I looking
back to the last two years now
the work of the closing for two
years I'm I'm very proud to have
supported.
And thank you Mr chair thank you
Mr being and that's just to get
out the vote for the public you
know the make sure that
everybody understands and and I
think you're more than qualified
and I think that's why you were
appointed here but we just have
to have all the facts out in
front of us so I look forward to
you know you work on this
committee I think your
Background is is fitting for for
the position did you donate to
Mr chair and members of the
committee any of the members on
this committee.
Mr chair Senator I I believe at
one point one way I may have
donated to Senator words one of
his reelection campaigns as a
who down Senator and be very
proud of him and and what he
does I I don't believe that
I don't need anyone else to the
committee that recall.
Well Mr Chairman and Mr Bangham
and you didn't donate to me but
I didn't ask so that's only my
fault on that one
but
Wait I appreciate just to to get
the you know all of this on the
vote I look forward to to the
work that you're going to do on
the this I see and hopefully we
can use your expertise to to
benefit New Mexicans but Mr
chairman and and Mr name I do
have a question do you currently
reside in New Mexico.
Mr chair Senator yes I reside in
the city of San.
And Mr chair and and Mr being
meant if you were to say take a
job or move to New York or
something along those lines
would you resign as a member of
the state investment council or
how do you how would you handle
that.
Mr chair Senator I I I don't
think that's likely but if that
did occur I think I probably
would you know in consultation
you know with the governor's
office and people on the council
probably it would make sense for
me to resign it makes sense that
the members the council be
residents Mr Chairman and Mr
chairman I I appreciate that
because we don't have a
requirement of residency but you
know I think we all assume that
that that goes without saying so
I appreciate that and and it was
just brought to my attention
that a lot of these positions we
don't have a residency
requirement and so I do think
it's important that the you're
gonna sit on on one of these
very important boards
commissions councils
that you be a resident of New
Mexico thank you Mr chair.
Thank you very much our cerebral
center court.
Thank you Mr chairman and I'm a
I'm thrilled that the Mister
Bingaman is willing to continue
to serve in New Mexico I just
want to mention I work with John
Bingaman while he was chief of
staff of for our governor he and
I worked every year on the of
the impact aid issue and it's a
complicated issue and she was
just so gracious to hold
meetings with myself and so I
staff and talk to me on the
phone about it and proposed
changes we went back and forth
during every session that we
worked on it he was just a
delight to work with very calm
very organized understood the
problem completely and I just
want to tell you John that.
I think we're there this this
year I've been working with the
Representative Lundstrom and
speaker Egolf to combine the two
bills that we have moving
forward minus in the house
Representative Lundstrom is in
the Senate ultimately I think
we're going past Representative
Lundstrom spill so I'm still at
it I'll be very glad when it's
done and over and hopefully that
will be in the next eight days
so I just want to thank you for
the work you did to me that just
reflects the kind of
collaborator you are and clone
reasoned so thank you for being
willing to continue to work for
us in New Mexico.
Thanks so much.
Hi yes of those programs are
sorry for
thank you appreciate that other
members of the committee.
One medic I move a do pass Mr
chair.
Well we have a.
Most important pass from the
sponsor the conferees senator
Wirth with the second from
Senator Lopez.
and apart from senator.
And and if we are going on that
we would need to talk about so
I don't miss the hill please
signaldemand Representative
sticking recognitions time
please call the roll.
Senator Baca.
Yes.
Senator.
Yes yes.
Senator Moores.
Yes Senator o'neill yes Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino yes.
Senator Pirtle yes.
Senator Stewart yes Senator
Wirth yes and senator.
Yes ma'am.
Congratulations are Mr chairman
of you have any unanimous do
pass recommendation
it has your with your
appointments to the state
investment council.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee and Mr
Ramon also just real quick with
with all the things that that
that you do and and the
of the business interests of the
charity work that you do we very
much appreciate your willingness
to continue to serve the state
New Mexico that has a tradition
of your family and one that
continues and that's that.
Thank you so much Mr chairman.
Mr Chairman notice folks were
applauding or that we're just in
ASL deaf community this is a
plot so work works really well
you can't be seen.
Indeed yes.
Remember.
we are going to
move on then to a couple of
bills that we have before us
this morning and we're going to
begin with our house bill fifty
five Representative McQueen and
Senator AUMENT
and so if the two of you would
be so kind as to our present
house bill fifty five and we
will move on.
Either one of you may begin
speaking.
Go ahead Representative.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
center house bill fifty five is
the capital outlay transparency
bill I think we've all seen it
before or dispositive.
This bill is very popular around
house side and I think this is
the year that we get through the
Senate please I hope so in Mr
chair I would note that on the
house floor we did amend the
bill to include an emergency
clause so it would take effect
this year and I have spoken to
the Legislative Council Service
and they're fine with that.
That we have been answering
questions well senator Tom.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
thank you members of the the
committee
this is one of the three
transparency built on sponsoring
at this year
With the.
This is the third or fourth year
attempted to pass this
legislation enacted it it will
increase the transparency but
won't fix a broken system how we
allocate our capital outlay
funds one point four last time I
checked one point four billion
dollars a sitting idle because
there isn't enough a sufficient
amount of money that's been
allocated to see by the
legislature to start a project
this is really a that's a
bandaid it's a start to fix our
system but what we really need
is a but most states do which is
to have a commission or
committee of made up to a
prioritizing that projects on a
statewide basis and this
committee would be the made up
by all appointed officials and
experts or a combination of
staff and legislatures or third
a of the commission made up of
all like to officials and there
should be a minimum of a hundred
thousand dollars or thereabouts
so last year we had the fifteen
twenty projects under ten
thousand dollars so getting a
little bit off the topic this is
the least a good start to it's
really only a bandaid to to fix
a broken system I would
challenge anyone to find a
state.
Other than Alabama that has a
system that is far away not the
best practice on how to allocate
capital outlay projects thank
you Mr chair and we stand for
questions.
Thank you very much Mr hill on
do we have people who have.
Representative indicated as
artistic composition Mr chair we
have Melanie majors and Fred
Nathan.
well we'll start with nine
majors and will move over to
funding.
Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you for allowing
me to speak today as you know
this is a very important measure
it would reform the capital
outlay process and add
transparency to the state's
funding after the bills first
passage Senator McQueen was
quoted as saying this transfer
bill increases the public's
trust and makes the legislature
more responsive and cal
accountable to voters we
appreciate your desire to move
this bill forward and we hope
that you will Committee to pass
so that we can bring sunshine to
our state thank you very much.
Thank you very much up with
majors we now go to Mr anything.
Thank you Mr chairman Fred
Nathan executive director of
thank you Mexico a bipartisan
public policy think tank.
I just want to be very brief and
say this reform bills on the
many steps the legislature has
taken to increase the
transparency of state government
and make it more accessible to
members of the public in New
Mexico taxpayers and that
includes creating the sunshine
portal to webcasting committee
hearings and floor sessions and
opening up conference committees
making capital outlay the
capital outlay funding process
more transparent is the next
logical step in this very
positive Trent I urge the
members of the committee to vote
in favor of house bill fifty
five and many thanks to the
sponsors.
I thank you very much
Straight Fund is there anybody
else Miss Vigil.
Mr chair there is not very well
in that case we go to questions
from committee and Senator
Moores.
I'm sorry if I'm I and it was
probably from before
Okay very well I do notice that
some in this bill Senator I do
have my hand but I definitely
have a question about the
notwithstanding clause in here
it's one of our using this
committee
tell us what not was standing on
that.
For
the Mr chair Senator deferred to
the Representative McQueen.
Mr center Moores you know I
don't have that such in front of
me the reason this hasn't been
the creation have been
publicized in the past is that
the delegations have been
deemed.
Essentially drafts of
legislation.
So we don't you know in when we
work on bills we have lots we do
lots of different work we do
different grant there's a
thought process there it's not a
public document until it gets
introduced our I believe that's
what the references but I
actually don't have that statute
in front of me.
Yeah that's a Mr chair Senator
or I'm sorry Senator
Representative and and former
small groups MBA study number
yes one of the things that
raises our hackles of the last
couple years in the Senate
special in the budget and then
this committee and special
Judiciary we don't satellites
not withstanding provisions
about knowing what we're not
standing so section two three
seconds to dash three dash
thirteen
really like to know that some
legislators in the past but that
section was a great idea and
worked hard to get that bill
passed and you know how hard is
some asked and with ones fell
swoop with one word were saying
forget all that forget the law
this is what we're doing.
Senator Morris as it turns out I
happen to have some money was to
take care of that would you like
me to.
Go there you are shocks me thank
you thank you you know you know
the pet peeve I have on that
word and I appreciate you
jumping up on that yeah I do I
anticipated that you might say
something about that I also
noticed that we had made some
amendments in the rules
committee and past years that
were not included in the bill as
they came to us and so I thought
maybe we should simply align it
back to where it was I'm sure my
screen right now.
and and so that you can also see
what it would be so are ready
house for a minute number two
was is just simply that went
from the second session the
first session but if there's if
we're gonna have this going to
affect immediately there is no
need to say when it would not
affect.
So what what this does first of
all lines two three and four.
Just simply starts the sentence
with the Legislative Council
Service shall publish.
If we happen with immediately we
don't have to tell them what
they need to start doing it.
R. the second thing that it does
not there's I just think it's a
it's a little more elegant
online of the twenty four
instead of saying the names of
legislators or the governor well
educated a portion of state the
names of each legislators or the
governor who allocated the
fortune and then finally to
align it to the amendments that
have been done in the Senate
rules committee in the past we
have consistently amended this
bill in the past to be
that will be published.
Our problem instead of with them
to have a date certain that they
would be published thirty days
after adjournment of each letter
legislative session which are
capital projects list is
approved by both chambers the
legislature.
And and it's raised that way so
it takes time to account of a
governor vetoes the bill
are that it would that would
still be published out with the
details which I think is the
intense
and so and that's where we have
a date certain as to when
everybody kind of anticipate
that would be on we this is an
amendment we've made I think the
last four years of this is come
up and I would just COVID to the
house sponsor that when you
bring legislation back it would
be nice if you actually paid
attention to what we were taught
in the past in this committee
but unless we're willing to help
you out with that right now so
so since it's just a great great
amendments I wish I.
After propose that.
Very well so we have an
amendment proposed by Senator
Moores let me first go to the to
Sanchez Representative McQueen
Senator Tallman your thoughts on
the cement.
Mr chair thank you for that I
appreciate the advice about the
following your amendments I
would suggest if you have
amendments you can give me a
heads up so I can look at them
before the hearing that would be
be it appreciated I'm trying to
figure digest this on the fly I
was correct on the two three
thirteen reference it is the
confidential nature of the
services.
So this is the reason this
information has not been
published in the past is because
of that and that's why we're
saying not withstanding that
section
my concern with.
Simply saying that the
Legislative Council Service will
publish this information is
because it's very clear that
clearly to me is not
retroactive.
So I don't think the Legislative
Council Service out I I would
worry about creating a duty for
them the publishes information
in opening the door to going
back and in twenty years.
because there are some members
who are concerned about that.
You know I was just trying to
fix the system going forward and
up and Representative between we
will be happy to add and public
ability loss that will make it
profitable
be getting the first regular
session of the fifty fifth
legislature and that will
clarify that in an applicability
Clause without leaving that
permanently in the sectional
that would take care of that
issue and I'll just say with
regard to section two thirteen.
Our.
To just thirteen I think loses
its applicability once we pass
the bill there are.
So I'm not worried about that if
we're talking about bills that
have been passed.
Our.
To amend my amendments since
your screen to include the
applicability clause to
The first session of the fifty
legislature sure.
Be happy to know.
And and I would notes.
Are also Representative McQueen
that this is this is a long line
of amendment bill that we've
applied to this to this bill.
Recently in previous years so
that could not be a surprise to
you.
in fact I'll just tell you I
didn't bother reading this bill
before this morning because I
just assumed that you
incorporated but this committee
has consistently done.
Okay so with the correct
spelling reflective.
You were supposed to become
section forty.
And then we just simply add a
section to the applicability of
making applicables to the first
I'll be getting the fourth round
of session the fifty fifth
legislature I think I think that
does take care of that I
appreciate your you're concerned
about it not being retroactive.
and I do think that's
appropriate concern
Any other comments
Senator IBM Representative
McQueen or senator Tom.
If we go back to the committee.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chair and us.
Thank you.
This morning I had the the
printer is out and says new
material capital outlay
expenditures.
Beginning with the.
First session of the twenty
fifth legislature the council
service shall publish.
This list so we this was already
incorporated.
Yeah and and and so so.
Sorry.
I guess are common when you do
substance law.
A lot of times will put dates
inception of law and then twenty
years later there's a date there
that's frankly irrelevant to the
reality of what happens with the
statute.
It's more elegant to do an
applicability costs so this is
dated February the twelfth two.
Number two one nine oh one five
point one eight I see well I'm
not going to.
Are you I just thought I'd bring
it up going.
Mr chair go ahead.
Well.
Anything else Representative.
Mr I'm just trying to
Understand that the change in
the the timing so the bill has
ten days after action.
In your amendment says thirty
days after the gentleman that is
correct this is the conversation
we've had with you at least
three times if not I in this
committee over the years the
conversation has consistently
been Representative that the
governor has twenty days to sign
or veto bills after the end of
the legislative session this way
it is done on a date certain so
that the council service can
anticipate that the public can
anticipate and that is after the
time when the governor has
signed and vetoed bills so that
someone's capital outlay is not
held in the balance with regard
to other things maybe going.
Thank you Mr.
Was senator Clemente so in on
the act Billy because you have
an effective the first regular
session of the original bill sit
second session thank you for
legislature to we are I think we
should probably keep that
consistent that comes into
affect up to sectors such as.
Charlie summers that was I had a
changed on the house floor.
I do have a point that in
response and act this
legislative session.
Our.
So okay is there any is there
any objection Senator Stewart.
Thank you Mr chairman I hate to
be a stickler for your amendment
here but
I I would just assume that the.
that the T. online twenty one it
will be automatically
capitalized I don't think we can
assume that.
Are they part of the drafting
manual it would automatically be
capitalist.
Good to know all right thank
you.
I do appreciate you of think
questions about that though when
you in only.
Well is there any objection in
the committee to adopting.
Senator Morris agenda that is on
screen.
Very well Miss Vigil please show
all members present voting in
favor of the amendment on the
screen we now go back to the
committee and Star Wars did you
have anything else.
Mr about six care about.
close issue about thank you for
all Senator o'neill thank you Mr
chair and and photo Committee
members and sponsors are we're I
think we're all very familiar
with this bill
I I just remember when Senator
rue had it on the floor couple
years ago whenever that was and
I thought we we had a kind of
worked out a deal a compromise
and then he pulled it.
No disposal was wondering why he
told it but I guess he wanted
more of pure version of it but
anyway I know that this issue is
different for our rural
colleagues and and I'm looking
forward to hearing from them on
this but as one who is proud of
you know I do my best to capital
outlay and put a lot of thought
into it and I I like to brag
about it honestly to my district
so so I I just think this is
common sense and I fully support
this bill thank you.
Thank you very much other
members of the committee.
Let me just say that that this
is something that I've I've
advocated for for several years
other people being here in the
bill so I have not carried the
bills myself I think I'm out of
introduced at once
what about one of the
interesting things do the
advocacy from New Mexico in
depth who has worked on us
legislators if they would be
willing to share their capital
outlay and allow to be published
is that I think it's taking some
of the stigma out of.
And I found myself as a as a
procedural purist as one of the
one of the few legislators whose
been unwilling to share my
capital outlay specifics with
New Mexico in depth not because
I didn't believe they should be
made public but because I
believe we should change the
law.
And and kind of continue to
advocate for that and I
appreciate Representative
McQueen the the the early
tireless work that you've done
on this I think Senator o'neill
may have carried this bill at
some point
and I know others have have
weighed into this issue and and
so and and Center comment thank
you for joining in on this as
well I do think this is
something we deserve to let the
public now one of my goals long
term with capital outlay is
actually.
and I think this opens the door
for that is right now we have
the the sponsored lists and then
be allocated lists the sponsor
less have been have been made
public the the allocated less
have not been made public in the
sponsored less somewhat
misleading for people because
this is just we're proposing I
think it's a good idea somebody
ought to fund it or somebody out
to fund part of that some point
I would like for us to get away
from the Sanchez I think I think
what happened this year I
started last year some but but
this year just a comment where
everything was what what.
the applicant the the projects
were done online.
Thank opens the door for us to
get away from sponsorships of
projects because all the
informations already and put in
the computer by those seeking
the projects and and I think by
legislative rule or maybe a
revised statute in a future here
we can define how people would
do their spot that get the lists
submitted are are the projects
submitted for potential
allocation I wish point then we
would have the single list of
allocations and that would
provide greater transparency for
the public about what actually
gets allocated as opposed to
having you know each of us
getting maybe a million or two
million dollars but the
sponsored list looks like we're
we're trying to fund thirty or
forty million dollars and and
it's unclear to the public that
whether we're actually we're
actually I think we can we can
find that much or not so this is
an essential building block
towards doing that and again
Representative McQueen I I do
thank you as well as the the
various other sponsors who
worked at who worked on this
issue over the years and I do
agree I think actually Senator
Steinborn has worked on this as
well and I he has a bill up this
morning Representative will be
able to get to and our and so
anyway I do think I I have a
good books that this is the year
that would make it happen so
Senator Ortiz it can.
Thank you Mr chairman I just
wanted to make a brief comment
about.
Well what I'm you is possibility
of a hybrid between reposition
the senator Collins advocating
to to so we had an independent
commission do it and and our
current system which I don't
think is as dysfunctional as
everybody makes it out to be
but could be certainly improved
along the lines that you're
suggesting and that would be
that we would have.
Not as much money bridge
provided because two four one
frankly two point one million
for each of us.
Was was in some ways it
offensive in order to try to
figure out how best allocated
and I do agree with you that
when you put up the sponsorship
list and then compare it to the
appropriated list it looks like
you really shorting a whole
bunch of people that you had
made a promise to.
And and and and and I do things
that
major projects university
projects for example that or or
the city's building projects
like
the rail yards on the for the it
there initiated changes
shouldn't be a letdown
to individual legislative
decision making those should be
part of a statewide plan but
there's still a place for.
Vigil legislators to try to fund
projects in their districts that
would never rise to the to the
level of.
The importance in the statewide
scheme of things but that are
very important to their district
so it might be a smaller amount
for each of us but it would be I
think a much more rational and
defensible of course and what
we're doing now.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Absolutely thank you very much
R. what is the pleasure of the
committee.
Sure.
Once you pass Mr chairman.
I well so we have a motion for
to pass from Santo Lopez with a
second from Senator Moores.
Are saying no one else are
seeking the floor at this time.
Miss Vigil please call the roll.
Senator Baca.
Yes.
Senator Lopez.
Yes Senator Moores yes.
Yes Neil yes.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Yes.
Senator Pirtle.
Yes.
Senator Stewart yes Senator
Wirth yes.
Senator Ingle.
Your.
Your muted Senator Ingle.
Senator Ingle.
This is on passage of house bill
fifty five capital outlay.
Yes.
No.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Yes.
Well so with one dissenting vote
you have a do pass this bill now
moves on to the Senate finance
committee.
You are several of us time to
amend our capital outlay
requests for this year I'm
struck
very well congratulations and I
do look for to seeing this like
when it comes on for thank thank
you Mr chair thank you members
of the committee.
Thank you.
Okay so we now
We now move to house resolution
well.
And
And so house resolution twelve
actually.
All right I'm going to.
faxed Representative Eli to see
if he is available to see if
used in the waiting room.
Representative Rubio is in the
waiting room she's won the
cosponsors so very well
Representative Rubio if you
would please present on house
joint resolution well.
Thank you Mr chair
yes so hospital health joint
resolution twelve and I just
text
I just text Representative Eli
as well but house bill house
joint resolution twelve you've
seen a version of this before in
previous years and it's
primarily in relations to trying
to address
our citizen legislature and
working towards the possibility
of of of legislators actually
receiving a salary as you all
know we're one of the only
states the country that does not
get one and so
this house joint resolution
which sent to voters a question
on whether or not we created
commission that would then move
towards of looking at salaries
not only just for legislators
but for other public officers
like the governor
etcetera and so.
That's essentially what this
bill does is to work towards
creating that commission if I
don't know if you've got your he
might have some specifics but
I'm open to answering any
questions.
Well thank you very much Miss
Vigil do we have anybody who
events and interesting
commenting on this front result.
Mr chair believe we have the
chief Supreme Court justice
Michael we help all rights.
Mister Chief Justice please
press.
Senator the company a little bit
off guard
Can I have one minute please go
to to get my stuff together
here.
Well.
This this is the time for public
comment so if you'd like all
right thank you thank you
senator Soto okay I very Senate.
Ordinary.
The Senate Mr chair propping
right.
Thank I've got anyway thank you
ladies and and gentleman of the
of the committee Mr chairman and
members of the committee the
judiciary is very very grateful.
For this.
Resolution being introduced
together with S. J. R. for units
produced.
There are some what we perceive
to be some some flaws and let me
first of all address H. H. J. R.
four HR twelve since that's the
matter before you.
as originally proposed HSA are
for.
This contained a provision that
have two representatives of the
judiciary on the committee.
We we fully supported that it
was and we end up as I
understand it it's been reduced
to one percent on their we would
respectfully request that that
be increased to two let me
explain to you my reasoning
first of all we have over two
hundred judicial officers in the
state of New Mexico work full
time their pay is their
livelihood compared to a hundred
and twelve legislators who work
part time it is not their
livelihood at least at the
present time so that be in the
the situation and the judiciary
unique calling for branch of
government it's our position
that we should have equal
representation on the committee
secondly and this is not much
less important but.
Magistrate judges are not
specifically included in the
list of officers
as it's it's just it was
introduced we would respectfully
request that they be included in
the list although we understand.
And recognize that magistrate
judges are elected officials and
therefore covered by the
proposed a constitutional
amendment third you know judges
have to make a lot of decisions.
Some of them are not very
politically up a popular out
yeah and there's room in this
legislation your eyes proposed
retaliation in in the sense of
reducing salaries during the
term of a judge or justice we
would respectfully request that
has is support for the existing
constitutional provision for
magistrates that APA provision
be inserted in the up proposed
the legislation here the house
J. R. for to include a provision
that salaries of judges not be
reduced by a subsequent the
committee with those of
suggestions.
The letter I can assure you that
the legislature the the Supreme
Court court of appeals just all
the district courts across the
strait all the magistrate court
judges the metropolitan court
judges what we ended to see I
think we support this
constitutional proposed
constitutional amendment I stand
ready for any question.
Thank you very much Mr chair
trust must be hello is there
anybody else who had logged in I
would request to make public
comment Mr chair there is not
well Representative Ely I do see
you having joined us welcome to
the Senate rules committee
Representative if you're going
to
log in from your phone you may
want to read name your phone
from the generic iPhone so we
know who you are and waiting but
are nonetheless
Representative Rubio already
made an initial presentation
would you like to add any
anything to her works.
And you are muted Sir.
I there we go can you hear me
now Mr chairman yes we I
apologize yeah I you know how
the drillers last eight days I
know I'm here Representative
Rubio did a fine job and I will
stand for questions thank you Mr
thank you very much are very
well we go to questions and
comments from committee and we
start with Representative course
that's right senator Morris.
All the things you called me
over the years.
Well you know we're still on the
phone hello.
It's wrong or.
I I I actually Representative
Rubio I think actually leave us
a review we actually introduced
this your first year gather or
something similar it's something
I've been wanting to do it.
For a long long time
and have worked with the Senator
Ivey Soto on the thanks I do
that just say I have concerns
this way I liked it's not just
because I like our Senate bill
for better let's see some
conflicts that I in this
provision with I'm reading this
correctly.
That basically it's we as the
politicians collectively are
pointing to people who we will
be and then we'll be deciding
what our salaries are so I see
that it's just one degree of
separation what the public or
excuse as.
I was trying to get paid
and and make some money out
there that are oil I've always
for the idea put it into a affix
Commission stats on what you
guys addressed why you've gone
this route versus what we did in
this committee before without
making the ethics commission.
Representative Ely then so
Representative Rubio.
So I'm Mister chairman Senator
my hope is I have talked to
chair a little bit I am open to
an amendment to talk about the
ethics commission I'm hoping
that's coming and I apologize to
everybody for being so late
we're I got locked out and
community solar in a are a
Senate bill that's making its
way through but my my hope is I
I I had I had one chance in the
chair and and thoughtful that I
think I'm I would be open to an
amendment that would be more
consistent with what the
Senator is talking about thank
you I thank you for that all
look forward to that amendment
some I don't have a drafters
Oakley when my college does that
I also just think that you have
created another order commission
to make it two thousand boards
commissions that we have
and I know C. after our FY are
so there's no cost to create a
new border Commission rolled out
so also you can create a couple
thousand dollars okay I'll look
I'll I'll I'll stop here in the
hopefully someone has there are.
Discussed.
Representative really did you
want to comment before we go on
to the next of member.
Thank you Mr chair I'm I mean I
agree a hundred percent with
Representative you hi I'm
certainly open to amendment that
is favorable for us to move
forward I think this is a really
important issue and and should
be addressed
as as quickly as possible in
order to really work towards
modernizing our legislature.
Very well R. C. R. senator
Morris anything else.
You are are you done.
Yes Representative
Representative also works.
Thank you Mr chair and
good to see you Mr Chief Justice
I just I want to start by again
thanking Representative Rubio
and representative Ely and
really quite frankly you center
Ivey Soto all for continuing
this discussion we've come
really close to doing something
and I and I just think this is
an incredibly important staff
for all the different impacted.
Entities are including the
legislature and I will say the
judiciary the what we you know
just having been here for
seventeen years and watched the
judiciary kind of stock on our
oil and gas roller coaster I
believe they have two point
seven percent of our member it
might be floating of the total
budget for a separate branch of
government we're at point oh
four percent of four tenths of
one percent for the legislature
and.
You know I I just feel like our
judges need to have compensation
that's competitive across you
know the country but certainly
in the state I mean being able
to recruit judge is to take on
what I think is.
Really as big a public service
or more than what we do is is a
tough thing when the salaries
are at the very bottom of the of
the barrel I will say I also do
favor the approach Senator Ivey
Soto of using the ethics
commission I just.
Again I really worry that and
and I hear what you're saying
Chief Justice about you know
wanting to have your votes on
that on that new board but
that's reach the exact problem
we're trying to get out of is
then it comes down who who gets
lobbied to get put on the board
and you can control those
schools is having this done in a
independent way so R. I've got
to say I I tend to agree with.
With the chairs offer H. on this
and think we all need to kind of
sit down and really take a deep
breath about what this you know
what this would mean if we do it
in that way because I just think
we've.
You know we set up the ethics
commission
And and I do feel like it it can
handle this without getting
into.
You know the representation
issues in a lobbying that's
going to go on so I've got to
say I tend to agree with Senator
Moores and and appreciate the
Representative say they're
willing to consider the change
and I Mr chair at I don't know
if you have something drafted up
that would make that seems to be
happy to make a motion if you do
I think I have your amendments
Senator Wirth.
On it right now.
Yeah I would move this
ammendment point two two oh
seven oh six point one for
discussion purposes and also I
believe Miss Vigil sent this out
to all the members Senator Wirth
and it has to be delivered to
the committee look in all the
members and so it it is in
everybody's email again the the
total number is zero seven zero
six point one.
And as I read this amendments.
The amendment has the effect of
of striking the provisions of.
House resolution while and
amending by inserting in lieu
thereof effectively the
provisions of of sentiment
resolution for our which would
R. and and up including out of
the question then that will go
on the ballot.
Which would to be to find the
state ethics commission the sole
authority to review and
establish salaries every two
years for all elected state
officers and to remove the
existing legislative authority
to set certain elective state
officer salaries.
Representative Eli is this a
family moments of the
significance of what the
comments before I'm here Mister
chair I think sure I'm not unit
Mr chairman yes is friendly and.
Okay very well questions or
comments from committee.
Saying no questions from
committee is there any objection
to adopt in this amendment.
Seeing no objection of the
amendment is adopted Miss Vigil
please show all members present
voting in the affirmative.
Is there further discussion on
house resolution wealth.
Mr chairman of that if I may
speak to that please actually
we've already have public
comment thank you very much Mr
gives us
public I'm not there's been no
public comment on the amendment
not that you already have on
this matter thank you very much
your process.
But.
Senator o'neill did you have
comments yes I would like to
move it to pass on this fine
bill as amended.
Thank you very much we have a
motion for two passed as amended
from Senator o'neill is there a
and a second.
Are very well is from Senator
being Ingle your ability in our
works very well.
I would just if we could.
I would again I think we're
going to need to hear.
Kind of from the Chief Justice
as this moves along.
And so again it's obviously up
to you as the chair and we did
go to public comment on the bill
but I I just I would ask that
the Chief Justice to have the
opportunity to just share his
thoughts briefly given the time
and given what's on our agenda
but again I leave that up to
your discretion what we do have
other bills that we're trying to
get to work Senator Steinborn
has been waiting very patiently
on a bill that be is that
several times to be are to be
heard we also have
Senator pope that is that that
that has a bill up
This does go through one more
Canadian.
And so there will be ample
opportunity for public comment
however Mr justice if you would
like one minute to to say
something on the amended
resolution you may do so before
we left yes thank you Mr
chairman thank you Mr Majority
Leader I appreciate it I want to
make something very clear the
judiciary does not want to have
representation on the ethics
commission.
What we are proposing that I
have sent members of the Senate
Judiciary Committee thank you Mr
chairman our proposed exact
language what we we're proposing
is that the ethics commission
together with a two appointees
by the Chief Justice shall
constitute the state ethics
commission salary committee
which with that sets set
salaries for for all those the
the our elected state officials
we could and they would all only
have voting power in that
connection as a member of that
committee so I want to correct
any misimpression that may have
been created the the the
judiciary has no interest
whatsoever in and sitting on the
ethics commission except
percentage salaries as proposed
and with with that we would very
strongly at and is to the attic
we supported thank you Mr
chairman I appreciate the one.
Mr.
Mister Chief Justice of packages
has been very quick question how
how what what representation
just Judiciary have as voting
members of the legislature.
No.
And that's the status quo right
now thank you very much R. C.
nobody else seeking for to speak
Miss Vigil please call the roll.
Senator Baca.
Senator Lopez.
It's a question Senator Moores
yes.
Senator o'neill yes
are you back.
Three hundred dollars connected
him Senator Ortiz Pino.
Yes.
Well.
Sure sure.
Was that I know.
And this was the No.
And Senator Baca I'll go back
you know.
And Senator Stewart.
Yes.
Senator Wirth yes.
Senator Ingle yes.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Yes ma'am Representative Ely and
Representative Rubio
congratulations on a seventy two
to you have a due pass
recommendation from the Senate
rules committee.
You Mr chair thank you very much
we now move to the Senate
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn if you would
like to present on Senate bill
three fourteen the state.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Colleagues to Senate bill three
fourteen isn't bill that I've
been working on for several
years.
It's an important very important
transparency bill that frankly
unlocks some of the greatest
mysteries of the legislative
process which is who is really
behind in involved the mechanics
of power in the mechanics of
supporting legislation creating
legislation working to defeat
legislation what the bill does
is it requires that lobbyist or
lobbyist employers have to
report with the secretary of
state.
Session unless there retained
after the session is ended
before the governor's acted on a
bill to report their activity on
a piece of legislation
including whether there for
cancer took another position.
They are only required to file
once on a piece of legislation
so that I have to require every
interaction the legislature
throughout the session or let
alone multiple legislators they
just have to file that enter
that they got involved on a
piece of legislation here was a
position if they chose to if
there are positions change to
make shows the file again they
certainly could this this bill
does not prohibit that.
It does defined that the
secretary of state will come up
with the timing of that filing
as well as were filings and as
well as the electronic format
that way we can they can take
the input from lobbyist frankly
this employers all what's the
best timing to do that the best
way to do that I think that'll
be a very inclusive process
Still also Mr chairman committee
includes those that work on the
development of the bill may
never show up in the legislative
process but they help to develop
bill suddenly boom you see a
bill in the legislative process
don't really know where it came
from so it's always one of the
questions I asked myself since
my first as a legislators what's
this about.
What this bill come from.
That is a huge part of informing
understanding the context of
what the bill does because the
story here about why the bills
needed is does not always.
This is usually much simpler
than that.
And
And so that's what the bill does
Mr chairman I think I think it
is really important so that not
only is legislators we have all
the information we need to make
good decisions the governor has
the information they need full
story behind a bill before that
and signed a bill into law or
don't and finally so that the
citizens of New Mexico have a
real window into.
All the ingredients that are at
play.
Legislation and.
All thank you David evaluate the
merits of those issues you know
without this provision in place
Mr chairman I think frankly we
have a system that is primed to
be gained.
Because people don't have to
disclose that and and and that
is part of the strategy of.
How how the agency works.
Fortunately is not.
The kind of us being misled but
it's also right for corruption.
In terms of not being able to
follow follow the money as they
say so this is a great I think
this would be tremendous reform
for the state of New Mexico and
I will tell you that I believe
about fifteen states require
this.
About twenty five states
require.
Require a lobbyist employers
report compensation that's the
other piece of legislation up
for that not been scheduled but
but this one I'm passion about
it will tell you yes I know that
the this was a recommendation of
the independent ethics
commission and then I consulted
with the independent ethics
commission and many of those
organizations on the bill itself
so with that I will stand for
questions okay Mr chair I'm
sorry someone had a suggestion
on an amendment which is in your
possession if you would like to
address that talk about that it
just deals with.
The development of legislation
do you have a tool to number
four that amendments are sure
to.
Bear with me.
Two oh two numbers point two two
zero seven one two point one.
There was someone to.
Zero yes seven one two point one
well and it is up on the screen
right now it would be then on
page two.
Right protection protocol and
the in the
Final.
And then to line seven after the
period.
And start the language on screen
yes.
Act.
Very well
so we have
Sanchez amendments
for the bill
are there any questions on the
Sanchez amendments.
One.
Senator Ingle do have a question
on the moment.
Where the amendment reject
there's talking about a
particular bill just talking
about something ordered and well
it probably needs to be amended
and we were just having a Cup of
coffee or something a couple of
months the numbers of bill had
been introduced.
Yet the idea is that something
that's supposed to be reported.
So
For more yes Mr chairman
Senator Ingle it's a good
question we have a we have a
very specific definition of
lobbying in New Mexico law that
that when it's been done and I
don't think it's accidental if
someone's trying to talk to you
about a bill but when that
threshold crossed it's Rick
would be required to be reported
and it's attempting to influence
a decision related to any matter
to consider being considered by
the legislative branch of state
government or any legislative
committee or any legislative
matter requiring action by the
governor we're waiting action by
the governor so a bill
introduced it wouldn't apply.
correct unless they're talking
to you about the development of
a of a bill in which case this
amendment actually specifically
deals with the development of
legislation and so you know
it's.
That's I think if they're if
they're talking to you about a
bill that's being developed then
we're not talking about a bill
just talking about an idea yes
well if they're trying to insult
the influence an official action
or a bill yes if they're just
shoot the ball about the general
issue probably now it's a.
So it's kind of talking to
someone about teacher salaries
is that is that something that
needs to be reported.
Only this.
I'm sorry go ahead and answer
Simon please remember to go
through the chair.
Yes sorry Mr chairman no you
know Mr chair Senator I think
that the the definition of
lobbying is there and if someone
crosses that threshold and there
is an official action pending
orders bills pending they know
that that's what they're trying
to influence if they are just
having a general conversation
and then they're not and I think
they'll be clear on whether it's
a process threshold in their
requirement to to report that so
they don't health report by the
way I talk to Senator Ingle on
this date at this coffee shop
they just have to report they
just have report frankly during
the session.
I lobbied on this bill which can
include the development of that
bill and I was in favor of it
that's all they have to report
they don't have to report the
other incidentals this bill does
not require that.
Thank you.
Our Senator Ortiz you know is
this on the amendment.
Yes.
Mr chair Senator Ingle is
raising a really good point and
and I certainly do things in the
Senator Steinborn so basically
concern needs to be addressed
but.
You know there are a lot of
times when legislators call of
lobbyists for information.
What we're doing this bill how
would that affect you.
So this is the one who's kind of
being being.
So listen to it rather than the
other way around none none none
solicit in the sense of support
registered for information and
and then what does this also
include just simply testifying
in a bill at a hearing on a bill
to the.
Federation of state county and
municipal employees opposes this
bill is that considered
lobbying.
Oh absolutely Mr chairman that's
that's the most common form of
lobbying we're aware of is when
they show up in front of you but
absolutely anytime you try to
influence.
Policy or legislative action
which that is that is under New
Mexico law classic definition of
lobbying.
So yes.
Very well so let's go back to
the to the issue of the
The proposed amendments this
being a sponsor's amendment I I
tend to give deference to
Sanchez amendments and deal with
that when in consideration of
the bill itself senator Morris.
By thank you Mr thank you very
much attention or you get your
attention Senator Steinborn I
see what you're talking about on
follows the lobbying and what
this amendment but what we just
did a bill dealing with capital
outlay.
Obviously we get lots of lots of
calls.
Little league city councilors
county commissioners of course
we get the you're you're on
Albuquerque to get us a lot is
from Albuquerque we get all this
from I guess lobbyist from
Sandia.
Pueblo but also your calls from
an send your governor before the
session same thing with the
county trying to commissioners
of this eight four eight on on
Monaco on you you all got some
calls.
I would that possibly be
reported under this amendments.
Well this ammendment really Mr
Mr chair or is just deals with
the development of legislation.
Well a legislation.
It certainly can be because
appropriations and up in
legislation having said that
it's important to know who
qualifies for the act at all
qualifies for this bill at all
you have to be either I required
under a lot of filing
expenditure report for
registration report under our
our reporting act and what that
doesn't include is it doesn't
include an individual working on
their behalf it doesn't include
an employee of an officer of the
state or political subdivision
or Indian tribe acting in their
official capacity so it doesn't
involve your county
commissioners saying Hey mark I
really need this fire station.
It doesn't include the day
player who's coming up for the
day saying Hey I really need
your support of our shelter
if they have to be retained in
an official capacity as a
lobbyist compensated we're doing
it in a substantial or regular
basis for the purpose of
lobbying and that's how we
define lobbyist under law and
would be applicable in this bill
so what I say.
The current definition it's
taken care of
you will our yes so we got the
governor calls and since India
it's not reporter but it was
lobbyist also be allowed to suss
report.
Correct Mr chairman.
Center.
Thank you all
right well is there any
objection to adopting of the
Sanchez moments.
Seeing no objection the
amendment is adopted is not part
of the bill.
So let us go to substantive
discussion then of the.
Bill.
If we could and
This time or your sense of that
a moment ago about what a
lobbyist isn't isn't and and and
and actually.
R. was true that an individual
appears on on his or her on
behalf in actualization.
Hello this is Dr.
I'm an employee of the state or
its political subdivisions.
Is our.
Is is not considered a lobbyist.
R. if yeah the the designation
has been filed.
In writing of that person what
the secretary of state's office
designations napping pod in
writing with secretary of
state's office then that person
effect is a lobbyist.
so the fire chief asking for a
a new fire station on last the
on the more are the head of the
county commission R. as
Has has filed with the secretary
of state's office a designation
that personal factors this the
the little person asking I'm
absolutely that person is
actually in fact a a lobbyist.
And and also notes that
lobbyist.
Meeting somebody
It could somebody those cops in
response the specific purpose of
lobbying but it's also.
But it's not.
Let me just let me just go to
This press yes real quick when
notice here does someone have to
be paid in order to be a
lobbyist in New Mexico.
Mr chair no there there are a
number of uncompensated
lobbyists that are registered
lobbyists with the secretary of
state's office volunteers are
also considered lobbyist than if
they're trying to find a Fischer
to your.
Madam.
Please go ahead.
So yeah absolutely absolutely
like a like a A. R. P. there are
volunteers who are lobbying on a
substantial regular basis which
is part of the definition of of
lobbying and who has to register
as a lobbyist and this bill
intentionally captures them
because it's equal opportunity
right we we don't we're not just
trying to capture the paid guys
in the big companies were
wanting to capture the full
picture so what have been
incomplete to not include those
types of organizations however.
Regarding little league so they
are a lobbyist under our law it
means any individual who is
compensated.
Or is designated by a group's
representative on a substantial
or regular basis for the purpose
of lobbying specifically
excluding an individual who
appears on its own behalf in
connection with legislation
artificial action now if you're
if you so so you're a little
league coach in here not
representing a government you're
representing yourself basically
in a volunteer capacity if your
county commissioner.
Just say Hey I want your help on
this capital outlay you are not
Representative you organization
on a quote substantial regular
basis for the purpose of
lobbying so you're not required
to file as a lobbyist you're not
considered a lobbyist and I
would ask Miss respite dust if
that statement is is accurate.
And Mr chair Senator Steinborn
we would ask those those
individuals can't county
managers to I filed a statement
with our office specifically you
know appointing them as it
doesn't need to speak on behalf
of of an elected or appointed
official.
But I think the law the media's
with allies Mr chairman and I I
think people don't process
threshold but frankly they're
not violating the law by not
they're not considered a
lobbyist by my way of looking at
this and they're not in
violation of it.
On the example the strip.
Hello although if they're
supposed to be following report
and they don't follow report I
think that may end up with more
of a questions about that what
amount.
Yes.
Is expected of violating this
registration act where
complaints filed.
Mr chair there there filed with
the secretary of state's office
at this time okay and then are
they okay so so and and and all
complaints and found it's States
office those are public record
when they get found right.
That is correct Mr chair.
Thank you and
And so as you have this amended
them any anybody it's not just
them anything that somebody's
lobbying on but it's also during
the session options prior to the
session that would be our in
terms of potentially.
Jerry legislation are supporting
legislation that would also be
covered by this is that not
correct.
Yes Mr chairman it would include
the development of legislation
specifically session yes and
then
And I also note that the benefit
the report or the legislative
session the part is to be filed
prior to the chairman of the
legislative session.
Correct.
Correct Mr chairman so anybody
who ends up.
Jumping in to help out with an
issue on the last day of the
session would have to come up
with our report or or whatnot as
they did that.
The person that waited Mr
chairman I can see your point
And
That could that could be a
challenge but I I would think
that
Yes we can either address that
by amendment or or maybe that
could be addressed by a role
with the secretary of state.
That Senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr know you're on a
roll there I I said a question
earlier about we're talking
about the little eight in A. R.
P. so I want to make sure that
it is the intent I understood
that right.
neko.
that was the intent that it
applies to all lobbying
including the not advocacy
groups and the nonprofit switch
are extremely active around here
correctly start Mr chair Senator
Steinborn.
And Mister chairman Senator it
absolutely does it again what
the law for the distinction in
the law if you are lobbying on
if you are registered as a
lobbyist which by the way A. R.
P. these non profits that are
have a presence at the
roundhouse they all registered
as lobbyists because they are
lobbying on a substantial basis
their designated by this
employer to do it yes they're
all required in this and I
intentionally added that if you
look at the beginning of the
bill it references if you are
required to file an expenditure
report or registration report
one of those apply to kind of
the nonprofit.
Non compensated players is still
have to.
Mr chair Senator have you given
any thought about the potential
of the unintended consequences
of from.
squelching maybe input into the
process so my field as someone
who's not is explored Paul you
know I'm I look around this
committee we have many of us
were active in the legislative
process before we became Senator
so we need to process I look at
here you can myself you or to
see
of Bill
if you were nervous or your your
about to break off you our
conversation with the
Legislature about it took issue
could not our.
Two strikes fear in some persons
are today I can't really talk to
this legislator about this
because I might be violating
some reporting law
It would almost have a
consequence of.
Depriving people the ability to
participate in this process like
many of us on four June elected
officials.
Mr chairman senator Morris it
definitely is a transparency
he's legislation right and with
transparency is kind of like
when the camera came on suddenly
Hey it's a different set of
considerations it's a different
level of visibility to the
public that has to be considered
and that's a good thing that's
part of part of the the the
winds out of this having said
that what you brought up with an
elected official who needs to
talk to senator Morris about an
issue.
At the definition of this
excludes any elected or
appointed official of the state
or its political subdivisions
acting in their official
capacity so so I think people
very quickly learn the rules and
you know just an education
process.
Mr I appreciate that answer
sorry I was more talking about
the of the average year of a
member of the nonprofit or
something like that he was
trying to get more involved in
the process like for instance
Georgene CPO used to lobby for
gun a legislator for his
advocacy groups and once very
active in.
what would worry me is that
someone is like Hey I would like
to get involved but they're not
also face with requirements and
fear that they might not.
You might be getting a ball
they're not haven't found the
proper reports Mr chair Senator
but now they're like sh well I
can't talk to Now Senator to see
you know about this because I
might violate the law.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator I
appreciate the concern I think
it's just an education process
as to the rules of the game
having said that the issue of
people.
Playing a role in legislation
and not wanting that maybe now
maybe that's the reason why I
don't wanna they would be
uncomfortable with yes it's part
of why this is needed is it's
it's obscuring its obscuring
those rules and what we do that
then in our decision making
eleven transparent to the public
so I hear I hear what you're
saying and I think it's just
part of the transparency that is
appropriate for us making a
seven point four billion dollar
budget losses affect people's
lives yes I I totally respect
that Mr chair Senator sh in
other thing just popped in my
head is I do where I saw a good
serves about people were you
said it's going to be an
educational process I don't
think about the advocates of
Mostar groups
but you know most people don't
spend.
The stride as you and I do in
the chair dollars on thank you
know about what happens up here
and it's already a cost out.
And a hostile intimidating
system that we have up here a
lot of you come up here and
someone's fearful that the money
out but I have some concerns
about that then forge insulin
also just pop my Mr chair
Senator is we all are asked to
draft legislation drops Legisla-
are you know for to take a look
at what it looks like
you know we all have council
service work with our groups and
stuff and then we never ever you
madam deuces jazz get our paper
on your like Wallace stupid idea
market introduce as an example
for you drafted and then I'd
take over to Jerry and Jerry
says on the right here this of
my committee as the chair since
our are opposed to it so you
never to do so you know that's
what happens all the time up
here you spend a lot of time and
effort on that
how would you handle that Mr
chair Senator she soon as our
request two things what is what
we we wish all of us actually if
you're you're breaking up Mr
chair.
You're not yes okay our.
Selection is the actual non
action of a state official.
No action is not introducing the
legislation that would that
still in action and as well as
for example when someone asked
us to write a letter on on an
issue that is action or non
action.
Would also be.
reported I do not I was eleven
oh two were supposed to be on
the floor eleven o'clock I don't
want to cut the conversation
short we can do to pick this up
and of the time unless there's a
motion at this.
We're also seeing no motion at
this time we will we will come
back to this bill and another
hearing set rules committee is
recessed at this time thank you
very much we'll pick up with
some awards when this comes.
