We're here with the Kerry over
for Senate bill three eighty
five the wild horse management
Senator Woods and McKenna and
then we got Senate bill four oh
seven following and Senate bill
three ninety seven both the
Senator McKenna and Senate bill
four fifteenths Sanchez and we
do have a hard stop at the
eleven fifteen so that we can
have a couple minutes before we
get on the floor.
we're going on the floor at
eleven thirty right.
Okay all right so we'll have a
hard stop at eleven fifteen see
how far we get Senator Woods I
believe you had a.
Some amendments or was it a
committee substitute a committee
set up Madam chairman.
there were several amendments
and I'll try to show you where
they are in this committee did
so that we have.
Okay all right you may begin.
Okay
what we talked about senator
which did you have some expert
witnesses
I'm I'm.
The Senator McKenna is going to
be my expert witness with today
if the cobbler can't be an
expert.
service questions.
I think you may begin Senator
with madam chair yes.
Procedure do we need to have a
do not pass on SB three eighty
five so that we can move forward
into the committee substitute we
could do it will when motion or
do we want to have discussion
first on the.
On the substitute.
Is anybody.
Madam chair the substitutes
gonna replace the existing bill
yes I think what we do need to
do is we need to a motion of do
not pass on okay bill and our
and then and do passed for
discussion on this committee so
all right thank okay
you have a motion.
Sure.
Representative.
It
was in a.
Force and it but we do not pass
on Senate bill three eighty five
Rebecca you take the role.
Sorry about that Senator Griggs.
Yes.
Senator McKenna.
Yes.
Senator Sanchez.
Yes.
Senator Shendo.
Yes.
Senator had a meal yes Senator
Pinto.
Yes we have six yes is for do
not pass.
You and then substation on the
committee step.
That
the Canadian.
Madam chair moves that we are.
Except the committee showed for
discussion.
The second Senator McKenna are
used to getting.
It.
Actually a chairwoman I just
want to mention that we do have
a couple of experts
that I can mention to you when
you're ready.
Okay let's finish the motion
here and then we'll.
Get into that do have a second
thank you madam chairwoman a
second by Senator o'neal Rebecca
could you call the roll.
Yes yes.
Senator McKenna yes.
Yes yes yes.
Senator Shendo
yes Senator had a meal.
S. and Senator Pinto.
Yes.
Senator McKenna you want to
introduce there but for.
Yes thank you.
Madam chair.
For our experts we do have miss
Debbie Coburn and I don't see
her yet but also let's see yes
residents.
Yes.
Our caretaker we can yes.
Thank you.
Your last name but her name is
not here yet but I see that miss
Coburn is.
Okay thank you Senator McKenna
Senator which would you like to
have a discussion about the
committee substitute.
I thank you madam chair
we are I took it upon myself to
after having some input to you
two days ago from the public on
some of this.
Some places of this bill I took
it upon myself to further to
describe.
Or change slightly I hope it was
only slightly.
The.
Bill and
dealing over here to the first
change and on page can.
Are under Hey on page online
twenty two.
R. it describes this is actually
amendment that we put on that I
I tried to put on the last
committee meeting but the eight
reached a state agency County
municipality or political
subdivision was jurisdiction
over the land in which the wild
horses found or person that owns
or leases.
Or administers the land which a
wild horses from may request the
board to capture the wild horses
and then it it list a number of
things of when those forces
can be asked to be picked up and
one of them is up while works
presents a serious and
persistent threat to physical
harm to our has to physically
harm the health and the safety
of the human or domestic animal
of the wild horse requires
veterinary care and may need the
application of a of a
contraceptive drug or
sterilization a wild horse range
occupied by wild boars that is
exceeding its caring profession
and then we go on down and talk
about
different jurisdictions on how
that the sources can be picked
up and removed and have
different it requires important
to have a management plan that
approved for proposals of the
wild horse removal or
disposition articles opinion at
options on chart options that
the has to be approved by a
thirty day period of public
comment and then we go on down
we talk about the wild horse
herds study and what is required
to be at and
The number one it starts talking
about a wild horse population
survey using science based
methods and be at a
determination of the wild horse
range caring professions to be
taken into account factors
including available water and
forage and other wildlife and
domestic animal pressures on the
land scrape excluding the
consideration of private
property providing that the
percent of subject J. O. this
section Hey owner private
property made by agreements have
the owner's private property
considered in determining the
wild horse range current
capacity and over on J. E..
It makes a statement.
And owner of private property
continues with public property
that is part of the wild horse
range may enter into an
agreement with the state agency
economic municipality are a
political subdivisions that the
undertaking a while our study to
have their private property
considered in the determination
of the wild horses carrying
capacity the green light shall
be restricted.
All the private property and
shell and then here's some
requirements for that private
property owner to put skin in
the game.
One is to record an easement and
Office of the county clerk.
That runs with the land number
two have a term no less than
five years and your results will
during the term of the agreement
both of those I think are very
critical.
Because we want we want.
If that land the so we want it
to be remaining.
We don't want this study to be
made one day and the next day
the owner say well I didn't mean
to do that.
So we don't want this this is
going to be in relatively
expensive studies so we want we
want.
The parameters to be put forward
so that it lasts a little while.
Number three the the the legal
description of what part of the
private property is subject to
that restriction number four is
that it prohibits the private
property owner from taking any
action to impede the access by
wild horses to that part of the
private property subject to that
easement or to alter or impair
conditions on the private
property that were used in
determining the wild horse
ranging caring capacity.
In addition to any other terms
agreed to by the parties.
That is the main thrust of what
I was trying to do and I'm sure
that there's going to be people
on both sides of this issue that
want to chime in on this.
Madam chairman
I am I am ready
I'm sure that Senator McKenna
may want to chime in on this
stuff in and give her thoughts
on it also and so I I yield the
floor to her Madam chairman.
Senator McKenna.
Thank you madam madam chair and
thank you Senator Woods I I'm
really feeling quite good Madam
chair Senator Woods and my
colleagues that this bill is
really gonna take us where we
need to go the status quo is not
working.
Even though probably the best
intentions were meant years ago.
But
Our our experts that are with us
today they they're living with
the horses that we want to
provide even more welfare for
and what they're faced they're
faced with.
Not only as I've said before is
this a.
A horse.
Whether we call while our free
roaming horse it's also by human
concern as well I know of at
least two accidents.
That have occurred with.
One our being utilized another
one being heard and coming.
To a home in procedures to
provide care.
I just don't want.
A future accident to happen.
Well being
human and of course would be
even worse consequences so.
This a lot of this is it is a
people problem.
I understand folks come into
economic hardship and sometimes
they let their animals.
Free
and that's my understanding
that's what happened in the
proceed to this area some years
ago.
And.
And so those so there are now
some other cell reproduction and
I know Sandoval County and I are
Guard commissioner of rock is is
with us.
I know that they've tried to do
some of.
Using the R..
The the birth control methods.
But like anything that is living
everything gets hungry
everything needs water.
and so I.
You know when I found out
Senator would have been working
on this for years I said this is
the perfect and I've been
working really well together.
And.
I have to say to when I even
before I took my oath madam
chair and senator woods this was
the very first constituent issue
that appeared in my email box
and so
I decided very early on I'm not
going to ignore this.
So with that madam chair and
senator woods.
I think that's all I have to say
right now and I will come
further discussion and I'm
really pleased that the
livestock board has been
contacted and I hope she is
listening
because we want to know about
her concerns as well thank you
madam chair thank you Senator
Woods.
Thank you senator do we have any
questions from the committee.
Madam chair do we do we want to
have any comment from any of the
experts or any members of the
audience.
We went through the public
comment yesterday I'm not
yesterday Tuesday other than
what okay.
And I know the substitute here
and it's been adopted up in and
I know that
Senator McKenna center which but
which committee does this bill
go to next if it goes to
Judiciary madam chairman a so
public comment well they'll have
another chance in if that
depending on the what happens
here
Any questions from the committee
members.
Senator Griggs thank thank you
madam chair and and the your
Senator Woods I've I've I've
tried to be supportive of this
bill and your bill for several
years now as it as it comes
along because each problem we
have to address.
But there since I've been in the
Senate there are.
Representative this bill there's
liquor bills are scope of
practice bills and there's tax
former bills bills and those all
have difficult time moving
through the Senate.
R. this one that next committee
will be of the light and I I
know you guys will have a lot of
fun injudicious.
but H. R. I think that you know
I think the bill I think it
deserves it deserves to to move
a little bit and give you guys a
chance to hear
what folks are saying about the
committee substitute.
and show with that and measures
any other other questions all
all moved to pass on the
committee substance.
Thank you senator grace do we
have any of my questions from
the rest of the committee
members.
So we have a motion to do passed
by Senator Griggs to have a
second.
A second second second by
Senator Sanchez Rebecca could
you call the roll.
Thanks yes.
Senator McKenna.
Yes.
Senator Sanchez yes Senator
Shendo yes.
Senator how to me yes Senator
Pinto.
Yes.
We have six yes is for do pass
on the committee substitute.
Senator Woods methadone Mick and
the a new I'm glad you brought
this up I think it is a real
important issue that does have
to be discussed in the
conversation does need to take a
step forward and solutions need
to be put forth and both sides
need to come to a compromise
and solutions to this thank you
I don't know if you have any
they're they're think anything
further to say Senator Woods.
Thank you thank you very much
madam chairman for for working
with me and allowed me to roll
in and and get you a better copy
to look at thank you so much
thank you senator thank you
committee members thank you.
Thank.
Okay we got Senate bill four oh
seven four stroke to rescue one
Senator McKenna.
Thank you madam chair and and
colleagues.
So just be four oh seven.
Is hi my plan B. we've been
through the exercise of the
junior bill which is something
that was brand new for all of
us.
And when I found out that the
smallest allocation I could ask
to a state agency was fifty
thousand dollars and I have
already expressed to my leisure
and in my district that they
would have a certain amount of
for for their recommendation of
which agency to give to.
I realized I didn't have enough
for my planned requests to some
allocation to the New Mexico
livestock board
I understand as I said with the
previous bill.
The our welfare.
And.
Urgent situation that Senator
Woods and I have explained.
Was really front and center for
me and so for me to support
legislation.
For the future care of horses I
realize too that aren't New
Mexico livestock ward they need
help to help us and so when I
realize the limitations of the
junior bill I said okay well
let's see what else can I do to
help the livestock board take
care of courses in New Mexico
and so consequently madam chair
and colleagues are we have just
be four oh seven are which is a
I I know it's not probably all
that the lifestyle were needs to
take care of free roaming horses
in our state but I do hope that
it's a start
for them.
And their services and with that
madam chair
if you can be so kind hi I see
that are were of course our FY
nav experts are still with us
if we could
Ask them to speak on the bill
and.
Our welfare I'd appreciate it
thank you madam chair.
Thank you so.
So that.
Seven thank you.
Hi yes madam chair.
Thank you Roberts is a resident
of to see yes act an expert at
our is and that is Debbie Coburn
is C. E. O. of four corners at
quite pressed you.
Okay.
Thank you Robert would you like
to speak on the behalf of the
bill.
Thank you madam chair yes I'm
definitely in support of this
bill I was more the expert
witness on three eighty five
excuse me but having worked so I
started knowing how many
shelters there are in this state
and how much help they need I
definitely support this bill
thank you.
Every.
The school thank you.
Good morning madam chair and
committee members my name's
Debbie Coburn and I run four
corners equine rescue just
outside aspect New Mexico up in
the northwest corner here
I was a founding director four
corners and for seventeen years
now we've been running this so
I'm pretty familiar with the our
issue because we have.
Quite a few horses up in the
section of bomb New Mexico and
we really do need financial
assistance to help.
Get these horses into a place
where where we can set them up
for success
I'm also the co chair of the New
Mexico equine rescue alliance
which is comprised of the ten
rescues that are licensed by the
New Mexico livestock board one
of our commitments are is to
always be able to take in the
horses that are straight by the
New Mexico livestock board and
as with the preceding bill three
eighty five written knowledge
really more
Needed more than ever before to
get these guys into our rescue
or we can re have and trying and
get him out to a new home
last year the under twenty
twenty the rescues had a hundred
you see my notes here we had a
hundred and fifty six horses in
our facilities
and we had moved out I'm sorry
we had a hundred fifty sixty
crimes that were went out of our
facilities just last year most
of those went to good homes but
unfortunately there are always a
few that we have to choose nice
that we just got there too late
to help.
So is a monumental task and we
don't have any state funding to
rely on all of our members are
five oh one C. threes and we've
been doing this you know the
best we can but we need more
resources so we can do more more
help so that's.
Thank you welcome back if we go
to public comment.
That.
Madam chair members of the
committee.
We had no indicated opposition
to the bill.
We had to be in the port of this
bill.
Is cracked and broke.
Sandoval County commissioner.
Thank you madam chairman and
committee members I just wanted
to briefly more the things that
I have heard from our expert
thank you for your consideration
on this matter it is always so
critical that we recognize the
value of funding sources for the
very issues that we face across
the state and the I know many of
us to are in government
recognized that when we have and
found funded mandate so very
difficult to figure out how we
can proceed.
But I did want to say that with
the livestock board in place
with with some of the resources
that are needed to support that
locally that additional funding
will provide that they do have
a trailer or what ever might be
necessary to help support those
five oh one see three then.
Either our rescues that are out
there and well and other levels
of government thank you so very
much.
Have a great afternoon.
Madam chair.
Members of the committee.
Next we have Jessica John fan
with animal protection voters of
New Mexico.
Good morning madam chair and
committee members and Jessica
jobs and with the animal
protection voters we think
Senator McKenna for bringing
this bill to propose and much
needed financial support for our
state's licensed or shelters
I don't I'm not sure that and
ms COVID mentioned that there
are twelve for shelters eleven
of them are non profits and they
don't get regular support from
and from at governments
this appropriation which would
go into the court shelter rescue
fund that provide it does
currently get some funds from a
voluntary tax as donation check
off that's available when people
file their taxes and also direct
donations but those you know
those those monies that come in
through those sources are
wonderful and much appreciated
we know by the shelter is but at
they could still use a lot more
I think especially in the wake
of the past year with the
pandemic a lot and many of the
shelters have reported that they
did experience a decrease in
donations
severe limitations and being
able to utilize volunteers on
their facilities to care for the
horses and so some extra support
at to the next year to make up
for that
that shortfall I think would be
very beneficial to the horses
and to our communities as a
whole thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee that concluded public
comment on the bill.
Thank you mate then we have
questions from the committee
Senator Griggs.
Thank you madam chair
Senator and and that and experts
we have that we have the fund is
it is a minister by the
livestock board ordered it as a
line item in there is your
budget average.
Have money in the fund.
Get to the the rescue.
I can't answer that so that our
shelter rescue fund is
administered by the New Mexico
livestock board the funds in
that fund go to the registered
rescues that the eleven that
Jessica referred to we have a
Grant Committee that meets to
decide how to does how to
distribute the funds
that can be if there's not much
in there we just a straight line
to each rescue.
Amount of dollars and other
times when we have more money to
work with there's a grant
process that goes that we go
through and then our
recommendations are submitted to
the board and they both on.
Okay thank you madam madam chair
Senator in was that miss Coburn.
Who responded
The thing I.
With with this amount of of
money if you divided equally
which I'm guessing which sounds
like the project the way it
should administrative done go
equally but that's I mean that's
sixteen hundred dollars plus or
minus a little bit.
if you spread it out over twelve
groups.
show I'm sure while that should
still not a tremendous amount of
money to.
To go forward with I would I
would suggest Senator as a.
You know as time goes along that
you look at is there.
Your can you get this in their
budget actually can can it go
that way to we're H. recurring
and whatever the number is
whether it's fifty whether
twenty whether two hundred
twenty.
Something light like that and
try to try to get that within
their budget sure you don't have
to try to.
Do appropriations each and every
year to you know to to help out
I mean this is a.
You know we have issues with
with animals statewide and our
I'm sure Jessica knows as good
or better than than anybody
about all the.
the rescue dogs cats horses that
are that are out there because
people buy a home or have only
and I can't take care of our for
whatever reason that might be
and whether there be used
animals whether they just you
know they're they're getting a
little older like me and can't
take care of it your show you
know I checked I I don't I don't
know this is it this is an
important question and.
You know I think I think I'll
I'll support the The
appropriation but I think you're
gonna really need to dig into
this and see if there's ways you
can do it differently and and
possibly better if you really if
you really want to have an
impact on on the issue so thank
you madam chair and thank
shouldn't care.
Thank you senator grace any
other questions for the
committee.
Now I do have a couple comments
in that sense to of what Senator
Griggs was talking about and I
think this is on the end of the
spectrum of which the animal or
whatever reason was given up are
banned in in that sense so I
think some of this also needs to
occur on the front end before
and it's the Navajo nation's or
notorious for having problems in
that manner not really having
the resources out there to to
battle it as far as stray dogs
and spaying and neutering then
it takes
probably three to four months
before you're really on the list
and as far as Forces but you
know that there's two sides to
the story and I think that the
same thing is also the same for
them.
Almost all animals that people
tried to domesticate in that
manner down to cats so it's
I hope we can come up with the
plan comprehensively or maybe
basically that would could be
applied all the way you know
with all the domestic animals
cats dogs and even with the
forces and I know we try to
categorize courses as far as
being wild and stuff in this
building the wild west.
But
our population has grown it is a
very different world out there
than what it was before safety
is a big concern liability is
one of the biggest issues right
now when we talk about.
This coming in even with breeds
of dogs so I I think it is an
important issue and I hope we
can come to some some point and
it thank you Senator McKenna and
thank you for it to your expert
witnesses well what is the
pleasure of the committee.
To make a motion to do pass we
have a motion to do that to do
passed by Senator Hermio.
Thank you and the second by
Senator Griggs Rebecca could you
call the grow.
The
next yes.
Senator McKenna.
Yes senator Sanchez yes Senator
Shendo yes Senator had a meal.
Just.
Senator Pinto yes.
We have six yes yes.
Thank you thank you Senator
McKenna and your bill Senate
bill four oh seven receives a
two passed to go on and you have
the next bill Senate bill three
ninety seven
thank you madam chair and thank
you my fellow colleagues.
hold on a minute let me really
take this off the Mike here.
Rebecca that are all senator
McCann is expert witnesses
online.
For Senate bill three ninety
seven yes madam chair we have
and Berkeley Rogers.
And then we also have some folks
for public comment governor
Brian viral and Mr one year from
us a couple.
Okay thank you and senator
Kennedy you may present your
bills right I thank you madam
chair.
Well senators SB four oh seven
is meant to help try to start
here in New Mexico to be able to
assess their G. R. T. right
which is at eight percent
to to neighboring counties where
they do business currently
statute indicates that they are
not able to do that as for
example Cibola as G. R. T. rate
is six point eight and so
consequently of the tribe misses
out on that is additional tax
revenue of this bill is not
meant to cause any harm to the
the state treasury and in fact
it's designed to benefit both I
I do want to remind everyone
that.
I'm on my tried and virtually
all the tribes that I know of in
our state.
Our governors and
administrations we are unable we
do not charge property tax so
each if you can feature each
Pueblo each nation is its own
municipality with the the needs
to take care of its citizen
right just like any village and
town in New Mexico and so this
bill is meant to bring some.
Some of financial assistance to
the tribe's and I'm really
pleased that our governor of all
is with us and then also our
expert this and Berkeley Rogers
and with that madam chair
I I defer to you and our exports
thank you.
Thank you with any of the
experts
want to speak on the bill.
Good morning madam chair this is
members of the committee this is
governor Brian bio of the public
come on and I'm here to voice
the public strong support of SB
three ninety seven.
Present joint powers agreement
concerning the collection and
reporting of gross receipts is
an example of an agreement
excuse me I would agree with I
can be that can benefit both
Indian tribes in the state
however there is a problem with
the law governing these
agreements and those bills
intended to correct that
problem.
Under oculus tax agreement for
gross receipts sales and similar
taxes qualified tribal taxes the
taxation and revenue may collect
on behalf of the tribe or cap
with the tax rate of the county
or municipality within the
tribe's boundaries.
Or outcome of that is Cibola
County where the tax rate is six
point eight one two five percent
however I was gross receipts tax
rate is eight percent the
neighboring city of requests has
a slightly higher rate of eight
point one two five percent.
The Google the trouble tax the
state will collect on behalf of
New an Indian tribe is based on
the definition of a qualifying
taxed the law it is not
something that can be addressed
administratively.
If enacted.
Senate bill three ninety seven
what about the definition of a
qualifying tax for the purposes
of the joint powers agreement
when collecting gross receipts
taxes this would allow for the
state to collect the tribal tax
at the same or greater right as
the tax rate of the county or
municipality within the tribe's
boundaries.
Welcome a could not tax less
than stable County it could tax
at a higher rate and still have
the tax collected pursuant to
the joint powers agreement.
Excuse me during this pandemic
optima has not been able to take
full advantage of the tools
available to pay for tribal
programs and services are casino
remains closed and as and as it
is only one of our tribal
businesses that is not
generating revenue.
As such it is essential that the
state collect.
Now we receive our full gross
receipts tax this amendment
increases the revenue that I can
receive pursuant to the joint
powers agreements we ask for
your support on SB three ninety
seven thank you very much.
One this is Jim Rogers.
And I am
I've been asked to be the expert
witness on this bill.
I have reviewed the fiscal
impact report and I disagree
with it in several ways.
First this is not a problem of
dual taxation.
Because pursuant to these
agreements.
No.
Transaction is subject to both
the state and the tribal tax.
During hours agreements that
we're talking about resolved
that issue.
So any notion of this creating a
potential problem for dual
taxation is not correct.
I'm at as a as many of you know
I've served as the tribal
attorney for several.
I hate to say decades but it is
true that this point in time.
And so I hesitate to tell the
state how to allocate monies
that it receives.
But the other provision or
potential problem raised by the
fiscal impact report was the
suggestion that it would
somehow.
This rocked B. R. allocation of
taxes by the state and that is
not correct
the provision has a.
This is a very critical
provision which says
notwithstanding any other
provision of law to the contrary
the amount of credit taken
allowed should be applied
proportionately is the amount of
eight of the gross receipts tax
and local option gross receipts
taxes and against the amount of
the distribution of those taxes
pursuant to section seven dash
one dash six point one which of
course is the provision
concerning the monies that going
to Pacific suspense account and
what happens to them after all
allocations are made pursuant to
law.
Essentially they end up in the
general fund.
So.
The next question was the notion
that the state determines.
Or has the power to determine
whether tribal taxes that is not
correct.
Every tribe as a sovereign
entity has the right to set its
own tax.
Uses for these joint powers
agreements which are incredibly
beneficial for both the state
and the tribes the state has
artificially limited what the
tribes can collect these joint
powers agreements.
And we are asking for that
limitation to be removed.
Now there was a concern that
tribal taxes might.
skyrocket because of removing
this limitation.
And I would only remind the
committee that every try just
like the state is the government
which has to balance the
collection of taxes with
economic development on its
lands and every tribe has the
right to make that balance point
out.
We don't need the state tell us
how to make that balance which
is preferred.
That was a bit insulting
frankly.
There is a provision already
that says it must be
substantially similar the tribal
tax must be substantially
similar.
The gross receipts tax of the
statements local subdivisions.
Under that situation any tribal
tax that was.
Beyond.
He reasonable relation to the
state tax but of course not meet
this provision in the statute.
So while I do not believe any
other change is needed to the
statute I am and I am hesitant
is the tribal advocate and
attorney to tell the state how
they should allocate their tax I
believe that the concerns of for
can be very easily met.
By in our seven dash nine dash
eight eight one eight eight
point one eight.
When it talks about the amount
of the credit shall be equal to
take out the words the last
The same provision concerning.
The credit for the tribal tax in
B. four should be amended could
be amended in the same way
removing the words the lesser
up.
And in that that would address
the concerns raised in the for.
otherwise what this bill does is
allow war tribes and the state
to have some freedom within the
taxation area which the tribes
do not have pursuant to the
joint agreements.
Now the benefits to the tribe of
the joint agreement.
Are of course no challenges a
bill taxation.
And to and administrative
mechanism that allows them to
collect this kind of tax gross
receipts tax is one of the most
administratively intense taxes
to collect.
Through the strait agreements we
have one entity that does that.
The state and it shares and
allocates in shares taxes among
the other entities.
If you don't have the strength
powers agreements you would have
an incredible duplication of
this activity in every single
jurisdiction.
It wouldn't cost increase the
cost for everyone.
Second.
What it does is it it does allow
for businesses to have a uniform
way of collection of of paying
their taxes which is incredibly
important for both the state and
the tribes.
For the state
their budget to this as well
there's no charge that there are
involved in dual taxation
because there is this agreement
in place which doesn't allow any
transaction to be taxed both the
state and the tribal tax.
Saves the state an incredible
amount of time litigation angst
and everything that goes with
that.
The state collects and three
percent administrative fee.
All up on all of the taxes it
collects with the tribe's.
As this bill does not create any
additional expense for the
state.
In fact covers those expenses by
that administrative the.
Now being because in some
instances the state does.
Twenty five percent of the
tribal tax charge.
Which is what the agreements
allow for there's no question
about that.
As the tribal tax goes up the
amount of money remitted to the
state goes up as well.
Now the person in who analyze
the set of course the state
would have to.
I turned over a hundred percent
of what ever was above that six
point eight percent.
Back to the tribe but as I
stated with a minor amendment of
taking out the language the
lesser of.
The state would be able to keep.
The twenty the full twenty five
percent.
So.
I do not think any additional
changes other than the ones
suggested in the bill is needed.
I am suggesting that removal of
that language would in fact be
beneficial to both parties if
the state wants to do that I as
I said as an advocate and work
attorney for tribes I just like
I don't like the the state
telling the tribes have a tax I
don't think the state should
should help the tribe should
tell the state tax.
I stand for any questions.
Thank you again that does that
conclude your presentation of
the bill.
Yes madam chair thank you thank
you we'll go to public comment
Rebecca make the.
Madam chair members of the
committee.
We received now indications of
opposition to this bill.
In a quiet we have.
Mr Wanyama of the above act
among.
Mr wanna go ahead.
Mister money on quite a look
figure I needed but we are
having trouble hearing here.
So one F. et will try again.
Then at my apologies to at madam
chair members of the committee.
Mr one if you'd like to log off
and try going again we may be
able to figure something out at.
I'm.
I don't know if I Jerry at
Loretto Act emitted Pueblo would
like to be.
Good morning everybody this is
Gerald are on the grants and
contracts administrator for the
public pavements payments right
now does not have a cooperative
agreement with the with that the
state of New Mexico but we are
pursuing that and are interested
in these discussions with regard
to taxation but I think we would
also support the public of Aqaba
with regard to participate.
Thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee that Mr Bonnie I would
like to try again.
And part today we are able to
hear you at madam chair members
of the committee that concluded
public comment for that well.
Thank you may think Senator
Griggs.
Thank you madam chair and you
know I wish I was thinking
somehow this was we're shameful
maybe than a that it is but
we're.
What the bill does to me is a
little out of the the tried to
taxed mouth ridge making the
change to make in the.
And amount that can't be less.
Then the total gross receipts
enacted somewhere because I
don't know that I like the
wording of of three very much
anyway within the in the
boundary.
Show up I'd like to I'd like to
ask the governor if you could
just.
If you have more than.
One community.
Within the boundaries of your of
your.
Tribal lands.
How does that work do you do you
get to pick the highest is what
you can can be at work or how
does that work sure.
Madam chair and members of the
committee thank you for that
question I would like to do for
the response to our expert
witness agency and Rogers
Senator thank you.
Thank you.
And you are muted.
Technology is wonderful finance.
Share our respond.
Yes.
Senator Griggs we have that
situation in New Mexico already.
You and it's mentioned in the
fiscal impact report the City of
Espanola.
It is
many conflicting jurisdictions.
You have the municipality of
Espanola you have to pueblos the
pueblo okay when gay.
And you have the public Santa
Clara you have the county of Rio
Arriba and in some instances the
county of Santa Fe.
How that is address.
Is that.
Because the city restaurant Yala
has the ability to charge a
certain percentage eight.
Point I can't remember exactly
it changes.
It will mark the highest
percentage every entity within
that district charter can charge
the same amount except perhaps
maybe the Santa Fe County and I
know that the pueblo okay away
today Santa Clara pueblo and.
as you'll have that provision
and that's part of what's worked
out in the joint powers
agreements.
Is how to address the situation.
and it's one of the few
instances where that.
Actually happens has happened in
New Mexico the the other two are
where they are entities within
the municipalities one being be
former Albuquerque Indian school
property which is owned by the
night at the pueblos I jointly.
And also in Santa Fe what was
the Santa Fe Indian school that
property is also a separate
taxing entity within the City of
Santa Fe and all of them all
work together to make sure that
the same tax is charged
or is as we say similar they
they work together to make the
taxes work.
thank you madam chair Senator
McKenna and and and experts I
guess you're passionate
Mescalero is the is the closures
tribal nation to to me and it's
located within Otero county but
there are no.
No municipalities within the
Mescalero Rozier reservation.
The amount that the the tribes
and able to taxed gross receipts
would be the same as the county
right.
Or would be in the way the law
currently is is not greater than
the county right.
If this is correct.
Yes this is enacted then the the
tribe could tax at a and amount
greater than the county.
And and that's the I'm sure that
was one of the issues with the
the concern of the FIR is when
you say not less than and I I
certainly has been a a former
mayor and Alamogordo stuff I
appreciate that the arguments
differing between the state and
the and the tried.
But when you say not less then
that does open the door to a
rate that is.
Any number and that's.
Madam chair and now.
Senator an expert I'm shortened.
That to tribal governments would
not.
You know.
Go crazy but at the same time
the law allows them to go crazy
if that's which with that's what
you write.
I'm I'm concerned honestly about
this provisions three as H. as
it's written.
My my thoughts would be that you
re right.
Provision's three to talk about.
communities within a certain
distance of tribal boundaries or
or show because that's what
you're that's kind of what
you're you're dealing with
but when you leave it open ended
like usually can't be less than.
that sh.
I'm not sure that that's the
right policy to have just
because it it is is that open
ended and I you know I I
appreciate what you're trying to
do that Senator and and I
struggle with support it but I I
probably will if you will agree
to that work discotheques next
reserves go to.
Judiciary next yes I believe it
goes to Senator Shendo.
Commissioner Shendo well madam
chair and and we'll see you at I
think you ought to look at that
and and she how you can better
do that because I I just believe
that they're saying of less than
and creates a a tax policy
concern whether it creation
actual concern or not I hope
your expert understands that the
qualifier I'm trying to make but
I thank you madam chair and
share McKenna those are those
are are my comments as it
relates to it
it's it's I am probably going to
make a difference a whole lot
one way or the other you can
leave it not greater than if you
could define the area you're
really talking about that.
I don't know but
That's my comments madam chair
all Here listen to to more the
discussion so thank you madam
chair senator and ex works.
Thank you senator Graham's do
any comments response to
centigrade.
No okay we'll go to Senator
higher meal.
You madam chairman thank you
Senator McKenna for this bill is
so my question was actually
touched on by miss Rogers so
I've been Rio Arriba County I
think from Espanola and I
wondered how it worked in
regards to the Santa Clara
pueblo because as we know the
pueblo resides in Espanola and
Espanola resides in two counties
Rio Arriba and Santa Fe now on
the deal that was made between
the city and the Pueblo and the
county is how is that documented
and how does that work.
Chair may I respond yes.
This whole provision.
Was a result of that agreement.
And
There the joint powers
agreements between.
The state and the pueblo of
Santa Clara as well as that
between the pueblo okay we may
and the state address that.
And of course Espanola was very
involved in the creation of this
bill and in those joint powers
agreements.
Thank you so much madam chair
not twenty five percent of that
tax does go to enrolled members
in the respective pueblos and so
as a former county commissioner
I never ran into issues when it
came to gross receipts in
regards to this agreement
between the city and county is
and the problems and so thank
you for touching about I just
wanted to know how the agreement
was made it's it's a joint
powers agreement thank you Mr
Rogers and no further questions
madam chair.
Thank you senator our meal
Senator Shendo.
Thank you madam chair and and
thank you Senator McKenna of I
wanted to
maybe go back and I know the.
The the governor of Act Kamal
explain the scenario and I'm I'm
looking at the charts.
And so obviously it seems to me
from the chart that of I think
from the simple the table or or
requests.
Have a higher or similar to what
act more wants to do it and so I
don't know we have and is it
seems obvious that that is being
collected the.
By somebody of maybe it's DRT or
or or requests but the portion
that act among it is not being
collected I don't know if we
have anybody from TRD or or or.
To explain you know why they're
able to collect you know.
for another but not for the
other hand you know just.
Anybody and I don't know if
anybody from TRD or.
No I don't think we have anybody
from TRD I think they're all in
the waiting for your committee
meeting.
Well maybe maybe maybe and if
you could explain I I it maybe
has to do with the qualifying
Tax I know that concept came up
and of the and I think maybe a
little bit more explanation
either from you or the governor.
Share more respond yes.
You are correct that is part of
the problem with the way this
tax works.
City of grants is not within the
background recent back in the
land although it is adjacent to
act Comeaux lance.
All right and because of that.
Yes pursuant to state law this
municipality of requests can
raise its taxes to the
percentage that it hot.
But because of the way the
qualifying Tax is defined in
this agreement.
I cannot raise its tax or the
state will you can raise its tax
but the state will not collect
more than that.
Charged by
Cibola County which is the six
point eight one two five.
So that real problem.
When you're talking about it you
know everyone is concerned most
of the time a legislature state
legislatures concerned about
creating some kind of.
tax benefit to try or keeping
track of some kind of
economic advantage.
Actuality it is here that gives
the tribes the act the pueblo
lack of the economic advantages
bars limiting its ability to tax
but not limiting requests.
Another thing that was slightly
inaccurate in the in the fiscal
impact report there is been no
incidents of a business coming
to Aqaba because it's tax rate
is lower.
That is not that's not a major
issue with many of the
businesses in the state we often
would wish that it what.
And it is not okay.
What that is why yes the eight
the state can collect for the
city of requests eight point
whatever but it can't for the
Pueblo back and it's because of
this definition.
Okay but but but there is a
possibility that since these are
negotiated between the state and
the tribes.
That that is this something that
could be negotiated or do we
need to change this in state law
in order for that negotiation to
happen.
Chair may I respond.
Yes.
Senator you're absolutely
correct and that this is
something that cannot be changed
administrative deplete we have
to change the law to be able to
make those changes with the
state taxation and revenue
department through the joint
powers agreements with this
particular dealer change though
there is no real need for a
change in the wording of us was
joint powers agreement with the
state.
are there places might need to
all of the agreements are not
identical.
Right at this point one of the
problems is that this statute
prevents us from even going
there.
Way it is written now it
prevents us from even going
there.
Okay so no we can't do it
administrative Lee if we could.
Better believe we would be
trying to do that.
Thank you madam chair of thank
you.
I had another
When I know that when you do
individual transactions you know
I go to akka ma and go their
store.
And I just.
A customer rate that eight
percent.
Gross receipts on anything that
would I as a customer directly
purchase Act among lands.
Sure may I respond yes madam
chair.
Our business is our report taxes
on the same for every other
entity in the state reports
taxes that they collect on and
the money is then reallocated
and through that you pay the
state tax at this point that six
point eight percent we're not
allowed to collect this have a
separate collection process
under our joint powers agreement
to collect the difference
between the two tax.
Okay.
Okay
In these a agreements that we
have you know the the the the
twenty five seventy five
sharing.
Is that for every transaction or
it does it speak to this
specific.
In all of projects that the
tribe is doing with the state or
how how does that or is it and
transaction.
There are two classes of track
and actions under the joint
powers agreements.
First our transactions with the
tribal entity such as the tribe
itself and of course that is
preempted the state cannot tax
and under federal law so suppose
one hundred percent of that
money is the three percent in
ministry of the comes back to
the tribe of in in in TRD.
The second class or the class to
receipts are those are non
tribal entities on tribal lands.
And those are where you get the
twenty five seventy five split.
Okay.
Appreciate it thank you madam
chair and thank you for that
clarification and a good to see
you
On the.
Yeah that you know I I think
this is you know taxes are
complicated you know
and with my new Committee tax of
transportation the.
The end of a business you know
Senator Griggs myself into
Sanchez and how to be a good to
see all of them.
So so we will be seeing this
bill again but I I think you
know
lot of it was just to try to
clarify it's complicated these
are all of agreements are
negotiated between each of the
the the tribe's individually
because of the uniqueness and
and course to counties and the
rates and all of that stuff so
it's not.
Not the one one size fits all
and I think this is evident of
that situations so that madam
chair I don't have any more
questions of thank you thank you
Senator Shendo and I think with
the comments from the committee
members I don't know if you
would as far as flexibility in
the language are making it a
window as a percentage above or
below might be at making a
window within that language to.
But if you don't want to
compromise on it that's that's
up to you guys Senator McKenna
but
Thank you
What is the pleasure of the
committee.
a motion for the past Senator
Shendo.
And I'll second the motion.
Rep Rebecca could you call the
roll.
Thanks.
Senator graphics.
Thank you stepped away go ahead
and continue we'll see if it
comes back on.
Yes.
Yes Senator Shendo yes Senator
how to meal.
Yes.
Senator Griggs is still up there
good continue Rebekah.
Okay yes.
That's a test for you Senator
Pinto yes.
Senator Pinto.
Yes.
So we're back to Senator Griggs.
Just know them as X. absent just
like we do have is not a
committee yeah he's not showing
or even on.
Okay so then we're back to
senator Sanchez.
Each you voted yes.
Yes I'm sorry okay so we have
what he's he's casting his vote
for the next committee.
About that excuse me so we have
five yeses why do pass thank you
Rebecca and your bill moves on
governor by thank you for
joining us today and I'm sure we
will see you and I look forward
to working with you in.
Through the several years and
the Senator Shendo that's the
ball to you for this bill.
Thank you thank you thank you
governor thank you.
Madam chair thank you thank you
colleagues.
Thank you and thank you
governor.
Thank you senator so I I'm just
wondering is this Center
McKenna's first built in
committee.
well I think as a sole sponsor
right.
Yeah the to care yes Senator
McKenna day.
so we had to do passed by Senate
bill three eighty five to do
passed by Senate bill three four
oh seven and a do pass percent
ability ninety seven and we got
Senate bill four fifteen was
senator Sanchez.
If you would like to present
your bill Senator.
Well good morning madam chair
and committee members I bring
Senate bill four fifteen are in
front of you guys today.
And Senate bill four fifteen
will for a.
this providing a.
Out on the water service charge
on the middle Rio Grande
Conservancy walnut Services
district.
The past years the agency has
been financially stable and has
had a surplus of money of as
much as thirty million dollars
in their surplus
And.
So all right so this will bring
a cap to the water service
charges never there is no cap
now they can charge any tax they
want to the farmers and to the
people are within the benefit
area.
And.
With doing that we see you know
when we increase taxes makes the
heart of the farmers and the
public.
So with putting a two percent
cap at least the farmers would
be able to budget and people
would be able to budgets what
it's going to be
the Conservancy district
district has had as much as
twenty first I think they won in
eighty percent of five years ago
increase and then they came back
with they did it over four years
omitted twenty percent per year
instead of the one time eighty
percent increase.
so this bill will put a two
percent cap on the water service
charge for the Conservancy
district
We all know that COVID has
impacted the livelihood and of
the public some of the people of
lost jobs businesses and have
been closed down suffer two
serious consequences of this
pandemic will take several years
to replicate.
And get back to normal lives
with this two percent like I
said people will be able to
budget for the following year a
two percent cap on the middle
we're going Conservancy
assessment water service charge
is in order and make cost less
undue hardship for the public
and the farmers.
See I'm trying to go through all
my notes here.
In these times specially this
year in our drought years of you
know.
The middle Rio Grande
Conservancy or the board members
also can seek out for other
governments for federal
government and state government
grants and capital outlay
instead of raising this water
service charge what they've done
in the past for numerous years
and.
You know the people that pay for
it are the farmers and the
people live within the district
and so by putting this two
percent you know they won't be
able to do this anymore
without madam chair I stand for
questions of the committee or
from the public.
Senator Sanchez did you have any
other expert witnesses with you.
Madam chair I do not today okay
Rebecca lake then we can go to
public comment.
Madam chair members of the
committee.
Joining us on the amendment
called we have.
John Thompson.
You he can opposition.
Madam chair can you hear me.
Yes we can you may proceed thank
thank you madam chairman members
of the committee good morning my
name is John Thompson I'm a
registered lobbyist for middle
Rio Grande Conservancy district
we stand in respectful
opposition to Senate bill for
fifteen had we been consulted
prior to the introduction of
this measure we would have a
prize the sponsor the previous
board chose to reduce that that
born tax rate two thousand and
four which resulted eventually
in a budget deficit situation.
The board in two thousand
fifteen passed a resolution to
stop the bleeding if you will
from the reserve fund and move
towards a ballots a balanced
budget just like the state of
New Mexico.
It's worthy of note that are
rates have not increased in the
past two years madam chair we
are now increasing on the
consumer price index and the
board voted last year to cease
any increases for two years to
help with COVID related economic
impacts on farmers and
irrigators we are now operating
on a balanced budget and can
also addressed longstanding
capital improvements needed as a
result of getting the rates back
to what they were in two
thousand it's worthy of note
that that some information I
tried to share no takes our
rates are currently lower than
they were twenty years ago madam
chair.
Lastly my believe that this bill
would actually have a
counterproductive effect whereby
rather than using CPI two
percent increase could be added
and you.
Again I just noted our rates
were less than they were twenty
years ago I apologize also with
the you know Madame chairman
that since two thousand nine the
CPI annual percentage changes
and one point five seven percent
so that would be lower than the
two percent I'd also like to
note in the data that I sent in
our reserves are now near zero
we no longer Kerry does have the
reserves as previously mentioned
Madam chairman of I'd like to
offer that our chief engineer
Mike cannon is available in the
room should there be any
technical questions madam
chairman you asked that you
table this bill and and allow
the worked our board has done to
take effect and we are very
conscious of these of these
measures in these concerns and
and respect the Sanchez intent
on and with that madam chairman
I will I will stand thank you.
That madam chair members of the
committee.
In the port we have.
Beverly it thank god.
Hi good morning madam chair
members of the committee I'm
Beverly it's in god we dairy
producers of New Mexico we stand
in support of some Senate Bill
for fifteen because farmers need
to know what their assessments
are going to be so they can
budget for it and large
increases put in no in and do
burden on farmers especially in
a drought thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee.
We also received and.
Twenty five messages indicating.
Support for the bill as well as.
Written comments in support.
From Lisa Romero more.
Read the command had allies.
Jerry wrote the to maim.
Happy Terry Sanchez.
We now Romero.
Read it would be a good headed
to then Holla.
Right John L. Thompson.
And that concludes at public
comment this bill.
Thank you make them do we have
any other questions from the
members of the committee.
Senator harmony of.
Madam chairman thank you so much
thank you Senator Sanchez on
this bill now at the gentleman
who spoke in opposition of the
bill to talked about the board
now are there any farmers or
ranchers to help make up the
board.
Madam chair starts center how to
meal at this time
I'm not sure I don't know how
many our farmers and how many
are ranchers on the board at
this time.
I believe there would be one
that I know of I'm not sure how
many are exactly on the board of
farmers and ranchers.
Thank you and then just one last
question Madam chairwoman center
order just a the M. R. G. C. D.
I know that they work with flood
control and they help with that
irrigation now does this cap in
the percent the funds they get
from that help with the is an
initiatives in the community.
Helping with flood control and
irrigation.
Madam chair Senator this is a
cap that would be on the water
surface charted they're charging
for the
The farmers are using the water.
Nibert requests for capital
outlay this would not affect any
of that stuff.
But the money that they collect
Madam chairwoman the money
collected from that fee is that
what they use to help lead with
flood mitigation and with
irrigation yes at Madam chair
Senator I'm here yes this is
what it is but it is going to
cap on it it's gone from twenty
eight dollars was at twenty
eight dollars for over twenty
some years and it was never
raised and in the last five
years or six years as they've
depleted that are enormous
amount of money they had and
savings are due to mismanagement
I believe
Now they are starting to raise
the water service charge and it
does affect the farmers and it
does affect the people that are
within the district are not
farmers and so now this the
today's current rate is I
believe forty three.
dollars per acre.
Got it thank you madam chairman
thank you senator no further
questions.
Thank you senator Rubio Senator
Griggs.
Thank you madam chair and and
Senator.
Is there a building.
Let me give you a little a
little bit of.
History with with Alamogordo.
When I was first elected the the
prior she commissions had.
The collected a variety of
infrastructure projects and.
Because they you know they would
have to raise taxes or they
would have had to have done done
something because they they
didn't feel like they had a
revenue stream to do that what
we we want to be in stuck with.
Millions of dollars in water
sure projects that needed to be
done because they had failed to
act I don't know and I'll just
I'll ask you I mean do you
believe that any of that might
have been why the the board
spent down the chair plush had
their was there a whether major
projects that needed work
because a the prior board your
show had had neglected to do
that.
Madam chair Senator Griggs good
question thank you for bringing
that I believe that there has
not been any major projects we
need our dams worked on a lot up
north of the slide it down
probably needs some work.
Major projects that they use
this money on our they're not
major projects that have been
but within the district are
within the boundaries these are
just.
How would you like to say maybe
pet peeve projects and maybe
some of the members who wanted
to put on but with the surplus
they had we could have done a
better job I believe of.
Refurbishing our dams and doing
different things
So.
To your question I I still
believe it's mismanagement of
funds.
Thank you madam chair and and
and thank you Senator and our do
we believe or do you believe
senator that a eighty two
percent I'm I'm guessing you do
believe that a two percent
increase in their in their
operations budget will we'll
give them sufficient money to be
able to handle you know projects
like the damn or any other
things that need to be need to
be done does that does it
capital then at and on
reasonable number.
Madam chair Senator Griggs no
this number in FY are from this
of state engineers office show
that it does not affect the
Conservancy one bit if they are
looking out for other monies of
you know there's grants there's
capital outlay money you know
federal or state government
money they can.
Coach if they have to you know
they can slow some bonds for
this money raising the taxes is
just been a tradition that the
continuously due to the farmers
and the public.
Okay thank you madam chair and
thank you senator.
Thank you Senator Griggs Senator
Shendo.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you senator Sanchez
The.
So so this fee or what what
we're referred to as a fee or or
tax or whatever per acre.
What what is that generate you
know like
right now you're you're saying
that it's at forty three.
On an annualized basis what what
is that generate.
Madam chair.
Senator I don't have those exact
numbers but it generates
Mr Thompson would probably have
those numbers and I would like
to share the information that he
said I I never received none of
that I can give you three
different email so you can send
that to me but he was speaking
of some information that gets
shared I I've not received any
of that information.
But.
I'm gonna the maybe we can ask
him I I I don't know that number
that generates but it's you know
it's for the maintenance of the
ditches the mowing.
The lady in the ditches your
ditch writers your boots on the
ground people
management's and then also for
flood control
some of the people that live
within the district that are not
farmers their service charges
they pay would be for flood
control.
And like I said it had gone it
was at twenty eight dollars for
more than twenty some years and
in the last few years it's
jumped from twenty eight to
forty three.
So.
The I know that the at madam
chair of the acreage of has that
continue to increase or decrease
because I know that the you know
the challenges that you know
more more at this urban sprawl
happens you know people are
beginning to build and subdivide
and subdivisions and.
And so I'm curious you know all
of you know if the acreage is
declining in terms of farming.
Madam chair Senator great
question that hits the nail
right on the head the acreage is
going down the service is less
than the taxes are going up.
And.
That's my big concern with this
we're not having any cap.
The boots on the ground the
people in the field are great
people I want to make that very
clear this is I believe in upper
management that we have what we
are little bit top heavy and it
continues to drain their.
The extra funds they had and
then it continues to raise taxes
they continue to raise taxes on
our farmers and our public.
So that's why I believe we
should need a cap for better
management.
Madam chair I I I believe the.
There was stated that there is a
two year
I guess imposed a two year we
call it a freeze.
Of during the pandemic and and
and and I assume that's true
that's what that thing the
opposition said the other
question I have is a it is the
middle Rio Grande Conservancy
district is that in the
appointive borders in the
elected board or a how is that
and if there are the the entity
that's making these decisions
and people aren't happy just
like us you know if we're not
happy with you know we can get
voted out I mean a are the
appointed or elected a.
Madam chair Senator another
great question they are elected
officials and I believe it's on
every it's a four year cycle
with every two years they rotate
the there's half of one want to.
They're all four years but there
every two years is election the
middle ranks Services.
All righty and the I know you
know the.
It's a tough one you know
because you know we're talking
about taxes we're talking about
infrastructure you know I think
any community hero or whatever
of community is.
It's it's just the the
The amount of infrastructure
improvements are needed I don't
know there'll ever be any money
enough money to do all the
things and
Of you know I don't know what
the situation is there I know
that the middle Rio Grande.
also serves I believe
the pueblos from coach should be
all the way down to a sled a and
and.
I'd like to get their
perspective as well but you know
nobody's on and and see their
situation and and and how the
middle will grant you know is
doing and and and not knowing
that I I'm kind of New Mexico
place to support support
something that may hamper some
of the projects that maybe on
there in Lansing with the money
that are being collected I I
just.
this is a tough one so but but
anyway well thanks for bringing
to me I think it's a good
discussion a conversation and
learn more about you know what's
going on in our in our in our
our surrounding communities at
that impact is you know I I'm a
I'm a farmer I'm not you know
small farmer of group on the
farm and it's tough you know of
a lot of work you know just
folks to you know put seed in
there and and the watching it
grow and cultivating and a lot
of work that that happens and
and in the Kobe instructors have
become very important and and
those are the infrastructure
that you're talking about so
with that thank you madam chair
for now.
Thank you Senator Shendo Senator
McKenna.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senator Sanchez
Senator I I don't understand.
How the two percent was arrived
at and is part of my oversight
if you mentioned it and I didn't
grasp that so how is it that the
two percent was settled on.
Madam chair Senator two percent
of national of the two to five
percent cost of living we would
start at two percent since there
has been no cap ever on this
chart.
And showing that the money that
they did have in savings and
stuff and
So we started at two percent.
And we'd be looking at you know.
That's where start at the two
percent on the cost of living to
a five percent we start on the
lowest
And we can go from there.
That's working over two percent.
Thank you madam chair and
senator.
The tax money is not my strong
suit I'll tell you right there
I.
I am.
But with that said.
Whenever I look at taxes and
costs and.
a growing population I always
think about inflation.
And I'm curious a big picture
how does inflation.
Affect what is proposed to be
put in statute.
I simply don't know
Madam chair Senator right off
the top of my head I don't know
either I I kinda like you I I I
I don't know.
Going forward I can get you the
answer for that
Thank you madam chair and
senator yet I'm I'm really
sensitive to of.
Of overcharging for needs that
we don't need to but then also
the balance of you know
especially putting something in
statute.
We'll be coming back again
because it wasn't adjusted for.
Arsene variable that maybe no
nobody your nose about.
So I'm I'm I'm in a conundrum to
because I want to be sensitive
to the needs of your
constituencies
and then I'm also trying to
think okay.
What happens going forward
inflation growing need drought.
Growing population so I'm thank
you madam chair thank you
senator.
Thank you senator McCain any
other questions from the
committee.
I do have a couple.
Senator Sanchez.
what are you just one
Conservancy district why make
why not statewide.
In the title a student madam
chair in the title there it's
the Conservancy district that's
over the it's the biggest but
can the over the hundred
thousand acres that's what the
statute.
So what.
Well it's it's the biggest
district it is chairman by the
eight research and that's.
It it's right here and my
constituents area and it doesn't
affect all the Conservancy
districts at each Conservancy
district is determined by a
great within their benefit area
so this one you know there's
with this one it's the largest
under this statute.
And so why will if if we're
trying to dress up in your area
particularly why don't we try to
change the right the district
part.
Madam chair was a question.
So if if you're saying like this
is one of the biggest districts
and to address the what you're
trying to addressed in your
area.
With the approach be to break
that districts part.
If you're saying it's too big
that they got too much money or
but you don't want to do that.
Madam chair no I would never
want to break the district
similar requests that serves as
a great district as start from
the top
I think Senator Standort mention
we have culture do we have
Albuquerque we have the land we
have Sapporo and runs all the
way through the point of the
bills not to break the district
up it's just too on to the to
cap there's never been a cap
since nineteen thirty on the
water surface charge when the
districts were formed.
And so some years when they run
shy on money they raise the
rates as high as twenty twenty
five percent I remember one year
they tried to do eighty percent
increase but.
as the people came to the board
and are all their opinions came
out they they spread that over a
four year so it came down to
twenty percent increase so no
never been tents not to break up
the district I the middle rank
and search district is it is a
beautiful and great district
that's not the intent there it's
just to put the cap on the water
surface charge that we are
charging
our farmers and public that are
within the benefit areas.
Yeah so it seems like M. to me
that you know something so large
and you're saying there's a lot
of money pool there are there
was and you know to service that
large in area that you would
need a large amount of money
that you would to do any
project.
And so that's why I'm talk about
breaking it up to so that you
make it smaller to meet the
local needs and what you don't
think it's a good I.
Way to go.
So when we talk about local
control and the economics of it
and the board is elected to
seven member board elected by
the people in those districts in
which to Representative so I am.
You know we just like with that
compared to the schools you know
we do have PED in some oversight
and that sent to oversee it so
there's a problem with the
economics of it then maybe our
approach should be trying to
help find resources in that
manner to assist those members
that are elected then to try and
managed them in this manner
Which we're just taking on one
district instead of you know in
a this was a statewide
initiative which if we saw
statewide abuse of this.
So.
In that sense to you know each
district is very different and
the economics of every and when
we talk about rural New Mexico
those responses
for the projects that they're
trying to take on and you know
raising those rates in some
sense.
Depending on what the effect
they're trying to go for a
putting a cap on it is a there
is doesn't.
Give them the flexibility to
really manage.
to me because you're up there
could be several factors you can
have a drought in that area you
could have water you know the
water efficiency really needed
to be addressed but then we
could probably approach that
with other resources instead of
trying to restrict them from
trying to.
Cultivated themselves within the
district and address it so ari
I'm not really in support of
this because I I think if we saw
a bigger.
Of the use of it statewide and
if this was really
I think that probably could be a
different solution as far as
trying to help the district if
if you see that but if they're
voted on by the voters
Thank guess get better
candidates is is my to go that
route to campaign
so that so.
Where I go what is the pleasure
of the committee.
I move to table.
That move the tables and
debatable Rebecca would you
please call the roll.
Senator creeks no.
Senator McKenna.
Senator Sanchez no.
Senator Shendo yes.
Senator how to meal yes.
Senator Pinto.
Yes.
We have three yeses and three
numbers.
So that is a
With a tie vote and it stays on
within the committee unless
there is any other a motion by
the committee.
No.
Madam chair.
Yes Senator Griggs right I move
to patch.
He moved to pass.
Senator Armia.
Madam chair before the to pass
came I was just going to suggest
that Mr John Thompson if it is
tabled or doesn't move forward
it definitely works I'm
contacting Senator order just to
work out the issues that you saw
with the bill and just to
explain my table was just
because I've not so involved in
the centre Committee I really
couldn't think about how to
better address the needs of
these people other than seven
respond just working again with
his constituents and working
with Mister Thompson on the
areas of concern Mr Thompson
brought forward thank you.
Yes so we have the ended in a
tie vote I think we should also
be considered this before we a
motion to do pass.
If I'm not mistaken and it would
do in that sense it would have
to be put on the next agenda.
In order for it to
In in order for any further
action to be taken place Senator
McKenna.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senator Sanchez and I I should
have ad I'm new at this staffs I
know I should have added to
explain my vote
I I am being sensitive to the
senators
interest on this legislation and
its constituencies and so the
reason why I did not vote
tabling is because I think it
needs more thought I really like
what Senator Shendo.
Such suggested and that is
having more staff stakeholders
at a later discussion so that we
can hear from them.
but I I just wasn't prepared to
table it because I think there's
something things that need to be
addressed.
Thank you.
Yes so madam chair can I make a
motion to do pass with the
amendment and working forward
with the John Thompson and I
don't know how do you do that
I'm new to this as well well it
it ended up in a tie vote so it
stays in the committee but on
the in the next committee it can
be reconsidered by
one of the sites and then be
That action can be taken on it
again right now just that's
where it is thank you.
Next Tuesday.
Thank you.
And madam chair all withdrawal
my depression motion okay that
Senator Griggs withdraws his
motion for the past.
So next depending on today's
floor session I do not Rebecca I
don't think we had any bills
referred to from a to this
committee actor this.
That is correct madam chair okay
so after the floor session the
floor session today we will see
if any of the bills red in on
the floor from the house or
anything else is not further in
but Tuesday we will schedule a
presentation from okay Wingate.
tried and that'll be first on
the agenda and then we'll add
any bills that are referred to
this committee on Tuesday and we
will meet next Tuesday at nine
AM.
Madam chair yes what is the
presentation on taxes with
Espanola.
Senator hardly wanted
to share thank you Senator
though it should be up taxes of
those would you like to search
for their little highest but
actually it's from the governor
of okay we get with two members
of his staff we're gonna talk
about a waste water treatment
plant and a water treatment that
would not only help the pueblo
but help the neighboring
communities in northern New
Mexico the need for it and then
the importance of clean drinking
water on the Google in the
neighboring communities that's a
non rural New Mexico septic
tanks are a danger to our
drinking water and so those are
some concerns are going to bring
up and then what their solution
would be to ensure that we don't
run into that situation of
contaminated water that that's
great that's great because I
know that similar addition was
taken in the Walker valley area
years ago when David built a I I
believe Pojoaque you Pueblo
donated the land in the I was
cabinet secretary back then and
I think the state invested a
huge amount of money to create a
regional of facility and tie in
all the rural areas into that
system to get rid of the septic
system for so great looking
forward to it thank you perfect
thank you thank you madam
chairwoman anything else from
many of the members of the
committee.
Madam chair could I get my email
address to John Thompson so we
can send over some stuff.
Yes yes well Rebekah can send it
to and Rebecca you have done Mr
Constantina.
He was gonna send out madam
chair use that we have some
information or something center
you're going to send over okay
all right.
J. A. S..
The number four.
And M..
At G. mail dot com.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Mr Thompson thank you Rebecca do
we have any housekeeping for the
members.
Not at this time madam chair
okay thank you guys and we'll
see you on the floor as okay
have a good one get some lunch.
Thank you madam chair.
