Yes I need to get.
Good morning everyone in terms
of housekeeping
I just wanted to mention that on
our agenda we ask that are any
public participation be
submitted by three o'clock the
day before the committee meeting
so that we can get noticed
sufficient notice out to all of
those
and and we are getting quite a
few people requesting for public
participation the problem with
late last Act yesterday
afternoon and yesterday evening
and this morning is we got lots
of requests for additional folks
to be put on the list for public
participation so to the extent
possible if you could help us
out to get you know if senators
are recommending expert
witnesses or public
participation notices to go out
to get those to us at timely as
possible because the lists are
growing quite large.
That is the main thing for right
now.
Yes so we just want to emphasize
that because it is on the agenda
at the bottom not sure about the
the amendment eight site would
just pass that along to
constituents and if anybody does
that you know with that wants to
speak on behalf of the bill
publicly okay senator is there
any concerns from the committee
members before we get started
here we good to go all right
okay Senator Woods thank you for
that moment to and you may
proceed.
Thank you madam chair.
Today I bring you bill Senate
bill one oh four.
And it is to make an
appropriation for weather
stations.
Not so three and a half million
dollar appropriation.
To the board of regents of New
Mexico state and it goes to the
state climatologist I've got two
witnesses with me today.
I've got the jealousy who is a
insurance salesman and a
rancher.
In the fort Sumner New Mexico I
got Dr David divorced.
That is the state primatologist
at New Mexico state and I've
also got a lease of been who is
a rancher has a rancher and
farmer and
Leving New Mexico now.
I don't know how many of you
have been all over the state
many of you have.
But but this is a problem that
exist across our state
about having accurate rainfall
and weather stations.
In a grid that situation so that
we can monitor.
Of our drought index we can do
is different things and have
more data is is better on
anything we do.
So I with that I would like to
call upon the Mr Jim let's see
and Jeremih this kind of caution
you to to try not to talk too
long on this these guys are busy
but explain explain your points
and and madam chair that's our
about I'll have my experts
start.
Thank you.
Good morning madam chairwoman
Senators and good morning out
witnesses and and experts out
there I'm Jim this yet four
Sumner New Mexico and and it's a
great day to be here in New
Mexico a little bit about this
the weather station expansion
project I don't I study did you
know here the last couple years
also sell.
The type of insurance that
budget ranchers and farmers
throughout New Mexico but I saw
a huge gap in New Mexico which
we didn't have good accurate
data for measurement of rainfall
wind speed exited route there is
weather stations out there from
the National Weather Service
and.
And Dr to what's.
department there in New Mexico
State University but there's not
enough within our our state so
Dr Barney has you can testify
again little bit there's there's
only ten agriculture weather
stations for our area the
National Weather Service has
approximately a hundred fifty
but added the eleven one hundred
twenty one thousand six hundred
ninety seven square miles here
in New Mexico that's still not
enough so an average there's
probably one to two to make
sometimes three weather stations
for our county and that thirty
three counties here in the state
of New Mexico.
So that the the weather station
expansion by having that
expansion through the New Mexico
State University and through the
there climatologist Department
would be doctor the loss.
And with that request is that
three point five million to put
in about a hundred and thirty
weather stations approximately
depending on more in some
counties lesson submitted but we
sent a fax sheet out to you all
to go ahead and look at the
different weather stations where
they could be placed at so what
is that data do so do we have
weather stations out there and
there was a hundred fifty I
talked about the National
Weather Service coop only half
of those approximately half of
them report daily the other half
will go ahead and read this
thread she put on a spreadsheet
and follow it and made it off to
the National Weather Service at
the end of the month and that
doesn't do any good for the
different programs are out there
in agony in other non ag
industries so what the request
is is New Mexico's Losin.
A bunch of money from the US
farm bill that's out there
that's appropriated for the
different USDA programs out
there.
For the farmers and ranchers
and other
of governmental agencies and
what that these weather stations
do is they'll grab this weather
station that data immediately in
their reported within five
minutes in it uploads into
database system and into the New
Mexico State University servers
and it goes a have you shows you
what that weather's doing so if
you want to look at it for
instance Oklahoma mesonet BBS
code any do you want to look at
that you can actually go in scam
and look at exactly when that
weather what's occurring right
at that time the temperature ET
rainfall amounts the barometric
pressure wind speed so to to be
sure sold moisture map it is
keep you know it just a Laverick
great weather station program.
Back in that the request of this
is to the US farm bill all these
different programs I feel that
New Mexico is losing millions of
dollars.
It's especially about a million
dollars per county so you're
bigger thirty three counties
that's about a million dollars
each with a thirty three million
dollars so this program to three
point five million expansion is
is minimal compared to the pay
out in the support in the
financial support not only for
the ranchers but for each
community with the New Mexico
from from the tribal areas to to
the the the northeast to the
southeast to the to the
southwest to the central part of
New Mexico even budget for
stream B. L. M. the land
commission the transportation
department all of these all
these people can actually get on
here in in see what's going on
and give you.
You did a great job thank you
Sir I'm going to move on to
drive the bus the.
Senator did everybody get The
presentation materials it was an
email from Lisa Runyon if you
want to look and see it but I
hope everybody got The
presentation materials that he
was referring to and if not let
Rebecca know and we'll have it
forwarded to you again thank you
go ahead Senator.
Okay thank you madam chair Dr
doubles.
Good morning madam chair and
then other senators thank you
for inviting me and I appreciate
the opportunity and I really
appreciate that Jim for giving
that a good overview I my name
is Dave to block on the state
climatologist for the state of
New Mexico and my offices in Los
crucis at New Mexico State
University have been here is my
going on my eleventh year at
that as a state climatologist
and and and that this project is
is like Jim said is is basically
a capacity building you know
we've we have a few weather
stations out and in the areas
and a lot of more in urban areas
so this and powers a lot of the
rural areas that are not covered
that are not being represented
by having a weather intelligence
whether information data so what
we're trying to do is build that
to provide the and how weather
information especially important
during extreme weather events
which includes floods but also
drought Gen mentioned we don't
have enough information out in
the field to give us a good
indication of where rain hasn't
fallen as we know this year is
particularly bad
and it's in we need to be able
to figure out where it the worst
impacts are and but we need that
information to provide the do
decision makers at all levels
and including my office all the
way up to the federal levels and
so did this data will go as
streaming I every five minutes
in archiving it and and being
available to the public so they
can look at the data as well as
the decision makers coming up
with things like the drought
monitor which is a decision map
its use for pick pay outs but if
there's many other uses just
like Jim said and you know
transportation and safety in
that the media.
Also use these to to push out in
case there's a big event TV can
use these so it there's all
there's many uses of these and
other states are are well ahead
of us and including Oklahoma
Texas Colorado Utah so we're our
goal is to build infrastructure
here in New Mexico get caught up
and provide that information to
the decision makers including
the National Weather Service.
Thank you doctor bought to our.
Leases if you would chair just
for just a minute and tell tell
your story.
I'm only sock madam chair and
members of the committee I farm
and ranch in southeastern New
Mexico my family has been here
since nineteen ninety on my
mother's side nineteen sixteen
on my dad so with your as
farmers and ranchers is vital in
our
you know it it depends on
whether we survive or not I'm
also chairman of the State Farm
service agency committee and so
in that capacity I have become
more acutely aware of the
situation throughout the whole
state of New Mexico well I'm not
speaking in that capacity it is
increased my knowledge of how
viability as that we have more
accurate weather stations
throughout the whole state of
New Mexico so that all of our
people in agriculture as well as
work urban areas have an up to
date timely
weather reporting system and I
am very much in favor increasing
the capacity of the state of New
Mexico to come into the twenty
first century with our weather
stations and be on an even keel
with the other states so that
all of our people in agriculture
are more able to utilize and be
recipients
their ability to that of things
in the farm bill class to give
the people in all areas of New
Mexico more timely weather
system.
This year in southeastern New
Mexico I'm south of Carlsbad we
had three inches of rain and six
inches of dirt so blowing so you
know we we need to keep up to
date on all of that information
and I really appreciate the fact
that you allowed me to speak
before your committee.
And madam chair with that we're
ready to say that for questions
and hopefully some public
comment.
Okay thank you Rebecca do we
have in the proposed anybody for
public comment.
Yes our webmaster I mean as
soon.
Administrator here is going.
Is going to lead in Johnny L.
mon torreya state director of
NMSU.
Okay.
Is he the only one are there
Google is one of the time.
He's the only one.
Okay did we have any emails for
or against.
We do not have any excuse me we
have
the email from Mr mentor if for
and that was the only one for
this this particular field.
Okay lab Mr Monterey you have to
approximately two minutes thank
you.
You can.
Mr Montoya.
Is he that is he in
I think that.
I don't know hello Mister
Montoya are you there.
Might be the connection but we
know he was supportive of the
bill.
That is correct.
Okay well.
I don't know if it's on.
One more time Mr much why are
you there.
Senator Woods.
Yes out of two million people
you have one public that support
your bill.
The technology the technology
may be a factor here.
Senator Shendo.
Okay we'll go on to Committee
members have questions from are
Senator our meal.
You madam chairwoman Senator
Woods this is that a good bill
especially for somebody who
represents rural New Mexicans
and who rural New Mexican
ranchers and farmers have talked
about the drought affected them
in district five in northern New
Mexico now my only question for
you that you might want to defer
to one of your expert witnesses
as I know you need an additional
seven hundred fifty eight point
six Kate to maintain Z. M. at is
there a plan in process to cover
that shortfall.
Mr chairman madam chair and and
and Senator a I tell you we have
got a plan.
We we kind of wanted to see
where this bill when.
Before we worry what this this
could get us through this year
and get some stations bought and
and get the process going.
There we will need some
maintenance money no doubt about
it there is a plan there is a
plan to possibly try to run a
bill.
To take some premiums off
insurance much like the fire
fund bill I don't know if you're
familiar with with that but the
you know there is a premium
that's taken off some of the
insurance policy so in the state
of New Mexico that the
contributes to a far for an that
our fire fighters get to to buy
trucks and bill station.
And to expand their deal this
would be kind of what we're
thinking about on this is to try
to use that kind of a premium to
finance the maintenance and
upkeep.
Madam chair.
You Senator thank you madam
chair no further questions thank
you senator.
Thank you any other for the
questions from the committee
Senator Shendo.
Okay thank you madam chair in
the.
thank you Senator Woods it did
get this to you good to hear
you.
I have a question I I think
maybe Jim I know try to explain
of your expert witness can you
can I know you talked about that
we are losing out on millions of
dollars and how these weather
station translates to those
dollars can and your expert
witness explained that again I
was sure how that all works and
he said that we were missing out
on federal funding because lack
of these weather stations so I I
guess yes Senator yes Senator it
that's a very good question Jim
please please explain what you
were saying about that.
Thank you madam chairwoman and
the Senator Shendo and Senator
Pat Woods in regards to that so
the monies that arrive from this
of the USDA programs does that
to the by eight or their sign up
to the farm service agency
there's a livestock forage
program there's a livestock
indemnity program the tree
assistance program non insured
crop the pasture rangeland
forage emergency loans and what
that money comes from is from
the US farm bill so that US farm
bills appropriated yields
slashing with twenty three
billion dollars it was
appropriated two thousand
eighteen correct me if I'm
wrong.
But New Mexico is I feel is not
getting the full amount of money
because these rain gauges are
lack rain gauges weather
stations in New Mexico are not
there to to to go ahead and
report that right also.
Those programs there's a lot of
federal programs and gotten in
state programs out there that
the PM on the weather stations
to report.
The rainfall in and whether in
order to trigger inactivate
payments to do these insurance
policies or non insurance
policies or even a
eight eight a time of need like
right now that the governor went
ahead and signed back in
December than.
That first part of December the
the that drought declaration so
all of that is is calculated
into it chair woman and Senator
Shendo.
And.
Madam chair in Senator Shendo.
Let me take a quick little story
rancher told me he signed up for
one of these insurance programs
on on and forge insurance would
which is you know grassland
insurance and it was done bye
bye how much rainfall deviation
it was from normal.
Okay so what it was supposed to
be they put this whole state in
grids of about fifteen square
miles.
And so they if you're if you're
greeted was deviating from norm
by so much.
You could collect on your
insurance policy that you bought
you actually paid a premium to
buy this insurance program all
right.
What happens is we've got these
ensure these a weather station
so far apart this man was in
Santa Rosa.
The data they use for that that
policy.
Was in Rio dosa.
Now you know the difference in
climate zones between Santa
Rosa.
And rebels now I'm sure there
was some plus and minus factors
in there.
But he got hardly any rainfall.
But he didn't get to collect any
on his insurance.
In this you know the.
How can you explain that to
someone that that put is good
money up.
To to cover up a you know it
insured what is insurance
insurance is to protect you for
some some casualties that you
that that you can't afford to to
stand on your own that's twenty
by insurance actually buy home
insurance auto insurance
whatever gun insurances is to
live send your lessen your risk
well this is this is the kind of
programs that more weather
stations would take care these
are the problems were running
into the and it's it's that
direct money Senator that that
would be paid into these
ranchers hands after they had
put out premium money on on
these policies madam chair and
senator thank thank you Mr
chairman that's a provides more
clarity and thank you for that.
Story I think it you know it it
it does make sense mill road
also no there's little higher
amount area and sure the a lot
more moisture you know that the
rules of course okay appreciate
that thank Senator.
Thank you senator Sandokan you
selected with Senator Griggs.
Thank you madam chair and
senator was always a pleasure
I need to ask you guys though
because as we look at this we're
we're looking at three and a
half million dollars four
hundred and thirty weather
station which is about I yes
twenty seven thousand dollars
page twenty six thousand dollars
the.
you've got.
Is there is our challenge with
getting locations is it is it
easy to require the
the right to use property for a
for a weather station and
I just can't I can't go over the
cost part with me a little bit
so we're sure we better
understand.
How that all fits in the
process.
Okay.
Madam chair in I'm gonna.
Put this question to David to
blog the state climatologist
because he's going that is part
of the deal is two places where
the stations.
So doctor what thank you thank
you madam chair and Senator
Griggs thank you for that
question so the question is
about citing getting permission
so so that's part of our project
is to
talk to various entities both
federal state private work with
our connections with farm
service hi FSA in our
connections with county
extension
and New Mexico state and and
work with them and based I will
first come up with a plan a
monitoring plan where do we want
to put stations and work with
ranchers farmers and and work
out a deal to
where should we put the station
to get permission and so it's
it's going to be a cooperative
effort for this it's not just me
putting them out its working
together with other agencies and
so conservation districts are
also a key players in this so
that it's going to be at a very
much a team effort and getting
people together and talking
about drought and where we think
of the best places are and we'll
have a plan and so we'll try to
make matcher plan was that the
needs of the communities rural
communities tribal communities
this is a whole state program so
we're getting pulling lots of
entities because it's gonna take
a little while to get this set
up but once we have it in place
is going to be a treasure for
New Mexico because of that and
so thank you.
and madam chair center which and
and David we've picked we picked
a hundred and thirty.
Do we need a hundred do we need
a hundred fifty where's the
magic in a in a hundred and
sort.
It and again Dr do what would
you like to speak to that yes
yes madam chair madam chair and
Senator Griggs so we picked that
number it was basically we I put
a map of all the current weather
stations state federal and and
we looked at the gaps where to
where where where we not
collecting information.
And so we came up with areas and
in New Mexico the work there is
no coverage and so we and it
dependent on some areas that are
in mountainous areas and needing
more
coverage because of the radar
doesn't cover those areas and so
in the bottom like came to about
two to two to six maybe three to
six stations per county there
may be some more
some areas that have a quite a
bit of covers like Bernalillo
county has a we're we have quite
a few stations were some other
stations more County other
counties in the north and the
south these have very very few
coverage so I don't think it'll
it'll it'll very terms of the
number per county we're trying
to do is fill in the gaps that
we don't have that information
right now we rely mainly on
Federal and we like to be have
New Mexico take charge of our of
our own information.
Okay and that and madam chair
senator
I guess right right now I mean
it sounds to me like what what
drive blockchain is it we need
to we need a hundred and thirty
stations that will we'll take
care of New Mexico so we have
our own family is a bad word
probably for their own network
of weather stations
and then the federal weather
stations would provide ancillary
data.
To that if if needed is is that
is that kind of what we're
trying to do.
And again a doctor to what you
would.
Yes thank you madam chair
Senator Griggs yes right now we
rely on our on National Weather
Service federal network for a
lot of the decision making
particularly for the for the
related to the farm bill and so
what we're trying to do is add
into that network to provide
more information to fill in the
gaps and to provide that
information so we can tell where
drought is a more drought isn't.
Thank you madam chair thank
Senator Woods and thank you
page.
Well as I mentioned something
you.
Yes please I would like to add
on to madam chair what David
wise with speaking to.
Midland Texas is our in our area
the National Weather Service
station are that we rely upon
over in southwest New Mexico
they rely upon el Paso said the
weather station for our area is
over a hundred and fifty miles
away and so we needed a more
accurate.
Station close by so as Dr boss
said we are not require relying
on
Texas for that matter but we're
not relying upon the station it
is so far away and so it is
vital for us in our area and
have timely up to date
information on not just
rain issues but also on any kind
of weather issued and I'm sure a
lot of you all remember the
flood of not two thousand
fourteen down in our area where
we had over thirty inches
arraignment sixteen days what we
needed that information that we
were having flooding and all
that kind of stuff and it it
wasn't there in a timely manner
so we really appreciate you
listening to this we would
really appreciate your
consideration and one of the
things that I've been told by
the insurance providers in our
area is the lack of the ability
to have
The internet service and and the
ability to collect the data from
and so thank you very much.
Thank you thank you thank you
Senator Woods and thank you
doctor doubly Senator McKenna.
I'm good morning madam chair and
Senators thank you Senator Woods
I had no idea we had such a gap
in this technology so thank you
for educating me on this I'm
curious Senator Woods what is
the lifespan of the weather
stations that are being proposed
to be purchased thank you.
Thank you for that question
Senator McKenna I would refer
that to drive to what.
Yes thank you madam chair and
Senator McKenna so these weather
stations we we call them
professional grade so they we
and as part of the project is we
will be maintaining them at a
high quality assurance level
that's basically checking things
just like a car your car can go
quite a long time if you keep it
maintained so we will have staff
there to look at each sensor and
to basically doing audits on it
on a regular basis several times
a year and then when they need
to be replaced what will replace
that particular sensor
calibrated if it needs to be
totally replaced will purchase a
new one and so this is kind of
the the the high quality that we
we we really need this isn't
just your backyard whether a
station that you can buy at
Walmart these are stations
that'll that'll last a long time
we had some of our stations
currently the wanted that Mr
list you mentioned out since the
late eighties and so we've we've
kept them up and going you know
it that that's the kind of day
that we need is a very high
quality and that we can
actually depend on so we knew we
know when we get a temperature
of so much your wins our amount
of our precipitation we have a
we can rely on that number.
Thank you.
Thank you doctor do what that's
the only question I have Senator
Woods in madam chair thank you.
Thank you thank you madam chair
Senator Disentis.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you senator what's for bringing
this bill as a background as
farmer and rancher and it's been
a long time needed
my question goes to Dr David.
working with the I work in the
middle of grant Conservancy
district for seventeen years and
around these things and the data
was provided to anyone that
could get on a website
will you guys were you guys do
the same were all farmers and
ranchers can get on and look at
the weather or start have access
to it or would only be of.
New Mexico state.
Yeah yes thank you madam chair
senator Sanchez so the data
currently goes into are New
Mexico State University web
server it's all weather dot NMSU
dot EDU and it also streams to
the national database and that
goes into the law the National
Geographic in an atmospheric
administration and that the once
it goes there it goes into the
public and so as we collected
every five minutes and so it
goes not only to New Mexico
first but to the the national
database and want to go to
nationalities you can go on your
cell phone and get the data and
that's that's the the key thing
is having a reliable and up to
date information at your
fingertips.
Thank you senator is another
question.
But my only question thank you.
Senator Shendo.
The thank you madam chair of it
that just brought up another
question in terms of
you know internet access and so
forth I know that on rural areas
so broadband deployment is a
huge issue so putting these
weather stations out there with
no broadband.
Or it what what what's the.
What does that look like you
mean do we have to do these
almost simultaneously so that
you know it's one thing to have
a weather station sent out there
and we can't collect in real
time data doesn't make sense and
and so I I guess can someone
explain that you know we what we
have today you know is this kind
of a slow ramp up
to we're areas that you have
broadband we can but the scene
of this bill this past and gets
appropriated it what what does
it look like because you know
the I think all of us have
discover with this pandemic you
know with our kids try to no do
the virtual learning from home
the challenges that we've had in
the rural areas and so not
having that broadband how how
does that impact the deployment
if this thing is Fund.
At the thank you passionate and
and madam chair of placement
placement placement and Dr
Deborah.
Senator yes madam chair Pinto
and Senator Shendo thank you for
the answer for question and so
we will be assessing each
location depending on where they
are the availability of
broadband
in some so some areas will have
cell coverage some walls many
areas won't and so we've been
working
to look at different
technologies out there satellite
is another one and I as well as
transmitting over radio
frequencies so basically radios
to transmit to a place that does
have broadband and collecting it
there so there are many options
out there technology is
increasing every year and the
costs are going down for that so
we will be assessing different
options and working with
companies to to to provide that
service for our weather stations
amid no matter where they are
some of them our current weather
stations we have a network of of
I'm in the rural areas that use
satellite only because they're
in the middle of the busy
nowhere and park service or for
service and they really rely on
satellites only thank you.
Right thank you.
Thank you Senator Shendo Senator
Griggs.
Thank you madam chair and I
don't certainly want to jump in
front of any questions you may
have but I don't know exactly
how we ought to do this with the
technology that we have but I
would like to go ahead make a
motion to do patch.
I thank you have a couple
questions Senator Griggs.
So.
I see the map there and I think
it got cut off what you sent us
at the bottom
we do have quite a few red dots
and triangles and stuff on there
and the area in which my
district it is in we do have a
radar station right there on top
of the mountain
but I wondering about restricted
areas
because you know then if it's
restricted I think we're gonna
still have a little bit of a gap
there especially when we talk
about the airforce base in
certain areas so is there a plan
to our have you worked with them
on sept those areas.
Thank you madam chair and and
again this is a placement issue
and doctor to what.
If you answer yes thank you for
that question madam chair
yes so there's some areas that
they're going to be a little bit
of a challenge will work with
the entities that are in those
areas we have I have lots of
connections with some of the
federal you know including DOD
that we can work with them
including white sands missile
range Los Alamos so will will
work with have you know how will
then meetings together on how to
do this and most of time we can
rely on some of the existing but
if we can't then we'll work with
those entities to help us with
the and and we could work out
some kind of agreement and as
part of the project that's why
it's a in there's is never easy
to do this but it it just takes
time and and a lot of
cooperation to come up with a
solution.
Thank you and.
The
Industry there's no literature
saying that the data station has
to be within so much miles of
your ranch or wherever Year
claim your claim is reaching out
to.
Madam chair a refer that the Mr
Lissie.
He's a insurance specialist.
Madam chairwoman bento and to
read Senator Woods in remarks to
that no ma'am what what it is
yes ma'am there are correct that
yes ma'am it is so the closer to
the weather station to say your
ranch in the in the the better
amount of weather stations
within that circle.
If you can get as many weather
station within your ranch to to
show a tighter area instead of a
broader area.
So if we have more weather
stations within a tighter circle
is going to calculate better of
how much rainfall is in that
circle compared to a hundred
fifty mile circle kind of being
a little visual here but Madam
chairwoman Pinto it is that
year.
A good answer to your question
so the.
So there's no direct language
that says that the weather
station has to be within a
hundred miles of the ranch in
order for the claim to be
effective.
Madam chair woman a Pinto
there's no language in there but
how they calculated is they they
calculated the weather stations
that's closest to your that at
six weather stations
approximately and what are these
policies is the closest where
the gauges that are to your area
is with calculated so if there's
one it's ten miles or two miles
away in the next one is ten
miles away than the other one is
thirty in L. one hundred fifty
well they're going to take the
first two.
Weather stations but they're
still going to calculate that
one it's a hundred fifty miles
away this.
This one situation that Senator
Woods talked about that this
rancher got jeopardize on
because he was pulled in his
area of of twelve inches of rain
in coming out of a rain gauge
from matter read also New Mexico
that received thirty inches of
rain so it in that so it didn't
the captain that that circle was
this big and we're trying to do
is make this circle smaller in
not only for discounting
Guadalupe County or to Baca or
are McKinley County it's it's
all counties that are have a
deficiency in and reporting
weather stations are whacked
weather stations to better.
predict the weather and
calculate the rainfall for each
day and instead of a month so
the key thing is is is date now.
Yes and being on Education
Committee we did here bill for
one of the schools and the board
of regents and that they missed
a deadline to have their budget
put in for
allocation.
It did not really speak to that
why we're why are we getting
presented a bill for an
appropriation from my higher ed
institution to the board of
regents after that deadline do
you know why that deadline was
not met.
No madam chair.
I do not know.
And and you you're the expert on
the education part
I cannot tell you that Reese
okay
I I can tell you that New Mexico
state supports this and I can
also give you a short list of of
other
agriculture organizations that
support this and I apologize for
not getting that to you this
technology deal is a killer
we are trying to to get people
in and.
As you know as senator Shendo
said you know the whole internet
process year is is broadband
process is just unbelievable and
our state in many times as
you've seen we have to shut off
for video in order to tell you
know it's a common thing but no
to add to your question I
apologize Madam.
Chair I I I they did not
probably turn this year you're
right okay and one of the things
we talk about farm boards and
ranches it's why it seems that
the higher ed it is like a
business within New Mexico State
University that New Mexico State
University is going into the
business of having a weather
station verses if the farm board
are the ranchers could
with their organizations have
these weather stations put on
their ranches.
And
so would be closer are have that
great system in which it's
incorporated instead of us
pulling money from the state
that the students would be going
out to the trenches to upkeep
and learning in that way about
it verses us putting money into
not that we don't want to put
money into that the university's
but that this seems more of a
private sector
Initiative that could be taken
up instead of going this route
through New Mexico state
and that's just I don't know if
you want to speak to that but
that's not honest.
Sure if you just a quick answer
to that is that the stations
need to be certified and I need
to be third party verified so
that the information is is is
verified to be accurate and so
For you as as you probably know
there's been whether
And I should be leading drive
devices stalk about this but but
there's whether of people out
there that have been keeping
records and at as
Mr Lissu was talking about in
may let me in once a month and
they've been giving these
records for thirty and forty
years.
But they are there are that the
station.
They are you know these are
federal stations that they are
are set up to then as as a group
or a family or an individual and
these as the demographic changes
you know and people move off of
the agriculture areas we're
losing a lot of the stations
also.
So this is a automated process
and the why New Mexico state is
because that's where Dr why is
stationed as of state
climatologist under you know and
and everything in agriculture is
under the New Mexico department
of agriculture which is under
the regents of New Mexico state
they're not a they're not a
cabinet position in the
governor's office.
The New Mexico department of
agriculture there under the
regents of the New Mexico State
University so those those are
the few reasons that I see but I
would be happy for Dr diwata to
track chime in on this also.
Sure that kind of led to my next
question was about if this data
that would this challenged as
far as criterion requirements
that the insurance companies
require and I think you can
answer that about having this
data certified so thank you
Senator Woods I'll go ahead and
drive to work.
Thank you madam chair being done
that Senator Woods yes so I mean
That's kind of the that the
nature of this kind of
information the data weather
data it's usually other states
it usually is collected through
like a universities
system and they're well
positioned to do this kind of
work it I mean it obviously
could be done by a private and
and so we will as the amendment
issue we will be teaming with
some private organizations to
help with this as well.
And so this is a very much a
cooperative effort involving
students state federal tribal
agencies and will pull in
everybody that we
who were it was interested in
helping with this we will be
looking for operators who are
local who will be helping out to
make sure because we get
federalism and so will need
folks to live in the area to to
check on things chapter houses
every you know small soil
conservation districts those are
all the people will be bringing
in to this that that to help
out.
Thank you and I always
appreciate New Mexico state
because I always hear your name
at the chapter house it's and
not helping out with that many
things out there so I appreciate
that and that there are no
further questions by the
committee I'll go to Senator
Griggs to make a motion.
Thank you madam chair moved to
patch.
To the.
And second okay Rebecca you knew
that the motion to do past and
second I a motion to best to
pass by Senator Griggs and
second by Senator Shendo.
And will take a vote chair.
Thanks yes.
Senator McKenna.
Yes to pass.
Senator Sanchez yes.
Senator Shendo.
Yes.
Senator how to meal yes and
Senator Pinto.
Yes.
We have six yes this work.
For it to pass.
And congratulations Senator
Woods and the I believe you're
on to Senate finance with your
bill and I not please revise
that map so I can see the
bottom.
I I will I will try to get madam
chair I will try to get better
information to you just just
quickly our association of
conservation districts support
this in New Mexico farm
livestock bureau support this
and New Mexico cattle growers
and support each one had
resolutions it to that fact but
thank you so much for your time
and your and your your
Help thank you thank thank you
thank you senator okay and now
we have
Senate bill one twenty with the.
Used car prisons conservation
Corp simply turn it back with
Senator Stefan X. and do we have
Senator Stefanics on somebody
else's presenting or to madam
madam chair women it said it
will be over the course
cosponsored I'll be presenting
today.
Okay all right well is the spot
light on you are all your you
have all your witnesses in and
ready for webcast our test madam
chair both of my expert
witnesses are are online with us
okay thank you and the let's
move go ahead and begin Madam
chairwoman Pinto and members of
the committee thank you for
listening to Senate bill one
twenty this morning and co
sponsoring along with Senator
products as they just mentioned
who's presenting another one of
her bills and another committee
at the exact same.
Senate bill one twenty is the
youth conservation corps and
procurement act which was right
in to amend and M. S. A.
nineteen seventy eight section
thirteen dash one dash nine
eight of the procurement code to
accept contracts and the
procurement of services for
projects entered into by the New
Mexico youth conservation corps
Commission pursuant to the New
Mexico youth conservation corps
Act well both YCC and the
General Services Department
expect Senate bill one twenty
two resulted agency cost savings
while reducing the
administrative burden of the YCC
decreasing the amount of time
that is required to prep issue
and process any R. F. P. the
state purchasing division with
me this morning madam chair our
agency Senator would it be
executive director of the youth
conservation corps along with
YCC commissioner miss Lisa
little better Madam chairwoman I
would like agency what to speak
on behalf of Senate bill one
twenty as an expert witness miss
with that Senator I forgot to
asked if of any presentation
material was sent do you know if
any presentation Terry was sent
to the committee so I I would
defer that to miss what.
Madam chair members of the
committee good morning no I did
not send any presentation okay
okay go ahead and move on that
you may be okay good morning
madam chair members of the
committee and Mr vice chair
Hermio I'm really pleased to be
here today along with
commissioner little bear we are.
These conservation corps we
provide funds to tribes non
profits and and small local
governments who then hire used
to carry out projects of lasting
value some great examples this
year are a group of teenagers
who installed state parks that
news only parking in Shiprock.
The trail crew that went up the
dark canyon trail outside
Alamogordo to do some
maintenance on a very narrow
part of that trail and high
schoolers and middle schoolers
in the south valley of
Albuquerque who learn how to
farm and GP's.
So those are just some of the
the wonderful projects that we
funded this year despite COVID
they they follow all COVID
protocols and
The bill request an exemption
for the procurement code for our
contracts and procurement of
services because to comply with
the procurement code right now
we have to release that are if
P. through state purchasing and
that means we follow their
templates and and all their
protocol and it's quite
confusing to our applicants who
you know often are very small
entities it also it's not a good
fit because we're really work
grant program we want to provide
as many proposals as possible
where as the R. P. through state
purchasing is really designed to
give awards to one or two
applicants.
We can't this exemption to the
procurement code we can we'll be
able to do a few things that
will really help the visibility
of the program the accessibility
and are sufficiency as well one
is little yes ma'am could you we
do have a couple of freshman
senators on our
Committee here could you kind of
let them know what R. F. P. it's
thank you
madam chair members of the
committee thank you for that
question yes that are if P. is a
request for proposals so it's
it's basically a document that
lays out the parameters of of
what the program is and what
people need to do to apply for
funding.
So that's what I'm gonna
abbreviated as our at the so the
RFP can be released through YCC
which we used to do that before
two thousand twelve and we can
do that on our own website we
can put helpful materials on our
own website and that will really
help reduce confusion for our
potential applicants and
increase accessibility and then
I think I mentioned before will
have the flexibility if we don't
have to go through state
purchasing every year we'll have
the flexibility to reallocate
reverted funds which will help
keep our fund balance and at a
reasonable rate.
And another thing that we may be
able to do is get grant software
currently we cannot use third
party grant software to issue a
R. F. P. through state
purchasing so what that will do
is it it will enable us to craft
a really good accessible
application it will allow YCC to
become much more efficient on
the budget tracking and program
tracking are are and so much so
that it's really like hiring
another person so I hope that
that kind of explains that
what's not really evident in the
bill why we want this exemption
state purchasing also supports a
and I believe
Care is somebody member of state
purchasing I saw in the waiting
room who can speak to that and
really it marks an investment in
our use we can hopefully have
more projects on the ground
words you use hired and trained
and help build New Mexico's
young workforce.
That is that is my summary thank
you.
Thank you madam chair with us
today is also a least a little
better who would also like to
speak on behalf of Senate bill
one twenty this little bit.
Morning madam chair and members
of the committee thank you for
having me here today I just
wanted to come on and say that
I'm here in support of the
amendment and here to support is
there what are you executive
director executive director of
the YCC had a meetings about
this amendment that we're
proposing and we are in full
support of myself and members of
our community that could be here
today
if you have any questions for me
I think he.
Madam chair those are two expert
witnesses if you now want to go
to comments from the from the
communities from the public or
if you have any questions we
than can take those at this
time.
And that concludes your
presentation okay Rebecca do we
have any emails are public
comment.
Yes we have a yes from a colonel
Buhari's samples with the Aztec
high school
Christy to Fauria who is with
the New Mexico state.
Alright director of the energy
minerals and natural resources
department is here to get public
comment.
Okay go ahead and lecture.
She has two minutes.
She
See if.
Madam chair members of the
committee this is Christy to
point out I am the director of
New Mexico state parks thank you
for having me today I am
speaking in support of Senate
bill one twenty and just wanted
to so in my support today thank
you.
Thank you many others Rebekah.
We have a Michael dax defenders
of wildlife organization.
Is that the one with the.
Trees hello.
No that's Mr Peters is okay.
It's not that.
There.
Okay Mr taxes they are now.
Okay I see it And excelling at.
Yes my name is Michael dax I'm
with defenders of wildlife in
Santa Fe and we stand in support
of the bill this is a common
sense administrative fix that
will allow YCC to get more
projects are on the ground
I think as we've all seen over
the past year outdoor recreation
has boomed in our state says
attending more trail projects
also the need to do more
restoration projects more
habitat restoration projects
there's a wide recognition among
both conservation and
agricultural groups to increase
the capacity that kind
restoration and this is an easy
administrative affects the YCC
to do just that thank you.
Thank you Mr taxi any others
Rebecca.
Yes we have a.
Greg Peters who is with the
conservation voters of New
Mexico.
Okay Mister Peters go to two
minutes.
Madam chair and members of the
committee and and thank you for
the opportunity to comment my
name is Greg Peters on the
Public plant.
conservation voters New Mexico I
am here on behalf of C. N. M.
two boys are so SB one
communities conservation corps
sure.
This will reduce the
administrative burden of the YCC
by decreasing the amount of time
that is required to prepare
issued process a request for
proposals state purchasing
division this will help us
positive effects that will
increase access to the program
as well as priests seem
licensees operating fish is a
common sense bill it's a win for
all New Mexicans does not have a
price tag makes our government
more efficient.
We're very hired and trained for
including.
Our New Mexicans who fund the
YCC program to the gross
receipts tax desert Report
fission accessible youth
conservation corps we believe
this bill will deliver again CNN
recommends the passage of SB one
twenty thank you for your time.
Thank you Mr Peters any other
more many of the tribeca.
In Denver New Mexico which is
the state's outdoor recreation
business alliance we have a
hundred ten members throughout
the state representing al all
outdoor
recreation sectors and our
mission is to expand the outdoor
recreation economy and enhance
the outdoor recreation
experiences by passing Senate
bill one twenty you will do that
we'll get more kids out on the
trails they will be doing more
to enhance the offerings of the
communities which will then
bring more people from out of
state and in state to visit
those destinations and grow our
outdoor recreation economy
accordingly so we are a big fan
of this bill it makes sense for
everybody thank you so much for
your time.
Thank you Mr governor Rebecca
any others we have a Mr more
Caton.
Thank you chair and thank you
everyone for allowing me to
speak I'm the director of state
purchasing and we support this
legislation and has we submitted
a letter of support to EMNRD for
this for this bill the the
program is required currently to
go to the procurement code and
it's been plagued with problems
over the past years.
Personally had to write and
number of a protest
determinations after the the
submissions were rejected and
it's painful to see a lot of
this money not be used for these
programs because of minor
mistakes or mandatory
requirements that were included
so I think this is going to
streamline the process make it
much more simpler and and better
for New Mexico thank.
One
and Rebecca and we have cabinet
secretary can Ortiz who is with
GST who's just here in case
there's any questions.
Madam chair members of the
committee good morning great to
see you all all the virtually I
I just want to extend our
support I also want to thank the
department and agency would for
contacting us giving a chance to
analyze it for all the reasons
that director heating stated we
think that this is a great bill
it will allow more used to be
employed and streamline the
process so we're here to answer
any technical questions but we
would urge you to support this
bill thank you madam chair
members of the committee.
Thank you Mr Ortiz Rebecca is
are we that is all as far as
public comment at and we do have
three written letters of
support.
That's in support okay I will
enter okay thank you I would
entertain that.
Questions from the committee.
Yes Senator McKenna.
Thank you madam chairwoman and
thank you vice chair and senator
how to meal I I don't have a
question madam chair and senator
I have a comment and that is
back in two thousand five I had
the.
Great opportunity to partner
with YCC and the indigenous
language institute and we had a
marvelous project with the non
beta will language
revitalization program and
anything that would enhance the
program and save its money and
in in large its mission that's
the right term hi I'm all for it
so thank you very much I think
it's a very incredibly
Effective program for New
Mexico.
Thank you.
Thank you senator McCain any
other questions from the
committee.
Okay.
Yeah yes Senator Shendo.
Good question.
I do have a few questions though
yes in addition to no I use if
there are no questions as can
take a motion to for the past
but go.
I I just want to make sure that
our freshman senators understand
that some of these processes and
maybe soon Mr teas can
Speak to it is the perfect
procurement code in when we talk
about rejections that some of
these processes are in place to
make sure we ensure
accountability especially with
funding so that.
If this bill is passed and that
would not jeopardize that part.
M. I. E. correct.
Madam chair you're absolutely
correct would impact the funding
it would just basically
streamlined applications or that
applicants to receive
consideration as director Hayden
and previously stated there have
been instances four point where
an applicant Mr technical aspect
and because it wasn't complete
they were not awarded and you
know use were not employed and
some of that revenue was not
provided to the community so
this basically streamlined to
applicants to you know get to
work and received the funding
from amber.
Senator this would.
You madam chair members of the
committee I just wanted to add
to that that this is not a total
exemption from the procurement
code it is for the issuance of
the R. F. P. and although YCC is
the staff of only two we have an
agreement with EMNRD and we have
the services of their HSD
department and their chief
procurement officer and a also a
a I don't know what her title is
but she is our contracts manager
and and all those folks can can
help.
Ensure funding and also
to stay in line with the the
procurement code that is not
about the R. F. P..
Thank you thank you so much and
I appreciate all the work YCC
does especially on a reservation
senator Sanchez.
madam chair Serra thank you for
the bill bringing it so all this
stuff the kids get to
participate in the animals the
bears the trails that you've
talked about and they are from
different schools different
areas of tribes everything.
Thank you senator Sanchez madam
chair members of the committee.
We are funding is open to any a
government agency or local
government unit tribes or
nonprofits we have charter
schools as well that have
received funding and really the
the parameters for YCC project
are are pretty wide open it
depends on what is needed in the
community what kind of training
that the offered to decides to
use need or want so there is a a
lot of flexibility in our
program and we have a big
emphasis on training use and
continuing their their academic
or vocational education.
I I hope that answers your
question yes thank you madam
chair miss woods one more
question so that the use are
employed they receive a paycheck
or their interns or how does it
what age can they start
you know be involved in in this
program.
Yes thank you for that question
Senator Sanchez madam chair
members of the committee the age
ranges from fourteen to twenty
five of course when you're
younger they do need a work
permit and there's there's
certain things they may not to.
And the offer who gets the
funding hires the use and
provides training programs they
can hire outside contractors to
carry out some of those training
sessions and we encourage at a
variety of training not just
strictly limited to the project
at hand but we also want them to
learn a career life and and job
skills so that they can then
it's really sort of a training
ground ground for having a job
and sometimes
you don't know how to act on a
job and why C. C. projects the.
They're often train just yet
going to show up on time and
this is how you act and so
there's a lot of good that comes
from it along with a paycheck
which sometimes is vitally
important to these families.
Service was thank you answered
my question thank you.
Thank you Senator Griggs.
Thank you madam chair Mrs this
is kind of tagging on page
comment that you made and and
directed pretty much to
secretary Ortiz is no it's
important that we have
consistency across the board in
in a lot of this stuff so we so
we handle things correctly and
properly but I also applaud you
Secretary for being able to look
into some of this and look where
things can be done differently
and and better and I'm you know
frankly I think you ought to be
doing that in the whole the
whole procurement code and the
whole bit process because we've
got a lot of things out there
that I think could or should or
need to be modified and adjusted
so state government can operate
proficiently and still protect.
The needs of the citizens tax
dollars so that's that's the
comment and and that's that's
all I have to and so thank you
madam chair and thank you
presenters.
Madam chair then respond to
Centerbridge call center in my
opinion you're right on hold and
I appreciate your comments on
GST is been working on a what
we're calling the project
procurement code re write and
modernization it's rather
extensive as you might imagine
so our plan is to work during
the interim working with
different committees different
agencies and being able to
present a comprehensive bill for
your consideration next year
streamlining it updating at
looking at what exemptions are
there we also have a bill Senate
bill fifty three introduced this
session by Senator o'neal that
is good that I had a couple of
preference categories for
minority and native owned
businesses that's a first step
but the more comprehensive bill
for your comment we're already
working on it and we plan to
take this during the interim so
I very much appreciate your
comments you wrote a point as
usual Sir thank you so much.
Thank you thank you Senator
Griggs thank you Mr keys Senator
McKenna.
Thank you madam chair
For.
One more minute I wanted to
take on with what Senator Griggs
said Senate he reminded me of
something I wanted to.
To ask previously or comment on
and that is if there was any
other programs that were being
identified that would be
eligible for such a cost saving
such as YCC and and Mr or tease
you have already answered that
question so yeah whatever we can
do to streamline processes and.
Spend our our tax dollars wisely
I'm I'm all for it so way to go
and thank you Senator Griggs for
the comment.
Thank you senator can we really
appreciate your comments as well
looking forward to working with
you on this comprehensive our
procurement related bill.
Thank you Secretary and if there
are no further questions from
the committee members we'll go
to Senator Shendo.
Yes Sir thank you madam chair I
was just going to make a comment
that the I was in my
grandfather's use conservation
corps at five years old and
there was no restrictions apply
what I couldn't do have a shovel
and a hole in a pick and and so
why are we limiting you know
thirteen year olds when grapple
having on a tractor at nine.
Anyway with that a big commotion
for the past.
I have a motion for two passed
by Senator Shendo the we have a
second.
Second.
Second by Senator Griggs and we
will take a vote here.
Senator creeks yes.
Senator McKenna.
Yes two passed.
Senator Sanchez.
Yes.
Senator Shendo yes.
Senator how to meal yes Senator
Pinto.
Yes.
We have a total of six yes.
Great Senate bill one twenty
with the vote of six to zero
well as a do pass and you're on
to your next Committee
congradulations Senator are
million first presentation I
think it is thank you madam
chair and thank you committee
and also thank you to miss would
miss little beer and secretary
or tease for standing behind
Senate bill one twenty thank you
so much yes and I think the
point and stare in them if you
go into the next committee
especially with the as you know
the election and we had a lot of
our new new members is the
awareness of the program I'm
aware of it because of the
Shiprock and got to meet a lot
of the students before COVID
**** and that little park you
were talking about and they were
having a workshop at that time
and the students were little shy
I think that was one of the good
things would stay well it's
being able to go by there and
see the work that you do but not
all of us are aware of that but
I'm very glad you do have a
program that is accessible and
able to be conducted on the
reservation and I tribal lands
madam chair if I can make one
last comment I think YCC is in
almost every one of our counties
and districts that we serve YCC
was instrumental in doing
projects in Rio Arriba county
including on the Santa Clara
pueblo thank you madam chair yes
very positive and I think the
key word was cost savings.
Good luck
then we'll move on to our next
bill and thank you all for
joining us you guys have a great
day and now we got Senate bill
sixty one role primary care
clinician loan repayment or TCP
email and the Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino and before we move on I
don't know of any presentation
materials were sent out do you
know Senator there was any
Materials to be disseminated to
the committee.
Madam chair no I don't believe
anything other than we do have
an amendment that I and I hope
that got to the committee on
time we had requested it
wrecked and we do have the
amendment.
Okay and do you have any expert
witnesses that lead to the.
Thank you madam chair I think
David Roddy had requested to be
an expert witness again on this
bill as he was the other day.
Ex Cuse me Madam chairman Ronnie
had signed on earlier and he
left the managing.
Now he's in the waiting room
will get him right in.
Okay excellent so we're about
ready to go
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Thank you madam chair and and
committee members of the could
be back in front of your
committee again today with
another bill that went the the
attempts to deal with the
ongoing issue we have in New
Mexico of providing adequate
health manpower personnel for.
A rural communities and this
bill would create a the loan
repayment.
Fund that would be handled
through the clinics the actual
employers of the.
Medical personnel that would be
included in the program.
The way that it would work is
the appropriation.
Would be what the request would
come to the Department of Health
The appropriation would come to
the Department help the request
comes to the department of
health from the clinic saying we
need any of the listed the
person.
In the bill a doctor a nurse
psychologist the.
Whatever social worker whatever
the whatever the the needs of
that clinic is and the they
would be granted some money.
To pay for what it would be up
to them to recruit them they
have to go out and find them but
this this this program would
provide a way to pay for the the
repayment of the loan.
One one
Part of it each year so that as
the health the professional is
paying up their own educational
loan the clinic would be paying
it for them.
And and and.
There there it doesn't cover
those salary it covers the
repayment of the loan and it's
and it's based on staying in
service in that community in
that rural communities as long
as is there is a balance on the
loan and it has provisions for
the department to draw up
regulations to make sure
somebody leaves they don't
continue to be able to access
those repayment the funds.
We have the amendment that we
have simply adds to New.
A professions that came to us
after we prepared the bill.
This was a bill that that we
discussed at the interim health
and Human Services Committee and
the two professions that we
hadn't included we had thought
about and to be honest we're
up time interests and to a
certified nurse midwives.
Those are the those are the two
that we're adding.
And with that madam chair I'd
like to preface Mr radi to say
something about this bill.
Madam chair members of the
committee.
My name is David Roddy saw you
two days ago it was my pleasure
in this again my pleasure that
would dress the committee I'm
the policy director The New
Mexico primary care association
of services it's director for
twenty as prior to semi retiring
our primary care clinics in New
Mexico serve three hundred
eighty three thousand New
Mexicans I was very late and in
sending Rebeca Martinez some
information for the committee
which up hopefully you can get
later but it includes a map in a
fact sheet about what is
happening in a few points about
this bill clinician recruitment
is up well of these three
hundred eighty three thousand
New Mexicans that's over one and
six of the sense one in three of
the uninsured not state and
sixty percent of the people
under one hundred percent of
poverty.
Our clinician recruitment you
can imagine is the highest
priority and challenge for
clinics and the office too often
new clinicians long the payment
for a higher education debts is
the most effective recruitment
tool I worked in primary care
myself for over twenty years and
even back in the old ages docs
and nurses and counselors and
that this is often the first
question was you know can you
offer me some help with loan
repayment.
What loan repayments due to high
demand only a fraction of the
number of there is a a long
repayment program runs with
higher education which of speak
to here and due to high demand
only a fraction of money with a
new primary care doctors can be
approved and this is at a time
where we have over a hundred
fifty clinics and school based
clinics you know trying to
recruit and and staff to clinics
the current program does a good
job of assisting clinicians who
have already made a commitment
to work in New Mexico and
expanded in the last two years
unfortunately it doesn't serve
as a very effective recruitment
tool for the rural clinics
because the way it works is that
when you when your clinician
you're trying to so the so
higher also about loan recruit
repayment you tell them what we
have a program in the state that
you're gonna have to come to
work here you know signing
contracts that work and then I
was six months later you can
apply in the annual loan
recruitment cycle and then you
may have a wanted to R. one
three chance for proof and so
unfortunately you know that that
program and so rewarding people
of maybe or a commitment to New
Mexico but it's really not too
effective a recruitment tool
this program would allow
organizations to apply to the to
the Department of Health for
loan repayment slot and if they
were approved for instance if
you were to receive a fifty
thousand dollar commitments for
a to repay to test at twenty
five thousand for physician and
believe me that's that's not a
high amount actually the the
state program is paying up to
thirty three thousand in certain
areas at this point time but the
clinic would receive a a
commitment and then they could
use that and if the doctor you
know wanted to come to Wirth
said you have loan repayment
they would have nine months nine
to twelve months depending on
what the regulations department
put together.
They would have that that period
to to actually hiring new docks
so in this case every dollar
spent would result in a new
clinician and do behavioral
health I'm interested in New a
new person coming into the state
you know this.
Program would be administrated
by the department of health help
already sees the entire clinic
system essential the map with
the map of the clinics on every
rural community virtually in
this well every rural community
over I did a so in the state and
it.
The department health works
constantly with these clinics as
expertise and could do the best
job in targeting you know these
funds and and I know that now
that the LFC does not want to
put appropriations with these
new statutes because they get
tied up with some of finance on
the cat they can't pass so you
know we would be up to the
Senate and the house of
representatives to up to fund
this program you know come down
the line.
Thanks.
Madam chair will stand for
questions well we I guess we
would love action on the
amendment for so.
Okay action on the amendment.
Senator Hermio well.
Madam chair I was going to be a
question but if we're gonna take
action I did read the amendment
I moved to accept the amendment.
So who face off so don't think
the amendment motion made by
Senator Hermio do we need a
second on that are just one.
I do we need we need take about
I believe that we need a second
to take a vote madam chair.
I have a motion by Senator our
meal to adopt the amendment do I
have a second.
I don't have if the other
senators are raising their hands
of the my screen just shows the.
So you're going to make a voice
out if a second this is center
okay I think that I can see
Senators and okay and we have a
Senate.
Yes.
In my part of my intrusion and
don't know the.
The correct protocol but I have
a comment before we vote on the
amendment so could you advise me
when that's appropriate to make
it.
Is it really caught is related
to the amendment which is all
the more.
Yes if you make a good.
Okay thank you chairman
Yes Senator RTZ Pino I noticed
that that midwife is being added
how has it been consideration
about adding doula and and with
that occupation.
Qualify and if so why not.
Madam chair and and the Senator
McKenna
thank I don't know.
We didn't even have midwives who
in the that created the bill and
and people came to us and ask
for it so right I suppose I I
let Mr body respond I am not
sure to what extent do is are
are utilized in the clinics but
certainly they they are a health
profession that many rural
communities rely on.
Madam chair representative
McKenna I again I'm of I'm I
have to admit I'm a little bit
ignorant of of of the profession
and I don't know that I don't
know frankly if we employee to
us and our rural clinics and I
don't know what kind of
educational that they might have
as well.
We.
Do we need further clarification
are what would you like to do
senator McCain I mean as far as
thank you I'm so I'm familiar
with the doulas because there's
at least one or two at my Pueblo
non that and yeah they they help
with a woman's childbirth and
after they give birth and so I
know it's a respected occupation
and whilst one.
Go ahead I think what the
because this is the loan
repayment program
would date a cure
loans for their education are
the to to have this profession I
think probably the question yeah
and I don't know too much about
it but just a cursory review
they do pay for training I don't
know how many of them have to
take out loans for that
education and training however.
So I think it would be more
under if they actually qualify
under the
With the federal.
Loans and grants for schools and
higher ed I think that's what
the question would probably be
and I am not sure how strongly
you feel about adding them into
the bill here.
I'm just wonder if it would.
Cause any disruption to do so.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino thank you
madam chair and senator McCain a
possibly one way to provide seed
would be to adopt this amendment
and then if you wanted to do is
into it is a separate second
amendment and the I mean there's
no harm in having a profession
listed that may never actually
in current of student debt to to
be attracted to work just on
that basis my impression is the
deal is working at the clinics
tend to be local people anyhow
and this this provides a.
But it but as an extra incentive
I have no problem with that
adding them if you'd like to I
don't know that I think probably
a second amendment would be the
way to do that that.
Whatever the chairman wants to
do on this.
Okay great sorry Senator McKenna
Senator Griggs do you have any
comments on this.
You madam chair and.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino Senator
McKenna I thank senator Ortiz
Pinos correct that the
additional then that would
probably be better but it may be
our senators that.
The better approach might be not
in this committee would catch it
in the next committee when you
really have a chance to look at.
The the ability to defend why it
is that the the do it needs to
be included in it where you've
got all the all the facts
together to to make that that
argument because I don't want to
I want to do something that
would would water down the the
amendment and happy and have it
brought into question.
So I think I'd I would just
recommend doing it the other way
madam chair and senator Ortiz Y.
Pino and and share McKenna add
up to you of course but but
that's what I think you got you
got a long way to go Jerry in
the it might not.
My number.
That's right.
Senator McKenna do you.
Yeah I think Senator Griggs has
a great idea it gives us time to
get into the weeds about the to
the profession
will tax.
Okay so we'll move forward on
the amendment and the we did
have our motions in place
if we get a second on that.
Yes okay what Senator Shendo
okay okay and take a vote on the
amendment.
Senator Griggs.
Yes.
Senator McKenna.
Yes to pass senator Sanchez.
Yes Senator Shendo yes Senator
how to meal yes and Senator
Pinto.
Yes.
We have a total of six yes this.
Okay sixteen zero and we will
drive the amendment into the
bill and let's go on to public
comment about the bill Rebecca
if we have any.
Yes we have a Mr rob black who
is president for public comment.
Okay areas go ahead Mr black you
have two minutes.
Good morning I thank you for the
opportunity to speak with you
today my name is rob black in
the president and CEO The New
Mexico chamber of commerce and
pleased to be here in support of
this measure thank you to
Senator to see Moquino for
bringing this forward we
recently conducted a survey in
New Mexico as part of our
competitive analysis and
economic strategy for
diversification we surveyed nine
hundred businesses we did focus
groups and one of the primary
things we learned was the need
for growing and developing our
skilled workforce New Mexico has
a key to economic development
and and and health in the state.
So we applaud the Senator for
bringing forward I think a
creative approach to recruitment
and retaining skilled health
professionals in New Mexico
having grown up in rural New
Mexico I I watched and I had to
go in drive hundreds of miles to
Texas to get health care at with
my family so I understand that
the real impacted this has for
our rural community so thank you
very much for the leadership on
this I will say it brings to
light as well though H. B.
seventy five which you may be
seeing later which gets into
medical malpractice issues and
the concern we would have from
the chambers perspective is that
bill would cut the exact
opposite way of what the
leadership that this bill will
create so we hope that you
continue to move forward in a
way that's recruiting and making
New Mexico a positive place to
work thank you very much for the
opportunity.
Thank you Mr black
Rebecca any others for public
comment.
No we have no more people in the
waiting room any emails.
Yes we did get an email from and
the blue co D. Estrada and that
the cold home you.
In in support our support in
support and all right thank you
the committee will not entertain
questions from the members
Senator harm you.
Sure well ma'am thank you so
much Senator Ortiz Y. Pino I
think this is a great deal as a
former educator there was the
same loan repayment for myself
who taught in a title one school
in the land we're if I taught a
certain amount of years I got my
loan repaid which is a huge help
expressions as an educator and
we all understand how much
school can cost especially
medical school now I do have
just one question if the
physician or medical expert
doesn't say a certain period of
time in the clinic do they then
have to pay back the loan or is
there no ties to the amount of
time they stay working in a
place to the loan repayment
repayment plan.
Madam chair and and the Senator
had a meal well it Mr Radhi
respond my impression is the way
it's structured is that the
repayment is is a partial
repayment upon completion of
each quarter of work.
So that so that that if they if
they leave before their total
loan is paid off there.
There's nothing to pay back
their they've they've served and
then been at their loan a
portion of the loan rate.
In return for their service but
all that Mr ruddy explained how
that how that is structured.
Madam chair some of our our meal
Senator to see if you know
Sanchez absolutely correct the
department of health will
monitor on a quarterly basis and
payment so maybe.
You know for the previous
quarter and and and generally
the made directly to the lending
institution the whole screen.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senator Ortiz Y. Pino thank you
Mr ready that answers my
question I think that's a great
idea to attract and recruit
medical professionals and to
rural areas with the incentive
of ensuring that there's loan
repayment thank you.
Thank you senator Hermio and we
have senator Sanchez.
Thank you madam chair Mr Senator
Ortiz the panel and Mr David
I don't know which one the
questions for but I'll ask it
I love the bill I love that
we're tracking all these
Doctors and dentists and
everything to a rural area.
Is there anything coming L. sore
in the bill that what about the
ones that stay import routes
here and you know where's the
incentive for them to.
To actually say you know a lot
of these dentists and doctors
they do love the rural area and
then they build their practice
and they stay here and that's
the ones we want we want to
attract on but we also want to
keep on.
That's my question is there
anything there to to stay here
build roots and build a clinic
and stay in our rural areas.
Thank you madam chair and and
senator Sanchez said that's that
of course is the goal of mean.
I think Mr Radhi at the last
meeting at a different bill of
this committee.
Mention his own experience and
I'll let him talk about that as
well but but keep in mind that
this is one of a number of
things that we tried to do to
make serving in rural
communities more attractive to
medical personnel so that we do
have tax incentives for example
once their their loans been paid
up.
They may still want to stay in
the community and and one
incentive to do so is our tax a.
Whatever you call tax credit
program that we have for for
rural health practitioners who
live and work in those rural
communities David do you have
anything else you'd like to add
presenters such as.
Yes madam chair some of the
subconscious that's the
excellent question and you know
frankly there's not a lot in
continuation but there are a
couple of okay good you know
positive aspects first off as
you pay off the loan
unfortunately low so big now
that may not be sufficient to
pay it off but as the doctors
loans paid off they don't need
as much money but secondly it
gives us two years to try and
work on magic rural community
magic and and it's just a
wonderful feeling of
satisfaction and and self you
know worth to to serve
underserved people in rural
people so we we hope that works
and it works with the percentage
of people and I think the
investment is good but it is
problematic the clinic strand
scramble and and you know give
them a good racing yes three to
it also to kind of offset things
but it's a it's a it's a
process.
Thank you and thank you for
staying here since the seventies
we appreciate your service.
Thank.
You put your roots here.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee.
As senator Sanchez anything
further.
No thank you madam chair.
Okay senator Sanchez as thank
you senator Senator Shendo.
Yes thank thank you madam chair
and thank you Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino for bring this bill I think
it's a great bill of.
Under eligible organizations of
page two you know it's defined
as a nonprofit community based
or public entity.
it doesn't include and I I don't
know if you know includes I know
in our tribal communities we
have IHS facilities and tribal
health facilities.
Under this definition are the
included excluded.
Madam chair and senator sienko
I thought they were included let
me let me defer to Mister Roddy
again on that issue.
We are a public a public
institution you madam chair
Senator Shendo I am not a
hundred percent certain about
IHS the pueblo tribal Pueblo
introduce you know have run many
rural clinics and.
Some of the members of my
organization and and they have
certainly intended to be
included.
IHS on the other hand ten states
tend to have their own programs
it's just like you if the bottom
of health is is running
facilities they have resources
you know built into their
budgets generally the loan
repayment programs.
So I but I I I cannot on the
technical aspects
whether you know public entities
act actually public entities I
would I would you know well
being a lawyer would tend to say
that yes that included as would
be D. O. H. and and both the H.
S. and D. O. H. are included in
the current state loan programs.
Okay a thank you I appreciate
that I know that the
I I was really a reviewer for
ideas scholarships years ago of
and those that we're pursuing
You know a medical or medical
professions the when the.
Serve their time with indicted
facility for number of years
their loans we're we're we're
forgiven and so forth so I'm
familiar with that but but yeah
I wasn't particularly interest
with the tribal programs so with
that definition does include
that that I'm fine with it so
thank you are ready for the
clarification.
That's it.
Any other questions for the
committee I do have a couple
okay.
How is this program different
from the National Health Service
corps loan repayment program.
Madam chair I will again defer
to David to this program was
designed by the local state
organization for which she works
and so I'll let him save quite a
but it was necessary to create
this additional incentive
program.
Madam chair members of the
committee.
The.
Program the the excuse me the
the national service corps
program is is a program in which
the scholar applies to the
national service corps and they
get approval for themselves to
have loan repayment and then
they go out and look to match
with an organization that has
that's approved by the by the
National Health Service school
so I guess the the difference in
this would be giving the money
to the clinics because then the
clinics are able you know to use
that and ensure that that you
know if this successful but they
get a recruit whereas the
national service school on if
you have a you know
maybe a less desirable community
and I don't think there's any of
those.
There's a lot National Health
Service school people out there
but they they don't want to come
to you you don't have you know
the restructure Act I know
that's kind of a convoluted
answer a I'm willing to to
Madam chair.
Go.
Okay yep the the national
service because a great program
and and it and it definitely
best budget clinics but there
are certain clinics in rural
areas you have to have the
claims get schools by that by
the federal government and then
you have to have somebody who
wants to come to you from this
national pool whereas in this
program you have already got
someone who you're talking to
who was interested in you all
you know facility so it it gives
you a lot more you know
potential for success should I
say.
And I think because you know
it's going to cost there is
money that's going to be
allocated to it from the state
and I know we're trying to do
this reverse of using all the
federal funding used to
utilizing and maximizing make
sure we're efficient in that
manner and getting those
monetary.
You know programs in place and
you know squeezing Ali can from
grants and staff and the problem
with some of the rural areas and
clinics is that they're unable
to keep their accreditation when
Dzeko comes around and does
turns actions that some of these
areas are you know that they're
not able to be in that pool
because they're unable to keep
the criteria to receive those
funds and that's where I run
into with some of my physicians
and doctors being out going out
there is when they don't meet
that criteria and you know that
jeopardizes in some sense your
own license because you're
operating in a facility in which
a liability is increased in your
you know if you're in there and
you don't have the right
Whatever you know that the only
there's no claim in that manner
that your
Infrastructure are the those
criteria are not met it
jeopardizes in a if you go to
facility in your you look
through it are you find out that
there was
Issues with that the weights
being run the way if the funding
is not enough where the
infrastructure is not adequate
they won't go there and I think
that's one of the things we
don't look at is the the bottom
line is you know you if you love
the place you work and you will
go to work every day and and
feel good about it but the
report I get is that you know
databases and a lot of the.
Things that are there are not
supported by not up to date so
that's why they don't want to
work there they go to other
places and they see that it's
better there versus to rule and
I think that's where we do we
need to put our money to
invest in our find a way to make
the.
The facilities better so that
they do not feel that their
jeopardized especially when
they're getting started that
day.
Some of the.
Nurses you know they do want to
continue school and learn about
research and stuff but the
facilities there in and don't
allow it don't really have those
things to move forward
that they want to do that kind
of stuck in place doing things
that the you know it that they
would have an advantage and a
better urban areas so they move
out of the rural area
but they do want to help you
know the tension and their heart
is there but just as far to the
moving ahead in progressing and
I think that would be a better
way to them.
Act are into those areas people
my family that are in the health
care system
didn't work they looked
elsewhere because of those
factors so
and they were unable to have
their lone tree the they worked
that Mr accreditation by one
point and that's in the state of
New Mexico so I I applaud the.
The intent of the program but I
feel it's kind of like doubling
a work are something that's
pretty kind of being done.
And claimed from there but you
know I am support of it it's
just I don't know if you want to
comment on that thank you.
Chair just to I would add a
couple things to what you said
because you you're making an
excellent point and that is that
there are many factors that
limit the tractive agency of
practicing in rural communities
and one of them is the status of
the.
Of the actual physical facility
in which people are asked to
work and and if those are of
this stuff is going to be very
hard no matter how many loan
repayment programs or tax
incentives or special
scholarships we we try to create
it's going to be very difficult
to attract professionals to work
in those kind of settings so
you're making an excellent
point.
I think we we acknowledge Mr
ruddy come in as well because I
think that the clinics one two
is Association now for the most
part have pretty good facilities
I know
I went to get my COVID test.
At the.
Clinic in Embu though at the
clinic and that's a wonderful of
early new facility the.
Not all of them of course or is
new is that one and and so they
don't have the information
technology systems as up to date
is they need but I think we're
making some strides there but we
need to do it all madam chair I
guess is how I would summarize
we need to have good facilities
for practitioners to work in we
need to have strong support
staff there and then we need to
have a way to pay them.
Hey off their student debt so
that it makes it possible for
them to to bring up a family in
a small community even if they
can't draw the kind of salaries
that they might have been able
to get in Albuquerque or Santa
Fe.
David did you want to add
anything to what I'm cert.
Yes madam chair members of the
committee.
I would echo what Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino has said and note that
there are those it's always a
challenge to keep up quality and
and systems and infrastructure
in rural areas and you know I
would say that the state New
Mexico's been very support of
investing in this legislature
and investing in New Mexico's
rural health system which is
considered you know one of the
finest in the country and and
has great
you know through the numbers has
has great ability to provide
access in the in the giants
Geographic say all of the
hundred and fifty four clinics
that are members of my
organization and and that's
really twenty organizations with
multiple sites they're all
twelve by Jaco that the federal
government that in when they if
you see any federal funding that
required to be credited the
required to good luck trying to
health records but nevertheless
we were kind and and there are a
actually six nurses of the New
Mexico primary care association
is not a trade association are
lobbying Association we help our
people to quality we help our
people to systems we have seven
I. T. people who actually in a
lot of rural communities help to
run the systems because I cannot
track those people so what you
stated is is very troubling as a
lot of improvement you know to
go but
we we got we do try and and work
on that and with we're proud of
the efforts of the clinics
making with thank you for the
support that this legislature
has has always wanted us.
Okay and I think one of the
other things seems like there's
a movement of that a nurse kind
of opens up their own
Well you can you know go see
nurse and that I don't know if
we could look into that sports.
Going that route in the rural
area.
So there are no further comments
or questions from the committee
what is the pleasure of the
committee.
Motion for the past.
Madam chair.
Dodds a motion for due to Madam.
In an army LCS.
And we will take about.
Senator Griggs yes.
Senator McKenna.
Yes to pass.
Senator Sanchez.
Yes.
Senator Shendo yes Senator how
to meal yes.
And Senator Pinto.
Yes.
Senator Ortiz also at record we
have six yeses and Zeronos.
Okay so you want to Senate
finance where you're headed
that's right madam chair thank
you very much committee members
to the.
Presheaf discussion in the great
points that you all made very
much thank you thank you senator
Ortiz Y. Pino thank you Mr
Robbie for joining us and thank
you members and would be a
little housekeeping there and
will sure we'll see both again
Senator Ortiz took you know Mr
this.
Thank you okay thank you.
Thank you at.
So committee we go to the floor
on on Monday and we'll see how
many we froze we have I think
it's going to be great right now
we have two bills we have
selected souls who asked to have
his bill rolled over and Senator
Lopez is bill that will be on
Tuesday's agenda but I think in
lieu of have making sure we have
things on the agenda a little
before and we're not getting on
the floor tell Levin I think
that time limit of having the
agenda for Tuesday
well we'll be we'll see we'll
see if we can get it at Senator
Griggs.
Thank you madam chair I just
wanted to make a thank you Madam
someone along at that on that
last bill
on the FIR the department of
health said that New Mexico has
a shortage of physicians and I
think that's I think that's true
but I also believe we're New
Mexico is really really in
trouble and it's on the shortage
of primary care practitioners
mention as all across the state
budget and try thank these these
type of bills maybe will help us
to our
To
solve that problem.
And maybe maybe we'll see but I
think you know the the primary
care practitioner the way
medicines changing anymore
there's so many referrals here
in there and that we can just
get people in to see someone and
the and madam chair with
virtual nurse or not I I talked
to a good friend of mine who's
been a nurse for fifty years and
she said for the most part about
eighty percent of the people
that she's ever seen.
Just want somebody to come talk
to spend a little bit of time
with them about their condition
and then that is that is
something that really makes a
difference to them so probably
is you know a good start on a on
a on a bill whether whether or
not it's the exact way it ought
to be I I don't know that is and
I know they're going to have a
difficult time and in financial
and some of it but it's a it's
something that we need to look
at in New Mexico is how do we
bring in.
More primary care practitioners
we may we may love to have some
more surgeons and some of those
guys good for the most part of
the state we need these primary
care people who can get you in
there first and then change your
work show less just to just a
bunch of long winded comments
but I wanted to add those and
and didn't necessarily need to
that jury and and these expert
witness would be there but my
gosh you thank you guys it's
been in New Mexico for fifty
years would get rid of the
Massachusetts action.
I appreciate that Senator Griggs
and I think it is one thing
especially for freshmen senators
that you know the hearing some
things and putting something
support is making sure the
discussion is being had about
the issue and you know that that
we bring everybody together to
come up with solutions and that.
Would you mind if we try to
pursue maybe a presentation from
I don't know D. O. H. or and
we're not there's any ideas on a
certain entity to see what
what's out there are where
they're at now
as far as being in the make to
committee yes in addition to.
The madam chair I have another
thing at what level of clocks
only get off now I will say is
on Monday thank you thank you
Senator Shendo thank you for
joining us but let this
committee secretary now if
there's some be certain that
that you think would be a good
resource as far as updating us
are moving forward on the issue
Senator Griggs was talking about
so we can get things going
Rebecca you have something to
say to the committee I just
wanted to add that in addition
to the two bills that you just
mentioned for next Tuesday we
have a third one which is Senate
bill seventy the public project
revolving fund appropriations
Senator Padilla is the sponsor
of that so we will have three
bills for Tuesday.
Okay so we will have three bills
for Tuesday and we'll probably
just let it stand that that and
see but we might have a full
agenda on Thursday's a committee
meeting in lieu of the floor
session on Monday many questions
are comments from committee.
Thank you all for joining us and
the use the whole time thank you
Rebecca thank you make them and
thank you and we'll see you on
the floor thank you madam chair.
Yeah.
