Yeah Mr.
Yeah Mr chair on the webcast is
started it looks like we it
looks like we're streaming now
okay thank you much.
what are the and stricter
Committee right now we are
started one pressing shy of a
quorum with the start of the
subcommittee out of respect for
the time for the US secretary
designate Department security
are and who's not permission
we're doing today and and so
with that
Our major floor wet Senator
Lopez would like to present
depository.
we'll go ahead and get started.
Okay well thank you very much Mr
chairman members of the
committee and madam secretary
designate.
I would love to be able to have
and so I say let me just start
over Mr chairman I am honored to
present to bianco or these it
worst time to the committee she
has been appointed of course to
services secretary of homeland
security I have known a Bianca
for many many years as I think
many of us have also in her
different roles that she has
been with both here in New
Mexico as well as in Washington
DC.
this are these worth time of
course graduated in nineteen
ninety nine from UNM with a
master of business
administration.
She also has served in
Washington DC as chief of staff
as for Senator US senator Tom
Udall.
she has also worked for the City
of Albuquerque office of the
more back from two thousand
seven to two thousand nine she
was served again as chief of
staff.
she also of course works under
governor bill Richardson as
director of cabinet affairs that
was from two thousand four to
two thousand six and Mr chairman
members of the committee I know
that you can read through the
rest of her resume to see all of
her accomplishments.
Course for me most importantly
issues a local and again a lot
of the different work that we
have done in many other
different committees and
I am honored to present and I
would ask
Mr Ortiz were time to please say
a few words to the committee Mr
chairman.
And our service.
And madam secretary designate
which is it's it's on a from
be calling about because of
known as the working for so long
and on the thank I think I think
we first met my about the time
of your second date with John
and this.
I think.
Was but
so it's it's not it's it's it's
access to have a good friend a
presenting today but
beginning to diplomatic back to
the provided the committee madam
secretary does that
thank you very much for your
willingness to serve the state
of New Mexico continue to
serve the state of New Mexico
has been doing all these years
and with that you might see a
few words and we have several
people who need also of interest
to speak on your behalf.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members and members of the
committee thank you for your
time today and for your service
I am humbled by being in front
of you and two major quit Lopez
thank you for your tireless
service not only in front of
this committee but for the state
of New Mexico for so many years
and for giving me the honor of
supporting my nomination and for
your comments today.
I am grateful to our governor
Michelle Lujan Grisham for
appointing me to this position.
in zero moral I am joined by
members of my family my husband
John my sister Christiana and
high thinker entire of classroom
at the youth challenge academy
in Norfolk Virginia hello.
Friends colleagues and co
workers I thank them for their
incredible support.
It's a real honor to be
appointed as secretary designate
for the department of homeland
security and emergency
management department plays a
critical role in the state of
New Mexico we assess local
jurisdictions and their
preparedness efforts and the
response to emergencies as well
as serving as a conduit for
assistance from the federal
government mostly through FEMA
grants we impact all counties
and tribes we could not serve
all of these communities without
the incredible expertise of our
team and staff.
We have bureau chiefs and person
who are experts in mitigation
response and recovery finance
and grants as well as
intelligence our executive staff
has served in law enforcement
the state department and private
industry.
I have worked in policy in
government for over twenty years
serving New Mexico my entire
career has been focused on
connecting people and
communities with resources.
This last March our team has
worked tirelessly to protect our
communities and connect them
with resources an example of our
teams work is our coordination
response during the current
COVID nineteen pandemic.
It's really hard to single out a
standalone moments of the year
that is presented so many
hurdles heartbreak and
challenges for our entire state
nation.
One major highlight is DHS CM's
incredible response to our
tribal communities this included
the state emergency operations
center staffed coordination and
distribution of the personal
protective equipment food water
and supplies.
Working together with our sister
agencies the department of
public safety Indian Affairs
transportation National Guard
aging and long term care and
health.
Some of our best partners are
local emergency management and
first responder community one of
our main mission is to provide
training for emergency
management community.
These trainings are normally
done in person the time for us
to come together connect with
old friends and neighbors with
one another and learn but like
so many organizations meeting up
in large groups is not an option
in the pandemic we had to
rethink how to find these
trainings for some birds Rick
for some first responders.
And partners we could not have
pods or cancel these courses are
required for some of our first
responders to meet requirements
for advancement the other
livelihood depended on it.
Our department was the first in
the nation to convert the
incident command system courses
to a virtual platform this is a
huge achievement and has allowed
us to discover our potential to
reach a greater audience.
You know growing up in on that
that's in a northern New Mexico
I was blessed to be surrounded
by family and neighbors who.
We're family.
My childhood home is the adobe
house that my great great
grandfather and grandmother
built.
Everyone is expected to work
roll up your sleeves you
couldn't get out and not help
with the baling of hay.
The cleanup of the affect young
or the cleaning of the church.
I've come to realize that
through these experiences came
the lessons of hard work respect
for one another and love for my
neighbor.
Growing up in rural New Mexico
has always given me an
appreciation for small towns.
Years ago.
Probably you know over twenty
maybe twenty five and John and I
first married my father in law
Jared resigned who proudly hails
from fort Sumner New Mexico and
Baca County invited me to the
family cattle ranch known as the
rock in a ranch to go help with
the delivery of cattle.
I was ready ready to see newborn
calves and help them survive
that day.
Driving up to the ranch I
noticed thanks semi trucks
parked on the side of the road
I'd only a dozen or so how girls
and how was on top their horses
helping to guide the cattle into
the corral.
My husband subject the confusion
on my face.
And I explained to John what I
just do we would be doing.
You want me to the large corral
and explain to me that title
delivery is not the same as
delivering caps.
I was assigned to the scale with
my father in law and throughout
the morning helped record the
weight a very large animals
eight at a time and then watched
them leave lotus in semi trucks
headed for delivery.
Not only did I have a chuckle at
my own expense that day I
experienced New Mexico once
again in its true form neighbors
helping neighbors this common
decency and work ethic is
present whether you are not bad
or for some their my father in
law uses the phrase New Mexico
is a place with the we're
neighbors of our.
I agree.
I attended elementary school
graduated from St Michael's high
school and sent us that earned a
bachelor's degree in English
from the university of Oklahoma
and several years later earned
my MBA from the university of
New Mexico the courses I took
especially the error in the area
of organizational behavior and
management have been valuable
during my entire career in
government.
I might be an unconventional
tech for this department that
for eleven years the state
director and chief of staff to
US senator Tom Udall I manages
operation of multiple offices
about the same number of staff
and a multi million dollar
budget I was also the second
month enough to serve in the
role of chief of staff in the
history of the US Senate.
Mr chairman members of the
committee with your support I
would be the first Latina to
service secretary of homeland
security and emergency
management for New Mexico.
And I'm grateful to our governor
for getting this opportunity to
serve and recognize my
experience and background as a
good set.
I was strong understanding of
the federal government in New
Mexico state and local
government I relationships with
our congressional delegation in
our national laboratories these
relationships and connections
will help for the important work
of coordination as chief of
staff I helped the security
clearances and was able to
transfer them to my current
position these credentials are
valuable as I'm required to work
closely with the federal federal
bureau of investigation and the
U. S. department of homeland
security.
During my tenure with the U. S.
Senate I co hosted the
bipartisan chief of staff for an
affair study group managed by
the council on foreign relations
this brought together chiefs of
staff and national experts to
focus on current events that
affect our nation my co host was
the chief of staff to senator
John Cornyn of Texas a friend of
mine so naturally she and I
prioritize several sessions on
the US Mexico relationship.
As a conduit for federal
assistance working closely with
the Federal Emergency Management
Agency FEMA and the U. S.
department of homeland security
is a must assisting with and
supporting requests for local
governments and tribes.
Over eighty percent of the funds
we distribute comes from the
federal government in fiscal
year twenty for example we
distributed thirty four million
dollars in federal and state
assistance to local and tribal
governments over the last six
years we have averaged forty two
million and annual disbursements
to our local governments and
tribes.
This type of administrative
support that our agency provides
is a priority for our department
because it allows our local
governments and are states
receive the grants they deserve
and they reimbursement that they
are owed.
We are proud to welcome the
state fire marshal's office or
agency come July we respect the
work that they do and commitment
to protecting our citizens.
Thank you for giving me this
time today and I stand for
questions.
Thank you very much missions I
appreciate those are comments
that actually nicely
encapsulates the position miss
at all I know that we have
several people who are lined up
to speak on behalf of secretary
designate but is what time are
would you please
The the traffic cop on the on
the comments chair Mister chair
we have General kenapa first.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Major
General cannot find edges in
general of the New Mexico
National Guard thank you for the
opportunity to speak on behalf
of secretary designate the
authorities were time I've known
Bianca for over thirty years we
were high school classmates at
St Michael's high school and in
I've known her for over thirty
years that's incredible when I
think about that.
Unfortunately for me I really
don't have much interaction with
Bianca in the last thirty years
it wasn't until she was
appointed to the position as the
secretary designate of the
department of homeland security
that we kind of reconnected and
in my humble opinion and as one
of the individuals that you work
very closely with she has done
an incredible job in this role
she obviously came in with their
own skills in networks that
she's developed over her
professional career but she was
not assuming that you knew
everything about emergency
management from day one to work
with our staff to work with the
female partners that were there
to try to build your level of
expertise around the weight
Emergency Management is supposed
to work she effectively leverage
your staff in and put them to
work
I can tell you that the other
thing that I really appreciate
is that she has gone out meet we
trying to work with our
emergency managers to build
trust with them to let them know
that we are part of their team
that this is not about the
department of homeland security
emergency management taking over
their responses she's done a
very effective job in working
with our federal partners
bringing in as you mentioned the
department of homeland security
in our female partners in that
she's done an incredible job
there.
I'll tell you that in my opinion
department homeland security is
in great hands with secretary
designate the authorities were
time I personally stand very
strong support and respect and
requested the Senate give her
for confirmation and unanimous
confirmation on her appointment
thank you very much Mr chair
members of the committee.
Federal you may proceed in your
classified location.
Thank you Sir.
Mr chair next we have US
secretary Lynn Trujillo.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Lynn Trujillo and the
secretary of the Indian Affairs
Department and extremely honored
to be here before the committee
today to stand in strong support
of I'm secretary designate
Bianca or tease worth time just
as many of you have noted I've
known the aka for many many
years as well and it also had
the privilege to work with her
and her various capacities
as you heard from the secretary
designate this pandemic has hit
our native communities extremely
hard and in response our tribes
have taken some of the most
stringent enforcement measures
to mitigate the spread of COVID
I just try again to lock down
their communities they reached
out to the state for assistance
with PPE food water shelter and
accessing federal resources and
the department of homeland
security and emergency
management has been instrumental
in getting vital resources into
tribal communities.
Any time that I reached out to
Bianca for assistance she was
there never saying no confident
and steady working through
problems away searching for a
solution embracing the chaos
with her distinct sense of
humor.
It's this type of leadership
that we need during our most
trying times she has the
experience to lead this
department and the hard to serve
on the Mexicans just as she has
done in previous positions in
state and federal government.
I'm proud to call her my friend.
And I'm extremely proud to serve
with her and this
administration.
I strongly I stand in strong
support of the on.
The.
Hi thank.
Thank you so much madam
secretary.
New Mexico we have the Sara Benz
in.
Good morning everyone hear me.
thank you to the committee and
the chair for a lot of my
testimony today hello my name is
there and thank and it is truly
an honor to testify in support
of Yafa or Keith weir I
nomination for secretary of
homeland security and emergency
management for the state of New
Mexico.
Yeah and I spent several years
working together as chief of
staff US senator Bianca serving
New Mexico percent are you doll
and myself serving Ohio percent
brown.
Senate chief have a reputation
for working collaborative please
whether it's discussing policy
issues that he and working to
solve constituent problem or
simply providing additional
information office office eight
in our work and that's how I got
to know beyond that.
Serving people was always start
beyond the focus I witnessed
time and time again how to
navigated complex policy
challenges always my one goal
how to best serve the people of
New Mexico and I know she will
bring the thing focus to this
new role.
In the summer of twenty nineteen
senator brown visited the
southern border to better inform
our work to improve the
immigration system.
In preparing for the trip the
first call I made with the
beyond that and just like that
the she knew who she talked to
who and what we should see and
the question is that he expertly
advised the from everything from
the care technical aspect of
border security to the human
impact on the migrants local
communities the organization and
border security officers.
Our visit had a profound impact
on senator brown is with
financial and our staff.
The greatly expanded our depth
of knowledge and help that's
informal highland what happens
the community that our southern
border and the impact or
policies have on migrants and
their families it was all
possible because of the on that.
This is just one example of how
Bianca brings together policy
expertise community relations
thank you hi this is service of
working to make life better.
Through the on guidance and
friendship I have become a
better keep that a better leader
for senator brown and the people
of Ohio.
And I know she will make that
same positive difference in the
lives and work of those she
touches at the secretary of
homeland security and emergency
management for the state of New
Mexico thank you again for the
through the.
And next we have Mister Kelly
Hamilton.
Good morning Mr chair person and
members of the committee.
I'm W. secretary for homeland
security and emergency
management and I really feel
strongly about standing for the
secretary designate she is
absolutely the right leader but
more importantly the right New
Mexican spirit that that
department homeland security
emergency management needs as as
you can imagine she came in
about eight months ago in a very
very challenging time in the
agency's history she's learned
quickly she's led to calmly and
she's in third personal loss and
all of that and she holds her
head up high and does an amazing
job we are now facing
coordination issues on the
border in a pandemic and that is
challenging as well but she's
one of the greatest coordinators
of people and entities and bring
in despair parties together that
I have ever encountered our
tribal relations have never been
stronger thanks to the secretary
and when we're supposed to do
this last Friday I was reminded
of how much she is like here at
the HSC and there is a little
pile of candy outside her office
door and somebody had put it
there because they love our
secretary I stole it and ate it
but I'll give it back to our
some day I I could not.
More strongly support the
secretary and in this and love
working with her thank you.
And Mr chair next we have Seth
Miller.
Mr chair committee members
special guests my name is Seth
Moeller the emergency manager
for Santa Fe County and I'm also
the president of the New Mexico
association of emergency
management professionals.
I'm here today because we we
love Bianca she has been amazing
for me it'll be the sixth
cabinet secretary at the HSD M..
We are very excited.
like she had said before
initially when she called me
eight months ago she didn't have
a whole lot of emergency
management experience and she
reached out and was concerned
about that but now eight months
later you would never know that
like she has fit in extremely
well all of the locals love her
anybody that reaches out to her
knows that she will respond if
not immediately within twenty
four hours to give you the
answer that you need to help you
figure out what needs to be done
if we have issues we've had some
issues at the local levels you
can call on her and she will be
there to support you she was on
a couple of zoom meetings for us
when we were trying to do the
teachers for Rio Rancho.
To help us figure all that out
but I would state for myself I
am super blessed to have known
her even though it's a short
time and hopefully gets in or
better as we move along overall
as the president of the
association I know that all of
our local emergency managers
deeply appreciate all the hard
work that beyonc has done and
the way that she motivates our
team at DHS CM and the support
that we get is beyond reproach I
think it's amazing.
Thank you for your time Sir.
Mr chair next we have Greg
bloom.
Good morning Mr chairman members
the committee my name is Greg
bloom I am the assistant
commissioner for mineral
resources at the New Mexico
State Land Office and it's been
my great good proud pleasure to
work professionally twice with
Bianca or tease worth time over
the past twelve years when we
first worked together she was
state director to US senator Tom
Udall I was our counterparts and
senator Bingaman's office and
this was back in two thousand
nine is there's four things I'm
gonna leave you with today and
the first one looking back at
that time it was in the in the
middle of the discussions about
the affordable Care Act it's
been addressed your day already
one of the questions beyond all
these **** how will this affect
New Mexico's working families
how will this affect our
communities at home and we heard
that I've heard that over and
over again in the decade plus
that I've worked with her with
the affordable Care Act it meant
that hundreds of thousands of
New Mexicos New Mexicans were
insured not just because of the
subsidies on the exchange
because of expanded Medicaid as
well the second time I had the
opportunity to work with
bianco's and she went out to
Washington DC to become senator
Udall's chief of staff when she
got there she was the only
Latina chief in the Senate and
she got there and she held the
door open for others behind her
she bills one of the most
diverse staffs not just in the
Senate but on the hill a staff
that reflected the great
diversity we have in New Mexico
and something that we're all
very proud of and that helped
inform Senator you all decision
making as policies along the way
a little more time I I would I
would dip into her or
significant policy chops Serra
addresses servants and you're on
the call with us but I would
just mention her guidance to the
senator as use vice chair of the
Senate Indian affairs committee
or work on the for the people of
Iraq's synodals major democracy
reform bill which passed as H.
R. one out of.
House in twenty nineteen we're
just hoping it passes the United
States Senate soon.
The last thing I'll mention is
as we are here Bianca staycation
Lee I think more management
philosophies is always no
surprises trying to keep all the
balls up in the air knowing
what's happening in the nation's
capital knowing what's happening
at home knowing what's happening
in our communities New Mexico
and I'm thinking about just last
week when she I saw.
The statement you sent out on
New Mexicans about this
historic.
Freezing weather we had.
Last week and she and and that
was all well she's planning for
for fire season and trying to
figure out how to address issues
down at the border now do in due
in doing all this.
Being an unprecedented pandemic
something that the office of our
homeland security were demanded
as never had to do before in our
New Mexico's history
and so I'm just so proud to
stand here today in support of
surgery does any Iago Ortiz were
fine thank you all so much.
Mr chair lastly we have Susana
Gonzalez.
Can you guys hear me okay.
Yeah okay fantastic Mr chairman
and members of the committee
it's with incredible pride that
I speak for my friend my very
dear friend the authorities were
time
I am Suzanna Gonzalez and I'm a
physician at Presbyterian
Hospital in Albuquerque where I
practice in the intensive care
unit as a critical care medicine
providers and I've known Bianca
actually since back in our
junior high days we both
attended St Michael's high
school from seventh through
twelfth grade at for her that
meant commuting thirty minutes
from the community of non bay
and and at Saint Mike's she was
really a standout student
intelligent very talented
athletically she was a
cheerleader and I have to say
despite all of that and my
distinct lack of any real
athletic ability and and myself
falling into very much the nerd
community she connected with me
and we've been friends since
seventh grade and so it's been
with great pride that I've seen
her development over time from
that stand out student that she
was at that point and the dear
friend to the professional that
that you've heard about today
and I think it's those qualities
that she had back then that led
to her success at that point
that have only grown and and
evolved to the point where she
has been able to excel
professionally both with the her
work with governor Richard St
and with senator Udall and now
is your.
Your appointees for secretary of
health and homeland security and
so I'm I can only say great
things about her she's remained
steadfast in her commitment to
serving New Mexico and she knows
New Mexico and she stepped into
this role of course as you've
all heard during at a really
difficult time with the pandemic
and I just I couldn't be more
proud of her with all of that.
I think these are much in
addition we also have
our secretary state who wanted
to say a couple of words.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee Maggie
Toulouse Oliver New Mexico
secretary of state like many
others I've known Bianca for
many many years I was doing the
quick math I think it's twenty
seven manner since I was
eighteen years old I've worked
with her in many capacities over
those years and in addition to
just being able to call her a a
wonderful life time friends
you know when Bianca came in to
the homeland security office
this year the pandemic was
already under way and we were
already navigating the
incredible complexities of
managing an election I'm trying
to keep every single voter and
poll worker and county clerk and
their staff safe while we
managed a record turned out and
and at her W. Mister Hamilton
was wonderful during the primary
that Bianca came in and really
brought it home working very
closely together with our office
and and making sure we were able
to distribute all the supplies
that were needed out to those
communities working together
with the local county homeland
security offices she was
personally available she and I
spoke many times directly to
each other over the course of
getting ready for that
unprecedented election and so
her her commitment is deeper
abilities are great and I just
want to echo everything
everybody else has said that she
will make an absolutely
fantastic secretary of homeland
security and and urge your
support for that thank you.
Thank you madam secretary and I
will also let the committee know
that Lawrence right now CEO The
City of Albuquerque opting to
about being able to come in to
say something about Mr shape
with I'm I'm assuming it's in
support and
but I don't I don't I think get
tech problems to be able to get
it but I did want to let
everybody know that the that he
had made that attempt
and also that let us go to
questions from the committee.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
secretary designate you know I
have a question.
You.
We're in senator Udall's office
I notice
your spouse's run for for
partisan race it has run in
partisan races how are you going
to
leave the department kind of
shed all of those of partisan
things that we learned over the
time what what can you do to
help ensure that not in a
bipartisan way but in a
nonpartisan way leave the
department of homeland security.
Thank you so much Mister
chairman Senator Pirtle thank
you for that question throughout
my career I have.
Look at New Mexico as of one
body we are non nonpartisan when
you're trying to connect
resources to communities are
people that's the last thing you
should be looking at is part is
through it through a partisan
lens
I think the department of
homeland security and emergency
management is absolutely a
wonderful department that
This everyone and every
community every county and tried
throughout the state and we
don't have any any room for for
playing politics lives are at
stake in this is serious
business and so yes there has
you know I have the of been
active in politics that even
under my work with with senator
Tom Udall he was also very very
nonpartisan and when we went and
work in New Mexico and during
all of our district visits and
when I was state director we had
a policy of hitting all thirty
three counties in our visits
every single year
and you know that is something
that we have to do and we will
continue to I will continue to
carry that type of policy in my
work in this department thank
you so much Senator for your
question.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Secretary designate.
Without being in the in the
capitol not privy to the the
packet
but can you maybe go through
some of the your experience with
regard to
some of the things that homeland
security is in charge of doing
whether it's
You know first responders or or
any history working with police
or military experience something
like that that that would really
put you over the top qualified
for homeland security.
Mr Chairman Senator Pirtle thank
you so much for that for that
question in my opening
statements I did mention several
points and my experience as
chief of staff to your senator
Tom Udall you know one of the
one of the issues of course my
experience on border issues and
having work with the state of
New Mexico very closely during
the twenty nineteen surgeon I
think was twenty fourteen or
twenty sixteen search and those
that that knowledge that I bring
is actually very important
because as we see with the new
administration that's going to
be something that of we are get
re up already started
coordinating with our local
emergency managers and local
officials my understanding of
the legislative process one
thing that is I think
pretty good news I hope that
holds is that your marks will be
coming back in the in the lead
in the the Congress I know that
that is the very
can be a controversial issue but
at the same time it could be
very helpful for New Mexico
especially for preparedness the
understanding the process the
legislative of the process that
the in Congress I think is very
helpful the other pieces that my
knowledge and relationships of
our national laboratories and
our congressional delegation and
I also have I held on to my
security clearances that I had
during my time as chief of staff
I have them now in this role and
so you know that is very
important because of my needed
work with the federal bureau of
investigation and the U. S.
department of homeland security
so hopefully those are are some
of the the area that help answer
your question one pieces of
course.
My true interest and and wanted
wanting to make sure that New
Mexico is made whole through
reimbursements that are only and
of course our local communities
and tribes who are also I'm
looking for grants you know the
department of homeland security
and emergency management New
Mexico
you know we have our conduit for
federal financing and so
building up our our ads are HSD
a division making sure our
finance grants division are
strong that is going to be a
real
real goal of mine because their
work matters to every single
person in the state of New
Mexico thank you I hope that
answers your question.
Thank you Mr chair and secretary
so so to be clear in any of your
previous jobs you don't have
first hand experience with
military or first responders or
anything like that but you do
have experience through your
position as as chief of staff
working with those types of
organizations.
Mr chair members of the
committee Senator Pirtle yes Sir
that is that is correct.
And and thank you Mr chairman
and secretary designate
you know I I do have a little
bit of concern with the
partisan past hopefully we can
put that behind us and then you
know this is a very important
department as you mentioned
border border security I hope
you understand that that doesn't
have any room for partisan
politics as it is usually occurs
in in Washington we have a duty
to protect our border protected
protect our people and input in
into drug smuggling sex
trafficking all the the horrible
things that we hear about that
can happen when when we don't
have a secure border we need to
ensure that we protect the
public and and there's no room
for partisan politics whatever
it comes to protecting the
citizens of the state thank you
Mr chair.
Thank you very much several
other members of the committee.
Representative you know I I do
want to
What is dried at actually one of
the things that for me is very
important about the public
comment along the lines action
what of what senator
acaba sort of rules our
questions were were as that read
pretty consistently from people
speaking on your behalf this
morning are you currently on
recognition that you came into
the position I'm secretary of
homeland security without
without a lot of background in
homeland security issues present
a on the traditional perspective
but that you can then with my
leadership skills and our and
that and that it was leadership
and administration skills that
you have been of that have that
you immediately
are displayed in the role of the
department as you've been
working with that with the
homeland security our
professions right and and that's
something that I think The New
York I think that's something
that we should never discount is
is is the value of of someone
who was a strong administrator
and a strong leader on to build
related part of of of of content
area experts and and so that's
something that that that was for
me came through loud and clear
in the and the public comment
that we had today Senator only
have a couple questions.
I apologize Mister chair
committee and related to this I
any questions all I can say is.
Bianca is fabulous I mean I've
worked with her back in the day
she helped me of secure that
appointment
to head up the state juvenile
parole board for she's just
worked you know no and DC I know
our family very well and I'm
very excited about her
appointment so I'm sorry for the
late comments but but way we
we're just gonna be served
really well with her skill set
and and I'm just really looking
forward to working with her in
that capacity so thank you Mr
chair members.
Much of the committee.
Mr chairman and move it to pass.
Second row.
I'm on the second did I miss
that
Senator fantastic are very good
so.
And we do passed motion.
Our.
Our our secretary of homeland
security.
And I'm is there any other are
there any other questions or
comments from committee at this
time.
Very well K. R. local level
Senator Lopez.
Yes Senator o'neill yes Senator
Pirtle yes Senator Stewart yes.
Senator Wirth yes.
Senator Ingle.
Yes.
Senator Duhigg yes and Senator
Ivey Soto yes ma'am what was the
what it is eight two zero.
Senator missions I'm not looks
like we will be working
in your in your name so and I'm
on the road this will go to the
floor on Wednesday.
Thank you very much thank you
everybody.
Thank you resolutions by what we
know now to.
Senator some contests.
Once.
US senators centered chairman
Ivy Soto members the rules
committee care me.
Good the zoom is all working
thank you very much for hearing
Senate bill three sixty seven
this morning I'm gonna refer to
some notes this last year's of
course been very challenging and
all those we realize that there
are shortcomings in the way we
govern
ourselves in the section on
short notice what we address
things when they're urgent.
and these limitations reinforce
something I've been trying to do
for several years but let me
just give you a few statistics
since our since our statehood
our constitution is now a
hundred nine years old so we
have a preceded by try that
piecemeal amend the constitution
three hundred six times since
statehood.
It's a succeeded a hundred
seventy one times with again a
piecemeal approach the
constitution and and this
session alone there are thirty
one bills to amend our
constitution.
The bill before you takes a more
thoughtful and professional
approach which we have set forth
in our constitutional law which
is to create a constitutional
revision commission to convene
this year includes an
appropriation for this year and
sunsets after here in the
purpose of the commission is to
create a fifteen member groups
to review our constitution and
ideally from my perspective look
at best practices to look at
what other states do in all
respects does it still make
sense for us to meet thirty days
and sixty days in alternating
years as a still makes sense in
a thirty day session that we
limit the matter only to matters
for the budget for the governor
alone.
All of these are questions that
somebody should be asking
somebody should be evaluating
and and I think there's four
more thoughtful approach which
is to reconvene the
constitutional revision
commission this is something
that has been convened twice
before under our law once in
nineteen sixty seven which led
to a constitutional convention.
It was presided over by Bruce
Cain nineteen sixty nine they
made recommendations and and the
recommendations went on to the
ballot and my understanding of
history from nineteen sixty nine
I think most of us with are not
born a pretty young nineteen
sixty nine the voters rejected
the constitutional revision
commission recommendations but
by a very narrow margin.
Since nineteen sixty nine the
constitution revision commission
has only assembled once again in
nineteen ninety four for this
purpose once again to assess our
constitution nineteen ninety
four realize we have in this in
twenty seven years
to do this so Mr chairman that
explains a bill I believe I know
that the some discussion perhaps
about the composition of the
commission realized the role of
the commission is only to study
ideally with some very learn it
individuals the Supreme Court
has a non voting participation
role the Attorney General has a
non voting participation role
but the majority of members of
this commission would be
appointed by the Legislative
Council with three appointees by
the governor and ensuring that
the year the up there is a party
requirement that no one party
has more than eight members of
the fifteen member commission so
that we we avoid this best best
we can a partisan approach to
the the task at hand but
ultimately this is what any good
business does what any good
organization does which is take
a step back look at how we're
doing things and really assess
ourselves objectively and I
think I will I think we need to
do that chairman I'll stand for
the questions of the committee.
March Senator mantis.
Squeezing the lost Senator on
yes let's see if we can get
impact.
No I'm I'm here Mister I just
muted myself.
Okay we also work with you.
I'm here for you all the way
okay yes.
Our questions from committee.
As I'm looking at.
This
is it my understanding.
That
It would be that so I'm I'm
reading.
That was a principal public
numbers that and the.
R. and and that the governor
points the public numbers ninety
stand up to be an exclusion of
them all of anyone serving the
legislature.
Mister chairman Senator that's
the idea behind it I believe
when we when we did this last
time
I can't recall a time when my
understanding is that Jack
Burton may be on this call and I
can refer to him as an expert
program to or perhaps Mister
Lara going to serve on the last
commission I I my recollection
is that perhaps Ramon Sanchez
was on the last commission and I
don't know whether he was in the
legislature at the time but but
back to really to the point of
your question is I think that we
don't want legislators on this
on this commission but I'd be
engineer the committee spots
here's the here's the thanking
Senator Ivey Soto was chairman
you know you're trying to have
this legislature consider I
think this is fair to say I
shouldn't.
I guess to your motives but I
think that you are leaving open
the possibility that this
session that that the
legislators could be begin to
consider for compensation for
salary but but to be determined
by the ethics commission.
we struggle with this for years
we struggled for years whether
the legislature New Mexico
should be the last not be the
last remaining state that does
not pay its legislature but of
course none of us feel
comfortable casting the votes to
change that relies on their the
political implications of doing
that and so it seems to me that
having an outside commission
make that recommendation to the
public in this form as well as
many other potential
recommendations to to really
bring ourselves into the twenty
first century should probably be
made by people other than
legislators my concern is that
there might be too much
deference given to legislators
or there might be an effort to
put very influential legislators
into this process the goal here
is to have somebody tell us
we're not doing it right there's
a better way to do it.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you very much
What if you have some questions
thank you Mr chair I appreciate.
Senator entrees you bringing
this I have.
Definite memories of having a
conversation with former
representative Max call
about the last constitutional
convention we had and I I
believe Bruce king was the chair
of that convention Jeff Bingaman
was council many years ago and
it's an interesting process for
sure I I want to make sure that
I understand.
Kind of where this goes from
here so under that I'm looking
at the constitution article
nineteen section one so the
independent commission comes up
with recommendations.
Then then what happens to we
still have a requirement under
section two of article nineteen
to.
Pass a by two thirds of.
A vote to call the
constitutional convention or is
that two thirds vote by past
when you do this statutory
process.
Senator Wirth no there's nothing
in the bill that would bypass
that constitutional process so
really the goal here are we wish
that to you know this one of
those times when you really need
visual aids and I can't do would
soon unfortunately but you're
not a really members when they
have a chance go take a look at
the product of the last
constitutional committee
convention it's a it's a
terrific report it's a probably
about an inch thick a great deal
detail but it made very specific
recommendations for amending our
constitution but Senator Wirth
ultimately all this commission
does is can be themselves by
this bill they're required to
meet four times in the next
year.
Vied said appropriation although
I will note the fire says it's a
recurring appropriation I
disagree with that because the
billion that has a sunset clause
and in the twenty twenty two so
exist only for one year the goal
here is to get a report to us
from which we then as a
legislature can now can decide
the next course of action so it
fortunately is much slower
process and I would like but but
is this is a bill I've been
introducing for several years to
so I've learned to be a little
patient but to your question
center now this would not quite
as that constitutional
requirement at all and so on Mr
chair does this do the Kobe is
the is the convention limited to
those items that are in that are
recommended by this commission
or once a convention is opened
is it fair game can anyone bring
anything.
That's a good question and I
think that's been one of the
reservations or hesitation in
the past about convening a
constitutional convention center
where there's nothing in this
bill that requires the
convention to limit itself to
the product of the constitution
revision commission but but
certainly the legislature I
think we we call it we call for
the commission so so we most
certainly can I think limit the
quick parameters on what that
can convention can consider so
I'll just be blunt about it some
folks in the past to be
concerned about doing this
because they don't want open
Pandora's box.
In a worried about where this
might go.
And I think we I think was
Legislature retain ultimately
that control for the for the
role of the convention and then
ultimately the the the voters
would have to approve this.
Yeah Mister chair and the
interesting thing about this is
that the convention is it it's
seventy members as I understand
it one all elected from each
congressional each state
legislative district and so I
distinctly remember.
Max call telling me that he he
ran a campaign in his house
district for to get the seat on
the on the convention and so
it's those seventy members who
are separately elected and I
just think it's important that
people understand.
Exactly what that what that
commission what what the
convention make up looks like
because it's not it's not
sitting legislators and lets you
run.
And so I just want to flag flag
that piece of it but I I support
this I do think that we've
what's happened now is we're
doing a piecemeal approach and
we we kind of take single issues
in different places and and this
is a chance to really look at
look at the bigger picture I I
do think I have I have some
concerns about the guard rails
and making sure that once you
get in here again you're gonna
have seventy folks elected for
these positions and I'm not sure
that you can we may put
guardrails out but I do have
some concern that that those
seventy folks can add things to
the convention and and this
thing could get.
I want to direction is very
different than what the
commission wants and I think
you're right to to note those
concerns I just curious about
that that interplay but I I
support the bill appreciate you
bringing it thanks.
And actually I I I I guess I
need some clarity just moments.
Based on several US questions
are answers around us Madam is
it was this and I see that Mr
Burton is joining us
It is.
The commission.
Senator just nine months process
for convention.
Representative seven for the
process for commission is that
correct that's correct.
I
have seventy different people
running from different places
from from each state house
district correct no not a
commission stage now okay.
Well.
Yeah I I just want to make sure
I understand it is is the
commission making
recommendations to a convention
or does this happen without the
committee so this happens
without the convention that's
correct no is that the
commission makes recommendations
to us as the legislature we then
decide whether to convene a
convention or not.
Well but let me make sure I
understand so.
So but if we make the decision
to convict convene a convention
is that the convention that's
considering these changes the
commission makes or or do we
bypass the convention I guess
that's where I Senator Ivy Soto
is going and I I just wanna make
sure I understand.
Senator Wirth center I'm so
there's nothing in this bill and
nothing to my understanding of
the constitution that would ever
by pass the convention process
or the legislature by this
commission the the product of
this commission in this bill and
as I envision it simply report
to us.
By an assessment of our
constitution with
recommendations of well again to
look at everything we do that
now again there's my new should
our constitution you all know
this there's arcane and and
frankly of probably offensive
language in our constitution
there's language with thank the
clusters the remains that limit
the role of women and and what
they can do in society I think
it's still in there so so the
goal here is to to look look at
the big the big picture of the
constitution that but also the
my notion my my real goal here
is to really have this
commission doing something
nobody does for us right now
which is look at other states
look at the way they conduct
their business and assessed
maybe there's a better way to do
New Mexico's business than we
envisioned over a hundred and
whatever it is hundred nine
years ago.
Yes Mr is one more thing so just
to be clear that this
recommendation by the commission
we vote on it and then basically
it gets sent to the voters.
Well I mean like if we propose
is like a I propose a joint
resolution we vote on it goes to
voters is no convention involved
I just I'm trying to figure out
you know and I think that's what
it says here.
I mean just just real quick and
and we may want to get Mr Burton
and you're on the discussion but
we have this our mission is when
we do a piece mineral I'm member
of the constitution
we are limited to a single free
standing topic.
R. and if we do multiple our
topics we would it would become
a lot of really if we approve
the product of the commission
the long running issue goes away
and we're able to present
affectively up package more to
the rotors and and million and
then I was if we do a
convention.
Attractively and they start with
federal saw.
And and can just simply come in
with a brand new
constitution altogether that is
not available to the commission
it is available red is is also
my understanding of and but but
Senator Wirth and centers around
as if with with with your
indulgence if we could bring in
Mister Roderick that Mr Burton
in the conversation that will be
able to help us out with this
little bit of Mr I would go to
Mr Britain first and then Mr
light with yeah it before you go
to Mr Burton Senator Mr chairman
if I may my understanding is
that in nineteen ninety six we
changed.
Process and your exact year
explaining is that correct Mr
chairman which is that that we
can continue to do the piecemeal
process we've been doing or
alternatively we can do a much
more wholesale outlet
reform of our constitution we as
one single about an item but may
reforming in in that item
multiple sections of our of our
state constitution to do so in
that way and evidently that was
a change made in nineteen ninety
six that allows for.
Much broader constitutional
process rather than the
piecemeal we're doing and and it
is one ballot item but again Mr
chairman two year and senator
Wirth point still requires this
legislature to.
Authorize it in the normal
constitutional of.
Process for concerts amendments
to put it on the ballot and
ultimately for the voters but
but I appreciate you recognizing
Mr Burton or Mister Lara going
to have to have more information
on this.
More.
One job.
You are muted.
You're just can't hear you.
It appears that I Jack Burton is
having technical difficulties on
his hand if you want to move on
and you can.
I'm.
Okay.
This but okay with your one stop
source okay thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee I just want to say
that I am in favor of the
principle of it because of the
constitutional revision
commission in favor of the bill
and this is been
something that we've been
working on in the state in fits
and starts I can remember with
senator Jeff Bingaman and I were
very young lawyers and he hi I
believe he had staffed
a constitutional revision
commission when he was a very
young lawyer and it's about time
we got this thing off and
running and got it done right
and I think it's long overdue
and I hope that we can get it
done right this is a good bill
to get it done right so I just
want to say that.
I'm in favor of the principal
and I'm in favor of the bill
thank you.
Mr our will to.
You can see right now we can't
say much of anything else.
Thank you.
thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee this there are
three fundamental ways to amend
our constitution one is by
piecemeal amendment to is by
proposals from the
constitutional revision
commission and the third manner
is a constitutional convention
the constitutional revision
commission does not require a
constitutional convention.
having served is nineteen in
ninety six on the last
constitutional revision
commission it's a mechanism to
learn about our constitution to
make recommendations for men
that whether those be piecemeal
or packaged this is what the
report looks like this is the
out back the report is and I
would commend to the members two
documents produced by the
Legislative Council Service one
is piecemeal amendments to the
New Mexico constitution it's a
comprehensive study of all of
the amendments we've proposed
and how we've progressed since
statehood on the other is the
other is a constitutional
amendment proposals arguments
for and against the council
service also put that document
together prior to the general
election at which constitutional
amendments will be considered
and that basically can change
the arguments for and against
the commission the principal
recommendation in the highest
priority recommendation of the
last constitutional revision
commission was that we pay
legislators a salary
as the members who served on the
revision commission it was a
bipartisan learned it members
except the present company
excepted from around the state
those members Mr chairman
members were Richard Boston
Robert I me for from Los crucis
Dick former who'd been the
deputy director of the council
service hi doctor feral heady
former president and U. N. M.
and professor of political
science Gary king myself Charlie
Lee from Alamogordo Dorothy
Lockwood of Albuquerque ****
Ortiz of Santa Fe that don
Salazar also Santa Fe was a
practicing lawyer at the time
Victor servicing for Laguna and
read it to the Strom Los crucis.
On the work of that revision
commission was truncated when
governor Gary Johnson took
office I remember that we didn't
have all of the time we needed
to complete our work as a result
of that work of that commissions
chair members the committee
there were proposals that
emerged and some of those
proposals have since been
adopted by the legislature in a
piecemeal fashion one of the
other recommendations
was that we print something in
addition to just the title of
the joint resolution that goes
on the ballot we felt that it
would be nice for the voters to
have additional information
about what the contents of that
proposal work
but again to emphasize this does
not require a constitutional
convention and the Legislature
maintains its role in this
process unless the amendments
are package in such a way
that they can be treated as a
package will recall
That in judicial reform there
was a challenge to the Supreme
Court about the single subject
rule the danger is logrolling
when we put too many provisions
together and in that case the
court found that relating to
judicial reform was a sufficient
title to encompass all the
changes that were made in that
recommendation and as a bill
drafter Mr chair members of the
commission that was my very
first a constitutional provision
that I drafted while at the
Legislative Council Service
I have other alternatives but I
I am familiar with the single
subject rule and that proposal
did pass constitutional muster
thank you Mr chairman members.
Thank you very much Senator
Ortiz told the floor but you're
not you're share so therefore
center office.
The north with the returns okay
thank you Mr chairman I just
have a question is we're talking
about what can be proposed from
this.
Revision commission and US
senator survive this this would
be on I believe Page three line
ten.
It says upon majority approval
of the fifteen voting members
legislation shall be drafted and
submitted to the legislature for
its review of course you know
with with in accordance with
their article nineteen section
one.
So is this if I am Mr chairman
Senator Vontaze am I
understanding correctly then
that this could be any what what
is it that your expectations
would be for the legislation
proposed for us to consider.
Thank you.
Senator Lopez for a good
question the ultimately the
introduction of any legislation
has to come from a legislator
and so the committee review
commission would not be
authorized by this bill in any
way to have legislation
introduced thank the goal here
would be to propose legislation
to perhaps work with Legislative
Council and just as the agency
may be directed by the
commission to have proposed
legislation introduced then of
course ultimately we may have an
interim committee reviewing that
proposed legislation and and go
that route or the legislation
may be given to any given
legislator to introduce but but
nothing here gives the
commission the authorization to
introduce any legislation on its
own.
Mr Chairman I guess and thank
you senator of it's just shell.
Yeah.
As the original Mr chairman the
way I've been educated
you know with us here in the
legislature's shelling may have
very different connotations so
that's my question Mr Chairman
just is is it shall and I know
it does refer to us because
again for us as legislators I'm
to have legislation drafted and
introduced but
It's just a question on out we
all shall verses may thank you
Mr chairman.
Good question Senator all this
bill does not go to Judiciary
goes from this committee and
only to finance.
Yes Mr chairman that's what is
that us.
Thank you.
Well R. let us go to our most
reliable to did you want to add
something and then.
Mr chairman let me read from the
constitution if I buy amendments
initiated by an independent
commission created by law for
that purpose may be submitted to
the legislature separately or as
a single ballot question in any
such commission initiated
amendments that are not
substantively altered by the
legislature may be submitted to
the electors in a single or
separate ballot question form
recommended by the commission.
that is the language of the
constitution Mr chair members of
the members of the committee.
Thank you Sir this is really
not.
Senator refused to have the
floor are you trying to get up
and and and and good that is
something else I had to run
around with the rest of the
community come back to I'm all
set thank you Mr right well
Senator.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator for bringing this
forward
You know I tend to be very
protective of of the
constitution but your points are
very well taken that over the
years we've seen
Amending the constitution as a
way to bypass the governor that
we knew wouldn't.
Just a piece of legislation sort
constitution has some very
interesting things added in it
that are a hundred and nine
years old so I think you know
there's definitely some room for
improvement there's sections in
there that have been deemed
unconstitutional take somewhere
where it talks about who who can
voting and can't vote in in the
terminology that that you is
used is
not acceptable in in today's
today's a for good reason so
there's plenty of room for
improvement to our state
constitution
it is interesting that we bring
up you know learning from other
states but I hope we don't fall
victim to the curse of the
Wallace we've all heard the
quote of all calculations on our
experiences and it's we're
family New Mexico so I think you
know we're a unique state and
although we like to look at
other states I think we're
unique and we need to
you know really focus on New
Mexico not focus too much on on
other states when it comes to
the constitution I think we need
to
Continue to have this
conversation that I'm ready Mr
chair Senator to to do this
but I do think our our peace
mental system is failing but you
know there's other solutions
that we can do I have a the
proposal that would require a
two thirds vote just to amend
the constitution so that we're
not doing these little piece
mill type amendments to bypass
whoever's governor at the time
and so amending the constitution
should be a very difficult thing
as is amending the federal
constitution it's extremely
difficult
we've seen many states passed
resolutions to.
All of federal convention of
states
and we repeal those in New
Mexico by the way a few years
ago but you know it's it's very
difficult even that process for
doing that with a convention of
states would require a two
thirds vote at the convention
and three force
Rule of all the several states
so you know I think our
constitution is a little too
easy to amend.
And I think that's why we've
ended up with the
you know a constitution that is
it streamline thick there's
weird provisions dealing with
things that really should be in
statute
so for that reason I I think.
We should look at the way of
cleaning up the constitution
getting it back to what our
constitution should look like
which is to protect the citizens
from.
But an overreaching government
so I think it's always good to
look at the suggestions I still
a little weary
on how the process will work
after but you made very very
good point Senator that it's
still a tough tough row to hoe
afterwards and so I think.
For that reason I will support
this I have my reservations of
Senate but
You know I think afterwards it
never hurts to have non
legislators had given input on
one where we could improve so I
will supported avid this
committee it is the the
judiciary liked Committee
many of us are I Judiciary so
it's very Judiciary light so
it's all.
Every.
For me.
You're always welcome Senator to
to join in and then we can maybe
save it save a stop but I know I
I think you just Senator Lopez
says is probably should go to
Judiciary
but I will support it coming out
of this committee thank you Mr
chair I think madam center pro
on actually those are short.
Thank you Mr chairman
I guess after listening to
everyone the one question that I
still have this that.
This seems a drafted in such
ways that happens very quickly I
mean you have to meet at least
four times then a month before
the next session of which is you
know December twentieth there's
something you shall have a
report to the legislature with
your recommendations so
this is really chop chop twenty
one get it done and then give
your report to us and I'm I'm
reading the same section that
Senator Lopez did or close to it
and it's on its section for and
it is a shell your report shall
be made to the governor each
member not later than thirty
days priority to the convening
up the second of that second
regular session.
The fifty fifth so to me that
means next January am I reading
that correctly Senator serve on
this you're you're reading it
correctly madam president.
Well that that seems very close
Mr chairman I mean very quickly
you know you're allowing for
subcommittees St you know the
first thing that has to happen
is all these appointments and
Legislative Council you know
sort of after all of us sleep
for three weeks after the
session you know get started in
April this seems like a very
quick timeline to look at
revisions to our constitution of
so tell me that I'm wrong if you
can Senator sirventes Mr
chairman.
Mr Mr with the Madam pro
temperature to you're reading it
correctly it is ambitious it is
quicker chop chop like your
words all of those things are
are true and accurate
and it's it's quite simply just
my nature madam president you
know that I am not a guide to.
To get there around if I'll just
use an example we did the Civil
Rights Commission was similarly
very tight.
Deadlines and they got their
task the now admittedly
reviewing of the the the task of
the Civil Rights Commission is
much narrower than we're asking
for the entire review of the
state constitution.
But when it could very well be
that the report of the
commission after four meetings
in the chair may simply be that
they need more time and they and
they would like more money to to
do their tasks in a more
thorough manner that may be
there report to us and that
would be acceptable to me
from but but but I think I don't
think that given you know year
and a half two years this is
really what we need to be doing
at this point in time I I would
like to.
Using your question to answer.
Concern is of Center portals
well to.
But with an observation our our
purpose our process seems to be
designed to make change very
difficult very slow and I know
some people would say that's a
good thing.
And and I would just say this I
began the discussion here today
this last year should be a
lesson to us that sometimes life
throws things to us very quickly
and requires immediate response
of this Senate chamber Senator
Ivey Soto center worth in you
Senator Stewart and others you
know we dealt with an election
in the middle of an election
year in a pandemic and and how
we're gonna deal with election
how we're going to with Clark's
we saw that from the
presidential race on down you
know sometimes we got to move
quick the world is moving at at
breathtaking speeds the changes
are happening happening quickly
and and I'll just ask ourselves
right now under our existing
process you and I cannot change
the law in the state of New
Mexico except once every two
years.
you know.
When we call ourselves into a
six day session otherwise we
gotta get everybody's approval
the governor's approval in about
once every two years is way too
slow in my opinion these days Mr
chairman and madam president
stern.
I thank you for your answers
thank you Mr chairman I'm
finished.
Thank you very much housing
nobody else in the for this time
I do have a couple of things I
would like to raise although I
now see Senator Baca
is in his hand so Center Michael
would like to go first directly
to do so.
Sure with respect Mr chair I'll
go first the chair typically
goes last so if the you don't
mind
this is it Mr chair and senator
just as I read it currently we
have of four methods of of
altering the constitution it
looks like this is one method
does this alter the convention
method anyway does it have any
impact on it at all Mr chair.
It might Senator you know the
the legislature may decide to
take the report and put this
into the hands of the
constitutional convention.
and there may be reasons to do
that the I gave the example I
don't know what do you enjoy the
committee yet at that time but
you know the good the good
example may be this analysts
discussion we've had about
whether New Mexico remains
alasan rate legislature.
I'm not sure how I think about
that one or the other but I know
we've had.
Very diligent efforts most
recently I think by former
governor Carruthers and others
to convene a group to try and
study in the sense that we we
just couldn't bring ourselves to
doing it and Senator Ivy Soto
setting of effort to do that the
session I don't need to stay
focused on legislative
compensation what I'm trying to
illustrate is there are just
some things that need to get
done and and we don't have the
will or the stomach to do it and
I don't mean that to be critical
of us we just politically can
sometimes do things that need to
be done and this is a way I
think to have of.
Others perhaps do what we
recognize needs to be done
center.
Thank you Mr chair and it looks
like you know with the with the
for with the with the four ways
we have there looks like we do
we've actually equipped
ourselves in on this is just
some commentary on it with this
with this nineteen ninety six
addition for the concert for the
commission and we do that we
just don't have that tool
available to us right now so I
guess my question would be what
what prevented you from just
making the commission something
more permanent Mr chair and
senator rather than
basically it looks to be a a
single one year item and then it
evaporates once it's given its
report unless we empower once
again what what you think that
was or wasn't ever considered
that that we have this come
commission exist perpetually to
give us this other tool in our
tool toolbox to alter the the
constitution if need be.
Senator Baca I've not given that
I and it would discourage just
having that order at this time.
My experience you'll forgive me
of but for for giving a little
bit of ideology here my
experience in government is when
you create a permanent
commission that perfectly
Commission looks for something
to do and and and to us to
support its existence and so we
may find ourselves with the
commission like this if you made
it permanent I suspect every
year would be getting a new
report with the new wholesale
changes to the constitution and
that's really not what I
envisioned here what I really
envisioned is a hard look at a
constitution that's been in
place for hundred nine years
that made sense it made sense
that we could not call ourselves
into extraordinary session
without a great deal of effort
and in time to do so I've got a
bill I've got a resolution for
constitution amendment at the
session that allows us to call
ourselves into extraordinary
session with a great deal more
ease so that we can do so and
and like this last year respond
to a pandemic the short order
but but senator I I don't
envision this to be a permanent
deal this is this is something
that requires us to really take
a hard look nine hundred nine
years of history and and say you
know just really this is really
the right way to do this is the
best way to do this and I I
appreciate Center pros comments
earlier you know the New Mexico
is unique governor Lujan while
us made the observation a long
time ago but but Senator is a
businessman I'm a business man I
know without asking him he looks
it is it looks it is
competition.
I I look at my competition and
when they're doing them some
better than me I steal it.
It's that simple I'd be a fool
not to.
Whether states are doing some
things better us.
We at least know about it.
Thank you Mr chairman I
appreciate that I
I appreciate that I guess you
know we have a.
And I'm gonna support this I I
like the idea of it I brought
this up an earlier debate on a
are a resolution that came up
this year Mr chair and senator
this very proposal of of a a
commission because I think it
you know with the with the peace
no process which is what we
typically use are you know some
of the some of the resolutions
of the that are suggested going
into the car constitution you
know it in my opinion you know
are are sometimes maybe not.
White thought out to the who was
the extent and that's why I like
the commission might be that you
know commission like this solely
focuses on something like that
and and you have a different
idea yes and that you know
you're looking at overall maybe
reconstruction of the of the
constitution or organization of
the constitution being that it
sold I guess the way I interpret
this would be to have a
commission available to us to
help us to drafting consider
resolutions going forward where
we're and we would make
additions to the constitution
rather than being done simply by
by legislator to legislators in
the bill drafter they would go
to what we would have access to
a commission where we could
submit these resolutions and and
and suggestions being made by by
more than one person in the
thought process would go deeper
than then you know simply
something similar to a bill
initiatives that ends up on a as
a as a ballot measure at some
point instead of going through
legislative legislator and and
even with the the input of this
commission and then coming up
with something much better at
the end of this so that's why I
asked if there was a you know
this consider to be permanent I
think you know your vision is
one there could be other visions
that could be braced by by this
commission and and give us
really as a legislator
legislators that
you know that that third are.
Landed to stand on changing the
constitution and when I say that
of course on the meeting the
other preemption judicial
preemption market and the the
federal court of preemption
method and the judicial decision
obviously benefits of on the
other three are what are
available to us but anyway that
was just my comments on and on
and supported because a good
idea of that that we have that
tool there even if just for one
year thank you.
Thank you very much I'm sorry
yes
you use but the concept in
Oregon I appreciate you brought
this forward I do have a couple
of
the numbers to suggest
Representative correct and so
I'm going to share my screen
here and
so.
This will tend to write these
thinking about which major
political parties but I think
there's other political parties
and there's increasing number of
people right now the political
party.
I'm sorry what what I'd like to
do is is on page two.
I have a couple others to bring
forward as well but a picture
like to make following
suggestions what is on page two
line three.
strike.
M. so that it would be three
public members shall be
appointed by the governor.
No to shop belonged to the same
political party so that was the
governor we would have to
appointments armed.
You
would have to be a different
club provided a little part
on transmission line management
then strike.
Which is the majority of the
commission and the seven.
So that no
word
we're trying to convention.
And and.
Up past.
You are to use our of the
language that we've that we've
gone to a variety of other
statutes which is no member
consider point mint structures
party registration you're
working on where we got to other
places in the parameters
proceeding the members apartment
in such a way that the members
of our party registration would
make the member ineligible to
serve on the commission if it's
providing about somebody
changing on prostitution drugs
libertarian it's not gonna
commission balances.
Our.
And and a member of the
commission I continue to serve
on the commission the member
changed by the registration
department in such a manner as
to make an announcement from the
commission which is the same
eight that is some changes let's
say there's a let's say you have
a a person who is a Republican
and they change to being a a
libertarian I have that that
we're not we're not the balance
of the commission proposal party
ballots are
wondering what's in regards to
the seven point I think that
you're getting out and so
cylinders are going first as to
your reaction to the my
suggestion members here.
Mr chair sent all of your
amendment I consider all the
favorably they all are
consistent with the goal of
assuring that this commission
does not break down into a
partisan exercise.
Thank you and so then ten more
games let me go to questions
from the committee on the
proposed amendments.
Senator questions from committee
is there any objection to these
proposed amendments that are on
the street right now.
Senator junction Miss Vigil if
you would probably indicate all
members present voting in the
affirmative
I also have on that stage and
then page four so instead of
four.
And the first one before their
page for.
Where is I'm on page three line
ten you have a problem the
general approval of the fifteen
voting members hi and this was
just an issue of whether or not
it ends up becoming a partisan
has recommendation for consensus
recommendation.
And so some of their numbers and
a fifteen member commission what
are the dates members a hundred
my math correctly.
This our major Representative
end up being the staff Senator
just member just be shut in
probate members to ten members
of force.
The recommendations to me are to
be a more collaborative
recommendation that would come
in I don't I actually.
Sen here tried a little bit of
the of the I should be sixty
percent of that would not from
eight to nine the two thirds
well that's that's eight to ten
I I I think I'm you know comes
with that so certainly start
with that one what what what
what is it is just simply.
Well
I'm not certain committees and
and these are these are
complaining amendments really
the run on page three.
What are the findings and
recommendations of the
commission shall be a doctor
point only by majority approval
of the fifteen voting members I
just simply write that so that
so that the the number of of
the commission is in one place
instead of into places and just
simply than say are
Right findings and
recommendations our shop we
adopted and reported are only
Commission member of the
subcommittee present reporting
findings and recommendations in
this report the commission
members are to do that and it's
it's on page three there which
of which would be the approval
by two thirds in terms of their
of their all.
There are projections so Senator
rightist you have any
Some.
So this seems to be just a.
Matter of policy in our judgment
I think with the experience
we've had Senator Ivey Soto you
know here your first proposal
that the findings of the
commission could only be adopted
by two thirds of the commission
requiring collaboration and
requiring compromises no doubt
that that is what that would
require
I'm always cautious about that
because it also you know we look
at our U. S. Senate these days
you know you you have the
majority you can't get anything
done that make any difference
because you don't have enough of
a major
I know it also I gave the
example earlier of the Civil
Rights.
Contact study commission which
had a narrow vote of approval
thing was fortified by my
recollection of that boat that
commission and then and then
interestingly there was a
minority report evidently
generated which I don't know
whether the enabling legislation
to allow for a minority report
or not but they took it upon
themselves to do one so Mr
Chairman center and I'm not
going to say with this is a
favorable or unfavorable because
I really would need to hear from
the committee on this I I'll say
it this way I would not
considered non favorable
amendment but I don't know that
I would say it's a favorable
amendment it really comes down
to
do do we want to required a
greater level of compromise to
assure that they can reach that
resulted in mid may turn out to
be easy for them to reach ten as
opposed dated may be difficult I
don't know but I I will consider
that on from women.
Thank you mentioned that and I
was sent a deceased man's part
of them.
I'll just secondly you know part
of it is I I I do here a number
of people expressing a real
concerns about about
You know on on different
proposes as they come in when
people say well us let's think
about the rest of the state
people so what we have about two
minutes to do that and
we're talking about a
foundational documents no I
think we need to include the
entire state and and we need to
implement our all of a certain
level of of collaboration as we
do that statewide
when we and and and different
perspectives throughout the
state we are are looking are
foundational document our
constitution without with the
center during the central.
Thank you Mr chair so I I do
have concerns that this might be
setting the bar too high for
this commission and and I think
that your concerns about making
sure that the entire state is
involved I mean already whatever
would be coming to the
legislature for us to prove
would have to be approved by two
thirds of the legislature
correct one on.
So
I have the up to numbers of each
check personal constitutional
amendment is approved by
our constitution it is one of
those matters which has to be
approved by twenty two members
of the Senate it's hard for.
And by thirty six members of the
house that's a hard floor but it
doesn't require more than.
I want to raise my point.
Well and but but in that case it
is it is the hard floor and it's
the majority of the the members
of the body not the majority of
the members there so we're still
insuring.
The statewide consideration I
think in that area I I'm I'm
just concerned about I I and and
I understand your intent with
this and and and the.
And and wanting to prioritize
collaboration I'm worried that
in practical terms it will mean
that that not much will get out
of that commission hi and and it
will kind of stymied the the
overall intent the purpose of of
of getting this work done and so
I think I like that there are
the protections built in about
the the make up of the
commission I think that that is
that is protected as well I I
think that this might be decided
to hire bar on on getting stuff
out of that commission.
And and I and I do understand
that and just one of the masters
remember that that prostitution
movement right now including the
recommendations for this
commission require running two
of the twenty seven Democrats in
the Senate in order to get out.
That's the for and and and the
math this is is a little more
skewed in the in the house of
that is in the center.
So and and regards more concern
is if we have a bare majority.
Your recommendation that is and
once partisanship comes into
this political.
This is a political chambers and
that's our our on a on a
positive note then and that's
where the product to some of the
books for that senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr chair so I tend to
agree with Senator Duhigg and
here's why basically if there's
ten different proposals that
you're presenting to this
commission where you would have
a major but perhaps on for them
you don't have to thirds in
effect you're gonna have one
vote for the commission for the
six items to get two thirds and
then quite frankly for members
the legislature can eat each
introduce individually the other
for items which only require a
majority vote on the floor so I
just I I hear what you're doing
I think Center pearls trying to
do the same thing by changing
the constitution for how you
present individual.
You know individual
constitutional amendments but I
just feel like you're you're
kind of.
You do again I I get the goal of
what you're trying to do but I
think the fact is that the other
for items that have a major
approval but not two thirds can
all be brought individually and
I just I I I like the idea of
having the the commission come
out with a product that's one
product but.
You know putting a two thirds
bar on it I just think it is is
not consistent with the
constitution and what happens on
the floor and so that's a
separate conversation we can
have and I just worry that
you're you're you're limiting
the effectiveness of this and
we're gonna have a whole bunch
of backdoor amendments which is
I think what Senator Bob is
trying to avoid so again this is
just my thoughts
were part of our national that
that there's a difference
between the product of a COVID
commission image longer was not
an issue and it goes to the
voters have approved by the
legislature to go to the voters
as a package verses into the
piecemeal which which are so
people could come with peace no
recommendations as they do today
but that is very clear that is
not the that is not a fun
Commission stand in subject to
the piecemeal approach Mr chair
my concern is that by changing
the threshold here you're in a
fact default raising an issue
about the the current process
that exists in the legislature
and I respectfully disagree with
Center portals attempt to move
that to two thirds so that's my
concern with this because again
basically what you're saying as
well yeah but this is gotten
more weight because it's two
thirds well that every single
constitutional amendment that's
brought individually is now
going to say well wait a minute
let's send it to the commission
so it gets by and get the two
thirds and why don't we do the
two thirds here so I just this
is just of a philosophical
difference and I I I feel like
it should be consistent with the
current rules that exist and I I
don't support moving moving the
threshold for constitutional
amendments to two thirds for
individual ones that are brought
on the floor.
Right and and and I do want to
point because our growth this is
this does not provide the
legislature miss Barnes the
commission yeah at Mister teal.
Yeah Mister and I I I get that I
I understand completely it binds
the commission but what what
what what we're doing by saying
this is we're creating a
different standard and that's
what concerns me is that you're
setting a precedence and I
realize it's the commission it
still comes back for an upper
down you know majority votes on
what the commission does I just
worry about moving in this
direction and I don't think we
need to do it again I think you
know if you've got a balance of
appointments here and I just
again it's just a philosophical
difference I I I feel like we
should leave it at a major.
And you hear what you're saying
Thomas major work and our and
interest it is Omar this article
and haven't been happy for them
but also it would be subject
them to the world where would be
a prompt.
Well.
Okay any insurance.
That are on the screen.
In that case Miss Vigil please
call.
Mr Chairman yes Mr Manny suggest
perhaps that would regard the
members on the screen that you
sever the issue divide the issue
because I believe the amendment
you have on page three line
tennis on we've been discussing
your other amendment seem to be
a different distinct issue.
And the.
That you might find opposition
to progressive first amendment
that you don't have to the other
three.
All so we are actually the ones
on page four or.
Terms of reference one form if
we if we
It does more than simply.
News.
More than simply conforming.
Do only because
of the many amendments on page
four line eight and nine seem to
be relating to the issue of
commission versus sub sub
committees in other words that
section six relates to
subcommittees and I understand
your proposed amendments to be
ensuring that the report being
of the entire commission out of
subcommittees but.
But but that's that's why see
those changes no words it seems
it seems to me that the changes
to section six.
Should be done and now we
consider those to be favorable
regardless of what we do with
the with the vote
and the requirement of a Jordy
or two thirds on the first
minute that's just my suggestion
to you Mr Chairman is there
may be a division there.
I would appreciate that very
much let me let me actually then
put the order and let's let's
take a look at the ones on page
four forest because I because I
do agree I think I think
regardless of what we do on page
three
we want to make sure the friends
recommendations come from the
commission our our and so is
there is there any.
Mmhm.
Is there any objection to the so
the amendments on page four
because those are not dependent
upon which the.
Mr chair I just have a question
just a clarifying question yes
so so with those amendments.
There would not be a requirement
of of any though for the
findings recommendations to be
adopted and report.
Also some requirement is that
the child we are Dr reported.
The commission.
One out of the process is kind
of commission for a more
affordable option be at major
for two thirds of wouldn't
matter but it would be it would
be commission yes.
Yes Representative Rod gnostic
as to as to what the what the.
We believe those words are with
whatever we end up with on page
three line to.
So.
Any other questions on page four
will collect as junction to the
amendments on page four.
The same objection to the page
foreman's Miss Vigil we show all
members are present and and
voting
But with the amendments on page
four letters returned and.
To the to the amendments on page
three.
And with regards to the
amendments on page three at the
Further discussion about major
verses are two thirds of page
three seven or I just just want
one point I want to bring up
it's been brought to my
attention that the.
Prior commission vote was
unanimous and obviously that's
really where we're trying to go
I just you know.
I worry that getting into this
two thirds versus one half we
really start to get turning this
into a partisan deal I think we
can all agree there's things
that need to get fixed in our in
our constitution
and again I've made my arguments
as to why I I don't like the the
two thirds but I really you know
I want this to be effective and
I think it's it it's and I
appreciate centers of this
coming back again with this.
And so I just want to make that
point that that the prior
commission it did meet did come
up with the unanimous
recommendation and I think
that's good that's what we're
striving to get whether we do
two thirds here major again it's
this this vehicle I would just
contention really be used to
clean up a lot of the things I
need to get cleaned up and not
turn it into a partisan
vehicle so I just want to make
that point thank you thank you
for making a point in favor of
this amendments yes well I
respectfully disagree with that.
Interpretation of my points
because unanimous two thirds
unanimous is not fifty percent
but what will we'll do what we
do here and see were guns and
chairman Mr chair I take back I
take back my request for a seat
on this committee never mind.
Right this moment Mr Chairman
plans cover mental on the this
is strictly on highlighted
what was on your screen page
three line times fact major
after approval and so two thirds
therefore if amended it would
need upon approval of two thirds
action should be two thirds of.
And I
wanted to spend free time for
our two thirds of the fifteen
voting members is have a great
well All Things gonna call the
roll Senator Baca yes Senator
Lopez.
Now.
Senator Morris.
Yes.
Senator Pirtle.
Yes.
Senator Stewart.
Senator Wirth.
No.
Senator Duhigg.
Now.
And Senator Ivey Soto yes.
Amendments are does not it's.
R. and Evelyn programs as part
of the commission I cannot
support the concept of mission
is going to come forth with a
majority vote so that doesn't
affect my ability to continue to
support the
The proposal that is before us
at this time off is there any
further discussion on the are on
the bill itself as amended
Senator the sixty seven see
nobody else seeking the floor.
R. the state help please call
the roll on the amended are on
the amended bill and they're
back at.
Yes.
Senator Lopez yes Senator
Moores.
Yes.
Senator Pirtle.
Yes.
Senator Stewart.
Yes Senator Wirth yes.
Senator do it yes Senator Ivey
Soto no ma'am well
residential centers around us on
a vote of seven to one you have
a due pass recommendation for
this committee and you want to
Senator finance committee to
look at thank you all for very
interesting discussion I think
an important one thank you thank
you very much senator Wirth are
you are up.
Thank you Mr chair Senate bill
three eighty seven.
Is a continuation of.
The changes made in twenty
nineteen to the campaign finance
campaign reporting act dealing
with disclosure of contributions
from independent expenditure
committees
we just went through the first
cycle with that law in place and
certainly it's
did require disclosure but also
raising questions because there
are always efforts to.
Kind of figure out how not to
disclose and.
There's a whole we have we have
kind of dark money where there's
no disclosure there's gray money
where things get blended and I
and I do think we need to
continue our work to be sure
that voters know who's donating
to independent expenditure
committees and so this this bill
is a baby staff
I.
Feel pretty strongly that we
really need to open up the
campaign reporting act and do
what other states have done
California has a very detailed
and extensive a great money
statutes and I did look at that
potentially doing something more
detailed but there were some
constitutional issues flagged
and this is an area of the laws
you are very familiar Mr chair
where you kind of need to have
your constitutional lawyer
sitting next to you every step
moving moving forward because
it's that tricky and our Supreme
Court has empowered political
speech as a part of the first
amendment and so any attempts to
limit you've got to be very
careful how you do them so all
this bill does is add an
additional
kind of clarification of for a
situation where there are
contributions from an
independent expenditure
committee of more than five
thousand dollars there's
currently an exemption of.
That exists where are those
contributors request in writing
that their contribution not be
used to fund independent or
coordinated expenditures of this
bill adds an additional
requirement to that.
Exception which says that the
contribution also gets deposited
in a segregated bank account
that is not to use to fund
independent coordinated
expenditures so we already have
a segregated bank account
provision
on page three line fifteen which
is the existing law
which again ended the and in
person just to be clear is is
you're very well aware Mr chair
I had to go double check this
person is defined as an entity
under the campaign reporting act
but when
an entity set up a fund
specifically for I. ease then
under that scenario
in those in those disclosures
are made out of that fund
there's a disclosure requirement
the exception though was a
little bit vague and there were
some issues in the last.
In the last election cycle about
this so this basically creates
up that's great the second
requirement on the back and when
you have a situation where
there's not a segregated account
on the front end it requires
that segregated Count effect on
the back and so again it's an
attempt to just figure out where
the where the dollars are coming
from and and get that
information the state ethics
commission was was very engaged
on this issue and I think I'm
not sure whether they're on
today to testify or not but
certainly we can listen to the
experts that are out there
so with that Mr chair that's
basically all it does is just
one more attempt to begin the
process of making sure we know
where independent expenditure
donors are coming from.
Thank you very much and and I do
see a secretary state president
to announce the position of her
office and I also know that for
general counsel inhouse counsel
Dylan laying that is present to
provide technical assistance on
this matter member center.
Thank you Mr chairman members I
just want to let the committee
know that we do support this
legislation thank you senator
Wirth for bringing it forward
and always working closely with
our office to try to improve how
we make sure the public has
information about how money is
being raised and spent for
political purposes in the state
and that as you said Mr chair
bill money for my office is here
to answer any technical
questions thank you thank you
very much questions comments
from committee Mr chair just one
thing I just got a taxed common
cause heather Ferguson was on
and got pushed out of the room
so if someone could let her back
and they would like to testify
on she was not in the waiting
room some of that would be it a
condition precedent to get into
the in the floor that that is
the true fit right well
questions or comments from
committee.
She was very.
Archer yes.
I'm on a I'm.
So phone so I'll quickly.
What what issue are we try to
resolve or the one of the the
lawsuit perhaps what our our I'm
sorry what we're trying to fix
from there was just a large we
are which is properties of
those.
Actually eight limit lower
payment over to Mister Lang if
you could tell us what the what
the backstory is.
Mr Mr chair Senator Moores.
I'm online the general counsel
this I think really the impetus
of this section is there is a
there are reporting requirements
for these independent
expenditures committees the
these are groups that are raised
and spend thousands and
thousands of dollars here in the
state of New Mexico and so
legislature has.
You like us senator Wirth
Stated I changed the election
law in two thousand nineteen to
to require disclosure there is
an ex exemption in this
particular time it if you don't
have a segregated bank account
but you do raise more than five
thousand dollars to
you don't need to disclose your
the individual contributors name
and address if they have entered
into agreements to not have the
money that they've provided to
your organization
if they can agreement for those
that money not to be spent has
an appendix Senator
I think the question asked was
what.
This morning what is the
progress in the right.
Sure I was just given your
background so we had a an
organization with the
legislative ethics Commission it
was let me pull that up Mr chair
committee to protect New Mexico
consumers
basically they just stated that
all the money that they that
they raise more than five
thousand dollars they had
entered an agreement with all
their contributors and so they
didn't need to disclose that
information that is a fact
intensive situation to actually
prove you know you need to
subpoena all the all the
agreements with these individual
donors this this section adds an
additional just.
A requirement for these
organizations to contain a
segregated bank account to put
that money in in addition so I
it's just easier for enforcement
for these enforcement agencies.
Mr Chairman thank you for trying
to get clarification of
providing.
What we talked about who is this
what group was the.
Is the one that played in the
democratic primary.
I don't know the name of these
groups were we trying to well
exposed yet to disclose.
That
is not knowing what you're
talking about yes Sir Mr Mr
chair Senator Moores the example
that I know in in particular is
the committee to protect New
Mexico this was a independent
expenditure
filer and support actually the
defeat of of a constitutional
amendment one regarding the PRC
it also dealt with
this issue generally regarding
the Committee to
Protect Mexico regarding again
in the deceit of a can go the
constitutional amendment one and
so they did not want to disclose
their contributors who gave more
than five thousand dollars one
of the reasons is the amendment
stating that they entered an
agreement with these individual
contributors not to use their
money for independent
expenditures a gentleman Jervis
want with PNM or was this what
do you what which which group
was.
Yes.
Mr chair Senator Moores it was
an organization that.
Was not it wasn't PNM it was
I said the name sorry they're so
similar you know just
shared all these groups the pop
up and pop out and I know
they'll have any brand
identities are that's what I'm
trying to get through what what
issue you're talking about for
actually understand what we're
doing.
Mr chair.
In the democratic primary I I we
have PNM are playing in that
that one issue of thunderstruck
euro which issue will try
before.
Mr chair Senator Moores yes it
it had to do you do with the
constitutional amendment
the constitutional amendment for
PNM.
I mean for for for the PRC
account.
The the the the the
organisation the PRC excuse me
thank you.
Mr chair Senator course I could
just to real quickly you and
I've had this discussion and I
think it is fair to say all
sides play in this this isn't
targeted towards one specific
issue it just it got flagged in
this last election cycle and
it's clear we just need to do a
couple more steps that we just
need to keep working on it so I
really didn't I mean it was
flagged by the ethics commission
based on the specific facts but
as you well know how this is not
a you know Republican or
democratic issue this is
something that that everyone is
doing because this is what the
constitution that with this is
what the US Supreme Court has
as done with citizens United and
so we've got this system
and again it's not designed to
pick on anybody other than to
let's make the rules clear so
the enforcement can happen it's
kind of the next step up from
the law we passed in twenty
nineteen.
Senator Wirth thank you thank
you.
For me to.
Mr chair
representative with.
I would move to pass.
One depressed officer directs
secretary of state rex anything
else on the committee see non
seeking recognition.
Still please follow Senator
Baca.
No.
Senator Lopez yes Senator
Moores.
No.
Senator Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle.
Senator Stewart.
Yes.
Senator Wirth.
Yes Senator do it yes.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Yes ma'am and what was the what
it would be five to to Sir
Senator Wirth congratulations on
a five to two you have to pass
recommendation for this
committee a good luck in the
next committee number thank you
for present thank you Mr chair.
Well we number two Senator words
on Senate bill forty eighties
and
this is informational only today
we're not gonna be taking public
comments on the over we gonna be
taking any votes on either on
the federal where are all in nor
any specific amendments although
we are going to take some
discussion on this then possibly
forty minutes for this
and so the Democrats the one I
think that we're going to go M.
is.
Senator words words tensions
Senator and then we're gonna go
to Alan white who's the quake
county clerk
where she has been in the
clerk's office primarily the
county clerk except for
constitute prohibited the for
the last.
What we we Harris
in a quite that long but the are
certainly of a quite sometimes
when researchers groups we have
in the state we're going to go
to the secretary of state's are
in terms of of of her office on
this and then we have
and then when we get into
discussion and questions from
the committee we also have Kerry
process for the secretary of
state's office bill to provide
technical answers on on issues
that may come up.
The problem.
Several research please proceed.
Thank you very much Mr chairman.
This is Senate rules committee
substitute for Senate bill forty
eight I started out with the
bill here that I thought that
that I went to the county
clerk's and we hammered out kind
of the bill and the through
several zoom meetings and
discussions with them came up
with the.
We decided to combine some work
remains secretary of state's
office to to help them a little
bit alone.
And I want to first tell you Mr
chairman that the this year it
seems like that I am I am very
good at eating crow and I have
decided that I really like grow
best.
Mattered and fried so with that
I'm actually one of the two
dissenting votes on house bills
are Senate bill four in the last
and we voted on this particular
issue I thought that I could
come together and and bring a
bill to you the addressed many
parts of what I considered
issues one of them being.
After T..
Ballots
The the.
Big arguments that was a much
that on who can qualify those
and and where that's that also
The other issues
We had was were number just
trying to pull out
the PRC from anything in a and
Alexion code and and Mr
chairman.
One of the big issues was the
business reply mail accounts for
the county clerk.
And I've got one particular FIR
that says that's a three hundred
fifty thousand dollar charge and
I've got another one that says
it's nearly nothing so.
We are I.
That's kind of my starting
presentation.
Ellen white knows a lot more
about this than I do and
certainly the secretary of state
so I'd like to Ellen tuned to
starter presentation out that
would be alright Mr chairman the
fantastic hello what.
Good morning Mr chair and
members of the committee I don't
know exactly where to start
except for
Senator Ivey Soto that was
exactly right when he said only
one of the longest living clerks
in New Mexico.
That is a back
Anyway with the county clerk's
in the state of New Mexico got
together and
after running a local election
and at primary election in the
general election particularly
under pandemic we gathered up
everything that worked and
everything that didn't work any
time I hammered it out Senator
called me one Saturday morning
and he was honest about to jump
whenever he thought that our
dominion voting machine said
failed and so I talked him down
off the roof and and then the
conversation started so
everything in this bill is I'm
comprised of things from the
secretary of state's office and
the county clerk's and we're
really excited about all the
pieces.
Right thank you very much
appreciate that
Secretary.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee Maggie Toulouse
Oliver New Mexico secretary of
state at first I just I want to
think Senator Woods at four for
working with the clerk to bring
a bill forward and particularly
to his expert my my dad friend
and truly one of the best County
court the state has ever seen
Ellen white and what this state
at an interest the privative Mr
chair in in to dig into you know
what let the committee to get
the questions is that we very
much support this legislation
this is very much a a a
compromise a lot of work has
gone into this by county clerks
from all over the state of the
two different political parties
and my office Kerry in
particular sort of working on
hammering out the specifics of
what the bill will look like
this is a truly bipartisan piece
of legislation and it really
represents a strong
collaboration between the
secretary of state's office and
county clerks and of course
Senator Woods and so I very
strongly urged support of this
legislation Kerry will be on
hand since she physically wrote
a good portion of this you know
taking in all of the different
comments and feedback and and
the different sections of what
it needed to be addressed
multiple times so she's very
much the weaver of this and and
can speak to the specifics but
we just that urged the committee
support and thank you so much Mr
chair.
Thank you so much members
mission.
R. and so with that let us go to
questions on plan committee are
you sure that you all had to on
the.
Our.
You won't have the committee
somber.
And our mmhm.
As well as you should have
gotten and this is of the
committees of as well and I
think we distributed the
secretary of state's.
Our on our analysis to be up to
the committee.
If you have not seen that yet
that should that should be in
your mailboxes so many seeds
Senator do it.
Thank you Mr chair Mr chair
Senator and the clerk white.
I I've I've been hearing
I.
Some conflicting stuff about the
the changes same day
registration in this bill so I'm
I was wondering if you could
kind of walk me through what
changes are are made to same day
registration as as opposed to
what was passed in two thousand
nineteen and and practically
what what that looks like.
Yes all right if you don't
Kerry.
Yes Senator and Mr chair
so in twenty twenty one send a
registration Law extended to all
polling locations in the state.
So this past election many of
the rural communities had a.
Klay hard time finding poll
workers just to work at our
polling places much less
additional staff on election day
to go into those polling places
and initially the law stated
that it had to be a
employee of the county clerk's
office that did that on election
day and voting locations and so
I have an office of three people
including myself I have six the
Senators so you can see how
problematic that would be for me
to send staff to register people
to vote at center registration
on election day.
So I'm are compromised and what
we ask the secretary to do was
to allow same day voting
registration to go on in the
county clerk's offices on
election day and polling sites
were clerks could deem if they
had essential enough staff to
man those polling places.
Thank this process.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee Kerry for us as
with the office of the.
All the way.
How's that that little bit
better.
Can you hear me.
So so now.
Let me give it give it a try
here I'll speak loudly okay
great
yes thank thank you for the
question Senator Duhigg so I I
think your question stems around
the the original Senate bill
forty eight have are we had a
repeal provision in it where as
the committee substitute which I
think is what we're focusing
discussion on today that
represents a compromise that's
based on now that county clerks
have had some experience with
the technology in the processing
of same day registration during
the twenty nineteen local
regular local election in the
twenty twenty primary and
general in which there were as
mandatory same day at the
clerk's office and then they
have the discretion to roll out
to extend sites for early that
turned out to be you know to be
I think probably a pretty good
compromise policy as it as it
turns out now that we're all
getting experiencing and seeing
how it works in in person where
there's deferring resource
capabilities in each of the
county clerk's offices it this
compromise let the county clerk
at her discretion his or her
discretion expand.
Be on the clerk's office for
polling locations during early
and election day depending on
their resource capacity in order
to support same day at those
extra sites so it's it's a
compromise that setting the
county clerk's up for success.
Thank you Mr chair and ranking
of moderate senators whose real
quick I'd because I'm assuming
that have you know phones
question to what you're doing
that I'm just going to do a
quick screen share this is that
this process on this morning to
committee members but that way
it goes out to the public as
well does the dashboard on about
There's a dashboard of on the
numbers.
Same day registration as they
have happened so far
in the three elections that
we've have them that are the
statistics office opt out was
shot to everybody that way that
is that's up on the screen my
address your questions please
proceed.
Right thank you Mr chair.
And I Cllr quite I mean the the
county clerk's dead and an
amazing job of of running
election during the pandemic and
and you are really to be
commended for doing so
and and I understand that the
staffing challenges that you're
describing.
But I'm also wondering if if
some of those challenges that
that you all experience during
the selection specifically what
was due to the pandemic that was
going on and I have concerns
about changing policy.
Based on a specific.
Experience that you all have
had.
Running that running the
election during the pandemic and
and whether those are staffing
challenges that that will be
present in the future when we're
not dealing with the
circumstances that we're dealing
with now
I am also wondering Mr chair and
and and senator and clerk clerk
why I who so the any additional
staff even if their temporary
clerk staff that would be needed
for that's a to staff up your
six locations
My understanding is that would
be paid for by the cost of this
repaid by the secretary of
state's office not the clerks
specifically is is that correct.
Chairman and senator yes that is
correct.
Okay
Part of the problem that I'm
having with this and and I
understand mistrust because what
you're saying about that the
original bill versus the sub and
and there's a big difference
between them.
Part of the problem that I'm
having in this area specifically
is that.
It is it feels like decisions
are being made based on
something that hasn't actually
happened yet we haven't actually
done election day same day voter
registration at
And and we're looking at the
experience of of this last
election but that which is one
that was done under very very
extraordinary circumstances that
that I'd I'm not sure we can can
can make decisions based on on
just that experience but.
But I would.
I'm trying to think of other
examples where there has been a
a policy change or or a mandate
at the the legislative level
that would would change how the
clerks would be doing.
Would would be doing their jobs
and that it is the beef before
attempting it is preemptively
changed.
And I can't think of an exact
another example and and if there
if there is an example like
that.
Please please let me now
but I would.
Before we say that this isn't
doable I would like to try doing
that if that makes sense.
Thank you Mr chair.
You're you're on mute Mr chair
thank you very much appreciate
that are usually even five
hundred people can hear me
there are
I have a question about
something that that Center do
would raise.
Which is the issue of
reimbursement and and and so
miss.
Our mistrust or for a secretary
reimbursable expense the
additional staff person for the
clerk's office.
Yes Mr chair.
And then and then
because our customers a lot of
that but then but then the
question is is where is the
experience that we have in terms
of of being able to to process
the reimbursements that kind of
course put in less time frame
for reimbursing and and and and
what's the availability funds
would reimbursements are put in
for
for the various different
reimbursable expenses that we
have elections because as one of
my understandings as for example
with the notice of election one
of the reasons why we have the
secretary state doing it on
behalf of the county clerk's is
so that we don't now do we get
some economies of scale but also
we don't have to deal with with
some of the reimbursement
questions which is as if they
were that with the business
reply mail because because I
understood that that the
Are the the probation the
secretary of state's office did
not always allow for full
reimbursement of the
reimbursable expenses to come
across as well as the the up up
up the time frames involved in
so many let me actually first
got out of court white on that
issue and then.
And then Senator expressed his
office.
Yes.
Mr chair and members of the
committee I'm the law currently
has all elections to be one
hundred percent funded by the
state and there I just had to be
Completely allocated so for
instance our last general
election my County paid out
about sixty thousand dollars for
the election and we were on the
reimbursed four thousand.
So that the determination of
funding is still up in the air.
Also so please give us right so
you put in point six thousand
over investments of sixty
thousand rivers no it our
election cost fourteen thousand
fourteen yes and the state paid
us back four thousand.
Okay so there was a ten thousand
dollar
shortfall in the money
reimbursed.
I am is that is that you are too
hi you submitted the paper clip
think I need or is that a is
that a system wide.
No no Sir that is system wide
that's this state and the
secretary of state's office not
being fully funded to run the
elections.
In the southern living circle
back then the secretary of
state's office on that issue
does that sound about right in
terms of a reimbursement request
versus funding and and and and
what challenges do you guys have
in terms of being able to
actually get these reimbursement
costs.
Mr chair all the for to carry on
some of the specifics but I will
say as as many of the members of
this committee well now it is it
is routinely been a challenge to
receive our full funding a
request for elections and and
for all operations for the
secretary of state's office and
I know Kerry has more
familiarity with the specifics
of how how we are managing the
reimbursement process operative
most recent election cycle.
This.
Thank you Mr chair and members
of the committee thank you for
the good question we we will we
always have a we will continue
to ask for full funding of the
election fund the election fund
is intended to cover all
statutory requirements under the
election code.
Election all the election costs
that that are anchored at the
state and and county level and
so we will continue to do that
we've done that this year
however it has been a challenge
as secretary Toulouse Oliver
mentioned it in regards to
actually realizing that fund and
unfortunately I think you hit
the nail on the head as far as
pointing out the challenge of
what ends up happening when
we're not fully funded the
counties and up not being fully
reimbursed for for some of their
costs and we we did see that
this time around.
Those numbers sound the the
percentage those numbers sound
about right across the board at
this point.
There Mr chair that yes I would
say so I don't have the
specifics in front of me but I
know there were there were
several counties in the same
boat as quake that submitted
eligible expenses that were not
reimbursed to this point.
Hello Senator did you have any
any follow ups.
On that point my understanding
is that in the the the current
budget that's be developed I
know there's a couple different
proposals about the funding for
the secretary of state's office
I think all of them increase the
funding by by more than fifty
percent so I'm wondering if it's
going forward.
That the situation that you just
described with the as delays in
reimbursement and and not
getting the full reimbursements
is that going to be remedied by
this more than fifty percent
increase in the budget to the
secretary of state's office that
appears to be fourth time.
Mr chair Senator Duhigg the yes
the the budget request that's
been submitted and in
consideration now during this
session
is considered the full
necessary budget needed in order
to meet all of the statutory
duties under the election code
for for state and county
incurred costs it's there's not
fluff in their it's it's it's
exactly what we need to do it
based on that on the statute is
how the the funding model has
been
Realized.
Thank you Mr chairman and the
that model is based on on the
current session so it would it
contemplates having same day
registration on election day
statewide so so we have so there
is the funding in place for that
at this point in the budget
correct.
Mr chair Senator do Hank yes if
for funding is realize based on
on our budgetary request then we
do expect to be able to fully
reimburse counties for their
their expenditures for the for
the upcoming elections.
Thank you so just to clarify
well well this has been a
problem with not getting getting
full reimbursement in the past
we are right now there's not
anticipation they even if we
keep same day registration on
election day statewide that that
clerks will be facing the same
issue that they're describing
now where they were they're not
getting appropriate
reimbursement correct.
Mr chair Senator do you think if
I'm if I'm following you
correctly our our brick our
request needs to be full fully
funded and in that event that
we're fully funded then the
counties we anticipate the
counties would get full
reimbursement back does that
answer your question yes thank
you great.
When was the last time you're
fully funded.
Madam secretary I mean it's it
has gotten better we we got we
got real close last year at
Senator and then we had a a
pandemic.
and at so you know there there
never any guarantees you know
what our office will probably
continue to piece that the
budget together through our our
full budget request as
percentage there being granted
supplementals and specials and
all of the things that we need
to do but ultimately the the
goal is to ensure that everybody
gets paid that that is our
responsibility to the county
clerks and the state's
responsibility as a whole.
I understand that it's just I
mean I seem to recall a chart
did you guys not going back I
think the last couple of years
of a consistent for for our
between one to four million
dollars.
We work on that in every single
fiscal year.
Right right but I'm misread that
truck that you guys have a
report.
No and no Mr chair that you know
your your point is exactly right
and and I I I I think we're all
speaking the same language here
We tend to have to come back
after the fact quite a bit to
get the remaining costs that we
already put before the
legislature to get covered and
what ends up happening when that
happens as in the case of our
county clerks are are bearing
the brunt are counties are
bearing the brunt of sort of
paying those costs on the front
and and so and so we can get you
know that funding back but your
point absolutely I'm not a
single legislative sessions and
I been secretary state or in the
ten years prior to that had the
legislature granted the full
budget request in any given
year it you know it without it
being sort of piecemeal address
on the back and Mr chair.
Okay.
Thank you thank you very much
appreciate that.
has clarified for questions that
that I just want to make because
I'm I might be misinterpreting
something.
If the if you all are given the
the fifty percent plus budget
increase that that we're saying
currently from the the LFC
proposal and and I think it was
in the governor's proposal as
well would that get you for
funding.
Mister chairman Senator do it we
are working with the committees
to address at that that final
allocation above the LFC
approval which has been
initially adopted by HFC because
there is a gap but we are
actively working again with both
committees on that process I
know that making sure that we
have full funding is a priority
I shouldn't say priority it's
important to the governor's
office as well I appreciate
knowledges the cost on and that
you know the county should have
to bear the brunt of that as
well so that that is the work in
progress on needless to say if
for some reason we do not get
adequate funding on the front
and we will come back and ask
for it on the back and just make
sure that we are paying the rest
of the bill Madam at Mr chair
and and then Senator.
request.
Yes.
You respond to the issue of of
like over the years I have
a reimbursement to come in and.
I I can.
Mr chairman and members
So what county it we're gonna
have an election with the state
funds us or not.
Basically
and for us as the are on Alexion
day at polling places has
nothing to do with the dollar
amount absolutely has to do with
able bodied citizens that are
getting harder and harder to
find just Amanda polling place
much less an additional person
or to to write and send a better
registration outside of the
county clerk's office and also
in rural communities a lot of
the rural areas and even in some
of the metropolitan areas the
internet capabilities that some
of those facilities are very
slam and this needs really
really quick internet connection
to be able to handle that and
many clerks express their
concerns with having that
capability at polling locations.
Senator.
I have nothing more and I'm sure
thank you.
And during this discussion we
have suddenly been joined by
the.
Our finance person I think for
the for the Oscars that's
office.
Our.
So I don't know if she was
anything but
Let
just be here for anymore
technical budget questions.
And just I just need you to get
that there was a there was a gap
between the LFC recommendation
and there and the request from
your office what is that cap.
Right now Mr chair BT want to
answer that because I can't
remember add down to that.
Hundred thousand it's a couple
million Mr chair.
Yes Mr chairman and committee
members the difference is about
the difference between the
recommendations is about six
hundred thousand dollars the
difference between our request
and those recommendations about
three million dollars.
So we're currently about three
runs down the million dollars
down from what you requested.
Right.
Thank you very much that's
that's that's rental because
the funding gets its funding of
the request for funding of the
need for funding of the
recommendation for funding of
like exactly what for funding
are we talking about and it just
seems to me that the state
historically shortchanged
elections and the election
medicines do you know.
I need to be able to not
the questions one of the
arguments for the elections are
and and
you know so it's it's it's
important president have an
understanding that and even in
terms of the increase that is
being.
That is being discussed which
which which is our our a long
overdue increase that increases
still seven million dollars down
at least a few million dollars
down what the request was and
what we're around the office to
go to function without having to
short change different areas.
Senator.
I don't have anything on more on
this right now Mr chair okay
well are there other questions
from committee members this
time.
By well I don't see anybody else
ask any other questions right
now
we were just back on.
on on the all of Wednesday I
don't know a couple of things
that I do want to raise that as
I look through where things are
out there a couple things on on
on the list that I had of some
cleanup items have gone down a
bill
that that part of the new.
On our in a in a bill such as
this and
so I do want to just simply
reserves right now because these
are things that we might want to
our take a look at that
incorporating before this bill
goes farther there is out in
general that that that this bill
has.
James R. remember this thank are
on the changes of our
registration form so that gender
is no longer.
Are provided for on the
registration form.
All plus general's not eight
cents since the passage of the
act and it has not been eight
eight requirement for the in
order to be qualified for as a
voting but it is into something
that has historically allowed us
to distinguish between Mr Frank
Miller Mrs Frank Miller Mr Frank
Miller junior misses fight
Miller junior etcetera that and
they reside in the same home on
our it it it seems to me I I do
understand that right in this
modern era are on a simply a
binary option on gender is
somewhat problematic but you
know we were on our driver's
licenses we actually worked with
training option allowing people
to to find not just affect but
the big just also provide tax
that they wanted to and I'm
wondering if that may be are on
a a
If that's if that's something we
might be able to to take a look
at our our as we go forward or
I'm just.
I think there will be some of
the implications in terms of of
removing that field although
although I do also understand
the issues that some people have
in terms of films in that field
and so
Is that is is that our is that a
hundred past impasses was that
something we can take a look at
in terms of how we proceed on
that matter.
Mr Chairman are we talking about
on the the certificate of
registration were we talking
about doing this that's that is
on the registration.
Okay yes.
Mr chair of the state from the
secretary of state's point of
view we we have no problem with
just conforming
the the field within the gender
A call at category on the voter
registration form to to what the
NMED is currently doing which as
I understand it is male female
and an actor representing.
Something not male or female and
we think that we can probably
even do that administratively I
don't know what the clerk's
position would be on that or if
they that's even something that
is of high concern to them so I
I would defer to them on our
talent you know to speak from
the core point of view but is
this was originally something
our office was looking at at for
the sake of trying to better
accommodate folks who do not fit
into a strictly male or female
category are they self identify
and so it makes a lot more sense
after having some conversations
that we just conform to the.
The information in the same
field that and the D. collects
Mr chair.
Why did you want to comment on
that.
Chairman and members I don't
think that service would take a
position on that one way or the
other as it doesn't affect us
administratively.
Okay okay and then there is an
and I am going to confess this
was a mistake on the right track
when we are adopted the local
election acts.
Some are provided for own
standards to qualify candidates
in the recollection Act and what
we have to be for our.
Where is was one of the options
are for the for the for the
primary in the in the election
we had
some nice to qualify people for
the general election candidates
I think we had five days and
four there are local nonpartisan
ones prior to this we have many
days and it just seems to me
that we might want to go back to
three days and and in fact for
the minutes not so much with
three days on so so somehow I
got that one right but I but I
think it was just I'm gonna type
our world of district sixty days
or or or sixty seven something
before the election on that and
also for administrative purposes
it just does seem to me that we
may want to think about aligning
that that time frame because we
have fairly tight time frames in
the regular recollection of
those additional seven days
actually to make a big
difference on the administrative
side of it mistrust is a could
you comment on that please.
Thank you Mr chair for for
catching that and from from our
perspective from the secretary
of state's office we would
support that that change it
makes it more uniform with how
municipal officers are handled
and how qualification timelines
are handled in general so that
would be fine with us.
I do remember that.
Hello just just a while I'm at
it in a couple minutes we have
left right raise a a couple
issues that that have come up
from other members one of them
is in terms of growling for
those are local jurisdictions
that have implemented a and like
tronic signature on process on
this would be specific to the
regular local action in specific
to those
Specific to those those
jurisdictions that have that
that the ability
is that is that something that
would require a statutory
changes that's something that
could be implemented
administratively by our office
and with profits between the
two.
Mr chair at in regards to up the
collection of electronic
signatures for candidate
qualification
eight we are aware of an all our
at we are actively working with
the City of Albuquerque on a
project to allow for the
collection of electronic
signatures and we do believe
that we have the authority to
enter into an agreement and to
do that with without statutory
change at this time.
Many of the other jurisdiction
that's that's another this time
or is it is it right now the
state of Albuquerque primarily
the stone I believe it's it's
only the City of Albuquerque Mr
chair and we would consider it
somewhat of a a pilot program if
it that's kind of the right
right description of it we're
not just yes representative that
allows you to program so the big
three hundred Mr method that
would be at about the author of
the final third would be
I'm not a judicial candidates
into the Senator requirements
yeah I think I think we have as
we've been looking at for
example public financing of
judicial candidates and some
more things and just candidates
I think we've been trying to try
to take the judicial candidates
out of the fight the same level
campaign.
That that we have for the more
for the for the political
branches and and so and so I I
do know that and I believe it's
actually sort of deal with raise
this issue about about
potentially
adjusting down a little bit the
the Senator requirements for a
judicial candidates as they
exist right now is that is that
something can be done
administratively or would that
need some statutory changes on
six separate state trickling on
non economic demonstrate ability
okay can be just as naturally
and and is that something
so when we're doing that you
know policy battle leading up
and modernizing a different
things it seems to me that that
is something we want to take a
look at between on Wednesday to
be on the to bring into the bill
as well and figure out figure
out a care we may need your
assistance in terms of figure
out exactly the locations to
make those changes so that it
conforms across the board.
Mr chair yup one of rules that
we put in some place if we can
find some global place to to to
just simply your legislative
instruction of of of what
percentage would be at seven so
absolutely chair Mister chair
have I'm happy to do that and
analysis and make a right
recommendation on an amendment
to
For that change.
Mr chair yes Mr chair.
On that on that particular item
of medication amendment are you
going to draft an amendment so I
can carry it forward with me to
the next committee.
Of and we can't a man a.
The.
We are able to run the committee
so what would happen is it would
get locked into the committee
some as it used to committee so
when actually come out as a
complete package so yes this
bill comes up on Wednesday in a
subject to amendment by the
committee
on on any item that any member
of the committee wants to bring
up and and but what would happen
then is that I think you're
you're committee so right now as
opposed to one another if we
amended it is that it would
leave the committee is a point
three
Representative one of the
changes we made in the committee
so okay I didn't understand that
to be that way so that's good
knowledge to have in the future
thank you very much I have a I
have one other thing to mention.
Senator let me just put it all
back over to center doing it
since I know a couple of years.
Matters on our things that she
raised is there is there that I
that I cover that is that the US
one talk about in terms of that
Mr chair I think the the only
other additional one would be
this is an amendment that was
made to the bill that you
carried specific to the special
election about rejections on us
to balance and making sure that
those rejection notices were
mailed both to the registered
address and to at a different
address was given in the
application to the other two
that other address as well I
know that that was a change that
we made on that other bell I
would like to see that put in
our in in this this bill as well
so that actually I think I think
you're seeing on page in this
bill ready is great wonderful I
was already property and yes so
yes Senator is you have one
other issue one to bring up yeah
I just want to bring up one
other thing about the budgeting
items I did re get out my little
spiral book here from the
legislative finance are the
Senate finance committee and and
there was a reversion by the
secretary of state a three
hundred twenty seven thousand
four hundred twenty six dollars
in FY twenty.
So.
That's kind of step that the
finance committee look at when
you ask for more money.
One.
Good or bad not saying that I'm
just this next statement our our
the conversation on a where
those funds are are and and what
they have budget for to use up
for that is something I think I
think we do need to take a look
at as well
and so on and then
All right well is there anything
else from the committee at this
time we are we are I'm in at
our.
Recess time.
The house where where we picked
up some words aren't clerk right
in representative office will
pick up what Senate Bill
forty eight on Wednesday we will
start with that bill.
and and work through it with the
committee
and like I said Senator what's
on it is it is a the committee
says what we'll be working off
of that committee so I would be
open to our to the amendment
process and then it'll come out
with the if they are the minutes
so come up with the without a
point higher number as it exits
the committee and and hopefully
some of the issues that Senator
would raise today also reviews
that I've raised we can
we have some conversations
between secretary states officer
words on the county clerk's
and so that and with the with
the issue committee members are
so that we can we can come in
with some of need
With some of re armaments to the
about and and and not have to
not to belabor points what
people agreed upon so that we
can use our time expeditiously
and judiciously
in order to be able to address
some other issues that may not
be present within the bill for
when that people want to talk
about which is the right of
every committee member to do
Madam well armed also that we
will be taking public comment on
the bill on Wednesday.
And so for those who are
interested in public comment on
the bill I will advise please
restrict your comment to the
committee substitutes are if you
do not have the committee
substitutes are then which we
have data available to the
public our upon request then
then if you do not have it
please send an email to S.
economy and we're just not go
requesting the committee
substitute for Senator forty
eight and we will send you back
to the substitute about your our
prominence in the constructive
comments are based upon the
matter that is before the
committee at the time that we
are considering and and that
would be helpful for everybody
at that point the other thing is
I don't know how many people are
requesting
the ability to speak we will be
making a judgment call on about
how much time we spend on
committee COVID in I want to
emphasize to everybody but this
is not going to be a question of
of one of of of of trying to
consequences we mention hearing
particularly in elections that
in in options matter that
matters that affect everybody we
don't want to hear people's
comments however that we need to
do is is we make sure we have
time for the committee develop
process through the bill and and
so if we have if we have three
hours with the committee
comments on the requested
effective right don't give us
any time to talk about the so so
so we weren't we would take a
look at that if we're able to
accommodate everybody we will on
that we would also ask that that
those who signed for comment on
you know if if there's an
organization we don't need for
the people to say the same thing
with Representative work just
fine there's an organization for
for their dispatch person saying
speaking on behalf of myself and
that's number people and here's
our comment something along
those lines and that would allow
us to actually pay more
attention to what the comments
are.
In the productive use of those
comments as we consider.
So that is everything has to
come before the committee at
this time.
But I will say nothing else near
in recess until Wednesday
morning at nine eight.
Thank you very much.
