Senator how to meal.
Your.
Senator Pinto.
It
looks like we have.
Members present and one member
has not joined Senator Shendo
has not joined the group yet.
Okay we'll go ahead and get
started so all we have on the
agenda is the presentation and
Rebecca or anything do you want
to go head introduce.
The that's online and see if we
have everybody we needed to
accounted for.
Yes madam chair members members
of the committee we have a
presentation from New Mexico
highlands university native
American social work studies
institute at Dr Melissa Riley is
with us today she is the
director of the program we also
have at Dr Christine that do
that and who is the dean of the
NMAA H. U. I couldn't overall
this school of social work.
We also have Dr Roxanne
Gonzalez.
She is the NMAA to vice
president of academic affairs
and then I see Mr Max Baca I
don't have your title Sir I'm
the vice president of finance
administration and government
relations thank you committee
thank you okay good morning.
Those are our guests so far this
morning Senator madam madam
chair.
Thank you thank you for joining
us today and this morning and
I am privy to who is going to be
doing the presentation you can
go ahead and begin.
Thank you all but go ahead and
begin madam chair and members of
the committee my name is
Christina and do it on I'm dean
of the welcome to all the school
of social work with New Mexico
highlands university it's a
pleasure to be here thank you
for the opportunity let me say
just a couple of things I'm I'm
going to introduce a our provost
Dr Gonzalez to say a couple
things Dr Melissa riding courses
here with us this morning who
will be presenting has a power
point and will be able to answer
your questions I mainly just
want to at the outset say hello
excited and thrilled we are to
have doctor Reilly on board on
taking the helm of the native
American social work studies
institute at the first of its
kind in the nation it's house
within the house within the
school of social work that New
Mexico highlands Melissa has
been on board with us since July
brings a wealth many many years
of experience in social work and
education
and is already someone familiar
to us she had taught for us
classes at the graduate and at
the undergraduate levels and had
actually been involved from the
ground up of on the with the
planning for the institute so
she can then sort of having some
familiarity with with the work
of the institute and I guess
before I I just a introduce
doctor Gonzalez I do want to
acknowledge of the work of Dr
Evelyn Blanchard I work with Dr
Blanchard of socially in the
early stages of the institute
she really helped to get the
institute launched and started a
lot of ground work and I do want
to recognize Dr Blanchard
efforts.
At this point I'll go ahead and
let doctor Gonzalez she's are
vice president of academic
affairs provost Dr Gonzalez.
Good morning everyone madam
chair and committee members
thank you for the opportunity to
that's a little bit of time with
you this morning we like to do
this morning is to share where
we've come progress we've made I
will tell you this is that a
project that I think he's been
very near and dear to animate
shoes our core mission of who we
are as an institution we are an
open admissions institution and
our mission is to serve under
represented populations to help
gain higher education and this
institute will not only help us
fulfill our mission but we have
a high proportion of students
that are native American across
the state of New Mexico and
social work is one of the
programs that they students tend
to drop we tend to drop and the
idea behind this is we will
start with social work but if
this is very successful and I
think it will be we have an
opportunity to set some
foundations not only here in New
Mexico but I think nationally to
set some parameters about
education for multicultural
environments not only in
education social work but
indication policing
Business education just a lot of
different things so we're really
excited to share with you today
our progress where we're headed
glasses done a great job and we
have been off and running so
thank you very much for your
time today and I'll turn it back
over to do that on.
It was muted excuse me with that
unless there are any questions
at the outset I will have doctor
Reilly present any questions of
myself for Dr Gonzalez before we
turn it over to Dr Riley anyone.
I will go ahead wait to the end
of the presentation for members
to ask questions thank you okay
very good thank you.
Of with that I'll go ahead and
turn it over to Dr Melissa Riley
our current
director of the American social
studies institute thanks
Melissa.
And good morning yeah I think
thank you everyone honorable
senators the Senate committee
members
as introduced in mentioned by
doctor did on and drive one
Stallis my name is Melissa
Reilly I have as mentioned in
part of the initial committee to
start up of the institute
And I just been really excited
about the growth that has
occurred since the conception of
this institute so what I have
for you all today is just a
brief presentation to provide us
some information some background
and hopefully some understanding
of where we are with the support
of provided funds that that
we've received which has been a
great
help in helping us get some of
these activities and I'll be
going over with you all on in
getting that started so thank
you all.
We okay.
Right so the native American
social work studies institute
really have been conceptualized
of course prior to twenty
seventeen when that all pueblo
council of governors Navajo
Nation and some specific pueblo
tribes here in New Mexico were
approached for discussion on
that concept and what New Mexico
highlands
was attempting to do when we
were able to garner that support
and with that support as well as
the state of New Mexico we've
been able to develop what we
have thank
I am as mentioned the director
of prior to that being a
committee member I was involved
with Dr Blanchard and other
colleagues in the field of
social work around the state
primarily tribal social work and
helping get some concepts
together to lay the groundwork
for this institution I do have a
graduate assistant Nation Ali
who is the name on eve has been
with me since last fall and with
her help and guidance and I
guess a lot of understanding
from the graduate school level
or student level we've been able
to come up with some activities
that would best suit the needs
of our students and potential
students.
We have a vision
at the institute and our mission
is to establish and native
American lands the social work
practices that educates trains
and helping professionals in the
families and communities that we
serve that we intend to serve so
with this vision we're really
just looking at really trying to
increase more of the knowledge
not just throughout the a
radical educational lands but
also a practitioners plans as
well.
in our mission statement to
educate and train social workers
to effectively respond to the
needs of native American
families and communities which
is are definitely always going
to be a mission that we're
striving for we just have a lot
of things that a lot of other
social work schools do not offer
around the country.
So we've identified for key
objectives as they're laid out
right here to provide native
specific
courses a special courses which
have already been developed and
we are at this time offering our
second course which I'm very
grateful for and I am the
instructor for these courses
also a working towards
increasing the number of social
work field placements right now
I think it's just really
critical that we look at
placements that are going to
benefit and
to provide more education or
social work students about the
understanding of the tribal
communities especially here in
the state of New Mexico where we
have a large number that are a
ninety three six thirty eight
contracts
that work very closely are under
the direct supervision of the
bureau of Indian affairs
and Indian health services and
you know really important so we
want to keep working towards
that objective for our field
placements also in providing
continuous education units also
known as C. use
And providing a topics
associated or sponsored by the
institute to create more
information or provide more
information I said I should say
to
filled agencies that we
currently work with and that we
hope to work with additional
lenses in the very near future.
And then lastly to increase the
number of social work graduates
that are really prepared to
understand how tribal programs
work tribal communities Indian
health services and all of the
other programs that are located
within our tribal communities
and even our urban Indian area
of primarily here in
Albuquerque.
So some capacity building
activities that we had I just
mentioned we have started to see
you unit courses of native
American focus courses we're
also working on research and
publications we've been hosting
monthly roundtable discussions
and actually we probably average
anywhere from sixteen to twenty
participants these are round
table discussions that can last
anywhere from forty to fifty
minutes their lunch time
brown bag discussions so to
speak but we've been very
successful at that and then we
have our resource and
collaborative development the
portion of the institute where
we're really looking to develop
more resources for students and
also communities and also
building relationships with
those that are.
Truly interested in serving our
native people here in New
Mexico.
So you have here as I have
listed on on the slide just an
idea of some of the see your
programs that we are offering
that have been approved fire a
continuing education office
we will be sticking off or for
C. E. U. program next month
beginning March six and that's
going to be with the native
American based fulfill practicum
a guide for supervisors at this
time I will be the lead
instructor for the C. E. U.
courses which are going to
average a day to two days but
we're really excited because
this is really a true
opportunity to talk with
and meat and educate of managers
the social workers that of
course take C. used to keep
their licensure but to give
really more information either
from a historical perspective or
true grassroots tribal
perspective as Dr you mentioned
I've been working in the field
of social work now for twenty
one years and I know one thing
that didn't happen in school was
that I didn't understand a lot
of the inner workings are
underpinnings of how tribal
government works
the different federal agencies
that we work with including the
US attorney's office
so these are really
see you courses that are
intended to provide that
information that we otherwise
don't get in traditional social
work courses.
Courses that I mentioned that I
am currently instructing right
now are here of the Indian child
welfare act which was last
semester in the fall and then
this spring semester is our
indigenous north American
perspectives course of the
Indian child welfare course that
I was able to to provide
instruction for we had eighteen
students of mixed graduate and
undergraduate students right now
with the indigenous north
American perspectives course I
have thirteen graduate students
enrolled in these courses so
we're really excited about the
momentum we're gaining in this.
here's an example of some
research and publications that
we're currently working on our
first quarterly institute
newsletter which we're looking
at the first edition being
presented in March our website
development is still pending and
then we're also working on some
research projects especially in
light of COVID nineteen of
looking and tribal sense system
in the world enrollment Scott
Andriy that we are facing us as
tribal nations and then also
some Public draft material as I
have listed out for everyone.
I'm here is.
Excuse me this schedule of
monthly roundtable discussions
as it notes here on the time
line we actually started this
back in October and I have been
able to facilitate almost all of
them except for most recent one
which was really a very good
a topic and that was addressing
tribal community needs during
the COVID nineteen we had and
we're very fortunate to have the
they he rose from the Taj Lee
community that did their
presentation from the Indian
health service or excuse me the
tribal health center there they
were guest speakers so.
You know this is just an example
of all of the topics that are so
rich and discussion that we're
able to share with faculty staff
and students.
Our resource and collaboration
development we do have about a
forty four page bibliography of
resources that we still continue
to build off of that will better
inform our instruction and
curriculum development
we have the leadership project
we're right now involved in New
Mexico's suicide prevention
coalition I'm also
Participating in groups like the
New Mexico breastfeeding task
force
the UNM's
Excuse me at the group put
together to analyze some of the
deaths that have occurred as a
result of domestic violence
within our tribal communities
here in New Mexico so what we're
really trying to get our foot in
the door to be involved and be
more informed in our practices
as we continue to put our
curriculum together and our
services at the institute.
Okay
we have some contact information
a PDF file of this presentation
was shared with miss Martinez
earlier but I do want to share
just very quickly with the
committee members is that there
are four universities here in
the country that are.
Not quite working out the
capacity that we are we have
Washington University of brown
school of social work in
Missouri
that has a social work program
that has in
in indigenous of concentration
university of Oklahoma Humboldt
state university as well as the
university of Minnesota that's
only for schools the eighteen
really don't have the conceptual
framework that we've been able
to develop with the institute
here at highland so this is
really a first step or in the
country that we're working with
right now and
you know that the funding that
we are so appreciative that has
been provided to the institute
is really helping us gain
and expand build capacity so
that we're able to continue this
good work and I am very
confident that with what we've
developed will definitely
improve increase our student
numbers especially with all of
the good projects that have been
developed outside of the
institute with that but within
the school of social work
We don't just want to focus on
the so much at the a radical
concepts policy public health
native history and child welfare
as a lot of other schools
currently do we want to expand
that to understanding the real
skills an application that is
needed to make social work very
effective in tribal communities
and helping our tribal people so
with that being said thank you
very much for your time and I'll
yeah stand for any questions.
Is that conclude that
presentation.
Yes ma'am.
do we have anybody any public
comments.
Madam chair members of the
committee we did not receive any
request for public comment.
Okay and then we'll go to
committee committee members any
questions.
Shendo.
Senator Shendo.
We can't hear you and then if
you're so.
Good morning senator good
morning I think senator Hermio
had his hands up before I put
money stating they both went to.
Senator Shendo I'll yield the
floor to you all go right after
you.
Okay.
Thank you for for the
presentations sorry I I came in
a couple minutes late.
Of a as a presentation got
started but the.
The before I ask my question I
do wanna.
Just make some initial comments
with the I know that she was
acknowledge should drive of
Blanchard.
She's come to Senator a.
Pinto the late Senator Pinto and
I years ago and
With this concept and the we try
to allocate the monies to this
process project over the years
and and we seen it involved and
I want to thank the.
The university and and the
president as well as a pro was
and all that that are involved
in the.
and certainly Mr Baku's also.
A frequent visitor to my office
and and I'm glad this year with
no lobbyist I'm able to have the
office to myself.
The.
Of but the.
I guess my question is I worked
at universities for almost
twenty years at Colorado
Stanford and you won and.
And I understand very well how
universities of function.
And I guess my question is in a
lot of times universities are
committed to certain things to
only to the extent that somebody
else's funding them.
my question is what is the
commitment of highlands in terms
of its own resources to the
program are these faculty of Dr
Riley and others are they under
the highlands of faculty it'll
all.
Programs what is this money that
we have been appropriated
funding I I like to kind of have
that conversation probably more
so than the programs I think the
programs are great but I want to
make sure that that if we're
going to build this program that
we're both working together is
partnership as a legislator or
as well as a the university to
to ensure that we can really
build this program and do the
kind of work that he needs to do
for for any country not only New
Mexico but I think a as a doctor
Riley had indicated you know
we're only thing for of one of
four universities around the
country doing something and and
if we could really develop the
something beyond what those
others are able to do that
certainly we could be the leader
and and and and the country on
on social work so yes but it's a
it's a little long winded
question it's probably gonna
response from the upper actually
of the university so I will the.
Listen now thank you.
I can start I think it and Dr
Gonzalez and others maybe maybe
chime in here
madam chair and members of the
committee Senator Shendo
let me see the current funding
from the R. P. S. P. bunnies
that we have primarily cover
Melissa Riley drive this
position which is a right now
that's a staff position as the
director of the institute there
also monies available for other
support staff a program
assistant a uh administrative
assistant and then the graduate
assistant that doctor Reddy
talked about who we have on
board so there are some of you
know sort of basic
Start up funds in a way to get
the institute started we do have
plans to hire faculty perhaps a
tenure track position and sort
of plan as we go along doctor
ready of course came on in July
and so this will be our first
full year of under her
leadership where we can be you
know continue to plan and
identify with the needs will be
I just I just want to say that
I'm grateful for the support of
president Sam Minner and also
our pros from San Juan Senator
in terms of their expressed
support ongoing support for the
institute and rocks and all that
you say a little bit Max you
might have something as well to
say in terms of the overall
institutional support and
planning going forward thank
you.
Thank you do there on madam
chair and members of the
committee and Senator Shendo
this is a really important
question because as we went to
put this package together and
and started to run.
Make the rounds to see if we can
get the funding we have a long
term vision for this at least
where I'm sitting today this is
where I see it this should
become part of an integrated
fully into our social work
program I also see this basic
concept when you look at those
objectives as objective should
be also fall flow into and there
are education programs you know
we look at what we're trying to
do with Yazzie Martinez all of
this should become one melted a
focus for the university and
many many of our programs that
we are looking to be a quite
probably this next year to start
looking at tenure track faculty
position you heard the doctor
Riley is is teaching a lot she's
also trying to run the institute
that's not realistic and the
nice thing about hiring tenure
track faculty because that we
can use that faculty in not only
in this program but other other
courses that we might have the
continuing ed education the nice
thing about continuing education
is the continuing education is
usually not for college credit
but it's for her credentials for
licensure so we actually can
make a little money on those and
reinvest those back into the
program for the next offer is
that we do so we have that model
in place.
We are also looking to.
Okay new facilities and we
actually looked facilities last
year with a silly about our
facilities director and we were
looking at specific space as
part of the social work program
integrated into our facility
what the office this particular
is to be integrated into our
social workers so late so in my
mind we're looking to invest as
we go down the road to make it
integrated not a separate part
of it you stand in Institute but
those concepts the mission would
flow right into what we're doing
in our day to day business and
social work and counseling in
our education program and that
the institute.
Feeds becomes part of the we
have several different centers
and institutes of the
institution and are well they
just seed money that we have
it's wonderful to get us started
we do need to start thinking
about sustainability as we go
forward and I'm committed to
that first step is to get full
time top key into the program to
start teaching.
I can I can I just a little bit
more to that a couple of points
related to doctor Gonzalez if I
may madam chair Senator Shendo
and members of the committee
with Dr Reilly's background in
curriculum development and
having you know no knowing her
way around the classroom and and
course development and so forth
a lot of the inauguration and Dr
Gonzalez is talking about is
already under way and this is
this is something that I I'm
really happy about we have
locations The school of social
work is has program locations in
Farmington four corners Las
Vegas Santa Fe and Albuquerque
Rio Rancho and Melissa has done
just a great job of doing
outreach to our faculty into our
staff to staff who worked on in
native American programming at
you know at the end that New
Mexico highlands outside of
social work and so the
inauguration and consultation
with faculty one of the big
needs that as a school of social
work that we have is to make
sure that our our content across
the curriculum again it's it's
an example of this integration
that we're that we're well
informed and and that are still
all of our students are getting
sort of up to date current
relevant content that will
enable all of our students to
graduate with some basic
knowledge
about the the needs of
indigenous communities in New
Mexico the southwest and beyond
so I wanted to mention that part
that that drive round these
already brought up a lot of
those skills and relationship
building outreach that she's
already done to work towards the
goals that Dr Gonzalez was that
talking about thank you.
So madam madam chair at Senator
Shendo.
A new talk about direct
resources we started this
program we had to two hundred
five thousand through the
various cuts from the the
special session and the
additional cuts we're down to
one sixty four and a half.
on probation that I just
highlands is still committed to
this so as we get Dr Riley and
she continues to build that long
term vision that you talked
about and the expansion as we we
know we'll have to add faculty
lines in there because we know
as it grows within the
curriculum and other areas you
need staffing to do that so just
as we pledge to you before
highlands is there and will
continue this is not a problem
that we want to go away we think
this is a beginning pillar of
changing social work and other
educational opportunities
developing the curriculum we
know that it started with a
small seed money that you and
and Senator Pinto have put and
your and all the other
colleagues and so we're really
excited that now we're running
and we expected to continue and
will continue to be a plugin
support even though sometimes we
do get the cats we understand
the tough decisions that you
have to make as legislators
we're out we're still committed
to this this program that will
continue to make it work thank
you senator.
Thank you thank you doctor Baca
and I appreciate that the
comments what when I saw the
name of a doctor Melissa Reilly
I assume that you was a faculty
member but he is a stab at the
moment but not a faculty member
within the social services
program is that correct.
Yes that's correct that's
correct in terms of of title and
you know the kind of H. R.
designation I guess I consider
Dr Riley to
you know she carries out faculty
duties just in the sense that
she teaches and and has that
expertise but right now she's
not in a faculty per
position per se that's correct
so so she's gonna take tenure
track position she's just
happens have a PC that's a
program director for the program
at the moment that's right okay
all right I appreciate that and
an a of you know this is
evolving understand it takes
time and about a but the whole
integration of the program of
the to make sure that what what
you know the knowledge base
aired I I think of I think
doctor Gonzales mention about
integrating this in throughout
your social program because you
know in New Mexico I am I'm sure
many of the social workers are
graduating going to be working
in many various organizations
whether tribal non tribal are
going to be in contact with
Indian people whether it's in
the you know and in child
welfare system or things that
we're dealing with throughout
the state in New Mexico and I
think
More knowledge they have the
better the hopefully we eighty
be able in a position to to
understand the complexities and
intricacies of what it means to
be a a tribal member in the
state of New Mexico why these
are important that we we need to
take care of and and and look at
the issues that are important to
their tribes and and and their
culture and and and our way of a
life and so forth so I
appreciate that thank you all of
you for for the presentation and
and good luck in the with the
work.
Thank you.
Thank you senator Shendo senator
our meal Madam chairman members
of the committee thank you for.
For this presentation today and
the just so you know I wore New
Mexico highlands purple today
because I knew you were going to
be out here and so I just want
to let you know that I'm really
excited about this program as a
senator who has to pueblos in
the area and as a former county
commissioner I understand the
importance of ensuring that we
have our native voices heard and
understood no my only question
is when we think about social
work we typically think about
just children does this program
also touch on people with
disabilities and our senior
population who also needs social
work help and are you training
your students to also touch in
those areas thank you.
Doctor Reilly and respond to
that.
Thank you senator how to me I
appreciate that we are actually
touching on all of that elder on
people with disabilities
including children
looking at public health the
hospital settings a large number
of areas where we currently see
social workers
Really expanding into not just a
social worker but in a wide
variety of helping professional
positions so definitely you know
we have we're working on on and
addressing those areas with then
our.
Within our courses and all of
our discussions because most and
we it's not just child welfare
you know it goes a great deal
beyond that but yes thank you.
Thank you for that Madam
chairwoman members of the
committee so thank you so much
for that because I think in most
parts of people think of social
work they just think about that
one piece which is children and
often times we don't remember
our seniors and those with
disabilities so I'm thankful to
know that you're incorporating
that into your program and I'm
excited to support you in any
way and to know that you're
getting students ready to go out
and be a true advocate for
communities thank you.
Thank you.
With that said if I may madam
madam chair is we know we heard
yesterday that that there may be
a junior B. L. probation and so
we know this program's been cut
twenty percent and we have a new
program that's starting you have
to get resources and stuff like
that if you would consider
thinking about this program and
restart it thank you senator and
I know if Senator sandals like
Gabby's gonna come back and ask
for it anyway thank you.
Thank you any other questions
from committee members.
No.
Okay so can you speak to the
last meeting we had the when
Senator Shendo was talking about
the the appropriation there was
a gentleman here I don't recall
I don't think it was Mr Baca but
that the question was from the
university to the university
about the facilities for the
institute and we we are shared
from the college that they would
have a facility for them so
you're telling me there's still
no real calm for the institute
at the college.
I can begin response Madam
chairwoman members of the
committee we have office space
now we have we we have a
facility we have our Albuquerque
location which by the way if you
do happen to drive down I. forty
we now have some beautiful new
signage let let signage in
purple that faces I forty right
near some Matteo at the summit
to exit so we have a facility
the school of social work has a
building there we've been there
for for many years actually
we're getting having some
renovations done currently and
that's where the office spaces
we got a couple of offices there
for the institute we've been as
Dr Gonzalez was talking about we
have been kind of looking at the
possibility of expansion we're
we're still in discussions about
that with the in combination
with our Rio Rancho facility we
have a large Rio Rancho facility
as well with office spaces
accessible to us so we do have
current space we have current
office space Dr Riley has an
office and but we're still
exploring you know what are the
possibilities of expansion not
just for the institute but for
other aspects of our program as
well but others may want to
chime in on that facilities
question.
Thank you madam chairman
chairwoman excuse me.
Dr Alice.
Thank you very much madam chair
just to expand explain a little
bit I probably wasn't very clear
to just to get back on doctors
are on we are looking to create
a bigger facility for on ground
in the Albuquerque metro area
our social work program is the
largest in the state and
Albuquerque we have campus
center in Farmington Santa Fe
Rio Rancho and then our
Albuquerque in.
The good news is we're bursting
at the seams in Albuquerque with
our students but we need a
larger facility to accommodate
the students and the increase
faculty that we're having to
teach the students to teach the
students so we have been looking
at a facility that's larger with
we were looking at this last
year we found out there was a
potential work currently at that
had a building right behind
where we're currently located
within some little.
Sort of pseudo extension that we
would put some questions back
their student facilities but
there was a nice waiting where
we had planned to eventually put
the native American institute
there as well but we're no
longer doing that but we are
looking to look for a new
facility and right now the
doctor Reilly her team is in
there right right in bed with
our social work
Albuquerque but we will be
looking to expand because the
program the exciting thing is
our students are we still keep
getting students and so we need
more room the idea is to keep
everybody together absolutely
because it's part of the
program.
So madam by vice chair one woman
that if I can add a couple of
points.
By a little bit of history just
some of the members you're
probably wondering why is
highlands in and in the
metropolitan area model kirke
rather than our main campus in
Las Vegas our social work as a
building and national reputation
and because of the limitation of
the that in turn the clinical
internships with some of our
students we had to move to
Abakaliki just in order to meet
the demand and so that's why all
the cookie we do have a presence
and some of the other areas so
that's it so as we continue to
expand that enter the
integration between this native
American institute with the
social work will be will be
joined at the hip so we're
looking at the long term
inability as we expand our
footprint in that awful to carry
to have some separate space that
is really branded for the for
the native American so the
walking you'll see the social
work but then you'll see the
native American social work
institute so that's really that
that vision that that this
particular say now in the main
campus if they and we had to
expansion make cap as we do have
spaces on the main campus that
could outside of currently right
now doctor Reilly and her team
are in the Albuquerque
metropolitan area also that
provided some additional
information to you madam
chairman.
From the inception are with no
money was allocated to this.
If elected this program has
taken steps back.
In that we're seeing what we're
planning for it I believe when
we talked about this in
allocating money to it that the
plan was already in place and
that do it we should be further
along where we can draw on the
institute for guidance and the
research by now.
can you speak to that.
I can say a little bit about
that
madam chair and members of the
committee on.
The the allocation begin the the
money came and beginning July
first and we had accomplished of
Fairmount already a lot of
planning had already happened
and so we were really excited to
be able to
you know conduct a competitive
search and bring on a
what I'm calling up a permanent
director of the native American
social work studies institute
with Dr Riley and so at that
point and it's been well a
little over six months now seven
months or so since July first
we've been able to find doctor
ready with an opportunity to.
Put your team together for us to
respond of for you know honestly
with the
destruction caused by COVID in
the entire university and also
within the school which as
actually as a benefit that came
from comment if you want to call
it that in terms of having to
rely on soon made it even more
possible for doctor ready to
reach across you know I'll be
program locations that I was
talking about in terms of doing
the outreach but but yeah I I
guess so my view is that we
beginning in July with doctor
ready starting putting her team
together looking and building
upon the work that had already
been done looking to see what
kind of
sort of networks can be built to
make sure that the the.
Our objectives and the goals are
are further refined and carried
out you know since July what I
would say in terms of I think
the most outstanding progress
that has been made since July is
the number of courses offered
and the numbers of students and
community members now community
members with the continuing at
of programming that we're going
to be offering which is work
really workforce development not
only the licensure of people who
can keep their continuing ed to
get their license renewed and
all that but also workforce
development so that part had
really not happened at all
before doctor ready came on
board so that those are some
highlights I guess I want to
share as we move forward and and
develop the program Dr Riley you
might have other things to add
or Dr loans this
Mexico ahead.
Yes Sir thank you for that
question madam vice chairwoman
then we go back to fiscal year
twenty fiscal year twenty what
we had the the two hundred five
allocated we hit the ground
running the problem that we run
into is that some of the people
that we started the program were
considered consultants and by
state law you can only have a
consultant
Up to sixty thousand dollars
without having to go to a of a
competitive bid.
that's just that's a state
statute so in order to do that
we have to do a search for
permanent staffing and that that
second phase that drive around
was talking about that that
right around that same time is
where COVID hit when you have
the COVID that kind of created a
couple of issues and so for us
to rent a space to allocate a
space one people were sheltered
in place to make sense to us but
we're still very committed to to
this program and as we get back
to a normal operation where
people are meeting face to face
that's still our intent and will
continue to do that the L. as
its incorporated within the
social work program.
We will have to separate and
have a separate branding because
that was one of our commitment
that we made to the legislators
that allocated the funds was
that separate branding so we'll
we will continue to press on
that madam vice chair thank you
madam chair.
It is almost.
The members of the committee I
want to have one little piece to
this as well I think when we got
the funding what was well
founded in the project itself
was the research he's.
The authority that was
identified by Dr Ralph Riley
that is it was so complete and
comprehensive what had not been
done at that point we receive
the funding was any of what you
sought C. today's the program we
didn't have a curriculum really
even sketched out at that point
and Max referred to as a
consulting group we got a group
of faculty.
Members of the race communities
we got a group together to help
us develop with take a look at
that curriculum look like based
on the research that we when we
started this the research on
what we should be doing what we
need to be thinking about was
well established but the
programmatic pieces had not been
in place and really had not even
been fully conceptualized and so
that the national advisory group
they met weekly they met on
Saturdays they help put together
what you saw today as the full
implementation of that that
piece so our first course was
actually not this January if I'm
if I'm on the list that but it
was actually last January but we
started that first point so we
started with a good solid
foundation a research.
But the project itself had not
been laid out step by step what
you see today that took a couple
of a few months to get in place.
In the sense the enemy to that
it's their their business
as far as education and and
having a plan taking six months
to plan something that is really
your.
business seems a bit long to do
and in the sense
I I wouldn't assume that would
so difficult in that manner to
Because when we talk about in
the institute.
It's the legitimacy of it that
we really go beyond just a
curriculum and deeper than just
offering courses that are really
you know in social work I would
like to know where the tribal
collaboration is in all of this
too and what steps have been
taken.
If I may
um chairwoman
I'm just I as I mentioned
earlier I was part of the
initial committee before the
ends to to we were working with
A member of the of the committee
from.
The Navajo Nation Regina out of
the window rock office
And a member of the Wakhi tribe
as well as a member of this
letter and then my style
from Mescalero and doctor
Blanchard and drive under doctor
Blanchard
guidance you know the the
committee did spend a great deal
of time
discussed seen and.
Really in value beating some of
the challenges are that gaps in
services and providing direct
services and connecting that
into instruction.
And along those lines.
That that was a lengthy process
for us to go through at that
time because we wanted to make
sure that what we were trying to
build which was really the
foundation of the institute was
something that was unique in the
field of social work as well as
social work institutions and
that we're going to benefit
the the idea that a lot of
people do not talk about which
is that we have a lot most of
our tribal communities at least
the ones that I work with and
continue to work with have laced
social workers and how do we how
do we entice those lazy social
workers those helping
professionals to get into an
institution and rolling courses
towards an undergraduate degree
or even any type of
certification.
The New Mexico board of social
workers of course has the
requirements that you know we
did have some very lengthy
discussions about how do we how
do we do this at provide that
education training and support
but still allow for these
helping professionals are laced
social workers to remain in
their communities
of course technology you know
satellite campuses are number of
things that we had explored
also taking the courses to those
specific communities
and looking at what the credit
requirements are for
institutions you know the the
the the discussions were very
complex in my my opinion and you
know we were able to to mall
through that and see also what
was within the capacity of the
universities here in New Mexico
to be able to do what it is that
needs to be done
in in our expert opinion
even as far as connecting with
Vention intervention and even
down to the judicial pieces of
social work and how the US
attorney's office functions for
cases that have not been
adjudicated so
just a whole.
Discussion worthy of of research
and that that that is what we
did and that brought us to over
three hundred resources
identified in our
in our bibliography ready
bibliography really that doctor
Blanchard began to construct
I was off the committee for
several months so I was not able
to to finish up with that but at
the on.
I'm.
My my coming on board as the
director of one of the things
that I think was really
important and critical is being
able to get those resources and
rate them a little bit more in
depth in order for us to develop
a framework for these courses
and see use and publications and
research that I'm currently
working on and being of yes
that a former faculty member for
New Mexico State University
You know these are things that
are really it's on unchartered
territory you know we we we talk
about as I mentioned theoretical
approaches but we really do not
incorporate historical pieces of
our history as native people
say national world and then
bringing that down to present
day on education that's going to
pull together our late
professionals in our students so
that we have a more informed
practitioner in our community so
you know I I really appreciate
your comment I I know probably
from and now an outside and what
has been proposed or put into
the the budget and the proposal
story objectives that have been
identified I have been a slow
growth but it's in in my
experience it's not unheard of
in trying to taking some time to
develop these programs and I'm
not making any excuses that you
know I I.
Worked with hundreds of tribes
throughout the country and I
understand that building
programs is very
TDS and has to go in
collaboration with the tribes as
you mentioned and we are working
towards that and with the and if
a survey tool and hopefully we
can get together soon so that we
can have more dialogue within
tribal communities to really get
their input and their feedback
about
of social work and you know
right now we're also trying to
de stigmatize
the social work profession
because historically it's been
associated with the.
An Indian adoption era Act
which was pretty FY so we're
trying to really do so
stigmatize also the idea of what
we do in communities and what we
can do so a lot lot of education
but we're really working towards
that as much as we can including
working on at least an
indigenous E. symposium
hopefully that we can pull
together very soon to really
hone in on that grassroots
conversation to help inform also
what we're doing and enhance our
our our institute but I well as
I mentioned thank you very much
of Madam chairwoman for that
question and
And hopefully will work to just
build an excellent program.
Thank you and so the tribal
collaboration that this is a
survey.
For right now I am working with
a couple of on a tribal contacts
to see what they're
at the demographics of their
tribal programs are and seeing
what best types of Services our
existing what types are working
it doesn't work so trying to be
as thoughtful as I can in
constructing a survey.
At this point in time that
aligns with what the institute
is tasked to do and hopefully we
can follow up with that as well
as develop some workshop for the
New Mexico Indian child welfare
conference and some other
national conferences that we
propose to to go to where we
noticed some of ours are tracked
New Mexico tribal social service
programs attend as well.
Thank you can you speak to the
homeless project.
So right now we have not I have
not done anything on in that
area regarding the homeless
population here in the
Albuquerque area I did find some
literature that doctor Blanchard
had left behind regarding the
homeless project and the
initiatives and what was sent
out by the Albuquerque
the City of Albuquerque one of
the things that I did it to say
that it's not just that was
focused on homeless youth that
was started by doctor Blanchard
but if I could take you into a
little bit of how this
homelessness aligns with the
murdered missing indigenous
women and yes it is is that I've
been able to correlate some of
the indicators from that
murdered missing indigenous
women initiative and align that
with some of our homeless
population around the state of
New Mexico meaning that we do
have a lot of work to do
in working with tribal
governments as well as.
Programming specifically in
addressing at risk behaviors
within our communities and
outside a lot of our tribal
members who find themselves
leading our tribal communities
because they cannot find a job
they receive inadequate services
for behavioral health domestic
violence and other social issues
or judicial
constraints often times find
themselves leading the
reservation to and they're
transient so how do we best
create resources for one
reservation and off preservation
populations to and also to
better address the outcome of
that transient population which
ultimately leads to homelessness
when we have a lack of of
housing housing opportunities
housing or funding for housing
as you may know it chairwoman
and Senator Shendo that the
housing shortage within our
tribal communities is so great
we don't have enough money we
follow follow of federal
guideline on the GAO reports and
guidance that often times it's
very hard for tribes to be able
to build a home with those
constraints so with that.
That oftentimes perpetuate some
of the issues that we see with
homelessness
and you know we have three four
generation of families living in
a home on the reservation and
off the reservation.
That those oftentimes trigger
social issues regarding family
violence child welfare issues
elder abuse elder neglect in
those types of things so within
the institute you know we are
working really hard to bring
about and cultivate some more
discussions and hopefully
we can have to get some time
very soon to fully address
especially the youth population
that I know doctor Blanchard was
was extremely interested in.
Can you speak to the
relationship you have with the
state agencies.
Right now we are us we're
getting our foot in the door
I've actually been able to
get into some of the New Mexico
public education of webinars and
some of their calls a New Mexico
higher education with Mr
anything Moquino
and seeing what they're
initiatives are and how that
aligns with the institute
I've also been contacted by the
American the Indian Affairs
Office of the Geneva the
seventeen who's also been a
colleague of mine in the past on
other curriculum writing
projects so so I am actively
reaching out to these New Mexico
state government agencies and
then I've also had several
opportunities and talking to
miss Donal answer Seneal from
the children youth and families
department on of some of the
issues especially in light of
COVID and virtual learning so
although these that
conversations are still
on going we're I'm working
diligently on trying to build a
solid relationship with these
departments and agencies.
Thank you can you speak to any
of the legislation that's been
proposed in the session.
I I have to
I have to share with everyone
that I I I'm just recovering
from COVID I was hospitalized
for several days so I'm I'm just
fresh back in in this but I some
of the legislation
I know that is being sponsored
by Senate or Representative
Lamptey.
And Louis I a Setanta sat in on
a few hearings regarding
Indian Education or
multicultural education
the discussions regarding the
Yazzie Martinez our framework
being proposed as it relates to
higher education institutions
the committee that hearing that
I sat in on last week regarding
the changes in the Indian child
welfare
Bill I. E..
Sat in through that whole
process the hearing and so forth
so I'm trying to get myself more
acclimated back to work and and
getting in on these.
Hearings and getting that full
understanding about what it is
and how it affects us here at
the institute in higher
education in general.
Thank you thank you for your
presentation today and one of
the things I can not
underestimate is how much the
need for this Institute and the.
The need what we're expecting
from met one of the things I was
expecting from it was that we
are able as legislators be able
to draw on the institute for
guidance especially leading when
we talk about ECWA and having
all
Having those changes made to
those laws and I believe that
there are some people out there
that really do have the insight
deep insight from the beginning
of a where that will help us
lead into those changes we have
several several pieces of
legislation that overlap into
this essential part and I cannot
speak to how essential social
workers are especially in our
area especially during this time
of COVID in which they're
probably just as much as
important as the empty because
of our children and the the be
assumed that the things that
happened during these times
especially when they're isolated
that there is no time off and
there has at least one instance
where I had someone dropped the
ball as far as knocked no wing
about it where.
And it is even went deeper into
the nation of our judges not
knowing about it where so when
this Institute and learning
about it
It has a deeper value to me
personally
with my grandmother being a
social worker for a whole whole
life that she was out there in
those times and that experience
from the beginning and seeing
these of all being.
legislation that has effects on
our children's lives and their
futures it's very important I
believe it is you know
educational institutions find in
some sense superficial
not to say it's not valued but
education about it but the
experience that when you get
into the career and you go
through those cases with those
children it's practically
invaluable especially when you
Have you know seeing all those
changes and no where those gaps
are that we draw on those so I
hope you understand why it is
important that we do have an
update about this program
and where you know
Did the reasons for the
allocations you know I think we
do know it's an investment that
has to occur with in the state
especially when we talk about
our native American children
and the the culture that we have
in protecting that
our loved ones so thank you very
much I appreciate you being here
Mr Baca.
Thank you madam by the madam
chair woman I I think I thank
you for those candid.
Next to us and I'm glad that we
continue to be pressed to do
better and work harder the
public health will continue to
keep our our focus on their
we've pledged our resources and
we said this is going to be a
collaborative not just on the
state but we believe just like
you have the that vision we have
our staffing we're not gonna
make any excuses why the pace or
anything else but rest assured
we're going to continue to make
this an institute that the state
of New Mexico is very proud of
and if you need any any time any
updates or any of those please
reach out to us and we'll be
happy to provide that
information to you we believe
we're on the same page and we
need to continue to push harder
and work harder so thank you
very much for those kind of
conversations yes and I hope
this college does recognize
doctor Blanchard's
you know invaluable.
Quick cheap she started to the
work she did for this and she
still continues to still
continues to do the work for our
children and having her input
for that for me is very
Means a lot hi the respected
from my end to have her guide me
with
things that need to occur with
the nickel and helping our
social workers and our need can
you that are in needs
Them suffering from from these
issues thank you so much thank
you senators and thank you
committee members for joining us
today thank you Rebecca and
eight then we will we'll look
back on the floor and looks I
think we only had two bills that
were referred to committee and
introduction yesterday and that
there are no more bills on the
table that might be all we have
for Tuesday next week which we
would probably give us a short
committee and we'll see what
comes up to date thank you and
you guys have a great day we'll
see you on the floor Senators
thank you madam chairwoman.
Thank you thank you thank you so
much.
Thank you.
