We are Senator Ortiz Y. Pino are
safe after state chose to be in
front of a green wall.
And the.
We have a number of
confirmations to do this morning
but before we get to the
confirmations we're going to
do a little bit of legislative
work out real quick.
And the.
I just I can't believe the
reason for that is first also
provided what we should be able
to do fairly efficiently and
second of all the confirmations
we have today people we have to
confirm apparently much much
much beloved that if we what
part of the confirmations we
would never be able to get to
any of the less than what we
have to.
and so I appreciate everybody
who wants to be here to support
conferees
In order for us to get through
everybody privative will be the
the most appreciated and and and
if you want the opportunity to
tell this person's life story
there are other opportunities to
do that outside of this.
So we are going to begin I see
Representative Montoya is our
presence as a representative of
mentor are you ready to proceed
on H. J. R. fourteen.
Yes Mister chairman I'm ready to
proceed right well in that case
please stop presents.
Thank you Mr chairman have
struck resolution thirteen.
What it does is it takes our
our legislative sessions every
two year every two years and
takes the thirty day session and
turns it into a forty five day
session and also takes away with
restriction as to what can be
presented during that during
that session and that's that's
really what it does we are in
the process right now with that
and other a joint resolution
that said gonna go before the
public I believe it's going to
get all the way
out and that is to.
Go to the ethics commission and
ask them to determine whether or
not they need they want to pay
late legislators and if they do
what would that be so there's a
lot of talk this year about
whether or not we are going to
be a true professional
legislature if that's the case
we have a restriction that
thirty day session that if
you're not in the governor's
party you're not able to
introduce legislation it really
is a glorified.
Special session for it for the
governor.
along with the the budget
session but this idea would be
to extend that says that thirty
day session forty five days and
make it to where
any legislator can introduce
legislation Daniel I I do you
have anything to say on this
secure be presenting this on the
Senate side.
Senator Ivey Soto yes I thank
you the
You know I think this is that
that's the issue right we it's
interesting if you looked after
to Mexico we started off with a
sixty day session and that was
that it's actually kind of
interesting if you think about
that house members thank you you
ought to the November you come
to are you coming to Santa Fe in
January you leave in March and
that's it for your whole time
but even you know before we have
a little committees and
everything else and the and so
as as budgetary issues became
more but more of an issue there
were actually they were special
session for the governor would
call would grant the of
budgetary matters and finally
they did go ahead and make this
amendments in order to
In order to
have a regular session but they
did it in the context of the the
special session they were having
what is the budget plus other
things the governor I thank you
Mr trump so so in that regard
it's
I think it's I we we revisit
this let me just check real
quick with Mister Roberts we
have anybody waiting to speak on
this issue for the public Mr
chair we do not have anyone
registered to speak right well
in that case let me go to Google
members of the committee and
we'll start with senator Morris
of the Center he's been thank
you Mr thank you a very very
quickly since we're a tight
schedule I'm looking at the
amendments you guys only change
the of thirty day to a forty
five day but the changes sixty
to a forty five day
and I are I'm gonna make an
amendment Mr chairman hopefully
this is the right place and we
can talk about it
gone I think we need to change
the title so page one line
nineteen strike during even
numbered years and page one why
twenty two strikes sixty Senator
forty five and the reason I'm
conversation is that I just
think it's our our our I'm sorry
but.
I'm sorry.
The page one of the second part
we object first title and then
on page one why twenty two
strikes sixty Mr forty five so
what this would do is make it
forty five year forty five days
every year.
As opposed to our current sixty
thirty and that in this current
proposal as it's written sixty
forty five I think.
But I think that's where the W.
I think many of us think that
every year it's easier for us
plan our lives we're gonna stay
with system legislature for
businesses or jobs and
everything else the volunteer
time it sure is a lot easier to
plan it forty five days once a
year every year
you know by Senator port worth
and I know when you recruit try
recruit candidates for this job
it's difficult to actually six
points or more when you're you
do sixty Bucks thirty us I think
it's just better
to just two forty five the same
number days over two year cycle
and having not the limitation on
the short session I think opens
up it makes us more efficient in
that time so.
On that point.
Thank you Mr yes.
This is what I'm looking at does
strike the sixties I'm just
wondering if we're looking at
the same thing.
I understood from wrong Mr chair
Senator do it go from wrong in
the house of so grout also just
so some Representative so it my
understanding is that on the
house floor substitute is that
they want they kept the sixty
and went to a sixty forty five
okay I think I'm looking at the
original thank you okay thank
you no I.
I was looking at the result as
well.
R. and for some reason we didn't
get the sub delivered to
operation and come to me.
This change that to back that to
sixty forty five what I
introduced introduced Michelin
this forty five forty five for
exactly the same reasons that
that senator Morris just talked
about that it is hard I'm I've
been on that that same and of
trying to recruit folks and is
very difficult to get the.
people who.
As far as I I hate to put this
the wrong way but really high
quality candidates to consider
running
professionals in particular I
don't know if you look around
but it's very very hard to get
professionals lawyers got forget
forgive me for saying that we
need more lawyers on but I'd and
house Republican side
particularly very short and that
getting them to to get away from
their businesses I believe
Representative Ely for that very
reason is not is why he's
planning on coming back is
because it's just been so hard
to maintain a business so yeah
the forty five forty five is
what had been initially.
introduced and then it changed
on the house floor as a matter
fact somewhere trying to go to
sixty sixty that would that
would make it impossible to
recruit folks.
Okay.
So
So I Representative thanks for
all second class status and here
we are voting on this so.
So let me up.
If I may I just want to go
through with it let me get some
of these things with the
substitutes are Morris do you
mind if we go to other members
of the committee of real quick
and then well I do that us you
know that senator Wirth and we
will return to the amendment.
Mr chairman at the wrong bill
and and I like is the focus of
force okay.
We currently do sixty days and
have a hard time getting through
it to get all the work done so
you go back to forty five.
Are you saying the we're we're
in the.
It's going.
Representative major you and I
wouldn't have to worry about
that many other people actually
have here would be.
In real dire straits in you're
free trying to get everything
done in a review now in six
years in forty five
and I know the the idea is to
spread it out a little more
money but some of these issues
really come up and and need to
be thoroughly thoroughly vetted.
I think I I just wanted to say
that after I've read the.
sports that was actually the
amendment was gonna make so I
would just resign.
Rests with that Mr chairman and
and and and listen to the rest
of the debate but what senator
Wirth.
Thank you Mr chair I I actually
agree with senator Ortiz Y. Pino
I think a little I get the
recruiting arguments but I also
get how challenging it is in the
sixty day session I don't think
I've ever.
Work harder just given the
number of issues that are in
play and quite frankly a lot of
issues that are going to happen
because we just don't have the
time to do it and I think you
know being able to have
thoughtful deliberation on these
incredibly important issues.
takes time so I mean I I could
make an argument that it should
be sixty sixty I think Senator
Moores is forty five forty five
in the compromises where the
house ended up and so I kind of
think the compromise is is a
good place to be thirty days is
not enough time Representative
Montoya you and I talked about
this the realities we come in
January first the budget
committees go to work the first
two weeks anyway so we're
already doing a forty five day
session and I do think that
opening it up is a good idea
and again it'll be interesting
to see with everything opened up
in a forty five day session
that's going to be pretty
intense
which is why I think a good
argument could be made for sixty
sixty but I just so I'm going to
not support the amendment from
Senator Moores I think the
compromise on the floor on it is
kind of a.
A good sweet spot to be in and
that's just where I am thank
you.
Thank you very much also let me
go back to Senator Moores.
Are you want to where are you
right now I do want to continue
with the based on the discussion
going to continue with the our
amendment or I guess my question
Mr chair representative was is
actually a compromise or is this
something that was done to the
bill.
I.
To some degree it was a
compromise based on this the
discussion obviously forty five
forty five.
I actually have some folks think
can we do thirty thirty.
but that this to some degree was
a compromise on the house I got.
There was a little big push for
sixty sixty.
I sixty sixty there there's
absolutely no way we get anybody
to run for office who who owns a
business I don't know that sixty
forty five.
I I don't know where we get
there
it's a lot easier for folks to.
Work for organizations that
might just allow them to take
that time off they they could
see working in the legislature
as an extension of what they're
doing away from the legislature
as I I get a researcher
Representative
this is just a quick Mr chair
and move on.
Well this bill please call the
roll on the moors amendments.
Senator Baca.
Senator Moores yes Senator
o'neill no.
Senator T. C. Pino.
We are
sorry Senator was I don't know.
Yes.
Yes that was it.
Senator Stewart.
No Senator Wirth no.
Senator doing now and senator
Ivey Soto I'm not sure
background yes.
So that does not pass I do have
a one quick comment though that
I would like to suggest and that
is.
On that one line twenty one of
the sub.
Right now we start and twelve
noon on the third Tuesday of
January I actually like to
suggest that we make that the
fourth Tuesday in January and
the reason for the forces in
generate is that it lets us
start the session with better
numbers for putting the budget
together we're in it actually
will have of the the cycle on
the numbers comes in just a
little bit later these days than
than what is helpful on that and
although we didn't discuss this
before I just see Representative
Montoya out of the act at so let
me just
It should have on this I do know
that the original bill actually
have starting in February so
Representative that is with that
differently amendment or or non
permanent yes and I think it
makes up both appropriations and
House Appropriations and Senate
finance happy so it can be
dealing with better numbers in
February.
It would have the added benefit
until the past portals bill that
would be able to get over the
time change before we get into
that last week of the sessions
are and so that would also be
helpful I think so yes of is
there any discussion on the
amendment page one line twenty
one it's a starting point.
Senator Wirth and senator.
You are muted.
So.
Couple things one.
You know I've given given where
we are the timing I mean this
means it's got to go back to the
house for concurrence that's I
just that's a reality
I kind of just kind of get your
argument but we do when do when
do we Mr chair when do we get
the the updated budget numbers.
I have that yeah go ahead
Representative.
Yes that that about the middle
middle part of February.
And so the current thirty day
session what happens is we're
working on all budget numbers
and.
We conclude with old budget
numbers so that was that was
something that had a
Representative Lundstrom was
requesting that we potentially
move it move it forward so that
so that they would get those
revenue estimate that figures.
Sometime in February and what
that is I don't know if that's
the fifteenth but it's mid
February in Mr chair
representative so whether this
so why didn't this get done on
the on the house house side.
The initial as moved up too far
and then there was some concern
during the election cycle that
it would then interfere with our
filing dates.
but I did look at it so we are
doing the forced.
Tuesday in January that will
still give us a doctor at a week
but that's the lowest that the
closest would be about a week
out from from filing but
Anywhere from.
Thirteen days I believe to six
states I think is what it would
be out from filing deadline so
this so it would interfere with
filing deadline that was the
concerned with the dates that
were on the original.
offering.
Well that's an interesting
question I'm just thinking back
to my predecessor in the house
Mexico all.
In his decision so someone makes
a decision not to run after a
thirty day session that
basically gives.
The whole world we to Calexico
ensures is that correct.
Yes certainly guess had looked
at it from that perspective yeah
thirteen days to a week.
Finally the point at as well
that the thing is we go to forty
five days we would have the
extra fifteen days at least the
Senate side would be working
with.
New revenue estimate dollars
states where where it's at that
this the.
Third Tuesday you know what I
have Mister chairman I our
agency leader for me I'm just
gonna removes the the the
proposed amendment.
So we stay with the resolution
as a king from the house right
now thank you Mr chair not not
anything else on earth.
Nothing further a ceremony.
I'm since you're removing your
size of and I will.
Stand out very well in that case
was a pleasure right.
Do pass I'm depressed motion
from senator Wirth with a second
from Senator Duhigg.
anything else from anyone else
us in recognition of the chair
see no one else Miss Vigil
please call the roll Senator
Baca.
Senator Baca.
Senator Moores.
I know Senator o'neill yes.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes.
Senator Wirth yes.
Senator do it yes I'll go back
to Senator Baca.
And Senator Ivey Soto.
But the US federal regulations
to have a due pass
recommendation from the Senate
rules committee on the house
for some work that a joint
resolution thirty.
Thank you I thank you members.
Well we now move to
consideration of house joint
committee substitute out
district receptive for House
straight resolution nine.
And Representative Chandler it's
very well you are there and we
if you were present on this and
that we do have an amendments
are you at to that end and
actually if you don't mind
Representative Chandler
let's start with the amendment
and then you can explain just so
that people have the amendment
from them and and Mister Roberts
you have the amendment.
Mr chair on if I may interrupt
briefly I'm sorry my co sponsor
in setting out representative
Allison is in the waiting room
as is John Salazar are experts
Mr well we will get them both
in.
And our and then thank you for
letting us to that and then
Mister Roberts you have the
amendments Mr chair I do not
have the amendment.
That's the help you have the
amendment no Mr chair I do not
because this was the
item was put on a last minute
last night can we maybe have a
Representative Chandler share
screen.
You have the amendment
representative I have it in hard
copy Mr chair I believe it was
sent to the committee secretary
our our legal assistant
yesterday if not earlier all
right Hey what are you just read
it's it's it's one clause if you
just read the amendment I will
type it up and put up on the
screen
yes Mr chair the amendment is
two two zero eight seven five
point one.
and it is an amendment to House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House joint resolution nine
and it says on page six line
twelve after subsection insert
quote and so include consumer
protections to ensure the
affordability of essential
household services.
Out include.
Our.
Actions.
Would ensure the affordability.
Of essential household services.
Very well and this goes after
are discussed it before the
period.
It is inserted.
Afters of what it says is after
subsection quarter subsection
okay well.
Sure.
This is an in my packet search
and someone on the staff on the
sound to me
this year are that this was
added to the gentle late so I
don't have it in my pocket yes
so the the amendment is it don't
even have the.
A C. R. nine in my packet so so
if someone staff run that
dominates my question Mr chair
was added to the agenda as soon
as practicable that was actually
added as soon as practicable.
Okay.
To get a copy of that from the
staff I appreciate it I'm and
one night absolutely and and
also I will know that it is on
the Legislative websites.
We just very quickly what I'm
gonna do is I'm gonna go ahead
and share my screen.
And put that help so that people
see.
Where the amendment would be and
what people are looking at that
Representative Chandler if you
would presents along with
representative Allison on the
a joint resolution itself.
Yes yes Sir and if you could I
please Sir deferred the lead
sponsor on this first and I'm
happy to do some additional
comments if that's okay with you
Mr chair Esperite Representative
Allison.
Good morning Sir.
Thank you for and then of.
What are we looking for I was
not activated until just a few
seconds ago so just if you would
please present on how straight
resolution nine.
Okay
thank you for hearing us this
morning the.
The summary on house joint
resolution nine with place
ballot question before the
voters at the next regular
election whether to amend the
anti donation clause in the New
Mexico constitution to allow the
state to invest resources in
ensuring access to basic
infrastructure for all New
Mexicans that is the basis of
the house joint resolution.
well thank you US secretary
Seneal us out.
Did you want to try to.
Yes thank you Mr chairman and
committee members this is John
Salazar from the department of
information technology I'm.
Okay good morning again we're
doing this in support of this
bill because it helps us with
broadband expansion there are
some programs out there were the
internet service providers are
applying for federal funding and
the federal funding at to
require state.
match process as well so this
bill actually allows us to give
money or.
Money from do it funds directly
to the ISPs so that they can
invest in the infrastructure
that's needed and broadband
the current process right now
does not allow us to do that
normally when do it purchases a
product or services they become
our products and services they
go into our general ledger there
are assets and the recognizes as
ours in this environment as we
expand broadband the services
products are going to be on by
the ISPs so again this provides
an Avenue to provide them the
ability to expand broadband you
Mexico so we appreciate the
support we recommend do pass and
we're here to answer any
additional questions you may
have.
Thank you Mr Vance thank you
very much Representative
Chandler.
Mr chair thank you and I will be
brief I know all of you are very
aware of what the anti donation
clause in the state constitution
is and does and it is an
important clause and the
philosophy behind it is well
founded however I think in the
case of essential services such
as broadband or internet service
as well as the other essential
services that are ride such as
wastewater and water the state
has been very constrained in its
ability to assist individuals
who cannot afford the hook ups
that are necessary to provide
those essential services and
that is what this ammendment is
geared towards Mr Mr chair and
committee you'll note of course
that enabling legislation will
be required that will define
what we're now I hear everyone
talking about guard rails and so
on that's the new term of art or
of the legislature and in my
expectation is one if this
passes if the voters approve
this we will have a strong
debate about how we can ensure
that the monies are protected
and that the right populations
are appropriate appropriately
targeted Mr chair and with that
all right I'll defer back to the
lead sponsor Representative
Allison.
well miss Roberts with anybody
in the waiting room to speak on
this issue.
Mr chair I do not have anyone
registered very well in that
case I was from committees and
after the committee let's start
with some of these people and
then Senator doing and and let
me just tell the committee also
Senator Wirth raise a good point
that that that this was added as
soon as practicable.
The socialism is a big issue if
we have a comfort level of
making a decision today I think
that works well with of the
remaining days that we have.
If if we need to have come back
after have a little bit of
discussion and have a special
meeting tomorrow to revisit this
I can certainly visit with the
majority floor leader about
about having either special
meeting tomorrow we're doing
this for a day on Friday making
sure that we're able to have
time to be able to do a still
schedule it if that's necessary
Senator Wirth to go to you on
that.
Mr chair does have another
referral okay right from here
goes to work I think I believe
it goes to Indian and rural
affairs selves I think we kind
of need to deal with that today
Sir well I appreciate your
Senator so let me go to the
committee nonstop with once
again just on that point Senator
Wirth Mr chair Arkham this and
go to Judiciary most
constitutional members of rules
you to share.
So I would I would feel more
comfortable with what the Daniel
said of this get in the order
your quickly are Senator Ivey
Soto this is Judiciary well
Mister chair at this stage in
the proceedings it was going to
this year and I would probably
be the end of it and because it
involves rural issues and the
importance of water
infrastructure in rural areas
this is the second referral that
was given and.
Again I just think we are where
we are that committee has the
time to actually hear it and I
think you've got eight of the
nine members of the Judiciary
Committee on this committee so I
just think at this point for a
make sense are you that that
that Mr chair so for later that
part made sense was just set up
the and
but this is the constitution so
I I do think it's part time on
the so it's that's as we move
forward I don't want to be to
try to show us quite slowing it
down and we have a lot of stuff
to do but I do think we actually
take a look at the census will
talk about constitution what we
normally do so I'm not I'm not
asking to slow down to try to
your mask slow down so actually
review it since the constitution
so Mr chair on that point
We just moved a constitutional
amendment through here that came
was referred I believe yesterday
from the house it has one
referral dealing with length of
legislative sessions which I
would argue is.
S. significant a constitutional
if issue if not more than the
one we're dealing with right
here so I hear what you're
saying but again I did not hear
that argument made with
Representative Montoya is up you
know constitutional amendment I
think you know the two
representatives might make an
argument that given how fast
removing constitutional
amendments through this
committee maybe we should drop
the second for off so again I
don't think that's the right
thing to do because this is just
this is what we did this this
constitution Memon has been in
this committee for couple weeks
so again just given the time I
just feel it's appropriate to.
To certainly have the discussion
I'm not anyway minimizing that
but I do think we need to act
today I appreciate that Mr of us
in our work noted up against the
last want to be happy to do a
referral to hear about the
advent that motion or a false if
that helps the process of so so
thank your.
We appreciate your assistance on
that center works okay our
questions from committee on
first we have the amendments let
put the amendment back up on the
on the screen.
Are there questions on the
amendment so this should be on
page six line twelve after
subsection.
so that the sentence would read
the implementing legislation
shall include adequate
safeguards to protect public
money or other resources used
for the purposes authorized in
the subsection and shall include
consumer protections to ensure
the affordability of essential
household services.
Are are there are there are
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Thank you Mr chairman and and.
May I know what this is trying
to help with one of my main
objection to the to the entire
menu item is.
To the entire constitutional
amendment is and that is that
we're basically going to be
using public money.
You too and I just do.
The I. S. D. will then use
public money provided several
some of it governmental very
little in their own.
To extend internet services.
And then charge the people at
who use those services I'm on to
the need for the for the
privilege and this is trying to
make sure that their consumer
projections to make sure this is
still affordable but we're still
basically creating.
Millionaires.
And trying to justify it on the
on the grounds it this is an
essential service in these
families needed really needed to
be any charge at all this is
public money being used to
generate this this new profit
sector for a private company
there shouldn't be any charges
alteration four ball I mean do
we do we charge for public
schools.
To restructure those essential
services.
So currently
The zoom has decided that
certificate was heading on earth
too much and he just got kicked
off as a so we're going to go to
Senator Duhigg.
for further Cust etcetera should
have the opportunities because
your your back
I'm not sure what happened.
If you are a senator Neville
you're still muted.
I'm just waiting Mr chairman I I
I apologize I mean that I know
we're saying water we have met
distributing water to families
we already have those.
This is really about in any
dealing department is here
talking about this is Judy.
And and I know we need to have
it.
The internet service is
available to families all of the
state engineer but what we would
then create a message for these
companies that we have.
Given all the money is a little
bit like the pharmaceutical
companies the government pays
for all the development work
then we handed over to some guy
because of his connections and
he then is able to charge
outrageous fees this amendment
helps a little bit mentors as we
have to.
Legislative consumer protections
but they're still going to be
charging in most families who
live out in representative
Allison there you're not going
to be able to afford those
monthly fees what we don't know
probably help somebody extending
the lines of there is a chance
for them.
The monthly fees I mean.
Thank you for
making my issue Mr chairman is
not with this amendment to the
constitutional amendment itself
slightly but is still is gonna
leave those families unable to
connect if we turn it over to
private ISPs to handle the
service and this is been my main
problem with with broadband
expansion from day one we're
creating millionaires at the
expense and justifying in that
we're helping these poor
families with them will be able
to afford it this service is
really a public service which I
think it is.
We should require you to be free
of those families not
protections for the consumer.
I think it's our Sir do it.
Thank you Mr chair I I share a
lot of.
to the **** concerns
That said because this is not
self executing and this will
require I think probably pretty
extensive implementing
legislation.
Even though even I I have a lot
of those concerns that were
voiced by Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Hey I have faith that we can
build in we can address a lot of
those in in the implementing
legislation
so.
So I am
I am nervously supporting this
right now on the assumption that
that what we're doing the
implementing legislation we
address yeah we I we should not
be of.
Funded underwriting private
corporations for their own
profit at the expense of
consumers just like I Senator to
the **** that and so I I am
trusting that we will be able to
address that issue in the
implementing legislation
But I understand the issues
around the the the need for for
the match to get those federal
funds
and so.
So I this point I'm supportive
but but I really hope that that
we when we are doing and
implementing legislation we are
we are seriously considering the
points raised by Senator Ortiz
Pino and addressing them their.
Right here is saying is we
shouldn't be doing this which is
a part the proposals point.
No we shouldn't be doing this
I'm saying we should be doing
this Mr chair very very
cautiously.
let me let me go to the
amendment first anybody else on
the amendments what are you on
the limits on happy talk about
the amendment I do think the
amendment is important and I
really appreciate the point that
Senator doing just maybe I mean
I guess I'm thinking Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino you know K. Carson
electric which is just done a
fantastic job using all kinds of
different grants and programs to
provide internet access through
a very rural remote part of the
state but at the end of the day
they deliver it to a certain
point and then it's up to the
individual landowners to do the
connection and then pay for the
costs on a monthly basis so I'm
just trying to I agree with you
I mean I do think that with the
internet one causes me some some
heartburn as well but I would
but I do think this also applies
to water and infrastructure for
water and I just know
representative Allison maybe he
can just enlighten us I mean to
the extent that were able to to
provide water infrastructure to
allow some of these the native
American homes that currently
are hooked up and there still
are many that to me is the
potential for that with the
necessary protections it just
feels like is why I'm also
leaning towards moving this
forward so maybe representative
Allison can you just just touch
on on what this would mean to
your district.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Mr Majority Leader
I want to share with you what I
know quite a bit about with the
onset of the pandemic
when we first experienced of one
of the first requirements was a
continuously wash your hands and
right off the bat of many
districts in many communities in
my district were falling behind
because not all areas had
running water most of the places
in my district were still
hauling water and we were
hauling water from anywhere from
fifty to a hundred miles one way
just to haul water and we hold
water but we did not have waste
water system.
And we just fell right off of
right behind right off the bat
when we were told to wash your
hands constantly and then.
The second requirement was
When the kids were told they
needed to stay home and.
Just attend classes online that
was easier said than done
because of.
We do not have adequate internet
I used to see children teenage
children in McDonald's or Burger
King or those fast food places
and I know that they were there
to eat because they have their
laptops open and I found out
that they were doing their
homework and.
In the the fast food places
because we did not have internet
and most of the places in
Farmington R. forty miles one
way from the nearest community
that had adequate internet so
most of these parents they were
driving their children to do
their homework at the burger
kings and the McDonalds so that
that.
Adequacy of both the internet
and broadband was not there and
then.
One of the third requirements
was of.
social distancing and keep stay
in home another one of those
things that so another mandate
that was easier said than done
because.
With the US more so distribution
of electricity most homes did
not have refrigerators they did
not have electricity so they
have to make more frequent trips
into the border town so that
they could have a proper's food
supply they were to buy it more
often so.
Right off the bat we were left
behind and all the mandates from
the department of health and
then when I started when I came
back to the legislature I
started sharing some of my
stories and I found out that it
was not only people are the
communities in my district that
we're suffering from these and
advocacies I found that places
and communities in the southern
part of New Mexico southwest
southeast part we're also
experiencing the same thing with
an adequate water supplies and
adequate water systems
wastewater system an adequate
internet so it opened a lot of
eyes and
one of the statements that New
Mexico has is that we want to
have a thriving economy okay
that to me is another one of
those things that's easier said
than done.
Our state.
Cannot have a thriving economy
that works for everyone if so
many.
New Mexicans are still suffering
from the lack of basic
infrastructure.
So with that Mr chair and.
Mr Majority Leader that is just
a very quick cap of why we need
to do and do pass on this list
on this resolution thank you Mr
chair I thank you.
That's all I have Mister okay
let's all go back to
consideration of the amendments
the weather on the amendments is
there any objection to adopting
the amendments.
Director Miss amendment is
adopted we're now on the amended
motion.
although I think through the
amendment we've already
discussed a fair amount.
All of that but nonetheless
Senator Moores yeah I just
really quickly I know we're
onsite line item is
Representative Allison Mr chair
I think everyone on this
committee in New Mexico
appreciate service angry about
the federal government's failure
to uphold their treaty
obligations on these matters
with water especially
you know the you said residents
it but this is our constitution.
The reason we have this because
of the corruption that happened
in New Mexico many many years
ago also be square about getting
water to
Raul tribal members are
currently in
but the part about the internet
I think we are looking at
technology that is ten thirteen
years old now there's a lot of
really exciting things happening
with the internet from
satellites to blam stabbing else
to deal with this last mile the
last mile issue that has been a
challenge for our rural rural
America and tribal communities
particularly and I think that
maybe the ten years ago this
would be an issue I think what
we're seeing a radical change
your internet to liberate Bob at
deliveries including projects
that we're doing in New Mexico
and investigators absolutely the
funding so I so it's so I'm
really nervous my mic Bartlett
change the constitution's
extremely high
then and so are vulnerable again
system but if it comes down to
getting water to our our people
and criticized the federal
government for their failure of
their treaty obligations of all
all with your but some
with that Mr thank you thank you
representatives will bring this
thank you very much and the sort
of course you'll forgive me for
one small correction of what you
said.
Is that I I believe you are
probably referring to dribbles
as opposed to limits R. O. Lempa
is actually tethered to the
ground a dirigible has a
directional ability up to move
to the.
Thank you for that education.
There are to be paid off.
Thank you Mr chairman.
All.
Yes.
Issue here is that we've got a
and you donations laws that
block showing what you're what
we realize has to be done so we
have to keep working these
workarounds.
Notwithstanding the language in
the constitution we think this
to be done so we're going to go
ahead and do it and that's right
but what we really need to be
dealing with is that basic
underlying anti donation clause
which is.
Mechanism should have been
changed years ago should have
been updated.
Doesn't really stop companies
from benefiting from public
expenditures but stops
individuals from getting the
benefit when they need it.
So I understand what what we're
doing here.
I just want to be sure.
The investment radial public
money most all of it is public
money by the way there's very
little private money works on
some call up maybe
the right job it wasn't like the
invest in some of their own
money that was all in requests
and and federal incentives which
is great.
But for them then.
Order us is Fischer
to trace the the end of the line
instructions for the individual
homes.
Business measure because we have
means of getting it out there
now without this it's very
individual homes in this the
discussion usual amendment is
needed for.
Then that.
That should not provide an
opportunity for those companies
to make money off of that we pay
for everything right up into the
home and then then to charge a
monthly fee.
That includes profit margin I
think it is certainly they will
need to have some kind of the.
But implementing Representative
Chandler pointed out that we
need implementing Lang Lang
legislation and I think that's
where we need to deal with this
so I will support this and this
point I'm I'm really uneasy
about what we may be doing in
terms of.
Providing a great deal of a
profit opportunity for some
private entrepreneur who and no
risk.
We call the risk.
Then they make a lot of money
and it may still be charging a
fee that makes and unavailable
to the people that we're
intending to L. so that I think
is something we'll have to deal
with in the implementing
language of the legislation
thank you Mr chair.
Thank you very much what is the
pleasure of the committee on
on house resolution nine as a
meant.
Mr chair I move a do pass as
amended.
well we have a depressed motion
from senator Wirth with thanks
from Senator Duhigg.
We know the LESC getting the
attention of the chair.
Call the roll.
Miss Senator.
Sorry.
No.
Senator Moores.
No.
Senator o'neill yes Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino.
Yes Senator Pirtle.
Senator waste.
Right here so.
Senator Pirtle.
No.
Sh.
Senator what yes Senator do it
yes and senator Ivey Soto yes
ma'am graduations Representative
Allison Representative Chandler
you have a do pass
recommendation from this
committee as amended this will
go on to the
role in the role affairs at in
the role cultural festivity
level first let me just make and
also real quick looking at the
time we do have to have a hard
stop today at ten thirty
we are going to that we just
enough for what we are going to
consider the appointment of our
stuff Rodriguez many HM we are
also going to do before we do
that we're going to do
Senator memorial I.
What that means is that we're
going to have to have a special
meeting tomorrow to consider the
regents conferees for the New
Mexico military institute and
from northern New Mexico college
I do apologize for the
scheduling issues at this time
we're doing our best to balance
on our responsibilities between
getting the various countries
through the system as well as
getting the considering
legislation and I hope people
appreciate that they were trying
to be thoughtful on each in that
process so having said that
Representative Stapleton if you
would like to present on I'll
struck a moral I.
Mr Chairman and Mr chairman and
and then I'm members of the
committee I apologize I was in
the Education Committee and then
I realized that I you change
this the intent this original
schedule Mr chairman and members
of the committee house joint
memorial I request the
legislative education study
committee and the legislative
finance committee to create a
joint subcommittee to study the
effects of changes in the state
public school funding formula
public school finance experts
will be included to provide
assistance Mr chairman and
members of the committee to part
with some of these Joint
Memorial is to examine the
changes that the legislature has
made to make to the formula and
how these changes affect the
public education system many of
these changes that have profound
impact on the funding formula
consequently the programming and
the delivery of educational
opportunities for example Mr
chairman recent challenges that
include the findings of the
Yazzie Martinez lawsuit and the
disastrous consequences of the
COVID nineteen pandemic.
Public school system in a fiscal
crisis.
Chairman would you pass.
Representative did you want to
finish your presentation.
All the all agency I stand for
questions thank you very much
awry to do press motion because
senator Morris is there a
second.
Representative further questions
comments from the committee.
Saying the clerk will call the
roll Senator Baca.
Yes.
Senator Morris yes Senator
o'neill.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes.
Senator Pirtle.
That you're on mute.
Yes.
Senator Wirth.
Senator Drake.
Yes.
And senator I guess of the.
Yes and our Representative
Stapleton I will speak with
senator Morris later about his
interrupting you but in the
meantime congratulations you
have a do pass recommendation.
The chairman and I would tell
you those are the kind of
interruption I like.
Well now to consideration of
Stephanie Rodriguez for us
secretary the more higher
education and
R. what I'm gonna suggest that
we do given the time that we
have is is to go ahead and admit
Mr grey yes Senator Moores
you're going to present she
apparently and radically popular
person I want to ask us of
course that you do is that you
if you have a list of the people
who are supportive of her if you
would after she makes a
presentation read that off.
Women are what I'd like to do
actually is as for the the the
committee this bill to spend its
time in consideration of this of
this comp re because my fear is
otherwise we'll hear so many
good things about it will build
us a questions so with that said
of course go ahead and present
thank you Mr chair thank you
members of the committee I think
money many of us know all
steps in the she is a radical
liberal progressive political
hack but she is three things
about her she is amazing to work
with she is more than competent
and most importantly she's a
local and she's a probable so
it's been a pleasure to work
with her over the years many
different things
The world up for other guys
minute you guys too also I guess
it's got a masters in about
schools from UNM as incredible
resume of
postal calls to work throughout
the years at UNM elsewhere also
in public service so we all know
Stephanie on this committee the
public no Sir not you said
everyone everyone loves a little
bit the list I got people who
are arts for this nomination as
president include all the
presents almost every university
we have president shepherds from
all western chancellor used to
from that call how college down
south president daily from the
New Mexico community college
president wells from tech are
resident manner from highland it
goes on and on of course Stokes
more favorites marks a major up
I I could read this list of sort
literally forty names long
Mister president sort of lost
time do not but everyone loves
she's greats and despite our
political ladies so I'll give it
to the the the committee for
consideration it's.
Thank you very much yes these
are safe you works yeah
absolutely Mr chair thank you
members of the committee thank
you and senator Morris thank you
for serving as my sponsor I
promise I cut these down there
only two minutes so all hurry up
through them but a little about
me as senator Morris said I'm
before you for higher education
I have to start with saying yes
I am a proud local I am the
first course that leads to
graduate from college I am the
daughter of the peaceful
educator I am the daughter and
wife of migrants from Mexico and
I am a proud to be at and my
niece and nephew are being
raised.
Here as you can see from the
little I have shared with you a
single handedly can relate many
of our fellow New Mexicans.
There is no question that higher
education is valuable as a
matter of fact over thirty
thousand students graduate from
our public colleges and
universities thank you again
annually however when I joined
the agency last the some late
this summer as acting secretary
I witnessed first hand the many
challenges facing higher
education in our state and most
importantly the reality students
face accessing and completing a
college degree or credential and
today as we face the need to
revitalize our economy in the
wake of a pandemic college and
career training programs that
prepare New Mexicans for
families the staining career and
grow our workforce are more
critical than ever we need to
harness the masquerade sectors
and industries that exist in our
own backyard and we have to
ensure that New Mexicans know
about the many educational
opportunities our state and
additionally the resources
available to pursue post
secondary education I don't know
portable costs I have some more
if the state but like I said I
wanted to keep it short for you
on respect your time the last
fish of the session so let me
close with this ministration has
worked with you are let's just
leisure and fell agencies to lay
a strong foundation for early
childhood education and we have
maintained consistent funding of
public education expanding
opportunities in higher
education for outcomes Mexicans
from cradle to career it's
something we are all committed
to and I promise to keep that
momentum moving forward.
There we can work to ensure that
students have every chance to
pursue and gain the skills they
need to thrive right here at
home doing so will secure New
Mexico for success now and for
years to come thank you.
Thank you Stephanie thank you Mr
chair members of the committee
we stand ready for questions.
Thank you very much questions
from the committee on our
conferee nominee
As part of this.
Mr chair Stephanie we've had
secretary a recent had this
question before and personal
conversations about New Mexico's
higher read be competitive in
the future with the changing
technologies that would
appropriate can you and I've
always said that we have a
nineteenth century model are
going into now in the twenty
first century also if you could
address some of those are
conversations of your plants to
make you are you a member of the
rest of the schools are more
competitive future absolutely
New Mexico so unique we have the
national laboratories and
defense laboratory and for
military bases in our backyard
additionally we have four
centers of excellence three of
which are at our higher
education research institutions
we need to harness those areas
agriculture cybersecurity and
bioscience and make sure that we
have those opportunities now and
in the future additionally we
need to improve technology in
excess for those centers of
excellence in students to pursue
those careers so that's why we
are investing in broadband as a
matter of fact the care funding
that we used in the first round
went to connectivity technology
and professional development for
educators for online environment
because higher education is ever
changing we need to build that
mentality of really harnessing
what is unique about New Mexico
but moving into the future and
elevating it to another level
and I believe we can do that
here with your partnership.
Thank you thank you Mr secretary
secretary Regis.
I do have
one quick question and that is I
do note.
When you have a masters in
community and regional planning.
And I think you will be the
first secretary of higher
education that will not have a
is that a total yes
Representative right it is
absolutely a terminal degree
okay okay thank you for checking
though yes
so
yeah I know that's that's that's
one of those departments where
where I I was I was I was trying
to figure out if that if that
made a terminal or not and so
very well that's good appreciate
that.
additional questions are from
members of the of the committee
senator Ortiz Pino.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
concerts thank you.
The secretary designate
originally and so we're looking
forward to too many things in
the in the higher higher
education in New Mexico with you
is at home I just wanted to come
in and one two things we can
process Senator Ivy Soto strong
about the terminal degree just
last night I was reading.
An interview with Cornel west.
And she was the the he's the
location and and and social
activist at Harvard and he was
saying hello in many ways the
PHED.
Process leaves people unable to
relate to the real world the
problems that they have to
confront and and and that that I
reach our mentality is this
Jennifer when somebody spend so
much of their lives exclusively
in academia I love that you
don't have a PhD just insert
that makes a your approach to
running this department
terminal degree in your own
field but still not one incident
so involved in in the in the
area of academic research the
issue that you're gonna be able
to really see the real world and
making who need other more more.
Really with what's going on in
our higher education
institutions second thing I just
wanted you to comment on what I
think is the single most
distressing fact about higher
education in New Mexico that
I've heard lately and that is.
All the colleges of education in
all of our schools NMAA shoot
you an M. eastern western
islands all of them all together
last year graduated fewer than
one hundred teachers.
And that's not really know you
needed and that was an
aberration that's been the the
trend over the last several
years fewer and fewer people
getting into the registration do
you have do you have some way of
dealing with that and and I'd
love to hear your plans for what
those might be.
Mr chair Senator Ortiz you know
thank you so much for that
question we have hundreds of
teacher vacancies right now and
I absolutely understand your
concern for what we're doing
what's really exciting is prior
to this legislative session we
partnered with the early
childhood education and care
department to actually establish
and down then at higher
education institutions improve
curriculum improve programs that
EA's could potentially have a
pathway to become teachers in
New Mexico and contribute to our
society and we're focused on
teachers that are special
education native American
Hispanic Education I'm at risk
students those are our main
focus in priority areas and
we're really excited that the
legislative body has been
supportive of that initiative
and there will be more to come
in the interim a line that
curriculum and make those
pathways for educators to become
teachers.
Mr chair Senator you.
This week in my chest raised.
Thank you madam secretary of
does and I I really think that
that that is an area where we're
you made of ideas are going to
be really useful and and we've
got to restore the
attractiveness of education as a
field I know Senator are
chairman was an educator and and
some of these still influences
his work as a legislator in as a
lawyer so I think that's a
terrific deal for be able to
begin and and and continuing as
long as they can thank you and
we desperately need them so
thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you very much senator
Pedro further questions from
committee.
Mr chair is the son of to drive
PhD Dr it's leading researchers
in their field I know what
Senator Ortiz your you know
saying that was my childhood.
What is the place to the
committee.
Two passed Mr.
Well we have a depressed motion
from Senator Moores with the
second from Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino.
They know what else seeking
recognition of the chair of the
court will call the roll Senator
Baca.
Yes Senator Moores yes.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator Pirtle.
Senator Duhigg yes and senator
Ivey Soto yes ma'am thank you
very much congratulations
secretary designate Rodriguez
you hopefully will soon be able
to drop it doesn't from your
from your title Mr chair members
thank you you're very welcome
there are all I do know there
are a few meetings that need to
take place in advance of the
floor session today so when we
just announced that we will have
a special meeting of the rules
committee tomorrow to deal with
the country that we are not able
to get to today and deal with
the northern New Mexico are
called out a college and our
university and also dealing with
the New Mexico military
institute also we will convene
tomorrow at nine AM in order to
be able to address those
conferees with that the Senate
rules committee will stand in
recess thank you all very much.
