The committee we are what we are
live.
Thank you very much good morning
everybody.
Everybody is having a good week
so far what how happy Wednesday
morning.
We begin this morning with two
conformations one a replacement
New Mexico bioscience Authority
and the other and appointments
the state investment council.
And our so Miss Vigil will you
please call the roll before we
get going
I'm it may.
Senator Baca.
Senator Lopez.
Senator Morris.
Senator o'neill.
Senator T. C. Pino.
Senator Pirtle your.
Senator Stewart here Senator
Wirth.
Also director this is not coming
through.
Here can you hear me.
Get Senator Ingle.
Senator doing here Senator Ivey
Soto yes ma'am.
I believe we have a quorum of
Senator Baca is there.
We do we have a quorum either
way we have given okay very that
so Senator Wirth please proceed
with
The first concrete.
Mr chair which one would you
like to do first what would
begin with the re appointment
since he's already been through
the process once and.
All right is is we consider
whether we had good judgment the
first.
So we will.
Proceed accordingly with the
appointments for Senate
confirmation of Greg burns to
the board of directors of the
New Mexico buying bioscience
authority for a term expiring
June eighteenth twenty twenty
four our this is pursuant to a
Legislative Council appointment
dated January twenty third
twenty twenty one and I think Mr
chair what I'm gonna do is just
because again this is a
reappointment of someone who has
been serving in this capacity
and and I believe serving very
well for the state I am just
gonna turn it over to Mr burns
to go ahead and give us an
update on on how the authority
is doing what's happening there
and kind of your background and
and why you are very graciously
stepping up again for a second
appointment.
To continue this work about
which we certainly appreciate it
so I would yield to.
You Mr burns.
I appreciate that another four
years almost sounds like a life
sentence.
They have agreed to do it and
part of that reason is because
we have made a lot of advances
in the last four years eight
eight job is really running New
Mexico by medical
the biotechnology biomedical
Association and in the five
years five and a half years I've
been here in New Mexico now we
have seen a score of companies
go from one to two employees to
fifteen twenty we recently had
one company go public on the New
York Stock Exchange of we are
seeing some.
Really a score of companies on
the verge of tremendous success
and my goal is to really to try
to help shepherd that and the
bioscience Authority plays an
important role in that because
one of the things that we've
tried to do and unfortunately we
ran into COVID nineteen and a
poor economy was to basically
raise and and and possibly of a
hundred million dollars to
really focus on.
Developing our bioscience
startups that's what I'd like to
have us focus on going forward
seeing if we can make the
strategic connections nationally
for a number of our start ups
and one of the things that we
did this year and it was really
led by me is part of the NM bio
but the bioscience Authority was
a major contributor as we're all
the economic development
of companies basically from Los
Alamos down to Los crucis so it
was a concerted effort will just
show you one of the quick pages
here what we did we had to
race basically about fifty five
thousand dollars and this was a
sixteen page section site
selection magazine this is the
largest industry section that
seven run for eight industry in
New Mexico so we're very proud
of the fact that we basically
put us showcase
all these firms are on the mail
boxes these are really are start
up firms and what I'll be happy
to do is send
Each of you a link to this story
and as soon as I get time we
have re prints and I'd like to
mail these to every elected
official legislator and also the
people in the county's mayor's
and things of that nature to
know the progress that we are
making one of the things that I
don't think has gotten caught
the is the number of the.
Ways that we've been adding to
the secretary in one company
alone Amorite global which is to
be deal with so bio has added
two hundred people in the last
year and the reason for that is
they are actually producing the
AstraZeneca COVID nineteen
vaccine here in New Mexico so
that is certainly one of our
more prominent companies they
now have close to five hundred
employees second only to
intelligent manufacturing in the
state as I mentioned before
piece of farm is the firm that
went public on the Toronto
exchange they're doing well and
we're also seeing more
investment dollars coming into
our companies here in New Mexico
from out of state we still have
to really build up that
endowment fund that I was
talking about but it's nice is
that we're getting some national
recognition.
I'll open it up to any questions
you might have.
Thank you so very much and and
before we go to comments.
I do want to join in and thank
you thank you very much for your
willingness to continue to serve
I think those of us who have
done multiple terms in the
Senate understand your feeling
about a new four year term
and and how that might feel
sometimes but you know it's
really exciting to get a new
project off the ground and
that's one of the things that
that you've been you've been
able to participate in and and I
think that's a this is really
exciting prospect to be part of
them and especially with all the
the advances that this story has
made in such a little amount of
time this bill do we have of
people signed up to use speak on
this nomination.
We have several people in the
waiting room Mr chair but I am
not certain that any of them
are.
Are here for this conferee.
Okay okay there we checked with
Mister Roberts to see if it
opts.
Mr chair I do not have anyone
registered okay Representative
well in that case let's go to
questions and comments from
committee.
Senator participate on.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
thank you Mr burns for for being
willing to serve a chair to
actually be moving things along
and identification you've
described it's very exciting
very interesting.
Is there are.
Is there any public investment
in that endowment fund.
I know it is and what the what
the legislature has done to date
is provide funding for staff for
the bioscience authority
last year I know Richard Larson
who is the chair came in and
requests I think a start up
fifty million dollars and that
was not approved.
this year before COVID nineteen
hit we were going to try to
come in for twenty five million
to get this started it's really
going to take public money and
then hopefully we can also get
some private sector money to
also go into this fund.
Mr chairman and and and Mr burns
you know in light of our.
Greatly enhanced fiscal
situation from the time you may
have been considering us and
opted not to this year we
actually have.
Considerable.
Research and were received
prostration additional federal
money coming in to to help was
the response to the pandemic.
I I just I do think this is
something that.
We should be putting some of
public money into
there are mechanisms.
Forty individuals firms
investment dollars to the state
investment council but I think
for endeavors under the sword we
we really ought to give some
thought to.
Creating funded that
the.
Devoted exclusively to the to
the and.
Enhancing the opportunities for
new start ups and and and new
forms of our location here and
so on
I I have a bill and and you know
the chances of it passing this
year very slightly I wanted to
plant the seed.
and then work on it with the tax
revenue tax stabilization and
revenue committee whatever it
is.
Revenue stabilization and tax
committee during the interim.
That would.
Right wing is from our oil and
gas injection.
And it would actually
Move some of the oil and gas
money we know uses in general
operating budget into a series
of of other funds that have.
Endowment qualities of the
source you're describing and
very a some point possibly we
ought to be talking about adding
the year creating and and and
and using this mechanism the
that I'm proposing to put some
money into that word where it
would do a lot of you know
really and have a great stimulus
impact on
on your industry.
What what exactly are the plans
for us for some public
participation in your endowment
fund.
basically we're probably going
to awaits
I don't want to know if the if
the word wages correct to see
how the economy was doing and
then see if we could we gather
our forces one of the things
that we did do last year but
have not been able to distribute
the money as we picked to
companies for basically about a
hundred thousand dollars each
these a to start ups one is
based out of Santa Fe in the
other was based on a Los crucis
to you know help them and then
they would try to get matching
funds of course from the hundred
thousand dollars that we would
get them I was encouraged by
what you just said and
We we have of the number of good
people on the board and I think
what we can do is certainly take
another look at it we also put
together our strategic plan and
study that is very comprehensive
and really talks about what this
additional money could do for
the industry because it is going
to be.
A tremendous.
Engine for job growth in New
Mexico as we go forward it works
very well with the university
research facilities and our
national labs and that gives us
what I hope will be a future
edge basically I came with the
idea of the endowment after
visiting my counterpart and
Arizona.
And they launched a two hundred
million dollar fund and they
were able to complete that in
the year it's obviously going to
take us longer period.
Time to do that but the green
shoots are here in New Mexico
for support and
even for example at Los at Los
Alamos there biosciences now
number over three hundred I
don't know all the projects that
working on the what's happening
out of that is that probably
been five to ten states in
office including pebble labs
which emerged out of the
the research that was being done
at Los Alamos so I'm very
encouraged that we're going to
have a lot of
future start ups and the that
basically that the work force
that and the research that's
being done here and the paths
that are coming out of the U. N.
M. the New Mexico State
University really bode well for
our future so I think we can
help make a strong case.
In terms of trying to get some
public funding for this
industry.
Well.
And I I would like to to.
See if there's ways in which we
can get something going to the
next session of the governor's
on presentation.
Governor's authorization
Four is a weighted to you can
start that that in no and
finally some public money and
hopefully the economy will will
be turning around even more than
and and and.
Previous situation.
More of us than we've had in the
past so this is something I'd
really like to work on that I
really appreciate you bringing
this idea back up again.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you very much senator
Vigil senator Morris.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for your service on this
committee I want to talk about
conflicts of interest and what
is happening at the the bus
aren't science committee
this you're doing a lot of
different research and what of
armed conflicts as I'm hearing a
popping up between companies
that you all are are investing
you're looking at and then
memberships and boards in those
kind of calm our committee our
company's afterwards any kind of
conflict among a monetary
thank but happening as you know
New Mexico has a long history of
these kind of conflicts and
concerns or want to try to get
since the new board ahead of
this you go over what your
conflict of interest policies
are and talk about any board
members for that have also been
members of any boards or
corporate boards that have
gone through this agency.
I'm not aware of any conflicts
of interest that and come up
with the with the board of
directors.
Tell me about the process you
have to identify conflicts of
interest of any companies are
working with and attend school
boards members are also being on
the court reports what is
usually a before we take a bow
if anyone feels that they have a
conflict of interest they have
staying on and and don't
participate in that boat and
again as far as I'm aware
You know this issue has has not
come up and to be honest I don't
know the legally State the hind
what might be in our statutes in
terms of conflict of interest
but I'm sure we're fine we're
following New Mexico's
guidelines.
Mr chair that last sentence
concerning when you said you're
sure you're following New Mexico
guidelines without knowing you
have a fiducial responsibility
on these matters and I'm a
little concerned that
you said that you feel or that
the members feel that they have
a conflict that we need to have
concrete guidelines about these
conflicts disclosures of these
conflicts as I'm here and there
are conflicts between what the
board is been doing and personal
involvements in a corporation so
I think we need to get to the
bottom of that and if there's a
perception that that is
happening we need to root that
out quickly to find out what the
guidelines are some transparency
in these things
but you don't know what those
conflicts requirements are
currently and and what is
happening so with that one of
the definitions I'll be honest
with you
my focus is really been on
getting things done and that's
where I put my time and energy
there are a number of other
people on the board that I just.
The I I basically will let them
make decisions those types of
decisions again I'm not aware of
any conflicts and I think in my
four years of on this one
meeting so
I think there are some rumors
out there not so much conflicts
of interest but potentially on
the idea of a possible probably
go under the heading of
mismanagement there are some
people that feel that you know
the.
The organization might be too
closely tied to the University
of New Mexico controlled by UNM
but despite that I think we
again have made a good deal of
progress in the past year and we
are taking a look at
reorganization
In terms of the relationship
between the authority which is a
you know public private and the
university in New Mexico.
I think we're all hearing the
same rumors messing what's
concerning about what's could be
potentially happening Mr chair
Mr by what are have you guys had
gone through an audit yet so
what were the results of those
audits.
If you do that I'm not aware
that they've gone through an
audit I know there are legal
issues that are being pursued I
think a lot of.
this started when the executive
director that was hired was
dismissed
and and she was dismissed by
caused by Richard Larson who is
the board chair and a lot of the
board members
I think unanimously felt that
the individual was doing
excellent work in the negative
reports came in from UNM who
claims that she had to
occasionally faced with such as
H. R. or I. T. things of that
nature but the board itself the
board members
me included thought she was
doing excellent.
What that is what that has
touched off some internal
debates and to be honest and
she's left
which was back in the spring
there there has been little
progress on most of the
activity has been focused on.
legal issues and bringing in
lawyers and you know she she is
basically I don't know how she's
gone to the point of selling but
she has complained about the way
that she was dismissed to you
and officials and they are
looking into that and could have
fall that was properly and she
was dismissed for the right
reasons are not.
But it has not it on on the of
financial that I'm aware of.
Mr chair do we know what kind of
liability
of the taxpayers are facing or
this what's going on there.
You said she's already suing the
state or.
Well she is she is gone to the
Attorney General but she's right
now she's been working with
officials that the university
New Mexico who are looking into
this into the issue of her are
dismissed it's so Mister chair
so you to Senator general is
looking at this and we don't
know if the auditors looking.
Don't know if the auditors and
their
No.
That will cease at this point
probably come to less than you
know thirty fifty thousand
eighty something in that range
amendment may even be lower than
that.
Mr chairman.
The service runs I'm very
concerned that this is a brand
new agency in order to have.
If this with its and we're also
hearing these reports of Senator
switchboards as for such a new
agency usually takes agencies in
New Mexico get back row for much
more on the just a couple years
I you know as I I appreciate
your answers I think you're good
what I what I I just encourage
you to be a better watchdog
sounds like you bring a lot of
skill level to the school board
but we have a fiduciary
responsibility to watch out for
the taxpayers also and I'm going
to urge you to get to the bottom
of some of the stuff and not
rely on other people because you
are a board member you
representative not not just the
Senate and the governor and
everyone else Representative
people of Mexico on that point
and you have a fiduciary
responsibility get to the bottom
of the if there is are the if
these rumors are true we need to
find out about it and stop.
And because I think the mission
of the sport is important we
can't let it be a hijacked by
typical New Mexico internal to
expand our production so I
appreciate you being there you
prepare right level of our
expertise to this long and
encouraging on the fiduciary
level more active and find out
what's going on okay.
At this point I think corruption
would be a very strong word I
think the real issue is going to
boil down to mismanagement.
but we'll we'll see where that
takes us and again you NM is
doing their own internal
investigation.
So they're looking at at this
and this point you know we're
we're basically waiting to hear
from the lawyers on both sides
as well as the you an
investigation.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
appreciate you stepping up for
another four years but continue
thank you.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you very much senator
Morris Senator Pirtle.
Thank you Mr.
Committee.
R. Pirtle.
Somebody else has a sound going
in the same city as you if they
could meet their sound that
would be helpful.
What's your your.
Thank you Mr chair
members of the committee my
question is the standard
question Mr burns again Preciado
willingness to serve
but have you or any close family
members donated to either the
governor or the governor's
campaign or any of
the pacs that supported the
governor.
I recall donating a hundred
dollars to attend one of the
governors
I'm racing events.
And and thank you for that Mr
chair and Mr Byrne three
straight that out in the open.
so I appreciate the answer and I
have no further questions thank
you.
Thank you Senator what is the
pleasure of the committee.
Mr chair I move I do pass
for Mister burns for this
appointment.
Well.
So we're on a two passed motion
from Santo teens if you know
where that second from Santo
storks.
Was senator or
maybe we should Mr.
What's but I was also stating
your trying to get the want to
make the motion so I I I
teleported has his words into
your into your spring.
Are they are
signal out seeking recognition
of this time
On the re confirmation of of Mr
burns to the bioscience
Authority as we go please call
the roll Senator Moores.
Yes yes Senator Ortiz Y. Pino
yes.
Senator Pirtle.
Yes Senator Stewart.
Yes Senator Wirth.
Yes Senator Ingle.
Yes Senator do make yes then
Senator Ivey Soto yes ma'am what
was about eight two zero to pass
regulations Mister burns you
have a do pass recommendation
from this committee and your
nomination will proceed to a
floor.
Thank you very much appreciated
thank you we now perceive per
second confirmation the morning
which is Catherine Allen for
in an apartment to the state
investment council and this also
is a Legislative Council Service
our Legislative Council
appointments and Senator Wirth
have the as the senator who
represents most of the locals
who served in various positions
if you would please proceed to
our to present the conferee.
Thank you Mr chairman I I am
honored this morning to present
Catherine Allen for an
appointment to the state
investment council for a term
that expires March thirty first
twenty twenty five this is a
Legislative Council appointments
are by letter dated January
twenty third twenty twenty one.
Mr chair I think
we have before us a an
incredible candidate for the
state investment council miss
Allen has over thirty years of
leadership experience in a wide
range of technology strategy and
corporate board governance
issues.
She's the founder of and
chairman of the board the Santa
Fe group that's based here of
course and it is a strategic
advisory company focused on
cyber security and risk
management which Spirit
specializes in briefing C. level
executives and boards and
financial institutions and other
critical infrastructure
companies she has served on a
variety of corporate boards and
is currently serving are served
on those Synovus financial
corporation el Paso Electric
Company Stewart information
services NBS technologies
RiskSense believe agency who
hand Loki and C. R. I. advantage
and during that in that service
she's chaired for been
all she's the chair served on
risk security technology
committees of these boards as
well as on compensation
nominations governance and
public policy in twenty eighteen
Mr chair she was named one of
the NACD hundred most
influential directors
she has a wide experience of
working in the arts and non
profits
and again I think she's prior to
that her work at us her
chairmanship of the Santa Fe
group she was the founding CEO
of an entity of B. I. T. S.
which is the banking industry
technology secretary it had to
look that one up to figure out
what it stood for but this was a
consortium of financial service
industry groups and again
something that she had.
Involvement and setting up and a
huge support from the industry
so early in her career she
served in several senior
executive positions at Citi Corp
in retail bank cards and
corporate innovation and
technology divisions and she
Representative city bank is the
founding chairman president of
the multi industry smart card
forum.
So I think you see Mr chair she
brings adding an incredible
business background to this
position she did previously
served for one year on the state
investment council at the end of
the Representative ministration
and then simply based on the
change of administration the
vast service ended she also was
appointed by president Obama.
To serve on the via script
called there I trust board and
on president Obama's economic
development and small business
boards so as you can see again
this is someone who has agreed
to step up again for the state
investment council I see my good
friend Steve always are down at
the bottom of the screen was
also is obviously have been the
CEO and director of state
investment council for many many
years and I I believe that miss
Allen will be a tremendous
addition to the board and again
aboard that we can probably talk
about a little bit that I I just
think since we did the
restructuring however many years
ago as really function in a way
that it does its job it does it
well and as a legislator who's
been here long enough to see a
time when it didn't work so well
I it's very reassuring to know
that the appointment process we
set up with senator Neville was
involved in that has worked well
and it's balanced those
appointments out and we have a
board that's doing the job the
incredibly important job of
managing our state finances so
with that Mr chair I am happy to
introduce to you Catherine Allen
who can save few words about why
she why she's willing to step up
to this position.
Well
call at see the state thank you
senator thank you chairman I'm
honored to be considered for
this position I am passionate
about our state in the economic
growth and development of the
state and also serving the
people of the state so I
appreciate this opportunity I
appreciated the one year that I
was able to be on before
I would see my I'm first I
believe where the time we are
people really do need to give
back in particular to our state
comment in social unrest and all
the things we've been through
the last year really make it
important that we think about
the future of our state in the
future health of our citizens so
I think this opportunity in
terms of oversight of playing a
role in the oversight of the
finances of the
state and making sure we're
meeting the highest ethical
standards understanding the
risks that are out there and I'm
as you can see from my
background I've spent a lot of
time either setting up or
spending time with risk
committees and I actually have a
nonprofit that we've set up for
corporate board directors that
sit on risk committee supports
so it's an issue that is really
important
of also yes G. which is really
important to all boards today
and so I'm happy to be here I
love the The New Mexico I was
born in Missouri I grew up in a
small town in Missouri the first
time I came to Santa Fe I was
five years old.
Aaron said that I sort of threw
a trip tantrum because I did not
want to leave and from then on
it was how to wake up by home
and and get to New Mexico so
I've been here since nineteen
ninety three and I love the
state and I love the opportunity
service so I'm open for any
questions you might have.
Well this Allen thank you so
much for for your willingness to
serve and and particularly with
your amazing all right and that
of of service that you've done
already over the years and
branded different capacities it
is it is really very impressive
Act I will just just just tell
you above all the different
positions that the that we are
out of in our packet in that
senator Wirth is detailed I'm
I'm a I'm a big fan of RiskSense
and and love that's in New
Mexico company and I think it's
fantastic that you have served
on the advisory board and and
helped with
Mister Fidel in terms of getting
that getting that of Business
going I think it's a real
gentleman New Mexico.
That we have.
So I'll put.
Absolutely yes so with that let
us move to a public comment
we're gonna start with Mr movies
and Mister Morgan if there is
anybody else was signed up for
public comment on this concrete
go ahead and admit them into the
room at this time Mister mo
it's.
Thank you Mr chair and members
of the committee good morning.
I'm see what we just your state
investment officer and it's my
pleasure today on behalf of the
SI see staff to strongly endorse
kafir al.
For confirmation as a new member
of the state investment council.
I know ms Allen for at least
fifteen years.
And I have always been impressed
with her professionalism.
Essex and our commitment to our
state.
As has been outlined by senator
Wirth and by ms Allen
her professional experience in
the financial services world.
Along with her commitment to
responsible governance.
And best practices service on
both corporate and non profit
boards.
I think will contribute
immensely to the council's
fulfillment of its permanent
fund oversight role so Mister
chair all right would.
Urged the confirmation of this
Alan for this position thank
you.
Thank you very much
Mr Modi's and and also private
thank you for all that you do
for the state
Mr
Roberts is there is there
anybody else.
Seeking comment at this time on
this conference Mr chair that
one registered for COVID well in
that case will proceed to the
committee.
Mr chair thank you members of
the committee.
Thank you Mr Allen for your
willingness to serve.
Going to ask you the same
questions that I asked the last
Capri Mr chairman Alan did you
or any close relatives donate to
this current governor's campaign
or any of her packs.
Yes I have.
And Mr chair the sound how much.
I think the maximum that you can
for a let me state to state I
support a number of women that
are in public policy so I'd give
across the United States two
women that are running of
whether it's for the Senate or a
governorship and I think I gave
the Max I'm pretty sure I get
the Max that you can get I don't
remember that number right now
with this thirty five hundred or
fifty two hundred that.
And.
Representative answer you
donated to any of the past the
owners Senator Argall if you
would stop what you're saying
over again let's see if we get
your cell engaged.
Mr chairman and the stock have
you donated to any other any
prior governors with the New
Mexico I have yes.
Mr chair and Amazon can you
disclose to which governors of
we're.
I I know I'm donated to governor
bill Richardson I donated to
governor Jared Keene
I.
I'm trying to think of how far
back that I've been here
I'm for you these his name who
became president of of
university in New Mexico state
Workers yes there we go thank
you.
Thank you Mr chair and the on
for that answer
I see that you are the
appointee or if you're me to
represent the legislative.
Body on the board how did how
did chair appointment come about
Mr chair to miss Allen
There there the third.
We got it.
Go ahead Sir but.
Thank you Mr chair miss Allen.
How did your appointment come
about which legislative member
brought you eight count table of
the inmate managed care or.
it was speaker Brian Egolf who
called me to see whether I would
be interested in serving again
again I say serve that one here
I think was in two thousand
eleven so I have had the
experience and he knew about my
background in financial services
in building on corporate boards.
And and thank you Mr chair thank
you for that.
That answer getting a message on
my computer my internet
connection is not that great
which is kind of interesting
being in the building but
Thank you Mr chair in this on
holidays for that
Have you donated to any sitting
legislators.
More to stick soon who's in the
legislator
Susan Herrera who's a has been
has served before I've to Brian
Egolf to Peter Wirth to
I think it mostly on that
there's a of support pack
Think of who else
Again my philosophy is I'm in
business and public policy of
them I'm not a lobbyist and I've
never I don't ever come to ask
for things but I just think it's
part of our duty as citizens to
support people that run for
public policy and I've actually
support of both Republicans
Democrats and independents.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for calling for for your answers
this is just for full disclosure
the state investment council as
a very important responsibility
and so it's just our due
diligence of ensuring that we
get all of this out there in the
open so that we we know about
the appointments
Thank you Sir pearl Senator
Ortiz being.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
thank you Mr Ellin's or for.
Actually in this responsibility
again I I'm just curious I guess
my question Mr chairman and may
actually be direction or
appropriate reaches senator
Wirth
and that is I'm trying to
remember the need when we re
organize the state investment
council restructured and.
We had a couple of appointments
and or do we have more than two
I thought Senator is a former
senators Rossen and and Jennings
were were our appointments or
are there others that we may as
well.
Mr chair that is my
understanding but I think what
I'd like to do is yield to Mr
ball we school know exactly what
the make up is and how it's work
I was part of you know
restructuring and I believe
Madam Senator Keller in
Centerville all were part of but
this is once again with the
Legislative Council having these
appointments but I think Mister
mori's could also let us know
who's currently for the
legislative appointments that
are currently there and you know
this is this bill and one of
those slots Mr voice.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator.
As I look at my list which is
helpful to me.
Senator Rawson continues to
serve on the council.
Senator Jennings continues to
serve.
Other legislative appointees.
Our.
I believe is the only other
legislative appointee at this
time so Mr Chairman and Mr
Morrison would miss Allen the
issue replacing somebody whose
term expired is that is that she
comes to the
nominated to serve.
Mr chair Senator that is
correct.
Peter Frank who served for.
At least.
Eleven years maybe twelve.
has turned out.
And.
Miss Allen will be taking that
position.
Thank you so much well thank you
and and by.
Your particularly reading over
your your.
Resume but also the the emails
I've been receiving from people
who know you and work with you
and and and state in the most
glowing terms in a cell in our
I'm just very impressed in the
you're willing to do this and we
are.
How are how much service you're
already provided to the state
and is capable and look forward
to being able to support your
confirmation.
Morning grants in particular
since our earliest very.
Our New Jersey estate Care
commendation are on you as a
nominee for this position so.
Thank you very much thank you
thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator Neville and and by the
way just a so that everybody
knows since you brought it up.
The membership of the state
investment council includes the
governor of by office state
treasurer by office Commission
public lands my office
The CFO of a state institution
of higher education appointed by
the governor with our pricing
consent then the governor
appoints to other people with
our by consent and then there
are four members appointed by
the New Mexico Legislative
Council.
With the by a consent of the
Senate and of those four people
no more than two can be of the
same political party so so that
is that is the compositions
fantastic council of service.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
nominee Kathleen for us stepping
up and trying to do this
I'm not gonna ask you the
questions us to be forthright
because I'm concerned
you said it to your your
credentials are impeccable I
mean there's obviously your your
expertise is impact but I think
what Senator Pirtle just
uncovered was state are a little
bit of partisanship that I
wanted to follow up on you said
you supported women candidates
for higher office did you
support governesses are Martinez
when she rammed no I did that.
and then you said you donated to
governor Richards and
and then he appointed you to the
investment council and that was
a very
correct time in New Mexico
history tell me about your rules
vestment Council during that era
how do you get on by the
governor
there's a lot of concerns about
investment council the political
corruption that happened the
past and so your your campaign
donations are definitely raises
red flags so the end of thanks
for the question and the if you
look at my history I've been
since the age of twenty one
donating to political can can
face again I go back to I grew
up my dad was a I grew up in a
very small town of eight hundred
people my dad was a banker of
the the banker and he was behind
the scenes that worked in
politics in democratic politics
in the state of Missouri and
missed financed here for center
long and Center Simonton and the
governor so I grew up
understanding the intersection
between public policy and really
the hello as a citizen that was
part of the state so I have a
history of getting
the governor Richardson I gave
to in here the appointed be it
was the last year of his term
we're there was a lot of
controversy that was going on
about and investigations going
on at that time and he said he
wanted me to go on because he
felt like I had ethics and would
bring back to the council in
fact one of the things that I
the short time I was on the
council was able to do is to
bring up and ethics a commitment
that we would sign as members of
the state investment council see
movies came on at that time is
about the same time that you
came in the state investment
council and I would say we did
as much as we possibly can to
now we have a thorough
investigation of the allegations
that were going on that also.
to have up to try to raise the
ethics in perspective the
perspective of the community
about the role of the state
investment council
and the reason I left the
council we had a that was the I
was at that time the CEO bets
this financial services
organization made up of the
hundred largest financial
institutions and I was not able
to be in person and that the
hearing the confirmation hearing
because I was doing a keynote at
our annual conference for CEOs
and because I miss that
confirmation that's why governor
Martinez then decided to replace
me with a Republican to sit on
the state investment council but
I think if you look back to
everything that happened in that
period of time you'll see that
only where they're investing the
appropriate investigations of
what happened during the richest
administration and that my role
was very much about bringing
ethics to of the process.
That actually you saw helpful to
grow very relieving this year
to continue and are are quite
frankly donated you said you to
make your first donation of
twenty one.
Yeah I was I was trying to get
gas money at twenty twelve.
Was was five Bucks or.
Twenty one were probably better
money
and so you know you mentioned
that should.
I think you understand my
concern here so you mentioned
that you had given to the
governor Carruthers thirty those
thirty four years ago when he
ran have you ever supported a
Republican for office since then
I have yes.
What about in New Mexico
weather.
Other than current there's no I
I'm trying to be honest you
because again I'm only.
I would hope you try Mr use
would be honest at the start.
The.
I.
I'm looking at probably was when
I was in I lived in the
Washington DC for a time and so
I voted there are of voted in
Missouri
in.
Absolutely you see centered
Danforth John Danforth from
Missouri I supported
Trying to think of who else.
as you can see I'm more.
Yeah I lean Democrat so of have
more candidates
and Richards from Texas.
Across.
I'm sorry Mary Kate
You exactly okay supported heard
Thank you so Senator snow from
for months.
Sorry all right
But anyway the answer is yes.
Thank you Mr chair thank you.
And my my consent then you
mentioned you gave the
Representative Egolf is the one
who nominated you how much
donate to.
I think usually five hundred
dollars I've also there's a pact
that also supports New Mexico
legislators that I've that gives
to all people running in New
Mexico and I've also give money
to emerge which helps support
women running in New Mexico.
Well that's an interesting
donation is there anyone on this
committee then that you donated
to.
Because I know merges very
active in a lot of campaign
since last yes
Senator Wirth and donated to
I might as.
At I am not sure let me
Certainly and may have donated
to.
I think Senator Stewart.
But I'm not positive on that and
again in may have gone to some
of the campaigns I'm also part
of New Mexico women elect which
is again that's a group that has
some more support women that are
running across the United
States.
Mr chair Kathleen Thomas Allen
do any of those groups support
Republican women running for
office we have in the New Mexico
women elect it it it it and not
have to think about who would be
I would say and
well let's go back early on
Susan Collins that we don't
support or anymore.
So.
We can do we need to have a beer
together and talk.
We do Mr chairman Mr chair and a
couple the other members because
I'm findings conversation
incredibly charming.
Again my philosophy is that we
have a obligation as services I
don't do this on behalf of my
business I do it by businesses
cybersecurity risk management
and we're neutral but I I think
it's part of our citizens
responsibility to support
legislators and the public
policy people and I'm passionate
about the I in particular got
about getting more women into
the C. suite on corporate boards
and in
and in public policy because I
think the more diversity that
the board thought leadership
you're going to have there's all
kinds of research behind having
that diversity of thought and
that's what leads to the best
decisions the state institute
actually does a lot of work in
this area of diversity so that's
part of my philosophy I I don't
I'm not a pay to play percent
Jack I don't think I've ever
asked any legislator for any.
Position and as I mentioned
earlier a speaker Egolf came to
me to say would because I've had
the experience my financial
governance process of
perspectives why he felt like it
might be a good person on the
just I see Mr chair was on I.
I am totally are enamored with
you already so I look forward to
sitting down with that here but
I think you can to
My concern is.
Quite frankly I don't care what
your position on abortion or gun
control is if you're gonna be on
investment counsel and you have
the qualifications and obviously
you're you're a I appreciate you
stepping up to do this on your
you have seen to have a true
heart of what you're talking
about
But do you know as my wife is a
C. suite person actually work
for
and I so I agree with you on
that so so I get what you're
saying this is the best leader
of or been around my mother so
Representative in Espanol
Spanish speaker growing up in
Espanola she gets showed up with
a doctorate in special education
and having a career and deaf
education so I get the staff
with a powerful women because I
been my experience of women I
love our what you're just
talking about but I I but
they're also powerful great
women with different user
Republican so I hope you would
consider that in the future to
so my but what I getting to all
these questions is how are you
good at this year representing
us the legislature not not
Representative you got off hi
you senator Wirth you know you
know so my personal feelings for
and even Mimi Stewart who are
actually okay will serve like a
lot safer sex
So I want to know how you're
going to represent us even
though we might have different
views on abortion control things
like that when it comes when
public investments we we all
share the same values so want to
make sure that you
Representative both all
legislators not just the the the
the the once rural power
absolutely in interest fall I
I'm a big believer in.
We're all citizens if we may
have different views on
different subjects but in the
end we're looking for what's
best for the state I have a
fiduciary responsibility the
fiduciary responsibility of the
state investment council has no
policy takes around that it has
what's the right thing to do for
the investments for the state
what's the right thing to do for
the economic growth in the
health of our state so
everything as we look through
that lens and it's very similar
to sitting on corporate boards
most corporate boards
I would say the majority of the
board members do not have the
same maybe political views I I
have a real things but that's
not the issue the issue is
what's the right thing for the
organization well from a
financial or strategy your
ethics point of view in
I Representative if I were to be
offered with this position I
would be representing the
citizens of the state trying to
help with the economics of the
state because we all know we we
have a lot of challenges we have
a lot of challenges and
education level of challenges
this and economic development a
friend of mine who was the head
of the council on
competitiveness in Washington DC
they did a study of New Mexico
as long in California looking
for hot spots for economic
development in the biggest
challenge we have in New Mexico
is we don't have enough people
that have business backgrounds
we don't have enough people to
do investment in you know
whether it's venture capitalists
or a private equity so looking I
was interested in the speaker
before the person before Greg
burns with they're doing with in
the science here it will be huge
opportunity in New Mexico from
the labs and technology transfer
for in addition to the tourism
in I I feel like my fiduciary
responsibility is not just the
investments that we're going to
make the to look at what we can
do to really help the state grow
and be a place we're seeing that
right now New Mexico and in the
influx of people move.
I'm here because because of
COVID people want to live in
smaller more coach culturally
interesting places and you know
it's running up our real estate
markets but I think there's just
gonna bring some real talent
into the state also that will
help us to grow businesses so
that's part of my interest to
the economic development for the
state that means jobs in mean
tax system which helps the state
your of feedback into the state
in having those let us be the
state that everybody wants to
live in we don't want to come
but anyway it's it's the place
to be in the and having real
leadership I think is important
in the state investment council
a you know I've been watching
ever since I was on I really
think the restructuring of it in
the ethics of that and the
operation of it has been really
outstanding so I think we have
something to be proud of but
there's with our state.
I really I really appreciate
those answers anyone the over to
be honest on and look forward to
that your whiskey or wine.
introduce you to my wife Lisa
and I would love the
conversation between the three
of you
a lot of concerns about economic
growth and see what we do
everything in New Mexico to make
as hostiles possible for
businesses and one of my pet
peeves is
Lost almost my my assisted
living New Mexico St sixty
ninety my grandfather was so his
father his father Jose my S.
this was a homes there were lost
almost is currently built on so
he that sins for he was actually
spent two summers and winters in
Espanol
and you know at that lab is been
here for since of the forty some
when it opened up and my
grandfather actually worked in
that lab the security person one
year after that it opened up but
you would never realize the
economic spin off of any of
those laps in New Mexico and you
know I I.
Not being a billionaire is the
goal for anyone but I've always
been shocked that in New Mexico
with that kind of research that
kind of technology would never
have a spin off company that has
created a billion
Bill of people we have with real
money and I mean I'm talking
about the obscene amounts of
money that you see in California
no place with billionaires we
want whenever I want to New
Mexico despite the trillions and
trillions of dollars spent at
Spahn spent on research in Los
Alamos and Sandia and
Representative state would never
had a spin off we never had a
successful spin off and I
believe it's because of create
such a hostile business
environment state so once those
ideas are are developed they
leave the state
and so.
Highly encourage you to be a
leader on that effort that we
were so anti business in the
state we try to Michael mark
manage everything in the state
that you believe this is Ruth
would never have that home run
in New Mexico.
The so get off my soapbox on
that point and we're gonna have
lots of interesting discussions
are looking forward to it we're
gonna have a good a good
conversation four be introducing
my wife Lisa so thank you thank
you Mr thank you Mr Allen and
this guy just encourage you to
take off the partisan hat and
work with on our side of the
aisle to absolutely.
By the way is a Republican is so
you know what.
East covered by starts at home.
What what what donations as your
report or your husband maybe
that.
Okay.
Thank you Mr chair thank miss
out.
Thank you thank you senator
Morris we have Center doing
ended Senator Stewart and
also just by way of
announcements following the vote
on this confirmation in the
committee before we go to bills
there will be a round associate
distanced round up by of that
will participate in and but
anyways Senator doing.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
ms Allen it's it's wonderful to
hear that the someone of your
caliber as is going to be are
serving our state in this
position I'm curious to know
what your thoughts are there's a
proposal the session for a
public bank well that proposal
doesn't look like it's
necessarily moving anywhere this
session I'd be curious to know
what your thoughts are about a
public bank in general fund and
impacts on our investment of
state funds so that I I I again
I don't know all the details are
just giving you a very high
level perspective I think
there's one other state the cell
has a north and South Dakota
still has what having served in
the banking industry it is very
difficult to date to run a good
bank that meets all of the
regulatory requirements whether
they're just regular let
regulatory requirements or just
cybersecurity issues and again
smaller banks are often times
the target of
cyber criminals so the idea of
setting up something that is a
State Bank that could meet all
those regulatory requirements
and to meet the cybersecurity
and security requirements is a
it's it's a huge huge challenge
so I would I think there's one
thing on whether the ideal or
the public policy piece behind
having a public bank there's
another of the actual running of
the bank in the actual running I
think we're finding
is very difficult for small
banks or credit unions just
because they don't have the
resources they have the right
executives in place so again I
would I can't make an opinion
one way or the other on that but
I would say it's a huge
challenge to start a new bank
these days.
Thank you missile.
That's all I have Mister chair.
We're also brought.
Thank you Mr chairman and I want
to also add my thanks to miss
Allen for being willing to step
up I appreciate all my
colleagues questions to you I'm
gonna take it totally different
tact because I'm just
I'm amazed that I've finally met
someone from Hannibal Missouri.
My my daughter lives in goes to
school in Kansas city.
Casey and my partner is from
Missouri so I've I've become
I've become a student of mystery
and I I think it's just amazing
that you were born in the place
where one of my American
literary heroes was Mark Twain
you want to Mark Twain high
school exactly so I have decided
to mark Twain's use them in
Connecticut learn how to make
his special.
of whiskey sour and have of
course as a kid and a teacher
read his books but I just want
you to give us a flavor of what
it was like to be born and
raised in the same places Mark
Twain and.
A little bit later than him.
So I'm I'm so glad you asked
that this amazing you even know
about Hannibal Missouri I
actually was born in H. which
had eight hundred and twenty
people we literally would tell
the number of people if they
died or were born there but my
dad is a said was a banker the
banker the results eight Mike
Baker a lawyer a doctor but he
also of was of founded the
marketing research foundation
with the lawyer in the town and
they became friends with Clara
who is the daughter Mark Twain
who lived in California and
because the birth place of Mark
Twain was in Florida Missouri my
dad worked we use the bank as a
platform to do good for the
community so he and a Bernice
this fact the other to the paper
the lorry in the town we're able
to get the state to build more
Twain Mark into native sea of.
In order.
Working with Clara they got a
lot of the furniture the his
last will and testament a lot of
the first additions I actually
have some of the first additions
to so there's actually Musim
Florida's Jareth that a state
use them that has a lot of the
literature and I know you're for
you are an educator former
educators
has going for suggestions for a
lot of the materials behind his
writing and in fact the my dad
this museum of the State
together my dad's you know
pictures on the wall was being
one of the people that got the
money for it he so that was one
of the things he did this goes
back to seeing how public policy
and business come together the
other my dad was friends with
Clarence cannon if you remember
of cannon office building in in
Washington and he with him he
was had appropriation got the
money to build Mark Twain lake
in they've built the Clarence
cannon dam again very close to
Hannibal and period where I grew
up to create a replication area
which also created economic
development for the year if this
was a primarily a rural area but
so I am immersed in Mark Twain I
have all of the first additions
every grand child I have you
know gets all of the Mark Twain
books with the it's if you go
back to your.
Comments was amazing in the
perception that he had about
society at that time and as you
know some of the books were
banned for a while
to the use of the N. word in it
but it was he was actually very
supportive and played with his
best friends were African
Americans that lives in Florida
Missouri so I I all of this I
grew up with this whole Mark
Twain thank and then the best
story is we had in the town I
grew up we didn't have a mo to
help we had one restaurant and
there was no motel or hotel in
the professor who headed the
American literature department
at Tokyo university to give
universities like Harvard enough
thank you in Japan came in
stated our home because he would
he would he translated Mark
Twain into Japanese the first to
do that so this was in like
nineteen fifty one or fifty two
and he with to all of these men
materials that my father had
gotten from
the more trains daughter so is
really a wonderful experience to
be part of that but I love that
you're you're fascinated with
Mark Twain is made using author.
Well thank you for that that
that was sent that was great and
you know you can go out have a
beer with mark Mars but let's
treat somehow trying to get.
When I visited the Mark Twain
museum in Connecticut I thought
fascinated because he he kind of
started the steam punk us staff
he you know he was an inventor
and of course he lost money in
his inventions but there's a
part of that museum that that
talks about him and his sword
inventions and steam punk coming
out of that so my partner and I
even put together steam punk
costumes anyway says I is going
way beyond.
Well we're into today a very
nice to meet you and thank you
for willing being willing to
step up is a very important
position and I think you're
gonna take it very seriously so
thank you for that don't forget
I want to meet you with mark
Moores and talk more absolutely
will do that thank you Mr
chairman.
So
where I think coming to a point
of of having a motion and moving
to a vote I do want to advise
miss Allen that if you accept
this position that probably
involves this war range of
different kinds with all the
different members of the rules
committee during your term on
the state investment council and
and I will also confess that I'm
that I'm trying to check myself
on objectivity in this vote
because I'm finding myself quite
smitten right now.
Thank you.
Or the plan of the committee
yeah Mr chairman yes.
Ring centering on your phone to
make a couple of comments to
miss out on and
just make sure that that the you
know she trusted look as as much
of the geographical part of the
status you can want to hear and
come to the south eastern part
of the state were the station
giant cash register is and the
northeastern part of the ranch
country and up around the
Farmington and and that so many
times we get folks that are
nominated from the Santa Fe
Albuquerque area and I really
don't do a lot of traveling and
New Mexico is a very diverse
state and it's really good to
see all.
And there's great great people
and not you're really gonna say
just eight year old is.
Is quite historic and and the
and its people and its way of
making a living so when you get
a chance to do that it's not not
a not any time schedule or
anything involved but to get to
know the rest of the folks in
the state thank you.
Senator just to responsible I
have reservations right now from
monument valley because we like
to go up in the Farmington and
that area in the four corners
area and go to many of the
trading post and we also are
going down in two weeks to see
the bus came down the the with
the birds in.
Sapporo but when I was in the
past Selectric board I spent a
lot of time in Los crucis is
Silvercity in the southern part
of the state and I agree with
you that's why I love New
Mexico's we had we're such a
diverse state in the geography
and the you know the from
mountains to desert and I that's
one of the things I love so I
appreciate your you're reminding
me that of how it special we're
hirer I remember when you're on
the board with the wrong or
right governor Richards and
because we had a gentleman and a
true oasis job name bland was
running thank you very well and
not that was why you were put on
there and you did a good job and
made the state investment
council have some integrity
again and Mr moe races much more
usually good is a is a good
director there and has done a
good job so it sure you know
which it's it's something that's
so important for New Mexico to
get its investments done
correctly and that's been done
so far and I I applaud Mr
Maurice for doing a good job
he's doing and also senator
Rawson that put him on there
when I was the leader and I hope
he stays on there there's not
very many people in the state
that have the depth of Business
knowledge that senator Rawson
has.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you very much Senator
Ingle what is part of the
committee Senator Stewart
do passed Mr Chairman.
well on a depressed motion from
Senator Stewart with a second
from Senator do it.
and saying nobody else are
seeking recognition for the
share this time Miss Vigil if
you'll please call the roll.
Senator Baca.
Senator Moores.
Senator o'neill yes.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes.
Senator Pirtle.
Senator Stewart yes Senator
Pirtle would you like to vote.
But no.
What was no we will also Baca
and more is back on the line
Senator Baca.
Know that.
And yes yes Senator acted.
And senator McConnell was in no
Senator Stewart.
Yes.
And senator Wirth yes Senator
Ingle yes.
Senator do it yes in center I'm.
Yes ma'am what is a vote.
Mr chair at eight two eight two
two.
We're well on eight two two
about our ms Allen
congratulations you have a do
pass recommendation from this
committee and we will be
considering your nomination on
the floor today thank you very
much I'm honored thank you.
Thank you so much again for the
service as an advance for all
the time that you're gonna be
spending with the various
members of the rules.
So what I'll make a quick
announcement as to the bills
that will be considering today
we're going to go in reverse
order that they're on the agenda
we're gonna start with Senate
memorial seven.
Proceed to set about three fifty
four when we get to Senate bill
four oh nine some of the stuff
time today to do that that will
be a discussion and and and and
consultation with sponsors
center renewable and senator
Wirth that will be a discussion
only today will not be taking a
vote on that bill but this is
the first part of the bill of
all of a longer term building
blocks of a project of so that
we can we can talk about that so
so with that Senator o'neill if
you would please proceed on
Senate memorial seven.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for the reverse order that
sometimes it's good to do the
reverse that's pretty cool no
but anyway Hey everybody can
read on this committee Senator
Morial seven basically looks at
the potential impact of closing
private prisons in our state now
I'm very sensitive to my
colleague got Senator per roll
concerns about memorials that
are like predetermined in their
outcome I I strongly feel this
isn't I mean this basically is a
good knowledge in that private
prisons are quite a discussion
these days they haven't really
lived up to the promise of what
they have promised you know what
they assured lawmakers they
would due to years ago decades
ago but the whole point of this
memorial is to consider the
impact of closer on these
communities and and I really
applaud Holly Velasquez Duffy
who really is the one who did
the work on this she cannot
because she's an analyst and
Senate ad she can't no.
Sent today and go for dance
which is the one that really
drove this and I just thank you
know I know there's a bill in
the house this much more far
reaching at the bill rather than
a memorial and it and I don't
think it really does is address
the impact the financial impact
on communities such as requests
for Hobbs wherever if if this
were to take place so I I really
believe that just like what we
did with the ETA you know what
we need to talk about the impact
of shutting the major industry
in a given area or town so
having said that are I stand for
questions and I I think there's
people that want to weigh in on
this from the public.
Well Mister Roberts do we have
people who signed up for public
comment on this issue.
Our test.
but one of yes please.
And while and also those of you
who are center for public
comment when you get admitted
into the room please turn off
the audio of the webcast
so that you're listening to the
audio of the zoom there's about
a twenty seven second delay and
this way you will not be are you
will you'll you'll actually know
when we ask you to.
Go ahead of time and
so that let us begin with Rikki
Lee Chavez.
And
I if you have good enough
internet to activate your camera
when you speak with appreciate
that.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee Rikki Lee Chavez
on behalf of the New Mexico
criminal defense lawyers
association I apologize I am in
my vehicle and unable to turn my
camera on we wanted to voice our
support percent memorials that
they'd be encouraging the
committee to get a state and
appreciate the dedication
Senator oatmeal to this because
thank you for your time Mr
chairman members of the
committee.
Thank you very much mistrust our
next Julie are creating.
Mr chairman members of the
committee Julianna Koob with the
ACLU of New Mexico we also stand
in strong support and and thank
you for Senator o'neill for
being so thoughtful with this.
Thank you very much Mr Roberts
to everybody else.
Now we have Representative help
Goldman who is having some
trouble joining and there we go.
That number one more act that.
Very well.
Let's wait until her audio
connects and miss golden please
proceed.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Rick hell Goldman and I'm
here to speak in support of
Senate memorial seven.
Among the many issues are on
private prisons in New Mexico I
am personally concerned for the
individuals who have been
detained for ice contracts
individuals who have come to
this country seeking a better
life for themselves and their
families and who are now subject
to physical abuse poor living
conditions and exposure to the
highly contagious Corona virus.
Because companies like geo group
CoreCivic and NTC are run for
profit they have become
associated with worse conditions
for detainees in state run
facilities.
At the same time I understand
that many communities are
reluctant to remove any
profitable or semi profitable
industry from their counties the
debate because the economic
needs of those areas assessed at
the immediate employment.
In the long grants estancia
shopper all and Hobbs counties
twenty the nearly fifty percent
of those populations live in
poverty rates have few
employment opportunities other
than working in correctional
facilities.
The reality is that these issues
are systemic and interconnected.
By studying abroad impacts of
closing private prisons and how
to mitigate the economic
consequences of these closures
we can thoughtfully and power
and support both The New Mexican
residents employed by private
prisons and the individuals held
within them please supports
animal world seven as part of a
better future for all New
Mexicans thank you.
Thank you very much and Mr
Edwards.
Yes thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee for
granting me the opportunity to
speak to you today in support of
some of the more L. seven.
Our rural communities in New
Mexico need diversified
economies to enter and thrive
in dependency on any single
industry or company makes these
economies in the communities
they support quite fragile I
also recognize the need for any
efforts to move from private
cars for carceral facilities and
contracts to take into
consideration both the immediate
and long term impacts to the
people of these communities
where the facilities operate.
as a former Air Force captain
and security forces I work with
the National Guard reserve
airman during my career his
primary career within
corrections they were proud of
their careers in corrections and
committed to the small town and
rural life in the communities
where they worked one reason
many were able to continue to
live in these communities it's
the jobs pay well legislative
budget that dependent upon they
didn't have any other employment
possibilities in those
communities that could have
supported their families and
without those jobs they would
that they would have had to
leave those communities.
These communities deserve stable
resilient economies allow for
people who live in them to be
able to support themselves and
their families without being
dependent on any single source
of jobs.
This legislation respects this
need and committee interim
committee to study and prepare
appropriate policy
recommendations in consultation
collaboration with these
communities to prepare for the
possibility of the source of
jobs to be impacted.
It allows planning actually I
want to correct that it does not
discuss a collaboration I
apologize for that it allows
planning how to respond in ways
that allow our amazing and
important role communities and
neighbors to force please
support senator Morris up.
Thank you very much I miss
Roberts we have anybody else.
Mr chair members of the
committee there's no one else
thank you very much appreciate
that miss Roberts we now go to
questions and comments from
committee and as we do
Senator o'neill I do notes of
the paragraph on page two lines
eleven through fifteen what
effect you raise part of the
problem with closing private
prisons and and and so in your
statement about trying to have a
balanced memorial in fact some
of those issues I the middle
part of the page but are we
going out to Senator do it and
then Senator Wirth certainly.
Thank you Mr chairman in full
disclosure I am the Senate
sponsor of the house bill that
senator Neil met and but I have
to say I I strongly support this
memorial because you're
absolutely right we have to take
into consideration the economic
impact on those communities
having handled cases against
private prisons in the past our.
A problem that that I I saw
continually was that there were
and and and seen really up
close.
What a bad deal private prisons
are for New Mexico and how
poorly both of the inmates and
the employees are treated at
these facilities and I would
have situations come up where
they're either employees or poor
past employees who really wanted
to to talk about some of the bad
stuff that they've seen and they
were absolutely terrified to do
so because they knew that they
were going to be blacklisted and
not be able to get a decent job
in their own community or that
their families would be
blacklisted if they did so I had
in one case a woman who was only
willing to talk to me off the
record because she although she
had left that community her
family was still there and she
was worried about repercussions
on on them and their because the
entire family was employed I buy
one of these facilities
telling me how every day driving
to work she would have to pull
over to vomit on her way to work
because she was so distressed
about what she was about to go
into and which was about to to
have to participate at
so we should not there when
we're talking about someone's
liberty there should never be a
profit motive involved I can
absolutely support getting rid
of of private prisons in New
Mexico from everything for for
humanitarian reasons to it's
just a bad economic deal for our
state of but you're absolutely
right many of these communities
are completely dependent on
these facilities are for the
vast majority of their
employment and and it needs to
be a transition that takes that
into consideration and doesn't
leave those folks hanging who
are honestly already being
treated very very poorly by the
facility is
and and we should not compound
the harm done to them by not
making sure but but by not
leaving those communities
hanging in the process of this
transition so thank you senator
o'neill for bringing us and I
look forward to supporting at.
Thank you senator thanks for
supporting first sponsoring that
other bills I mean the to kind
of go together in my opinion so
thank you.
Senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Senator o'neill
I also have.
Kind of follow this issue in my
seventeen years in the
legislature and serving on the
courts corrections and actually
Cherry at one point had toured
through these various facilities
across the state and I do think
there I've always had just a
fundamental philosophical
disagreement with privatization
of what I think is an essential
government function on
incarceration.
Having said that
I appreciate your
acknowledgement of the need for
balance and and a look at the
transition I would point out
that the Clayton facility I was
here when that was.
Built on it was a partnership
with the local community and as
I understand it now the state is
running that facility and there
was a transition there and I do
think the state needs to
seriously look at transitioning
into taking these.
Existing private prisons and
making a state facilities that's
one way you keep the keep the.
At the prison in the local area
and the big differences I think
you have all the protections
that come when it's a state
facility and much better working
environment as senator doing
pointed out
and I just think it's something
that we need to do what's
exciting is that the prison
population is on the direct
downswing and that's what
happens when you do criminal
justice reform and you focus on
rehabilitating folks instead of
just locking them up and we in
the legislature with the
leadership of governor Lujan
Grisham the the decisions we
make on criminal justice reform
have a direct impact on the
number of incarcerated
individuals in the state and
when those numbers go down we
find ourselves in a situation
where we have contracts for
private prisons that were stuck
in what is a good problem to
have and I've always said you
know they're closing prisons in
taxes.
Because they realize you save
money at the state level and so
as the populations go down it
gives us the ability to have
resources going towards
transition instead of
incarceration and I think that
is a really good direction to be
going and something we should
and I know Center o'neill you've
been part of those discussions
and you worked on that so so
really this is there's a huge
opportunity here and I do think
and I think we also innocent
Center doing I appreciate you
working on the legislation
because I think we're moving in
a direction where I hope we can
get to something that that says
a couple things one we're not
going to do any more new private
prisons number one and number
two how do we put in place the
transition and that's what
you're memorial will do Senator
o'neill and so I I really
support this and I think all the
folks have been working on this
and I feel like we're headed in
a very good direction on this
issue and this memorial will get
the folks at the table so we can
come back I would hold in a
thirty day session with a bill
on the call that actually gives
us a direction to move forward
so thank you senator Neal.
Thanks Senator.
Very much Senator Wirth
what's the committee.
Do pass.
Well do passport from senator
Wirth with the second from
Senator Duhigg.
Saying what.
Our agency we don't if you'd
please call the roll.
Senator Moores no no no.
Senator o'neill yes.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator Pirtle.
Senator Stewart.
Senator Wirth yes.
Senator Ingle.
Senator Ingle.
Senator.
Yes.
And Senator Ivy Soto restaurant
about center Ingle again he
unmuted and then.
We needed to.
Senator Ingle lying there.
We have a topical problems if he
wants to add a vote.
After work on this memorial if
is due to technical issues.
No objection we will allow him
to do that I will vote yes.
And Miss Vigil what is about Mr
chair I could to.
well sort of five to two up vote
Senator o'neill congratulations
you have just passed
recommendation from the Senate
rules committee thank you Mr
chair members.
But we now move to a set of
bills three fifty four which is
up from Senator law office she
is currently presenting in
another committee and
Actually let me just check it
real quick before we start this
bill senator Pete was prepared
to start the bill Senator Wirth
what time we started on the
floor was eleven or eleven
thirty AM Mr chair select a
clock a lot of clock okay
actually tie would given the
time right now we're gonna roll
both of these over to the next
the next meeting let me go ahead
and give us senator Neville and
senator Wirth an opportunity to
on separate to the introduction
on Senate bill four oh nine and
then we can we can see it down
the line if if we have an
opportunity to come back for for
for the discussion on at all it
did Representative on how long
you should take we might
actually take a couple of words
a public comment Senator some
people been waiting patiently.
So Senator nouvelle if you'd
like to yes Senator Wirth thank
you Mr chair my coming through
clear enough you are thank you
very good the Mr chairman you
know we passed constitutional
amendment senator Wirth myself
Senator pain or co sponsors on
the on the bills Google sessions
back that passed to the pastor
for this.
Readily in the in the general
public whenever they voted on
it.
We will have a totally new
concept in the PRC in the future
it takes a couple years for this
goes into effect we will have an
appointed body that is batted
through a committee that is
partially pointed by the
legislature the governor has a
couple slides in a couple of
positions that exist that
legislation is also pastor in
our last session last regular
session so we are embarking on a
new program and the design of
the new PRC is totally different
than the old PRC with the hope
that we get the politics out of
the system and to a great degree
never get it all out of SLO's
but will get most of it out we
think we help.
We hope that we have a committee
of very professional people and
they will be
charged with things like go
right setting and the monopoly
control in those kind of things
and their charges of will be
totally different than the
current PRC which is much
broader we have over time
because of various issues we've
moved insurance out of the PRC
we move corporations out of the
PRC and we want to get it down
to a point where it is dealing
with monopoly utilities and rate
setting and those kind of things
a very specialized function and
the to do that we have some
leftovers in the PRC that we
feel like we need to come out to
make it compatible with the
goals we set whenever we simply
need PRC up one of those in this
bill was to move the pipelines.
Division.
Which regulates safety and those
kind of things is it is not
enough and typically these are
not monopolies to prove they're
not right Hey your issues and
they don't fit the scheme of
what we're trying to do with PRC
and what their new charge will
be so we're we're proposes bill
to move one of those divisions
out the the pipeline
safety and so forth that
division out there was not never
any intent to set up a new
regulation on oil and gas are
new environmental controls and
that is to move the body the
people who were over in the
current PRC take their desk and
moved across the street to the
new location under OCD that's
all it was a there's even an
amendment try to clarify that we
won't get into that of course
but we wanted to make sure that
everybody understands this is
not anything that is attempting
to do any environmental issues
or any oil and gas regulatory
issues we want to take the same
people move across the road
where the new location will be
and have them operated in the
function of how now defer to my
co sponsor senator Wirth his
comments.
Your.
Thank you Mr chairman I
appreciate I think senator bills
giving you the the flavor you
know we the constitution now has
the PRC constitutionally
required to deal with with
utilities and I think senator
Neville has kind of mentioned
where the focus is going to be
the legislature by statute needs
to look at these other functions
and determine where they work
fast and and that's what needs
to happen and senator bill and I
were talking about this bill is
as a step towards doing that but
I I appreciate you know you Mr
chair I think you've got input
from both sides.
And and again there's a lot of
of you know respected Center
renewable have goals for each
other but also for the for
issued for members that are
interested in this in this
legislation on both sides and.
This probably is that what we're
doing right here is one piece
but it's not ready to go and so
I think the what what what we
need to do and we have until
twenty twenty three that's the
key that's the key date when the
new commission goes and so one
of the things I just want to
send the signal you know the
constitutional amendment was put
together with a with a broad
group of stakeholders that
participate in front of the PRC
on all sides and I just thank in
this upcoming interim we need to
we don't need a memorial to do
this I think Seneal and I can
kind of help put this together
but get this group to work
together to come up with exactly
what this would look like and
then during the thirty day
session I do think we should
come back and this may be one of
the areas but there may be a
number of others as senator
Neville mentioned that we would
put in statute as we make this
transition so this was really
intended to kind of start the
discussion about what we need to
do and I'll leave it at that
thank you Mr chair.
Well I can I can assure of
Senator Wirth the senator
Neville extra both of you you've
got people's attention.
Are the
so let me go to a public comment
real quick see if we can we can
just get a one or two minutes
from a couple different people
and if we can I've I've admitted
that both committee but Camilla
of Bill men and in the of the.
Into the room so that they can
find their comment also J.
someone try out the director of
the PRC.
Is is also in the room right now
also let's let's start with the
with the with with their and
them and see if we can have a
water for the people of before
we come to the so the time we
need to go to the floor so with
that let me start with this to
him and then go to is very and
just up up up.
The minutes of input that might
help guide us as we continue to
to consider that's what these
issues over the next year so.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee I am not properly
dressed up because of home
schooling this morning apologies
for that
I represent the Sierra Club in
our thirty five thousand members
and supporters and I think we
are so very much still in the
analysis mode here as one of the
sponsors said we'd like to
understand in more detail if
there is any environmental
compliance impact if the
proposed transfer of pipelines
is the is the full group with
all of the staff involved and if
there would be any budget
impacts to EMNRD we've heard a
really strong ask from these
agencies to fully fund them to
their executive levels and
though I understand that there
may be federal funds involved
here I think looking at all of
those factors would certainly
and be very helpful given and
pipeline impacts generally and
specifically so I think having
more space for conversation
would be helpful.
Thank you for the opportunity
thank you very much this very.
Good morning chairman Ivy Soto
members of the rules committee
my name is Amy therapy and I'm
the registered lobbyists for the
New Mexico oil and gas
association mode understands the
legislation before you today is
furthering the constitutional
amendment as senators renewable
and worth shared within the
pipeline safety division from
the PRC to the SCG entails much
more than simply moving staff
and office furniture to that
bureau with and and Mr thanks to
that generosity of the sponsors
and local members impacted by
this legislation have began
conversations and there is a
sincere desire by both the
Sanchez state and stakeholders
to work with the best transition
of this responsibility from the
PRC to the executive Mr chairman
and members of the community a
couple of challenges are members
see first the entirely new and
broad grant of jurisdiction to
the OCD in section eleven of the
bill section eleven would grant
OCD and bounded authority to
regulate pipelines and regulate
the transportation of crude oil
natural gas and other products
by the by line our conversation
with the sponsor has indicated
that this is not the intent of
the bill and this language can
and must be struck without
defeating the stated purpose of
the bill while the PRC is likely
best position to provide
testimony on the functional
matters these overarching
concerns included potential risk
to the pipeline safety funding
that comes from the federal
government the bill creates a
dual dual jurisdiction and the
bill gives the OCD damage
prevention jurisdiction over
owner operators and telecom
cable water sewer and electric
underground facilities all of
these facilities are subject to
the damage prevention statute
and have never been compliment
it contemplated as being under
the jurisdiction of it.
The state's oil and gas
regulator your mother sees real
potential for unintended
consequences if these
authorities and functions are
bluntly transferred without the
engagement of stakeholders with
that we look forward to
continuing to work with the
sponsors and other stakeholders
to develop the best
implementation policy for the
state.
Thank you very much R. and it
it actually sounds like up both
circle Avenue motor kind of
aligned in terms of yeah we see
where you're going but we kind
of want to have a further
conversation about to make sure
it gets done right which I think
is exactly the conversation
where we should be in terms of
the stakeholders and and taking
our time on this but but but
making sure people know this
conversation that needs to
happen as we move forward as I
determined that section eleven
referral was a that's the focus
of the amendment that you have
in your file to take that
particular section out we were
just strictly trying to move
warm bodies across the street to
another location so that it was
under a more appropriate
leadership which may or may not
be your action accurate but
that's what we set out of school
thank you.
No I appreciate that very much
Senator develop and and center
for the Nobel also you know
you both were involved in a
constitutional amendment to to
change the nature of our PRC and
then what the public oftentimes
doesn't realize is all the work
that comes after that to
finalize the details of of what
the voters have approved and so
also very much to both of you
thank you for your continued
work on this issue it is it is
truly an essential part of of
making government work actively
of for the people both in terms
of industry as well as the
environment and and other states
stable so up with that actually
we are at the time that we're
supposed to be done on the floor
and so we're going to thank you
a Sanchez and witnesses offer
The presentation today we're
going to go ahead and and recess
this meeting at this time so
that we don't delayed the start
of the floor and we will pick up
them with of you'll have Senate
bill three fifty four on the
