And and so and I'll do it either
way we don't have to present
anything they acted as I can get
the the the minutes to the
secretary and hi we want to
handle madam chair.
on that part.
The miniature too long to
verbally.
Talk to you about a.
All right thank you madam chair
I'm sorry I guess in lieu of
tying if we have time to present
the bill
and then for New okay and then
we can relate over at that time
and help get all the amendments
to the committee and then the
first thing on.
Thursday but those amendments
and hopefully getting enough
discussion today that
It'll shorten your presentation
on Thursday Senator graphics.
but the are you aware of what's
going on R. with three eighty
five.
Senator Woods bill are are you
speaking to to me Senator yes
yes Senator great being senior
member I just Y. animation I am
up you know I actually had to
actually had dinner with Senator
Woods last night okay.
And the he made that that that's
why you couldn't get his
amendments in.
You know he's a man that was
already and I think it was
because of there was a chair of
another Canadian who is messing
around with Senator Woods
amendment I will mention Senator
Shendo by name but okay all
right.
No
you know I'm happy to do there's
there's a lot of people I think
you have an interest in the bill
you know some four chamber
against it and they've all
anticipate some of it being
talked about today so I I think
it probably would be a good idea
for the Senator centers to.
Resent of Bill and just lay out
where it stands now and it if
they want you know to highlight
we're we're we're they're
considered amendments that seems
like a reasonable side and that
way the public can at least hear
what what we're considering.
Okay.
Okay with that okay with that
and not so we'll see how we do
it time Senator Woods what works
for me I'll stand by thank you
all right thank you.
I'm.
Ten million nine of six okay I
think we are Rebecca can you
call the roll.
Senator Senator bill after she
called to really can take the
chair.
Yes.
Here Senator McKenna.
Senator Sanchez.
Here.
Senator Shendo.
Senator had a meal here Senator
Pinto.
All members of press.
Very good thank you Rebecca I
want to take over for a while
because Senator Pinto does have
a bill that she'll be presenting
we're gonna start off with
Senate bill three ninety nine hi
Julie public safety complex
Senator Padilla.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee and
senator.
Senate bill three ninety nine
with emergency clause to go to
have to public safety complex.
Is a bill that appropriates five
point nine six million from the
general fund to the department
of finance to DFA for fiscal
year twenty to to plan construct
and equip a public safety
complex and at the chart in the
tow Hatchie chapter of the
Navajo Nation in McKinley county
however this
it's not just gonna be solely
used in that community it's more
regional with other chapters in
the area.
The planning and construction
would include right of way
easements archaeological
environmental studies abatement
and demolition any unexpended on
income balance that would be
revert back to the general fund.
And this is really and response
it has been in the works for at
least two years with the former
um president before and then the
new chapter president now
chapter president sending more
who's also on the line and we
have several people that are
here today to speak on behalf of
this bill so I will let them
have their time here and you'll
tell him Rebecca.
So you don't have an expert
witness center will go to public
comment just I know I have a
couple people that are there I
have the chapter president and
now my Cologne of the vice
president this online I should
be I think Rebecca has the list
thanks very good Representative
you can call on the president.
Yes madam chair we have person
hello no who was submitted as
your expert witness Mr home on
are you connected.
It looks like he still trying to
connect with the next needs.
As.
I can see the names there
Well I can only see the phone
numbers.
Madam chair this is funny more.
Madam chair okay.
Okay there is.
We can hear you.
Expert witness please go ahead.
More on without.
Thank you chapter.
I'm the newly elected chapter.
Absolutely Mr my Cologne
but it is also on the line and
then Good Morning legislators
and other officials that that
may be on the call let me give
you just a of
overview of where we're at with
this project.
Right now.
We have a meeting with the
former project manager from
twenty aerospace you know
over and at their casino they
have the.
Thank you complex that was built
about two years ago and last
year we had a chance to tour the
facility over there and we had a
chance to meet with merry west
was a project manager and we
have a meeting set up with her
on Thursday we're going to a
site review here in Tallahassee
and she also informed us that
the the the plans and design for
the twenty eros facility belongs
to the Navajo Nation so we're
going to start talking about the
establish a dialogue with
whomever we have to talk to see
if we can get a hold of those
plans and design and discuss
doing a
A design that fits our
community.
And so what we're gonna start
talking about that this coming
Thursday and also the the the
second thing that we're working
on is the basement and
demolishing of the existing
facilities the detention center.
And believe work that's going to
be to the cost of around a
hundred thousand dollars and we
did go out for bids last year we
do have a
a contractor or vendor that that
has
Award that bid and so we're just
going to continue to to move
along with this project.
So this business so if you will
house our police fire and
emergency medical teams for our
area and it was mentioned
earlier by the chair person
Senator Pinto that this is going
to cover district fourteen which
is made up of five chapters in
our area Mexican springs twin
lakes Committee canyon to
hatchery in mass Katie.
So that some.
I'd like to go ahead and just
send it on an existing page on
land four six acres and has
access to all the utilities
electric gas water and waste
water but the first thing we
need to do is demolished
existing facilities.
Thank you very much.
We can then go to the next as
expert witness.
I see that delegate Alona
joining us.
He was the first person we call
on.
Go ahead Mr homeowner with your
remarks.
good morning committee members
out.
Our senators.
Thank you very much for having
us today and our Senator Pinto
thank you very much for
sponsoring this bill we sure
appreciate your your
Representation here you have it
the actor has to be a safety
complex you're going to be
Three parts of your contacts
will be there to house the fire
station.
And then we also we're doing
that you will be a bigger
facility where that you need to
also be wholesaler they're
they're running of the place
right now to
our our how do you shop there
was EMTs so the space will be
dedicated for fire station EMTs
and also in a small out.
would you call that is online
for us substation.
R. and the substation there are
in my dream I hope that we make
I get the of the.
Understanding of agreement with
the city and the state because
our our I want to make this
substation available for the for
the also the county sheriff's
department as well as the state
police are and as you know how
it for ninety one oil and
highway there's a ninety
thousand vehicles a month after
that.
And so we need that are larger
please present are and so we we
had substation there along with
our fire station that would
being bring your president of
the police force to the
committee which would make you
know you just it just makes
everything a lot more state for
the committee members of the
court out there that want to do
bad things.
I have second thoughts about
doing those things so
that's why we want to include a
substation years ago that work
group from station and when it
was first resigned first created
and then it was changed to where
you are
We have center art center for
juveniles.
And then then that would be only
got all of the could we
remodeled anymore so they just
shut it all down.
And then several years ago I I
started work with community
working with Julie Donnie and
This was one of the things that
we wanted to get started here
for our community to our
build a new fire station and
that in I believe it was twenty
nine we have several fires and
they're not shooting area.
And there are some a couple and
to hide here I want to try out
here and one out towards
how unique you are past your
chairman and so.
We we had fires out there not
you know we're getting our fire
stations are about he gave me
chairs nauseating our is about
co chair forty five miles maybe
what we had to call the fire
station from law.
On the three out of four ninety
one.
Two six four intersection there
where the now the fire station
there that right handers.
And so that's the closest one to
us are there other fire station
at it's a small fire station
which is located in New Mexico.
And that's another that's also
twenty five thirty miles away
from us
and so that the fire station
with service opportunities right
there with and
Our top district fourteen as far
up as to
should spring are also out
towards standing rock which is
about twenty miles west of west.
thank you Terry.
So this is a project and we we
sure would like your support to
help us get started with this I
had it all set up last year to
deter demolition.
and I got close and did
everything already for.
And then now of the pandemic
came.
And the money that we have
allocated so that came from the
state and our all that money
went back to state because the
pandemic.
So I wouldn't be able to get
that started hopefully this year
I want try to get going
get this project started that
as the object Department had to
mention very workshop project
coordinator.
She she will be here tomorrow to
take a look at the land thank
you if there's anything else
that we need to do are you are
completed construction
in an ideal location right next
to our our how we order you want
I would rather have it in this
year here they want to put it
up.
Members want to try to put it up
there and
the Chester community on top the
hero but we there will be no
well visibility from there if we
do and so I want to really there
are tracking for the police
force this makes everything a
lot better for all the committee
membership feel safer.
R. eight.
But I I just this is our project
that we want to get started and
we thank you all for listening
to our appreciate your support
and moving forward with this
project thank you thank you so
much.
In terms of the application
thank you thank you so much
Senator Pinto do you have any
more expert witnesses at Rebecca
can you see that is on the line.
this is Julie Dhoni former
president thank you doctor.
Thank you yes thank you.
Go ahead Julie.
thank you madam president
President and Senator Pinto and
members of the
the the honorable senator
senators are in in on the line
thank you for letting me speak
today on the public safety I
know this and a long time
project for Tupac to chapter and
of course you know we have
a potential of
Economic Development in New
Mexico how to area with that you
know in money you know they have
to be police protection and also
a fire fire station and of
course EMS
right now the EMS
emergency medical team R. and
that is located in a small
building located next to the
clinic tried to clinic so
they're building is very old and
eight we we've been hearing that
and that building belongs to I.
H. S. so that building might be
demolish are are taken away
pretty soon so we do have a one
clinic there to add you plan it
and it's that inpatient
outpatient clinic and also we
have school we had to Gallup
McKinley county school the high
school the middle school and the
elementary and then we also have
judge guy community school there
so and then we have the churches
we have about seven churches in
Taiji area we have a head start
a senior center and also the
chapter the chapter house and
I believe that you know this
this complex will really serve
our our community as well as our
surrounding communities and they
can go as far as can you run I
think because right now from.
Point is about maybe fifty to
fifty five miles and when you
call a police.
It takes about may be one our
and sometimes they don't even
come so we really need police
president you know in our in our
community as well as throughout
the the our neighboring
communities because of the heavy
traffic on four ninety one and
So with that
really
glad that Senator Pinto has a
big interest in this and thank
you very much and also
the we have a proposal are ready
to demolish and do that basement
because they they're right now
the building is old and I think
the foundation is not good so we
couldn't review that building so
right now
we want to do that they met and
also
and demolish and those those
those things had already been
done by people that are in that
business of doing the at the end
of find what is that was in
their life expected and lead and
so on so
We really would like to have a
safety complex there because of
that and the traffic to alarm
for ninety one catches up for
lane highway so right now you
know we had that traffic and you
know we need to have believed
record do at least
the troll the community as well
as the school's own.
Both the through their even
though it's more and the lights
are for flashing for school
buses and they don't Pete the
truckers this bill by in in all
in our community so and then the
fire department that that the
closest one we have is any
update and that's about maybe
the twenty to thirty minute
of our area and we had a fire
there one time and even though
there was a fire.
That should guide Committee
school they couldn't definitely
there area so
so we just had to fight that
fire ourselves you know with our
employees that were at the
chapter house so with that in
mind I hope this I really really
strongly I hope that you know we
get there's some money for the
complex I know that twin Errol
fifty complex is is quite large
and all right now we want to do
a FY I think the media with more
wet who the project manager for
for that complex and we want to
introduce make it smaller
complex maybe
what we need to meet with her so
we can downsize that design that
was done for us when Errol so I
don't know if you have any
questions thank you for letting
me speak
this is all about eight thank
you.
Thank you Julie.
The other expert witnesses yes.
I Mr chair members of the
committee I don't live there
anymore expert witnesses we do
have a number of people for
public comment though.
Very good no opposition.
No opposition with indicated to
the bell.
In the port.
We have to take a bounty on it
at with the Navajo Nation office
that the president and vice
president.
Good morning chairman Hotmail
Madam chair Pinto members of the
committee honorable delegate
alone in a.
I am a taken some the honest
registered lobbyist for the
office of the president and vice
president of the Navajo Nation
who stands in strong support of
Senate bill three ninety nine.
I emailed a letter of support
from president now as and vice
president visor to the committee
chair the members.
For all the reasons stated
Navajo Nation office of the
president and vice president
strongly support Senate bill
three ninety nine.
the project would of course
include the police department
safety complex fire department
and emergency medical service
facility.
Again we ask you for your
support for Senate bill three
ninety nine and I want to thank
Senator Pinto for sponsoring the
legislation thank you.
Thank you so much if we can go
to our next.
Mr chair members of the
committee next we have I'll bet
that Billy.
Good morning this is Elvis
Mitchell eight.
The legislative district
assistant for delegate now hello
Anna and I'd like to make a few
comments on the on the on this
bill SB three ninety nine I want
to say thank you of committee
members madam chair
Senator Pinto of I'd like to
just say real briefly that we do
ask for your support and your
your favor and vote on this SB
three ninety nine for public
safety complex.
And I do appreciate all those
that or involved with this
project or district fourteen we
do have for other community
chapters that are in full
support for this project and we
we do believe that this can go
forward of this project is ready
for for it for its purpose and
what is going to serve our
community for the safety and
public emergency fire etcetera
so we are advocate and lobby as
a team here which you had you
chapter and I'd like to say
thank you to all committee
members including the office of
the president vice president
thank you for being online
supporting this project and
thank you again and we
appreciate again for your
support and vote.
You Mr bit silly make that if we
can go to the next.
At Mr chair members of the
committee next we have.
More than manually to the near.
Large can go ahead.
Hello.
We can hear you now let them go
ahead you have two minutes.
It was that was my only goal
senior.
Currently it is not a members of
visual anymore but I've been in
the past and I've worked on the
The land use planning committee
we're this originated the
concept through strategic
planning.
And influx of of traffic after
for ninety one became a four
lane highway.
We live on the freeway I say and
I don't need and want to raise
and I would participate in this
of chapter portion for almost
ten years I know about this
project and that they needed
project that needs to be done.
More part of McKinley County
does not have a fire station as
all of the places as mentioned
by my officials we're doing a
good job.
Currently as I'm listening we do
we support on the safety complex
to address the like I said the
influx of traffic at the four
nine one was completed.
And the outlying community in
the northern portion of McKinley
County need to fire response
fire and rescue.
Our police presence both as
mentioned.
State County Navajo Nation will
serve serve the northern portion
of can the county and for the
North and everybody that as well
the is on point on this project
on this a community member grew
up here and I'm supposed to have
twenty pack and.
The the establishment of a state
the complex as planned and of
the pushed forward by to have to
community officials yes.
Thank you maybe.
Mr chairman members of the
committee.
Next we have.
Lara Manuelito.
Yeah it.
Good morning everybody my name
is virus manually Mexico good
morning madam chair members of
the Senate thank you so much for
being able to hear me today and
everybody all the community
members and.
Honorable tell your homeowners
and.
Previous officials.
I just wanted to express my
great appreciation and everybody
support us for this.
Coming together to be able to
get this taken care of getting
this done because that was.
A long time working on this
It worked on it last year for
quite some time pushing it
through and in all the districts
and what have you through so I'm
really really happy to see us at
this point four or Senator Pinto
is actually pushing for this to
be you know taken care of
especially with the amount that
being asked for it's not easy
task so I thank you so much
Senator Pinto.
But I think everything pretty
much has been said you know what
I would say so thank you very
much and I just hope you know we
get full support in this through
and see it through so that we
can have this safety complex for
our communities not just one
community but then you know all
the communities involved so
thank you get a hacked and have
a good day and be safe.
You so much for your comments.
Mr chair members of the
committee next we have the Jean
Crawford current secretary and
treasurer of the hockey chapter.
And if you would like to be.
Mr chair members of the
committee.
At.
Do you know you are muted now
yes good morning.
This is Jean Crawford and the
secretary treasurer for two had
to help me to do a chapter.
I just want to thank everyone.
For your support and thank
everyone said this complex is
something that is truly needed
and our community Intel had she.
And I just want to say thank you
Senator Pinto.
supporting this and everyone
else who is involved.
So thank you very much.
Chair members of the committee.
Next we had Maria Allison king
the at the at the hockey
chapter.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my apology the believe
that Maria at may have
disconnected from the meeting.
Is there anyone out on the
amendment called for public
comment on Senate bill three
ninety nine.
Mr chair I believe that is that
it for public comment on that
bill.
You so much more than now we're
gonna go to questions and
comments from the committee and
we'll start with Senator Griggs.
Thank you Mr vice chair and and
thank you madam chair for for
right it certainly sounds as
though this is a a needed
project for a.
For the area but I I've got a
couple of things or maybe even
more than a couple that I want
to want to ask about about the
project
does the does the money being
appropriated there's there's
that take care of every saying
it or is this the total price
tag much bigger the can you
ensure that madam chair.
I will I will refer that to a
delegate Alona do you want to
answer that.
We can't hear you.
Many here now yes okay.
Yes thank you for that question
now.
Yes of the it sure cover the
complete cost of course you know
how the data in the
Yes that you allocate just a
little bit more on top and so
that that the complex out there
and and
where is complex.
that was built I'm thinking more
than about eight for five years
now.
and it was completed with a
price tag of right about four
point five million dollars.
And so with the and that was
with everything that that going
to contain the parking lot.
the sewer the water lines extra
lines if you to be completely
hooked up including
abatement
existing building down and
replace it with this new one
And I know right now according
to very last
Five point nine million dollars
will will cover all the costs he
should be more than enough.
Senator.
Thank you okay thank you Mr vice
chair thank you madam chair.
So I guess one of my other
question was is the.
is the nation planning to help
in the with the funding and I
guess if if this funding takes
care of it all then the
the Navajo Nation is not is not
assisting.
If this doesn't we've doesn't
pastor doesn't go through or
does it go through in H.
totality I wanted to make a you
know a couple recommendation one
of them
is every every year we set aside
money through the tribal
infrastructure fund
for applications through Rio
tribal governments to try to
obtain funding from that that's
that's about half of what the
water.
Trust Fund gets every year and
then and I I don't know if if
tribal fire stations are
eligible to obtain funding from
the fire I.
Because it's it's not there in
order to help communities build
fire stations so I I don't know
whether you guys should look
into that at all or or intend to
but they're all they're all
available.
Potentially I can't say about
the the few the fire fund.
R. one me one statement about
the.
And I believe.
Mr alone it was one that you
made about wanting the police to
feel safe and it's important to
you for that to occur.
There's a bill moving through
the house it may be on the house
for maybe maybe staff.
but that particular bill.
is trying to.
Strip qualified immunity or
greatly reduce qualified
immunity for communities and
police officers which.
How that will affect the.
tribal police I certainly don't
know.
But that is a in order to be a
situation where our police are
gonna feel less safe because
you're going to feel that we no
longer have their backs and that
creates a you know a real
difficult situation for them as
for communities across the state
if we cannot fund you know the
cost of the insurance award.
I just wanted to I wanted to
bring that out because that
that's out there it may not be
something that correctly impacts
a
the tribal communities but it's
a it's a nervous Bill and we'll
see where we're go but I I. E. I
thank senator I'm gonna I'm
gonna support you bill because I
know this stuff is important but
I want you to know that there's
other options out there
available in case this doesn't
move the way you would like so
thank you Mr vice chair thank
Shannon Pinto for bringing this.
Yes.
We now had to Senator Shendo
Senator.
Thank you.
Re read.
We're good.
Yeah my friend all right thank
you thank you a couple of of the
of the questions for
clarification under the FY are
it the.
notes that.
That this is a a duplicate of
the Navajo nation's capital
outlay requests.
Can someone explain is that the
Navajo Nation who is also
requests and to whom and all of
that that might be kind of a
clarification so that's one the
other one is we're plan I do see
designed is there and
construction what phase are we
talking about because you know
these funds get appropriated for
one year and you're asking for
the full amount and if you're
not ready to break ground
tomorrow you know I don't know
where this is me it if this bill
passes whether it if the money
is that there could be
appropriated a so I don't know
if you face in in if you're
just.
We're talking about demolition I
don't think you're ready to
build so that could take
sometimes I'm I'm just trying to
get a sense of we're.
Are you guys in the state of
this are you still in planning
and design and perhaps funding a
planning design will be better
and then you come back with the
full construction costs because
right now you know
you know I would tribal militia
right tribe and it takes a lot
more in doesn't happen in one
year and so I'm just trying to
see what's the best way to
approach this because I know
it's needed I travel that road
my my chapter is could utility
canyon which is almost a to
Hachey any yeah community can
use my for this western of a
chapter and that almost gets me
to I we for ninety one and so
forth so I know it's needed but
see how we can the move this
thing along so that we can get
it done hopefully in all of
sometime soon but I those are my
questions how is this different
or or maybe clarification on the
Navajo nation's requests.
Thank you senator Shendo thank
you Mr chairman members of the
committee so the capital outlay
request was for the for the full
five point ninety six the same
amount.
It really that to get it started
was to get the demolition and
abatement which is about a
hundred thousand I thought
that's what that capital outlay
requests was going to be for and
then they pulled and put it in
for the full amount
so at that time the bill was
already in draft for the full
amount versus the just the
basement and the demo at this
time though twin lakes chapter
also has a request in to do a
demolition and abatement on a
whole chapter house which is
just some what can go a couple
miles down the road.
So my hope is that if you get
this thing going they could
probably cut down the cost if
they can get in our P. with the
same company so that they both
come out and close to both of
those buildings out for us
demolition on the Navajo Nation
does take a timely process we do
have some buildings that are
our kids are still going to
school in that are not state in
which the costs to demo them
would really be very high but
they are federal government B.
I. A. schools.
So that might part of it if any
of the expert witnesses slide
like to speak about the amount
to our the process is how you.
Thank you Senator Pinto
Assertion no I I just want to
ask you a question on that that
is if this project and the money
that we get from the state fair.
You know you were betting as
high as you can but yeah
whatever we can get if this is
not enough to finish hi I am are
prepared to.
Submit legislation to.
The Navajo Nation to our.
Get your resources some
recognition of funding to.
Registry project if it's going
to be needed.
The goal right now is to to try
to get as much funding right now
from the state and nation
Senator Pinto has been
I will respond to this bill for
the amount of money that it's
there and whatever we can get
request we well to be used as
far as the
Landing and
The planning and design design
and plan to the building is
already there Navajo Nation
calls at the ask Matix the
architecture designed it was
designed for the twenty I was
building we on that so there's
not gonna be any design cost at
all.
And I don't need that we we
would have to be doing with that
design is that that building a
little bit larger than what we
would like to have a there's a
there's a substation there with
a holding cell I think that part
of that area will be cut down on
it's not really a I doubt we'll
need a holding cell there and
in to actually so that part will
cut down its so the building in
in not.
We know that total cost that
that date came out which was for
half million dollars of course I
was out for four have five years
ago.
So what and if we could do that
just to building down a little
bit to which we would that we we
are planning to do is is not to
have that.
Big of a deal and we just need
to us an office on the side you
a small substations so it will
be cut down a little bit.
Thank you for calling not Judy
or expanding in the near there
anything to add on that no no I
I'm I'm fine with that I'm fine
with the answer I I don't think
we need to go of I think our
only question is I just want to
get a sense of where things are
at and the center Greg makes a
good point we have the tribal
infrastructure fund of that
deadline is coming up sometime
in March of I think if the
Navajo Nation were to
appropriate something and make
it a matching it a hell of a lot
more possible that we're both in
it so I I think that's you know
we've done that other tribes
have done that I think if you
come to tiff you know we say Hey
were put up half of it we're
asking the the have the I think
those things go very well asking
somebody to pay the full full
cost sometime you know I think
we also have to have is going to
the game and that's all I
understand is that you know we
want this to happen and I think
the Navajo Nation can
appropriate money to that of and
and of course you're gonna have
to do the ongoing maintenance of
it and operations but of I mean
I know that you get a lot of
points I I I'm not a lot of
points but I did I know there's
additional points for the
defective cation if you know on
on leveraging so we just put
that out there that's a large
chunk of money that's available
on a yearly basis that can
handle something like this and I
don't know where this is at with
within the current budgeting
process on capital outlay for
but I just almost out of thank
you.
Thank you senator Sandel center
it had how do you have some
comments Senator to see what
Senator Shendo was talking about
with the Planning I believe the
needs that chapter did apply for
Jeff in the I. C. I. P. and
there are some discrepancies as
far as why they were denied on
some of the projects that hasn't
been ironed out in that manner
and the for comment before the
pandemic it was a very different
story I think for every
government that they had their
projects needs you know like a
DOJ building or something that
was a little bit
not so much related to all the
things we had to deal with the
COVID.
So that shifting of money I
think it's something that really
needed to occur at that time and
you know from last year to this
year I mean we're only talking
about a year and it's it's a
different priority now I believe
so however that comes out in
that.
I think it's a necessary thing
well what we're talking about is
building first is other things
that were probably a priority
back then students that Navajo
Nation co talking museum was
really one of the by priorities
on my list but since the
pandemic and that my
interceptions did my priorities
have shifted in that manner
thank you Mr.
Chairman members of the
committee.
Thank you senator Senator
McKenna you had your hand up you
still have a question.
Thank you Mr chair Senator
Shendo have the express the
question I have thank you.
You so much now I just have one
question Senator so I know that
this complex would bring in both
that EMS and the fire department
because they're separate and
currently residents have to make
individual calls try their EMS
and fire to report something
have you considered maybe even
bringing in dispatch into this
center if approved.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee that is probably
the next phase is going after
the command center funding that
was allocated I think it was
last session with when they were
trying to streamline all the
state police the sheriff's
department and I don't know what
other law enforcement agencies
to have one where they're not
dispatching from one region of
the state all the way into
Albuquerque and having to go
dispatching get now on another
line so once that kind
infrastructures kind of put in
place yes this would also be and
idea next space in that sense to
have that kind of communication
on the at this facility.
Thank you for that the reason
why I ask is because in Espanola
we have a need JPA with the
pueblos and the county with one
dispatch station so one call
comes in based on where the
caller says they are dispatchers
can then either determine if
it's tribal county or city that
gets dispatch that I'm happy to
know that you have a plan for a
second phase so senators are
there any other questions or
comments.
Seeing what's the what's the
pleasure of the committee.
Our motion for the past ocean
for passed by Senator Shendo do
I hear second I'll second
seconded by Senator McKenna
Rebecca if you can take a couple
is.
Thanks.
Yes.
Senator McKenna.
Yes.
Senator Sanchez.
Yes.
Senator Shendo yes.
Senator had a meal yes.
Senator Pinto.
Yes.
Legislation senator your bill
moves on to the next committee
and get everyone who came out
from the chapter and was who
spoke on behalf of the bill
thank you for spending your
morning with us and so with that
Madam chairwoman I hand over the
reins back to you.
Thank you to all my community
members and money Johnny out
there in the thank you this
morning and we'll see you again
in the next committee thank you
very much.
Okay we are all very.
Yes thank you
We are on Senate bill three
ninety eight consolidates
Senator Gonzales are you yes
okay did you have to check with
the expert witnesses with
Rebecca.
madam chair of to my knowledge I
have one may be a possibility of
two expert witnesses said they
should be on board.
Okay thank you senator and you
may begin your presentation okay
thank you madam chair and to the
members of the committee L. well
this is what Senate bill three
ninety eight.
The madam chair what all this
would do is us a request a five
hundred thousand to the Human
Services Department for
expenditures for the FY twenty
two and subsequent years for
programs that the quality of
mobile unit in for Santa Fe Los
Alamos town school facts and
what account needs to find a
rural health service and
evidence based peer support
substance use disorder recovery
service well madam chair there
so quite a bit of information
that with that I would like to
call on my witness cellphone
Donald home.
Madam chair and.
Senator.
I'd like to thank you for giving
me the opportunity to speak with
you on this
your support is a very vital
vital
Way of providing and then it
ends based practice to
individuals that expansion would
live in the rural communities.
So often we're not able to
deliver the services that are
needed to those individuals and
especially when they come from
your support because your
support is.
An individual with lived
experience which means that I'm
able to really draw those people
that are suffering substance use
disorder and other mental health
diagnoses.
In with me because they
understand.
They understand that we
understand.
You know the the need that they
have for trying to get into
recovery and not really being
able to access the services they
need in some of those small
rural community.
Usually when we start to look at
people with substance abuse and
the statement that is still
attached to people with
substance abuse you know
there are still people that
think that it's the moral
disease when we know that it is
a.
A disease that people live with
that it's an illness you know
and so when we start to offer
people those services were right
in their community the chances
of them recovering because of a
lot better you know they're able
to access
and get referrals to methadone
programs and make you programs
to
You've been working programs
where they can actually start to
recover and gain some of the
needs that they have by offering
them peer support what we're
also doing is we're opening the
door for them to start to
receive some of the other things
that interfere with their life.
And we start to look at people.
With that are part that are in
poverty that can't afford some
of the services and don't even.
Have Medicaid or haven't been
signed up for Medicaid when you
have a mobile unit your and
peers working a you're able to
assist these people getting
signed up for Medicaid and other
services also.
The other thing that peers are
able to do it were also able to
assist the provider the
professional in engaging these
people when they haven't been
able to engage them in the past
because of the connection that
here's have with both the
provider and with the.
Individual that is suffering
from either mental health or
substance use.
That engagement that that
connection that we have we're
able to bring them back into the
fold and that just help them but
also help their family members.
Thank you so much Senator
Gonzales to have another expert
witness at this time a little
while Mr chair of at this point
to you know I I really don't
know if there is there is maybe
they want to speak up now.
If I could do we know of any
other expert witnesses who may
have lost done out of the
committee.
Mr chairman of the committee.
I don't believe we have any
other act witnesses on the dam
with that.
We do have and.
Public comment for that bill.
Okay so let's start with public
comment and we can start first
with those if there's any
opposition.
We at the no indication of
opposition for that fell.
In support of this bill.
On that call with that we have
Fernando Trujillo.
Gold futures New Mexico Polly
pocket that the it.
Okay.
No they have committed.
Right Mr chair madam chair now
and members of the committee my
name is that level.
And I'm a policy associate with
both features and I currently
reside in a that came I was born
and raised in Espanola where I
struggled with substance
dependence for here is the
services and of that I received
the program such as these that
have made a tremendous impact
not just on my life when the
lives of many people in who are
you are County the hard work
dedication and compassion that
they take with them from village
to village as they provide much
needed services to countless
people all the way from quarter
Ruiloba through jazz all the way
to New Mexico and you'll.
I can also attest that the
services they rely my life than
many others had been saved
because the district will not
count and also train people who
can dangle and prevent overdose
death in rural communities where
the nearest how would be to fire
we stand in strong support of SB
three ninety eight and thank the
sponsor for their consideration
of the many people who need the
services thank you.
You Mr Trujillo.
Mr chair members of the
committee at mac we have brand
part of me I'll.
How county manager.
Thank you madam chair well.
Members of the committee.
My name is preventative Mayo yes
county manager stand in support
of this bill yes County used car
support in our detention center
as well as our national peer
support with those outside.
It's a great program
we need continued funding to
support peer support and
the continuing behavioral health
of counseling and.
Incentives vital component
appear in in order The New
Mexico as well as cross the
entire state but we certainly
take advantage of the working
with non profits that provide
more support for us.
Mr have you.
At Mr chair members of the
committee.
Next we have Lauren Medina.
Rio Grande recovery director.
What is the and let me also as
we say here in northern New
Mexico may good day
my name's Lauren Smith do not
first time in long term recovery
and what that means I haven't
had a drink or a drug and almost
thirty years I'm a product of
the public system in currently
the executive director of Rio
Grande alcoholism treatment
program which is been serving
the north for over forty two
years we are in support of
Senate bill three ninety eight
you know because of the mobility
and supporting rural and
frontier areas that are much
needed for outreach and services
distribution of supplies
supporting the homelessness you
know a lot of times we see a lot
of the resources that go to
Albuquerque Santa Fe the bigger
cities and sometimes a lot of
cases you know our rural and
frontier areas resources you
know people fall through the
cracks this is a very vulnerable
population and and and and it
would really help address the
high recidivism rate in the
detention centers especially the
trips to the hospital it's very
costly to local municipalities
in dealing with these because
that's where with no treatment
detox centers are limited
residential are limited in terms
of long waiting list so you know
peer support is a way to sustain
somebody's recovery just like
mine you know and having a peer
support that can share their
life experience and how they got
clean and sober and what they're
doing to maintain that so it's a
very effective treatment Rio
Grande's been providing
treatment program forty two
years and were you know peer
support is is really good and
impactful to our community and
again we support Senate bill
three ninety eight one just.
Yes yes would you miss thank you
Mr revenue which is a must
present.
Mr chair members of the
committee.
That I believe that conclude
public comment but it fell.
We know it in a pandemic in at
shared her expertise we needed.
We have Shelly Begay from the
Human Services Department.
Thank you now since there's no
other public comment do any
members of the committee have
any questions or comments at
this time.
Not at this time.
What's Senator Griggs.
Thank you and I guess I'm I'm
probably have a phone ringing in
the background so you guys just
a little off here that right.
you Senator Gonzales I mean
these sorts of things obviously
are are very important
I guess the thing I always have
about these additional funding
request for departments and I
guess is goes to health and
Human Services.
Is it what are they actually and
and.
Why does this not coming in
their budget initially so it's a
you know it's something we can
either add to or or take away
from you know we've got we've
got other parts of the state
probably that are in need of
help just like these counties
that that you're providing the
you know the mobile unit for so
I just could you kind of can't
explain the you know the the
process made me because.
You know and and maybe the who
we have from from Human Services
to chime in and say why it is in
their budget.
Very well Mr chairman of Senator
Griggs let meal defer to all of
the department we have Shelly
Begay C. hello you know on her
part you know what is her view.
I'm sorry.
Good morning members of the
chair and madam chair and of
course members of the committee
excuse me I want to express that
we do have budget budget to
address behavioral health
services the significant need
that's been outlined in the
fiscal analysis report
it focuses on your northern
rural areas not to say that the
this call
availability is not there the
focus is of course looking at
providing additional funding for
a mobile unit for peer support
services as you heard before
we do have one
specific testimony
in regards to the impact
that behavioral health services
does incorporate at peer support
services along with other
additional services.
We do want to focus our services
and the our area of providing a
mobile unit in these rural areas
again to provide direct services
from peer to peer I think with
with the appropriations and
funding we would be able to
leverage more of person to
person services with the mobile
at.
Okay thank you are thank you Mr
vice chair thank you senator and
and thank you witness I mean I
and I guess I I understand that
and it would help.
Obviously I I would think that
we also would have a need for
something like that in the in
the southern part of the state
as well but I I would guess that
release I would think that that
is something that that Human
Services you should plan for
during their budget process and
not not ask Senator Gonzales or
others to bring that that
forward.
I appreciate him doing it and
more than likely I'm gonna I'm
gonna supported because the
needs but that.
You know this is the staff.
Mr vice chair and senator that
I've I've never really
understood about you know the
way we do things here in the.
In the Senate we talk about you
know funding we've got
departments have budgets to
the judiciary has a budget and
then there's your we
consistently bring saying after
that to add to a woman state
here sometimes in that in the
insurance of this there were
other times are not even aware
we just bring in something pool
because somebody asked.
but I I understand the issue
understand the problem and the
and Mr vice chair and senator I
just hope that you know health
insurance she resources look at
this sure usually and look at
how they can incorporate this in
the budget.
From a from now on sure thank
you Mr vice chair thank shin.
Thank you senator grace.
Do we have any other questions
from the committee.
Senator Hermio.
Thank you madam chairwoman
Senator Gonzales so I can see
the need of this in rural New
Mexico.
And I just have one question so
we have programs in some of our
counties in the north would this
small ball center be teaming up
with let's just say for example
racks stop is a program through
Rio Arriba County with the then
be partnering with county
programs so that way we have.
More resources going out and
more services going to rural New
Mexico or with this just be a
stand alone.
Mr chairman of the.
Committee members I would I
would say yes but you know if my
expert witness still has
anything else that you would
want to add to it you know but
the more we can work together
the better you know the song is
getting the services so here's
the main objective.
This hello.
Madam chair in senators I'd like
to just say that I think one of
the important things about
it is that we do collaborate
with they will be collaborating
with other providers other
services
the opportunity that they have
to go into areas where there
aren't services and there are
transportation the main purpose
behind the mobile unit because
they're able to touch the people
that.
Wouldn't normally get touched.
Thank you for that so that
really makes me happy because
Rio Arriba counties rocks UP
program has a number of programs
that could help support in the
areas of substance abuse but the
number one issue we here are
people who talk about the lack
of transportation because of
that they don't access these
programs and the county can't
pick up individuals and
transported because of liability
issues so I'm happy to know that
you'll be teeming with different
counties and and think which
programs could work with this
mobile unit thank you for that
Madam chairwoman and thank you
Senator Gonzales for always
looking out for northern New
Mexico thank you.
Thank you senator Hermio Senator
McKenna.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you senator dollars or.
Be with us this morning and
present us with this legislation
and and I to I I agree I admit I
have a lot learn being a
freshman.
So want to echo what Senator
Griggs said about.
How the budget process works and
I'm I'm noticing and the
language here that this is for
fiscal year twenty to and
subsequent fiscal years and so
I'm just wondering what happened
in the past with this mobile
units how it secured its funding
because it seems it seems to me
that this is a continuing
program and I'm just I'm just
curious why it was such
requests or budgeted for
previously.
Will.
Madam chair and the.
Senator McKenna let me refer to
my expert witness on that.
Hello.
I just wanted to part of the
reason that I believe it because
it to
had been
The budget that budgeted but
funded through other sources
when Molina healthcare was the
one that budgeted and the first
time and then Malina laughed and
then they've been able to get
a different up budgeting from
different places to assess and
this year some of the
resources weren't able to
provide them the service I mean
provided in the budget to keep
it going so I think what they're
trying to do is to really try to
get it put into a budget where
it can be reoccurring every year
so that they will be able to
since the sustainable.
Thank you for that explanation
thank you madam chair thank you
senator.
Thank you Senator McKenna thank
you Senator Gonzales any other
questions from the committee.
No.
We have a motion from the
committee.
More motions to pass.
We have a motion to do pass from
Senator higher meal.
I will second miss second from
Senator McKenna.
Rebecca could you please call
the roll.
Senator Griggs.
Yes.
Senator McKenna.
Yes.
Yes Senator Shendo yes.
Senator how to meal yes.
Senator Pinto.
Yes.
We have six yeses were to pass.
Thank you thank you and
congratulations Senator Gonzales
and your bill thank you Senate
bill three ninety eight will
design rural substance abuse and
you have Senate bill four
hundred next.
Thank you penting.
Yes thank you madam chair
members so with the Senate bill
four hundred of this would
appropriate
asking for request for four
hundred and sixty thousand from
the general fund to the Indian
Affairs Department for
expenditure in the in the year
so twenty twenty one to twenty
twenty three to constructed game
fans.
In the tiles Pueblo he tells
County the census intended to
protect the Rio Grande gorge
bridge bighorn sheep.
From the seas an unexpected or
unencumbered the madam chair
well this is what of this bill
does send them you know
I do have two expert witnesses
and the I would refer to
First two runs Cameron Martinez
from coast Pueblo.
Cameron Martinez.
Good morning senator.
Morning madam chair no committee
members
Those Senator Gonzales and my
name is camera Martinez I'm the
director of yes but most natural
resources division
today.
We're here to well request
Assistance for the.
Construction of twelve miles of
eight foot tall fence the fence
would
Protect the grand March Rocky
Mount because she'd heard that
in the area.
Of in this.
Time of.
The COVID nineteen pandemic of
that's affecting human beings of
a wildlife has the same kinds of
viruses that affect them as well
and the rebranding gorge before
she purred is impacted by a
virus that is of contact
contracted
or maybe by contact with the
domestic sheep and goats.
We have a domestic sheep and
goats go hurts along our east
and south boundaries of this
parcel on tribal land and with
this high fence
this.
Will.
The
barrier for combating this.
virus called the movie viruses
just the.
A short and short version of the
entire name of the of the virus
but it'll.
Find the.
Protections as much as possible
for this infectious disease
for the Randy Karshi right now
we are in.
Working cooperatively with the
New Mexico department of game
and fish.
Of the bureau of land management
The New Mexico wild sheep
foundation and the US Forest
Service here and in our area
with the New Mexico department
of game and fish we are up.
Definitely of want to maintain
this heard causes heard of.
It's ranges from Pelor up to the
Colorado state line and the
majority of the herd resides on
this parcel of land where the
fence will be constructed.
And and the in order to do that
we've been working my staff and
I have been working
collaboratively with the New
Mexico department came and
finished to.
Continuing the survey of the
bighorn sheep herd to get an
idea of.
How.
widespread the this virus is
impacting
Our.
Because she because it only
takes are becoming she Pickett
went about eighty percent of the
sheep
we did have.
At the beginning when the sheep
of.
we're.
In the area we did not know that
they had this virus and we back
in last year here go now we had
the some sheep that media.
translocated with the Utah.
Game and fish and they were the
ones that did the analysis of
the blood work on these animals
and found that of the of.
Michael plaza mall.
The ammonia was in in our C. and
this is like I said is
the viruses.
While she come in contact with
the domestic sheep and goats
They're susceptible to it and
she.
The sheep in this in in our area
in the Rio Grande gorge area do
provide
pleasure and hunting
opportunities to not only of
state residents but
state residents and it provides
the heating of.
Provides the biodiversity for
this entire area because she
we're historically widespread
and in these canyons and in two
thousand six of we along with
the cooperation with the New
Mexico department came Affairs
transplanted these sheep from
the deadline heard up in the
with a peak area down to route
ninety point so they are
thriving and we do want to keep
on there as long as well as the
department of game fish
we do have support like I said
from the state and the other
entities I spoke about we also
have support from our local
ranchers we have been in contact
with Roberto Chavis who hasn't
heard down on the lower rent she
does up there really pueblo of
river.
And he is in favor of offense
that will keep of the while she
from intermingling with the with
the sheep so we do have a lot of
support for this project
and one last thing is that we
did we have constructed three
miles of high fence near the Rio
Grande gorge the the rebranding
orchard we're crossing the
I'm we sixty four there and we
felt that a high fence is was
needed to protect the sheep from
and our citizens from
having accidents the sheep would
stand in the middle of the road
so we do have of one and a half
miles east side of of the of the
highway sixty four on the side
of the Courts to do protect of
the animals and Susan's
utilizing the highway so
that I'd like to close by saying
that you know we we live in a
time where we see how
the COVID nineteen has some.
Just affect our daily lives and
the same can be said with the
with the wildlife conservation
and the challenges that a virus
impacts on our wildlife
population so this fence would
go a long way and.
preserving our biodiversity
biodiversity in the area and
combating the infectious disease
that the some wild animals.
Face with that Senator Gonzales
on back to you and thank you
madam chairwoman committee
members.
Thank you thank you very much
Cameron madam chair I have one
more and that is Conroy Chino.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name's
coverage you know and I'm the
registered lobbyist for
transport will most of the
people that come out and I
really would draw attention or
at least committees tension to
the collaborative nature of this
project as Mr Martinez
syndicated to this is a project
that set up been headed up by
Thomas pueblo but also supported
by the New Mexico game and fish
of the bureau of land management
and also a nonprofit called the
New Mexico wild sheep foundation
and this been a major.
Conservation effort by Taos
Pueblo as it's been outlined by
Mr Martinez and they've been
working over the years in
partnership with the state of
New Mexico yeah and protecting
and preserving the shared but at
this time trying to mitigate the
spread of this disease and the
real concern as Mr Martinez and
and Senator Gonzales of laid out
for you is if this infection is
not controlled we could really
participate the hurt
and so what's really needed at
this time is a strong sure
sturdy high fence
to ensure that the heard can
continue to thrive while at the
same time protecting the
bordering and the neighboring
the neighboring private
land holdings and their herds in
the area so
I just wanted to add that and
bring that to the committee's
attention madam chair and
members of the committee and
thank you very much Senator
Gonzales for bringing this
legislation forward.
Thank you all come royal madam
chair I that is on our witness
list I don't know if there's any
public comment.
Madam chair.
Thank.
Okay good members of the
committee.
We received now requires that.
We received and written a
comment from the Edward Alona
who is also.
Joining us on the meeting.
Mr alone at.
You have few minutes.
Mr Allana you are muted if you
would like to be.
Okay thank you.
I would like to oppose this bill
because of the.
bighorn sheep that are in that
area belong to the people of the
state of New Mexico and not to
the Taos pueblo by building this
fence and closing all these
the hard sheep in there you are
depriving the citizens of New
Mexico of the enjoyment of these
bighorn sheep either by viewing.
Or.
Honey.
So I strongly opposed the this
bill and I hope that everybody.
Votes against it thank you.
Your area you all.
Madam chair members of the
committee.
That includes opposition to this
bill.
We received no indication of
support for that well.
Thank you make them we have any
questions from the committee.
Senator Shendo.
Okay thank you thank you madam
chair and
just had a couple of questions
of clarification in the.
Mr Martinez a good to see you.
Senator will be doing well.
So so this fence is really two
separate.
The is it the tallest Pueblo or
or the domestic heard it's not
in the I know the general fund
I'm just listen to the gentleman
that was imposed you're not
trying to close the bighorn
sheep you're trying to separate
your domestic sheep from
interaction with the the bighorn
sheep that are in the real.
Of the gorge area is that.
That's correct senator motion
we're not trying to of.
We we don't have any control on
where they should go but we do
want to have control on the
domestic dispute and arching
interacting with all through a
through a regular bombardments
this hi Spence is I'm gonna let
me see those
game fences were they're a
little the the the it's a it's a
mash also.
there's little all wait for the
domestic Act
face the basement wall with
while she's so you're correct
all all we want to do is make
sure that there are the high
fence
limits that interaction at the
crossing of course you into
those domestic walks that
of the local local ranchers they
thank you to us because we dealt
with the many years they they do
a good job at keeping their sin
of where they should be with the
messaging but the while she that
is no longer in New Mexico you
heard of the opposition what I
try to limit that there's
there's plenty of hunting there
of all Rocky Mount Reports you
all around the group New York
Bridge that happens up and so.
We don't control that it's just
that we want to make sure that.
The interaction the message to
Milosevic she is limited at this
high budget will do that yeah we
we we see that happen and so
by doing the by constructing the
site that we will have a greater
impact on maintaining the she
population once you population
that Rome's like it's that
involves on both side Rio Grande
gorge all are up to the state
lines so
we're not impacting the we fill
where you don't we don't do
that.
Is that you the separation of
the Meskhetian and the washing
right now all we're looking at
is bombardments and and who
knows how although she well she
just we'll go inside someone's
R. ration your your mention of
farm field whatever and your
interactive content of
contracting.
The virus so that's the main
purpose institutional okay thank
you and so so this spans that
we're talking about I've been
there I've seen the bighorn
sheep other beautiful
used to hunt in the years to go
up Sandia's with the Board era
but never got close to one of
them so it's nice to see get to
one Wells.
As it is in this watch Newman
and so forth what the.
So so what would this fence be
on the tiles property line and
if that is a how far east from
the Rio Grande gorge are we
talking about me what would be
or
yes.
Senator it would be on possible
land
and the the farthest east if
we're regions of our
Four miles.
So so so from the gores to your
property line is four miles yes
east so that so so there's a
large area that yes she has it
the party much stay in the rocky
areas I don't think in a yes if
you want the wild ones will
probably go over Easton kind of
venture off well in a yes so the
the acreage of that property
tribal land is sixteen thousand
acres and
And it's from a right well hello
are to the roof then you go
gorge bridge so that's what of
wide area and they have that
sixteen thousand acres through
all of not only with the with
the you know other big points
you across the canyon across the
boards and and move whichever
way but we also have a realtor
in there too.
And so it's been scenario that
is.
has all kinds of animal of wild
animals in there we we recently
of help to bring back the river
altered the lower reaches of
that of tribal all of land with
the help of Mexico.
Game and fish department so
we're we're active in that area
we want to maintain that are
just like of the given this
department does as well as our
other operators and so
you know the high fence would
definitely will long ways to
maintain of the herd
and minimize really minimize the
virus from impacted more games
and decimated like it did and of
the herd all in Utah there is a
there's an island there in the
middle of the great Salt Lake
that they had a wild heard of
our because she was as as the
water in the lake Senator she
began washing off and they
contact with the message you get
wiped out there Holbert that was
one of the reasons why we work
with you talk to give them some
worse you however not knowing
that questions had the disease
as well we we had no idea either
that came in person that we this
heard we're going to go through
had this disease now we know now
we know we've kind of pinpointed
those hurts along of this twelve
mile stretch that
have impacted the hurting with
this spans we will definitely go
a long ways no
minimizing the effects of that
buyers just like come on you
know on a shot vaccinations that
we get through COVID nineteen so
to speak.
So that we just what we're quick
to do these sheet metal since
the part of the sheep family.
Do they do the cross breed.
Well noted on okay yeah.
Okay.
That's it Senator Shendo
thank you senator what one more
just just one more Cameron.
That the bighorn sheep do you
have on the wall where that come
from.
That was a all of mortality of
one that we found out all the
gorge.
We cleaned it up and it's
amounts yeah beautiful it's it's
it's one that
She added D. R. Tropea class in
the one eighty of.
One eighty class yes you know
when you measure mall route once
you hit one eighty that's when
they start Chavez we're just
fortunate that we found this and
that so very mature one that we
don't know how it of how it
died.
Yes thank you thank you.
Thank you Senator Shendo thank
you chairman I am.
Senator McKenna.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you.
Senator Gonzales I had no idea
this was happening I do have
some questions and it really
they reflect my ignorance and I
I simply want to understand more
about this.
So eight it's very tall fences
being proposed here.
Is is there is that because it's
best practices they are the the
the wild sheep are not there's
no way to immunize them against
this deadly pneumonia.
That's my understanding Senator
McKenna there there isn't and if
there was it's probably real
costly and
We are.
It's that's as far as I no.
As much as I know.
So the immunization.
Procedure will be more costly
than the fence yes.
I'm curious how is the amount of
the fence arrived at your how
much is labor how much the
Cheerios and do the the
construction we
as I stated earlier Senator we
have of one half miles of that
same high fence east of the Rio
Grande gorge bridge on tribal
land.
we can reconstruct that high
fence
In order to
of sheep the sheep from crossing
the highway sixty four of the
before the fence we had several
accidents Sheet� and vehicles
and we felt that in order to
keep that area safe that
construction of this high fence
and we do have excuse me
corridors that go underneath the
highway for the fence for the
she policy to go back and forth
along the rim of the Rio Grande
gorge as you go up north and
south and purpose of the call on
the Rio Grande gorge so
We we got that same expense of
figured out for today's cost
for the construction of the
twelve miles and and the height
of the fence seems to is right
since other studies in other
states and and including New
Mexico the that's the the right
height to.
Keep animals from jumping a
fence so eight foot high is
right at the on the hunt for a.
Keeping the animals in and of
waiting contact with human
vehicles.
That's we we base our our cost
on is is that.
Thank you Mr Cameron and madam
chair and senator.
Will is this a temporary.
Construction will be materials
be used elsewhere Sunday and and
I don't know how long this
pathogen yeah I was I was
looking at the the reference
that we were given.
And it looks like this pathogen.
reach the American west in the
mid eighteen hundreds so is that
a suggestion that this is going
to be a permanent fence.
Madam chair of.
Senator I can in my part I would
say yes.
Okay thank you madam chair and
senator.
So it's going to be permanent
all.
How is the fact other wildlife.
I always get concerned about.
humans trying to fix the
situation but then we always
find unintended consequences.
madam chair and Senator McKenna
let me refer to.
Mr Martinez worked Mr Conroy
Chino on that.
Senator I'll take that question
yes so
The majority of the of twelve
mile fence as I stated earlier
use up along the
Human populated side of the
tribal land and so as.
It's not taking into account of
the
We're hands there is plenty of
of miles I should say open open
area for other wildlife to up to
cross into passing to utilize so
we feel that the the area where
the fence is going to be
actually constructed and located
it's a permanent fence of course
You will be
Along the Human populated side
of that the.
Of that area and that's the area
that has the most impact
wearing pants is also in a cliff
area.
Where do you know.
We've seen other wildlife cross
in that area and and that's.
the area of
Just past the horseshoe curve
from large is a wildlife
corridor and that is.
Not going to be impacted so we
fill all the and as well as New
Mexico game and fish out New
Mexico wild sheep foundation and
the wildlife biologists of the
Forest Service and bureau of
land management agree that.
It provides
That protection.
From contact between the lost
sheep in the message she so the
other animals while at the less
area it's it's wide open range
land.
Lawrence is the way we see it
so.
I hope that answers your
question Senator.
Thank you it helps I'm.
It certainly seems that pardon
me thank you madam chair and
senator.
Mr Martinez said.
That response certainly suggests
that you've done due diligence
It's just I guess the big
picture is really static it
comes to this that we have to
put pants is up.
Just stare off pathogens like
such as this I'm and I'm just
curious.
You so the cost is west
determining the fence.
Do you have a sense Mr
Madam chair and senator.
Senator Gonzales and Mr Martinez
do you have a sense of how much
the immunization.
regimen with a cost compared to
the fence.
Madam chair go ahead can.
In order to vaccinate the sheep
we would need to.
Trap all the sheep from mark to
the Colorado state line.
and
We could do the majority
probably because on on tribal
land because a lot of them do
reside on tribal land of the
artist reception planned on
getting the rest of the herd.
vaccinated would be an issue and
and right now the virus is
endemic within the population
and
And so as.
As rose as the buyers takes out
those sheet that are more
susceptible you have
Of you're minimizing the contact
with the domestic sheep and your
slowly moving those
once our are highly susceptible
out of the
hopefully building up the
immunity the GTA to use those
words as you for that along with
you're trying to build up that
herd immunity and minimizing the
contacts so that the herd
flourishes doesn't floors at a
hundred percent but it's
flourishing at eight.
Sentences will keep the the more
going
And
maintained a herd for however
long this is going to do that.
The cost the cost to just
Trying to get the while she in
that whole area from Colorado to
more would be.
Extremely costly.
This is the best thing that we
we figure we can do.
So.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senator thank you Mr Martinez.
Thank you sentiment Canada and
put.
Senator Shendo.
Thank you madam chair I I think
the the follow up question that
I had that I think being and for
was was this fence is not
impeding the migratory of of
patterns of for a while gaming
and and I think Mr Martinez
answer that so thank you.
Thank you Senator Shendo any
other questions from the
committee.
I'm a couple maybe just comments
on it.
We talk about the rule this in
the specially for this committee
in the consideration of
You know some point that Senator
McKenna made about fences and I
think it's also making sure that
the plan that there is a plan in
place and it sounds like we did
make you know a plan to contain
that.
But moving forward you know it's
it's that students can really be
permanent will it have to be
that necessary for so many years
and.
Especially with the ecological
effects because we don't want to
create ecosystems that become
very distinct between each other
especially when there's a
barrier put at and for the state
of New Mexico I think one of the
things we do pride ourselves on
is our openness and that role in
this but I also think that
Workbenches are being put that
through the state for right away
for any kind of with
jurisdiction.
And I'm not really sure as far
as what the answer is
biologically
You know if we want to still
have our animals are wild
animals still running around
because I've been to other
states where you don't even see
any wild creatures no matter how
nice to habitat is you won't see
anything living not even birds
within the city
So I think that's one of the
things
that that you know my as far as
nature and keeping that
Christine and having that here
but thank you for trying to
protect our species and making
sure we're still at least going
to have some sheep here
thank you and I don't know if
you have any closing comments
Senator Gonzales.
Madam chair thank you I think
you heard of.
A very educational all part you
know to this small.
And you know I believe that all
some very strong go.
Our research has been done and
of course the.
We all know that technology
keeps moving forward and maybe
we will see a day where you know
something else can be done you
know that the spring the whole
picture to that but at this time
all I think the most important
part is to see recognizing that
there is a virus that could wipe
this part you know this species
so with that off madam chair
row.
Thank you for allowing us to
bring this forward to today.
Thank you senator.
we any other closing comments
for more expert witnesses are.
Yes not madam chair chairman and
senator is also like to thank
you and the also state that if
you happen to go to the Rio
Grande gorge bridge and you're
all either side you will be able
to see rocky mountain bighorn
sheep right up close so
are of.
There's a trail along the west
side of the Rio Grande gorge
were
many recreation US interests are
even hunters that's where they
go and that's what we'll be able
to see that animals and we we we
don't want to give it of any
wildlife from
More restricted movement and
want to make sure it's out there
because everybody loves you all
while came out there take a
picture or whatever.
It is available to not only on
New Mexico citizens with those
citizens isn't from other states
thank you very much Senators
manager.
Thank you and I'm.
What's the pleasure of the
committee I move a motion for to
pass.
We have a motion for do passed
by Senator Shendo the web
second.
Second the motion we have a
second motion from Senator Pinto
Rebecca would you call the roll.
Thanks.
Yes.
Senator McKenna.
Yes.
Senator Sanchez.
Yes.
Senator Shendo yes.
Senator huh meal yes.
Senator Pinto.
Yes.
We have six yes is for to pass.
Well congratulations Senator
Gonzales here bill moves on with
a do pass from the Senate Indian
cultural affairs committee and
all just thank you and thank the
committee you know thank you
very much.
Thank you and we have Senate
bill three eighty five the
world's worst management with
Senator Woods the keys right
there thank you for being
patient Senator Woods as we move
through our agenda here and we
will start with the bill I don't
know if you want to fill them in
prior to.
The process we're going to try
to accomplish here this
committee before you move on.
Thank you madam chairman I'd
like to present the the bill
tell you the reason why we need
to kind of explain the little
bill a little bit are there are
some amendments that I would
like to put on this bill in your
committee that ran out of time
to get to you Council services
backed up pretty far and and I
couldn't make the twenty four
our rules and these amendments
but I would like very much to
start at this point in time to
to kind of describe where we're
at with this bill.
Madam chair and thank you.
What we have we got a law in
place right now that is just
pretty well under administrative
level
one thing the current law does
is is require a DNA test one
horses to determine where their
of the Spanish colonial
heritage and trouble with that
is we never found a a yes or a
baseline be determined that.
Another thing the designated
state agency is a museum at at
UNM and I've talked to that
museum director and any assured
me that he didn't want to have
anything to do with the
management of of wild horses the
bill was pretty well poorly
written on administrative role
been in lawsuits several law
suits and they are.
They are.
The judge had real problems as
as determining a few things and
I hope that this R. give some
clear to do here and and to the
the law.
One of the first things this law
this spring our bill does it
puts our wild horses under the
current day to animal statutes
another thing it does it and
then it's a lot of stock closed.
To take these animals out of the
it is straight the section and
it's great in state I have been
and will come in one of my
pastor said I have now come in
one of my past years that
doesn't belong to me I called
the last on board the last
thought board comes and gets so
that animal finds out who the
owners
This eliminates while our is for
me even coming into that statute
the third thing it does a I want
to make it perfectly clear this
has nothing to do with the
federal forces under the while
force and borough Act nothing to
do whatsoever those are federal
animals on federal land and has
nothing to do with state
programs at all.
Of the four thing this does
It allows wild horses to be
captured with the permission of
the landowner they see it better
straighter
also with the amendment then
putting on it it reads this is
one of the amendment says that
in your committee a state agency
County municipality our
political subdivision where
jurisdiction over the land and
which the wild horses found or a
person that owns or leases and
mentorship land on which a wild
horses found may request the
board to capture wild horses yep
and then we've got a long list
of things here that tells you
what are there is that you can.
One of the sources up in one is
if it if our is a physical
threat so you are a domestic
animal if the our needs
veterinary care for one other
thing is the land has exceeded
its carrying capacity.
it can be permanently removed
under certain conditions and one
of the main thing is that that
the end to do the has to develop
a wild boars range herd
management plan with this
disposition options and the
while our management plan is one
thing that I need to to provide
further and that's one of the
things that we need to talk
about madam chairman I am going
to do something here that I
don't know how it's going to
work out but I have a map in my
office and I want to show that
to you.
Okay.
Don't get seasick here.
This this map.
These are orange dots.
Shows wild horse herds in the
state of New Mexico right now
now some of these herds.
Or under that federal program.
Which you can see there's
there's there are wild horse
herds.
New Mexico senators yes can you
move the camera back so we can
see the entire map.
Instead of roaming around like
that there we go to the doctor
big of okay.
What the docks also have
recyclable is the number of
forces and sick or hurt and the
names of the horses to the I
don't give the name of a joke
about that one day Senator.
I don't give up right.
My grandson that.
Thank good name ever every bird
out there in the force did not.
He went with me one day was on a
walk and he told me he could
just he can name every bird out
there.
So we know they're not showed in
the bird as to now.
What kind of birds that and he
said.
Let me look so we went over look
at it came back to me said that
spread.
Well those were the days.
Senator we're laughing but we're
on mute.
You're good lesson.
Oh goodness well I would like.
Synapses so what my bill is.
And I would like very much to.
Let my co sponsor of Senator can
I talk for a minute and and then
we'll go from there madam chair.
Senator McKenna.
I thank you madam chair and
thank you Senator Woods for that
some.
So as madam chair and hello.
Committee members.
I was
Introduced to this problem in my
district of I think about
November of last year.
And a few weeks a few weeks
later I am with Senator Woods
and commissioner Brock and
it was explained to me how long
you live.
The problem in the proceed this
area in particular.
and it included to my and my
understanding.
Back in two.
Twenty oh seven twenty eight
when we have that economic
collapse there was an
observation of many folks who.
Who simply didn't have the where
with all apparently to take care
of their horses they took them
over to the prestigious area.
And let them run free.
And so now at last count I
believe I'm.
This last I think the last
survey that was done there's
about a hundred and fifty
forces in in this small area
procedures which is in my
district and what was very
fortunate for me to find out.
Senator Woods started this
legislation
years ago and I figured hate.
Use Senator Woods expertise on
what he's learned from this
legislation and.
Thanks some remedy to.
To the situation posi yes
because not only is it a welfare
issue of for the horses Senator
Woods and I.
Of.
Really I admired the our
but it's also a safety issue.
For the humans in the area and
it's my understanding.
For instance one of my experts
one of our experts that will
join us on Thursday shared with
us right a situation whereby.
Our had to be euthanized in the
procedures area I believe off of
highway one sixty five.
because it collided with the
motorcyclist now fortunately the
motorcyclist was able to walk
away.
the horse had to be euthanized.
Senator Woods and.
And and supporters of this
legislation.
That's something we want to
prevent we don't want to have
another human and our collision
which could have even worse
outcomes than what I just spoke
of.
So we are
We're feeling really good about
this legislation words going.
We're really pleased that the
livestock board has commented on
the the the F. I. R..
And with that we look forward to
coming back to you on Thursday
and discussing it at length
Senator Woods is there anything
that I left out.
Madam chairman and senator
McCain thank you so much know
you pretty well explained it.
What is happened that this this
is an overpopulation of our
shared that we need to are you
know we remove some of those
horses in order for them to
remain while the not the master
cater because at this point in
time there's there's lots of
folks out there that are our
feed amend and there's been
actually some of those folks
that contacted me and said I
can't keep doing this is because
make to much money.
And you know they don't want the
horses starving to death and
it's it's so we walked in this
bill we want are you know
someone to take responsibility
for these horses and that's kind
of where we're directing this I
also got several emails from
How does the area and it seems
those horses down there have
moved on a.
Okay soccer field and this the
ground yes all they see out
there dirt now and you know
they're they're walking some
relief from somebody to figure
out who is is our our can pick
the sources up and who can get a
ready to put out to adopt do
something with them and just
give us a state agency a a
direct you to do this and that's
where the lawsuits have been
pretty well stricken down is
there's no state agency that has
jurisdiction all over these
items and with that madam chair
Paul Jasper not having the
amendments I had a time and
If there's someone that wants to
ask any questions in a short
time but I'd be happy to take
thank you madam chair.
Thank you Senator Woods thank
you seven McKenna I think we
could probably go to public
comment because I know the bill
was on the agenda
in but M. knowing that is going
to be amended but we'll go there
okay Senator if we go ahead and
us and we can go ahead with
public comment okay
thank.
Madam chair members of the
committee.
At in opposition to the bill.
First we have Lauren hatter then
with the New Mexico cattle
growers with that the Asian
Lauren you have committed.
I believe our interconnected to
audio and we also have might
need.
My go ahead.
Yes.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Senator Woods.
and I Senator McKenna.
The.
Yes now you can see me.
I have no idea what the
amendments were talking about so
I will continue as
Yes.
Only because I don't know I'm
I'm totally for the custom we
need to fix the problem here and
proceed.
Then please is for four years
and well zero for at least a ten
year long failed free roaming
our experiment.
To see more than a hundred fifty
free roaming feral horses in a
room for you in our gardens and.
Which is and this.
Virtually every corner of
proceedings and the procedures
watershed destroyed the lesser
have attested to many other
species at least was that on the
procedures roads.
In the last three years.
And.
In our New Mexico which has a
sum of rebuilding our problem
the horses are owned by the
state of New Mexico to be
managed by the state under the
public trust doctrine in the
current management risk
mismanagement situation does
harm to the roses and the people
as stewards of the land these
houses most.
Maybe we just make better
choices for these questions and
the choices that we make in
that the entire state Senate
bill three eighty five
consistent first sections
infection for our.
And I still there inspection
further.
Is the most important session
that needs to be addressed
Thank you make your time at the
next we have at Caitlyn Bradley
with the New Mexico farm and
livestock bureau.
Good morning madam chair and
committee members my name is
Kate wants broadly and I'm a
registered lobbyist with New
Mexico farm and livestock bureau
thank you for the opportunity to
comment this morning on behalf
of our twenty thousand member
families across the state of New
Mexico we stand in opposition to
Senate bill three eighty five we
do support the management of the
wild horse populations by the
New Mexico livestock board I
believe that the management
process proposed in this bill is
cumbersome with limited feasible
outcomes we also believe changes
to definitions such as a stray
and livestock will have broader
effects the wild horse
management this bill seeks to
address we would also like to
express concern about the
explicit inclusion of wild
horses in the animal cruelty
statute we are concerned that
this inclusion will broaden
risks for farmers and ranchers
who operate on land where wild
horses are present and limit
their ability to protect their
personal property from health
risks further conflict
mitigation options in the bill
include an option to reduce
domestic animals on the range
this provision provides a means
to remove the ranchers who
produce food for New Mexico from
the range work resources that
they need madam chair members of
the committee I thank you for
your time this morning for these
reasons we ask that you please
out in opposition of Senate bill
three eighty five thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee.
Next we have Michelle property
Maynard with the New Mexico
cattle growers that the H. and
Michelle yep came in at.
Sh good morning madam chairman
and members of the committee
Michelle frost on behalf The New
Mexico cattle growers
association our membership a
family ranchers stand in
opposition to Senate bill three
eighty five.
The bill directly affects land
owners and their right to
protect their land due to the
broad term while boards range if
the landowner is a neighbor to
reservation there by proxy
deadly and it's now considered
wild horse range land and
therefore have no legal Avenue
put to protect their property
from damage it.
New Mexico producers would be
criminalized for trying to drive
away specific problem horses
from their property according to
the Wall three roaming horses
and burros act
hi there SB three eighty five
states involved for tired study
would be conducted by wild horse
range specialist which New
Mexico did not have one.
With the wild specialist
received their accreditation
for these reasons and reasons
previously stated we stand in
opposition to Senate bill three
eighty five.
Madam chair members of the
committee we also received and
at written indications that
opposition to the bill.
And Caroline Kennedy and lemon
gallery of proceed that.
That project talk really does so
Everly next but also.
Very quickly in.
Any Rivera directed governance
government affairs with the New
Mexico farm and livestock
bureau.
The the case of proceed that.
Caroline and John Dennis McCoy
also.
And lastly Lynn Willard of
Ruidoso.
On the line with at and in
support of the bell.
We have.
We.
We had eight that Benjamin I'm
not sure if you're gonna call
with that.
We also have thank you Robert.
Thank you go ahead you have two
minutes.
Thank you I will say most my
comments to hopefully address on
Thursday just wanted to
reinforce there are hundred and
forty Forces roaming the
neighborhood of seven thousand
people.
Our.
Because of the drought increased
population there is no better
natural vegetation or water to
support the sources are
surviving because residents are
feeding them and providing water
this is unnatural and
unsustainable situation which
results and food aggression
between hertz semi domestication
and death by vehicles.
In order to not watch these
horses started at some rate
residents of undertaking the
financial burdens and dangers of
feeding.
This bill may not be perfect and
I've heard all of your concerts
but it is much better than the
bill we have it will give the
county a means to start finding
better homes for these corsets
thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee.
We also have bantered Johnson.
Add category Sandra Johnson.
Right into your unmuted you have
two minutes thank you.
This is a good start we need to
resolution.
We keep hearing.
And I guess we are my concerns.
We.
The idea of.
Responsible.
To.
In order to get this.
Completely.
And work and to do so.
So that's really my.
Still.
As.
Thank you at the end pandemic.
Next we had a good John thank
you government affairs office
thank ample protection batteries
of New Mexico.
Thank you good morning madam
chair and committee members
Jessica Johnson with animal
protection voters and we thank
the sponsors for bringing this
bill which reforms policy in the
state for the many wild horses
not protected under federal law
as humans have altered and
develop the land for many years
wild horses and their habitat
have been negatively affected
and some horses have faced death
from dehydration starvation and
vehicle collisions to protect
and preserve wild horses and the
land to some communities have
found that they must undertake
responsible science based
management of wild horses we
believe SB three eighty five
provides an Avenue and process
for responsible humane
management based on a number of
established principles including
that science based on range
management especially humane
fertility control like the
vaccine PCP which is
administered to mayor as must be
prioritized management cannot
rely on mass removals alone as
they are ineffective because of
compensatory reproduction
effective management is also
responsive and tailored to the
specific needs of the community
decisions should be made with
public input and transparency
and collaboration among
stakeholders encourage and
finally wild horses should not
be subject to cruelty and sold
for slaughter for consumption
thoughtful management may
include removals in cases where
wild horses are too sick or
injured to remain on the land or
where qualified experts have
determined the lands carrying
capacity is exceeded and if
appropriate humane placements
can be arranged such as a
preserve for an adoptive home
this is not a simple problem and
there's no simple answer and I'm
happy to discuss details and our
own organizations experience
with this committee but we urge
the committee to move this bill
forward to aid the wild horses
and communities across the state
thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee.
We had all the received requests
from the the Benjamin.
And to treat goalie.
They're not online with that.
We received written support from
don foster a petite that.
Kathleen Scott the petite that.
Thank you Robert requests that.
Alan the president.
And that concludes at.
A comment for this bill.
Thank you make them we have a
question from the committee.
Both.
I think it yes
Your the problem it's probably
Senator Griggs go ahead in the
first before.
Thank you madam madam chair just
slow pushing all the buttons
are.
I'm supported Senator Woods for
years now she's work toward a
solution what would you guys
your stand or some of you are
seeing this for the first time
in seeing.
The result of of a lot of work
that's gone before trying to
find that solution but yet
you're also state and a lot of
people now who think that this
approach is maybe not the right
approach either but straightedge
shooter later there's got to be
an approach agreed all.
Because you know that the
animals are are struggling
through through drought and and
storage issues and the and the
people that live there are
having to deal with the fact
that these animals as they
search for things to eat and
drink or evident impact on their
property.
and they're they're not they're
they're animals you know if we
were dealing with.
Action dogs or or show we you
know we might understand it
differently take at you know
take a whole different look at
it at our age for the most part
are are dangerous but you know
yet our vision is a big animal
and you know you don't have to
be in the are you just have to
be in the wrong place for just a
second that at animals big
enough to to harm you
so I don't know what the answer
is but I again Senator McKenna
Senator Woods I appreciate you
you continuing to try and and
hopefully the omit the the
amendments that you bring
forward will make it more.
Palatable to some of the
opponents but but I think we
gotta keep moving around with
this bill to we find that the
solution so madam chair that's
really all the comments Dr I've
got not applaud both of the
Sanchez for continuing to work
on a bill that maybe has more
difficulties in getting anything
done and liquor bill show up
sure thank you madam chair.
Thank you thank you Senator
Griggs and when you're talking
about a hundred fifty courses
where I live and that is why we
have cattle we have she we
stopped our is and I can just
drive over hill and a hundred
courses right there within mine
site that I can sit there and
with my binoculars and count
them out and it's been a growing
problem it is still growing
problem of the reservation
because we had.
How are they going to round up
about I think we're going all
the way back to the basics of
the finding.
so there you know saying well
what's a stray and what's that
but I think I even comes down to
size what Senator Griggs thank
you know for talking about dog
that's a little bit different to
manage but when you get to
certain sides of an animal and
which it could I mean we're
saying the horses are dying but
I'm sure there's people that
have hit courses and died from
the accident and in that case
the you know whoever owns the
animal is held liable you know
I think it Callard anything in
that sense and we're where I'm
from it that's your animal and
it causes you know damage you
you know if you were sponsor
both for paying it back to that
family whether the dog ate the
sheep you know then the dogs
gone
then that the cal got into that
you know pastor you do something
in that sense.
so a lot of those things need to
be addressed I think going back
to the definitions defining it
basically it would be really
good start so we really know
what's included and not included
in this.
The process the product the
problem we had is.
Thank you brought the Rangers
out.
To round up the horses in which
they did not know the lay of the
land.
In which it today was just a
very chaotic scene with four
wheelers going this way and that
way people were flipping off
there for oil is trying to keep
up with the wild horses they're
very wild horses have a
different brain capacity they
they know more than you know
they know where they can run to
where nobody has access
and you know that takes a lot of
know how in that sense and doing
it humanely and within this vast
area of New Mexico to the
geography plays a big role in
rounding them up.
And one of the things right
before COVID we were dealing
with just over the hill with
them while our band and you know
you have your free range with
your child's in your
domesticated animals and the
water source but when that water
sources depleted and it starts
to become less and less what
happened was somebody actually
went out and shot the stallions
that we're part of that heard
that's the way they decided to
control it and that means
somebody is shooting right from
the highway into the heard right
off the highway
and you know the killing killing
the horses right there
I understand you know that part
of the company competitiveness
for the range but also
understanding that something has
to be done to has to be
compromised and they.
It is a growing problem we're
going to see the the more now I
know we saw some national news
on about the two hundred horses
that practically
Died in the but because they
were sent stand there was no
other water source
for them to have access to
because offenses
so it's a.
A compromise there has to be a
solution I don't think anybody's
going to be happy in that sense
with what comes up but as we
move forward with this I really
hope that we look at a lot of
plants that are out there and I
hope my tribal nation will
maybe the state will come up
with a really great model that
we can address what's happening
on our nation in that manner
thank you Senator Woods for
bringing this up and senator
McCain.
And so we'll roll this over to
Thursday.
It'll be.
We're
going to ask the question you
you brought up a point here that
that I haven't got the answer to
and now I would like for do you
think about it and maybe get
back with me.
But you know we can gather our
we can put a man opinion.
But sooner or later that in gets
full.
Yes now what we do.
If you understand what I'm
saying we we have a you know
Of all of our problems we.
Was trying trying to bring in
our our our our kids tried to do
all these things all the
resources that that we're trying
to do something with.
Our our state resources.
No.
Is there going to be the
political will to pin these
horses and freedom for.
As far as having those resources
I don't think so either the way
they those that they captured
they try to return to the owners
those that we're not claimed I'm
not sure what they did with them
it but but they didn't they
didn't have it in their budget
to to feed them that long
I don't know.
Our action is my guess.
Madam chair all I'm asking is
that we really need but I think
it had a.
Is what I'm saying we really
need to think this problem
through and that's what I'm
trying to get at here there's
one bank to devise a plan.
That we agree to on how we can
gather the sources and integrate
that they need to be picked up
but we also need a plan on the
other.
As to what to do with the horses
either long term are have what
we do so just just saying that
we need.
We need to think long term.
And with that madam chair out
thank you for the opportunity
today I thank you for bye bye
cosponsored Senator McKenna
October when I started this I
said you're going to get some
big tight.
But because but this is not an
easy subject you're not going to
please.
No matter what you do and those
cowboys you heard they're
they're my best friends.
And you know I don't blame them
a bit they're not happy with.
So that's what happens when you
carry these bills but the other
thing that happens is when we
cannot set down to gather but
because of the restrictions of
the COVID.
In the same room and hammer some
this stuff out.
The committee so I apologize for
that but.
We move our thank you madam
chair for your time today.
Thank you Senator Woods and that
Senator McKenna so what will
happen committee members is
we'll have this bill rolled over
three eighty five to Thursday on
the agenda and I think we'll put
the order of three eighty five
and then the four oh seven there
for shelter rescue fund right
behind it.
And then three ninety seven then
for fifteen.
Is that usable and
Well we are on the floor to more
are there any other questions
from the committee.
Yes senator Hermio.
Thank you madam chairwoman I
just want to bring to light that
our good friend congresswoman
Department was testifying this
morning in front of the US
Senate energy and natural
resources committee to be the
next secretary of the interior
and so if confirmed just as a
reminder to everyone out there
she would be the first native
American cabinet secretary in
American history and she's a
proud thirty fifth generation
New Mexico and with the right
experience and background for
this so we weren't able to watch
that what you're testified today
but I just wanted to say that I
am sending her love and energy
from a from my home and I know
that she's good friends with
some of you as well and so just
thinking about hoping that the
testimony went well today thank
you madam chairwoman.
Thank you senator Hermio and she
will represent New Mexico very
well protected do we have any
housekeeping.
Then noted that this point.
Okay so hopefully everybody gets
those amendments that's one
thing that please follow up with
Senator Griggs with that Senator
Woods that we receive those
amendment so we can move forward
with this bill on Thursday.
Thank you you guys have a we'll
see you tomorrow on the floor.
Thank you so you.
Bye bye.
