We appreciate everybody's
patience this morning as we ban
Trying to do with the number of
logistical issues.
Getting ready for the
legislative session coming up
what is the echo echo one of
those from the.
Okay Mr chair you have.
Jennifer Clarke Wheeler on the
telephone.
And Robert brexit on telephone
also.
Okay so we will we will work
with that and then
Mr part if you could.
activate your camera if you're
able to do that we use.
And good morning this Salazar
you wanted to explain a couple
things and then.
All I have some basic ground
rules and we'll get going with
the current.
Cells are you want to go out and
eat yourself.
In the chamber.
there is.
More insurance.
Good morning thank you.
That.
Yet there is a very good we can
hear it on the cells are go
ahead.
I only what I wanted to have the
ability to be able to on you in
case there's a question that
comes up that I need to address
on behalf of the Commission.
You've noticed it on mute.
You so much you're welcome okay
so this morning we're going to
be dealing with the following
conferees.
for the bill but military base
Planning Commission General Eric
Sanchez Jennifer Clarke well
are.
We are going to defer action on
William Burkes for today cement
the single Paul Cassidy
Sherman McCorkle.
Robert Rapson and Deborah Moore
do we have to let everybody all
of those people here yes okay.
And
Okay Mr Chairman I'm here yes I
I'm here I'm just not the into
the meeting so up here we go I
got to
stand up would you.
if you can activate your camera.
That.
Okay there we go.
Okay there we go very good.
And up by the way we're going
to.
We'll talk later but we're gonna
switch response for for when you
go to the floor.
Okay
the
Okay very well and so
What I'm gonna invite.
the vice chair designate of the
Senate rules committee to chair
this part of the meeting so that
he can get some experience.
in doing so this is a good
opportunity for this and so
Center hundred if you'll if
you'll come over here.
And set and my feet and I will
move over.
And and so what we would like is
here's here's what we're going
to do just real quick the order
of business today.
And we're gonna invite each of
the members of the military base
Planning Commission to.
give us they are just kind of
what brought to this commission
how long we've been serving on
this commission and tell us
about what you have been working
on while you've been on the
commission.
And those three things each of
you that and then.
is there a staff person for the
commission that's present.
Mr chair and all no we do not
have someone available at this
time okay who is the chair of
the commission.
The the commission at this time
the commission does not have a
chair.
Does that question have a.
The commission does not have a
chair or vice chair does not
have a director.
the director resigned about four
months ago.
Prior to that the lieutenant
governor was acting as the
chair.
Very good so let me ask it in
this context given what this
commission is what is the chain
of command.
We do not have an organized
chain of command
We understand that a new
director will be appointed
shortly.
Not but as a result of the
governor of the lieutenant
governor acting as the chairman.
They chair or vice chair was
never elected.
Who on this panel has the
longest tenure on the
commission.
yeah it's just possible that is
may I've been on the commission
since its inception very good Mr
Chairman Mr Chairman also I have
been on the commission since its
inception so okay very good two
thousand three I believe after
we go down and and have each
person introduce themselves
actually them if
Mr McCorkle and in this context
Mr Burt.
If the two of you with them just
kind of give us an orientation
as to kind of the history of the
commission where things have
been a where things are not be
helpful for the committee and
then and then after that we'll
engaging questions either for
for the panel as a whole or to
individual conferees okay and so
with that let me go ahead and
let Senator how do you step into
the chair thank you so much.
And
and then.
You guys you guys will be
assisting in training.
Senator because wealth in this
process Senator huh thank you so
much good morning everyone thank
you for joining us this morning
and I'm excited to kick off my
first rules committee sitting in
the chair.
The chairs chair for the
military base Planning
Commission so what I'm gonna do
is I'm gonna go down the list in
the order that I have your name
is right and if you can give me
a brief background your
professional background let us
know if you on to this
commission and how long you've
been serving and I'm gonna start
this morning with the general
Eric conscious.
A good morning before I start I
got a text from Debbie Moore of
thank given allowed her in yet
so she's she's waiting.
To to come in thank you for that
general to the meeting.
Yes.
Thank you so much general.
So good morning madam Eric
Census
I retired from the military in
two thousand eighteen after
thirty two years on active duty
I had four years in the National
Guard prior to that.
Also thirty six years so totaled
my last duty assignment was the
commanding general white sands
missile range up in two thousand
nineteen I believe it was I was
asked if that would if I would
be interested in being part of
this commission
by some local individuals here
in the Los crucis area to
support the southern part of the
state and I said yes.
My name was forwarded to the
governor's office and then they
reach out to me and the so I've
been serving for about two and a
half years on the commission I
believe.
And I believe the reason that I
was brought on the commission
was due to my experience and
time one of the military and to
specifically but my knowledge of
what goes on at at the missile
range.
Thank you so much for that we're
now going to move on to Jennifer
Clarke well.
Good morning can you hear me.
Yes we can.
Thank you.
Serving twenty nineteen.
And I was introduced to the New
Mexico military bases Planning
Commission by my association
with the independent community
bankers association of New
Mexico and that would be Jerry
Walker my my father was in the
Air Force reserve and worked for
the department of energy at
current one when I was very
young so
Primarily what what I've learned
from being on the commission is
primarily that the educational
needs to support based operation
obviously the housing needed
then very important and then one
thing that that I thought was
the actually wonderful that
would be able to be passed with
the military about expedited
expedited licensure
so again I I thought that was a
major a major accomplishment by
the the commission so that I
guess a little bit about why I'm
here I've been in banking since
nineteen ninety.
I'm the chief operations officer
at citizens bank in Farmington
New Mexico and I'm I'm currently
serving at large.
That about me.
Thank you so much and now we're
going to move on over to senator
William part good morning
senator.
Good morning Mr chairman thank
you for the time
As I mentioned before I'm a
charter member of this August
group was formed by the governor
in two thousand and three to
prepare for a brac round that
was coming up in two thousand
five and since that time I have
served of independent business
owner in Alamogordo New Mexico
been associated with Solomon and
white sands for.
Probably thirty plus years I
hope and we then was on the Air
Combat Command commander's group
for sixteen years and I have
served in several capacities
including chairman twice of of a
local committee that supports
the error base here at home and
and
The mission of the local group
as well as this commission is to
support the bases in New Mexico
their missions it not only to
make sure that they remain
secure but also to look for and
prepare for a potential other
missions that may be coming to
the bases as well as insularity.
Issues such as housing if you
have a shortfall as we do at
Holloman Air Force base right
now looking at how we might to
work through those issues any
time there we develop
relationships with the
commanders and as the needs come
up for the base if there's
something we can do on the
civilian side that is certainly
our charge and we look forward
to continuing to serve in this
capacity so thank you Mr
chairman thank you senator I'm
not going to move on to cement
the single.
Good morning chairman and
members the committee thank you
for the time to talk with you
this morning I'm single and I
have been associated with the
commission since two thousand
nineteen as a result of my role
with the Kirkland partnership
committee as a board member I'm
it's my pleasure to have the
opportunity to work alongside so
many great professionals within
the credit partnership committee
and commission the focus on the
issues that we have state that
that our military bases are
facing our work over the last
few years has been centered
around how we address the
education and workforce issues
needed to support support the
military bases and how we can
ensure that Mexicans are still
getting the jobs have the skills
and getting the jobs needed for
military bases to thrive in New
Mexico my background is that in
the twenty five year higher
education and administrator and
have participated in New
Mexico's education system for
the last thirty years and my
association with the military's
started with the day I was born
I am the daughter of a colonel
me at United States Army retired
and made the decision to choose
New Mexico as a result of the
assets and the opportunity the
current airforce base afforded
to veterans in this community.
Thank you.
Thank you so much about the
we're next good move on to Mr
Pollock Cassidy.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for the opportunity to speak
this morning I to associated
with the curtain partnership
committee originally I joined
that committee in two thousand
eighteen been on the commission
since two thousand nineteen and
we met on and off and focused on
the areas that others have
already mentioned I am on
honorary commander to the vice
commander of the three seventy
sevenths colonel now I am also a
civic leader for general cutting
of global strike command which
is the base of the.
Comeaux commanding group that
oversees curtain or for space as
well
So the reason I'm involved is I
I spent forty two years serving
communities of New Mexico
through the public finance
function an investment banking
firm one once once I retired I
realized how important military
secretary wants to Mexico's
economy and I want to volunteer
my time.
To try to improve and support
our our four bases here in the
state of New Mexico on this
commission yes very much
appropriate.
Opportunity for me to
participate and help.
So thank you.
Thank you so much now I'm gonna
move on to Milton McCorkle charm
thank you.
My background is I've been
associated with Kirtland Air
Force base since the late
eighties as an honorary
commander.
I wish up involved in the
nineteen ninety five Brach
worked Kerwin was to be
shattered
was one of the six members.
Appointed by our congressional
delegation to lead that effort
In two thousand and three when
it became apparent that there
would be another brac under then
governor the commission was
created the statute that created
the commission focuses on
military value and the
commission is to focus its
efforts on a military value of
the military bases in New
Mexico.
My background
It includes
being at a civic leader with the
with the general
At global strike command as well
as a civic leader with general
brown the chief of staff of the
Air Force
And I too would like to cite
Paul Cassidy's leadership in
the.
Reciprocity efforts she worked
on that for.
Three years
and New Mexico Gemma great debt
of gratitude for his leadership
and ensuring that.
The reciprocity Matt what the
Air Force was asking for and I
thank you for the opportunity to
be here this morning.
You so much and joining us via
telephone is Robert perhaps.
Robert if you're there if you
can and you yourself.
Look will come back to Robert
I'm excited to go to Deborah
more.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee members and I do want
to thank you for the time this
morning I am president CEO the
greater Las Cruces chamber of
commerce been here since twenty
sixteen and obviously my work
and with the military has been
focused on our Y. said military
installation as well as we work
with Holloman Air Force base so
we've done diligently worked
diligently with them since that
can here I inherited some great
programs and I'm very passionate
and I've been involved in this
commission for about six months
now and I look forward to moving
forward for betterment and of
our officers and our our our
soldiers and airmen in our state
thank you Mr chair.
Thank you so much next every
move on to James burns.
Good morning and thank you
chairman Mr chairman.
I'm in Clovis New Mexico I own a
small group of retail building
material centers for students
that are.
And I've been a volunteer with
the chamber hearing Clovis as
well as the committee fifty
their dish chair of that for a
couple years and that during
that time got involved with all
Cassidy and help promote the
licensure bill which thanks to
Paul was successful in passing
and really excited about the.
That that goes for such score
as as my time with the committee
of fifty I.
Instituted a new program for
Canada Air Force base where we
would allow.
Single airman that live in the
dorms to be adopted by families
here in town it's a big issue
with the Air Force canonised
actually gets many of the new.
First assignment airman and they
don't really like coming to a
small town like Clovis and we're
trying to help them adjust to
small towns Air Force life makes
several.
The successful program and
really happy with that I'm still
director of that proconsuls.
Hi I'm probably the newest
member of the commission
observed about a year and a half
replacing run apartment who it
reside.
thank you.
Thank you so much I'm gonna
circle back to Robert
Representative if you're having
a hard time in meeting Robert if
you dial star six from your
telephone that will help you to
one you.
Okay we'll see if he comes back
so Senator for instance you're
the senior ranking member is
there anything you want to add a
about the commission before I go
to questions from the senators.
But Mr chairman thank you I'll I
would say is you looking at some
of the most incredible people
and supporting people of the
military in the state the state.
The department of defense has
made an incredible investment in
the state of New Mexico the base
is each mission at the bases is
very unique and it's a concept
and quite frankly the missions
that we provide at the bases in
New Mexico are.
Probably need to just about
anywhere else simple the nuclear
enterprise it currently special
appropriations that is trying to
fight in an environment that
would probably will be involved
with in the Middle East for
decades to come that the only
school house for the Air Force
proper for the R. PH which many
people called drones is it how
many airforce base and the
largest pilot training mission
in the airforce for F. sixteens
is based also on your projects
during the missions supporting
the
The security of the nation and
the uniqueness of white sands
missile range if you can't test
at white sands you're gonna have
to go to somewhere like
Australia or or future missile
out over the ocean to get some
kind of information back on the
data that you need to make sure
that that platform is working
properly.
The missions here incredibly
important and and I'm hoping
that
This certainly this committee
but the legislature will
continue to educate themselves
as to the importance of the
department of defense missions
of the bases in New Mexico
because they are truly unique
and truly need to be up.
Maybe more aware of through the
legislative process and we hope
to continue to do that only in
my capacity but certainly.
On this commission will do that
once we have a new director and
kind of gear back up for the
mission that we've been assigned
to thank you Mr chairman thank
you for those comments that are
part so it's my understanding
that Robert Robson is back on
the line so once again to get
yourself star six if you want to
give us a brief background what
brought you want to the
commission and how long you've
served.
Once again ten you hear me now I
can either go.
There you are.
I'm I'm traveled I'm sorry I hit
that area.
I've been a member live
gentleman and senator Robert
Byrd for Census inception.
And I have served all the time
and enjoyed every minute of I
have well.
Have a background of working
with the federal legislation
quite a bit of spent a lot of
time working on specific issues
at Holloman for education in the
schools also for the state on
the airspace issue that affects
the thank you all find in the
prior state of New Mexico
I was a women at home on served
on several of the military the
the
Committees.
Out of thirty years plus of
advocating for the military in
the state.
Thank you.
Which.
Now that it's part of my
colleagues I'm not gonna defer
to my colleagues commissioners
in the Senate for questions and
I'm gonna start off with Senator
Lopez.
thank you very much Mr chairman
and good morning everyone first
of all thanks to each of you for
Sir.
City and as we know that you all
of our bases add so much to the
economy of our state right so
thank you very very important
what I wanted to also mention
first of all as thank you
Sherman McCorkle for your
continued service to the state
of New Mexico I know that we're
still doing this in the in the
zoom mode because of what we're
dealing with but it's always
nice to see you hopefully
someday we'll see each other
again in person but again thank
you always and Mr Cassidy you
know again thank you for your
service also as to each of you
but I also noticed in your
resume were you serve on the of
health leadership high school
foundation and in doing so I
wanted to say thank you because
health leadership is is a school
in my area that began down at
first choice community health
there on this letter and I know
they do some wonderful work and
what they're doing to try and
encourage and train our high
school students for careers in
health so I just wanna say thank
you for your additional work
that you do in our communities
that's all Mr chairman thank
you.
Thank you very I'm not gonna
move on over to Senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr chair and good
morning everyone
Zero two what Senator Lopez just
said to see.
A commission that's as important
as this one with members that
have been here since two
thousand and three including you
know those that were mentioned
and senator Byrd I think you've
also been there since two
thousand three it just it's a
recognition of.
How important are bases are I
think it's over a I think I've
seen it's over nine billion
dollar and economic impact of
the state
and and.
You know what I see this
commission and just in my time
this commission's been around
just about a little longer than
I've been in the legislature but
not much I came in two thousand
five when you know the bracket
was that was kind of the end of
the economic effort at that
point but it's super important
that we have in place not only
eight a group like yours to be
able to be reactive but also I
think to just be proactive so
that we are prepared.
When we get the next bracket I
guess my question is here any
sense of I mean is there a
current Brak I don't think I
don't think so but is there a
sense of kind of when that might
happen again because obviously
that's really the.
The mission of this this
entities to be able to really
respond.
When we get in that situation so
just curious if you could please
if someone wants to give me a
sense of I guess one last crack
was and and if there's any sense
of another one being on the
horizon.
If if I could speak.
I had the opportunity to go to
several functions with the
Forgotten the name of the
Anyway in DC And was speaking
with several members of Congress
and the consensus is that there
is no stomach for rack at this
time I would like to mention
that I think that this
commission should be more
invested in making our base is
viable in New Mexico a welcoming
area for the spaces rather than
worry about an upcoming right
back up take care of itself if
we accomplish those two bills.
Mr chair appreciate that that's
kind of exactly what I was
saying I think that it's to the
extent that this commission is
active in funds functioning and
proactive it really does put our
state in a better place when
that next brac comes and it's
good to hear there's not one of
the work so Mister burns I think
that's that type of proactive is
exactly what you were doing by
being in DC and you know seeing
what the lay of the land looks
like and just you know the
signal coming back certainly
from all of us in the
legislature needs to be an
acknowledgement of how much we
appreciate.
You know the the bases that we
do have here and want us to
continue with the missions are
just one final thing Mister
chair I think it's important I
don't think the chairman Ivy
Soto explain kind of the process
so I just if I could so we're in
a sub committee we're not going
to vote today on on the
confirmations well what we'll do
is come back either in the
probably the first week and take
a vote on the Senate rules
committee and then typically
what happens is is on the same
day we vote we bring them down
to the floor
there's no.
Fireman for you to be there when
they're down on the floor but
you certainly are welcome to
attend and there will be zoom
option which probably maybe more
than action calling option that
maybe the only way right so you
can be on the on the board and
as we go through it but really
there's no back and forth with
questions on the floor process
it's just a the member
presenting your confirmation
will present it and we'll take a
vote and we may well given the
number of.
Different boards that we're
hearing this week it may happen
pretty quickly but I just want
to lay out the process for you
all will probably get to.
You know it'll be in the
committee the first week as my
guests and probably on the floor
of the second week so again I
just I really appreciate your
service and special shout out to
senator Byrd.
For being willing to continue on
top of.
Service you do in the Senate
again the fact that you are
willing to stay on this
commission I think it's a real
tribute to your public service
thank you thank you Mr chair
thank you senator Wirth any
other questions from any other
senators.
One question I have is I I truly
appreciate that one of your
rules as commissioners and
serving as liaisons with
community organizations that
support military bases can you
give us some examples of
organizations you work with and
the type of work that you do
with a.
If if I may Mister chairman just
briefly
The support committee in
Alamogordo has always worked
with if if education for example
the public education department
and
Alamogordo was needing some help
we've we've been very active in
New at drugs and Robert at
Babson has been very involved in
this I've tried to work very
much with our finance people
here in the state of New Mexico
the schools.
At Holloman Air Force base
there's an elementary amid high.
Both of them were were fifties
vantage cinderblock type
buildings
very hard to maintain very hard
to heat and cool many many
problems and and the Air Force
it took great pride in
maintaining those as best they
could yet they were there it was
time for them to be replaced and
we work very hard to get them
the elementary school is being
worked with through the local
education department as well as
the state department to replace
that and and
And I think this condition and
certainly Mr drugs and have been
very active in of a getting the
money to replace the mid high on
homeowner for space and that
will look like a complex two
different money sources to
different buildings but will
look like a a complexes those
are the things that we do within
our community as well as within
this commission to make that
work as I mentioned earlier we
have housing issues at home and
for space when we did the
housing it was designed for one
major mission that we have two
major missions we just don't
have housing on base to come
right so we need to look at some
housing off base and the I know
that the organization within
the.
Committee Balmoral was working
on that but we do know.
This commission was involved to
and supportive of the effort to
save candid in two thousand and
five and and we've worked issues
throughout the in the expansion
the airforce of excuse me the
air space to Mr Prashant talked
about so many states have not
been able to get that done in
New Mexico I think is one of
maybe two states is been able to
expand their space simply
because the folks especially in
southern New Mexico and so very
supportive of the mission all
know for station although we had
to do some wrangling we were
able to expand those missions
which.
Will accommodate up to four
squadrons of F. sixteen pilot
training and
Those are the guys you been in
the cockpit and and have to
defend this country up
regardless of where they have to
go on when they have to go so it
is missions like that local I
mean we support.
You know locally there's
interaction between I'd weigh in
the county commission city
commission and just any
organization that needs our help
that has to pertain to the
military function at a base here
in New Mexico we're certainly
open to listen to and see if
there's a way that we can
support
what information is coming down
the road thank you Mr chairman.
The gentleman if I may I would
also site that that.
The army research lab on white
sands was on the table for
closure.
And it was the commission and
the group in Alamogordo and the
group in Los crucis.
That put together
The information for the board at
that point in time and we were
fortunate enough to get former
governor Carruthers to present
to the commission and up as a
result there for the army
research lab remained opened and
remained on white sands airforce
base that was that's a.
People talk about Air Force
research laboratory which is
very important to currently.
But the army research laboratory
on white sands is very very
important to New Mexico in the
army thank you Sir thank you so
much thank you all for all of
your hard work and dedication to
the commission as an uncle of
the nephew who served in the
military I am so thankful for
people just like you who
advocated were tentative title
just three pieces if there are
no any other no other questions
we are done for today and I want
to thank you for your time.
Thank you so much thank you.
Thank you very much thank you.
Now for members of the audience
who are watching yes so what
we're next going to move on to
the commission for deaf and hard
of hearing persons and we're
going to give a couple of
minutes to bring the two numbers
that.
The ship.
Good morning and thank you so
much for joining us we have with
us to members of the commission
for the deaf and hard of hearing
persons as well as miss Deborah
Romero who can offer some
comments once we hear from our
two candidates so before we
begin
I would like to just remind
everybody that we're working on
a subcommittee today and we're
not going to be voting on
commissioners will come back to
the first week of the session
which is next week and will vote
in the rules committee before we
go on to the floor for a full
Senate vote and so it's to my
understanding that you're
welcome to come and and listen
in on the floor you won't need
to make any type of remarks your
sponsor will introduce you to
the entire Senate in a vote will
be taken and you'll also be able
to view that yes zoom like we
did last year so I just wanted
to make sure that I make those
comments so I'm gonna introduce
each of you if you can just give
us a brief background about
yourselves how long you've
served on the committee and what
brought you on to the committee
and I'm gonna start off this
morning with Francis be healed.
Good morning Senate committee
members and fellow New Mexico
definitiva fearing Commission
member Hooper I appreciate the
opportunity to share about my
experience with the community
with this committee I joined the
New Mexico definition commission
to thousand nineteen of the
pandemic Representative for the
commission.
First and foremost I'm a father
to death daughters who currently
attend New Mexico school for the
deaf in my experience as a
parent of deaf daughter says
provided me an opportunity to
engage and be involved in the
deaf and hard of hearing
community.
This opportunity has opened my
eyes to the vibrant deaf and
hard of hearing community but
has also allowed me to the
barriers in the positions that
affect the deaf and hard of
hearing community.
In addition I have two parents
who are appearing in the aging
process and I'm aware of the
various need based by elders to
accept access and have access to
opportunity to engage and
communicate.
I'm an educator by trade and
some of my work centres around
social justice and culturally
responsive education and this
work I think providing cultivate
learning environment that are
equitable value diversity engage
inclusion and provide
accessibility to all valuing a
getting cultures think again
with the New Mexico deaf and
hard of hearing commissions to
expand my work in education for
the deaf and hard of hearing
community to bring the voices of
of deaf and hard of hearing
community to the forefront and
advocate for programs and
services that directly and
indirectly affect open heart of
your community.
As an educator I continue to
advocate for deaf and hard of
hearing initiatives and
educational based and I've had
the opportunity to speak and
engage a very at that and hard
of hearing event such as a sign
language interpreters conference
addressing the digital divide
and sensibility for deaf and
hard of hearing students and
individual providing
professional development for New
Mexico school for the deaf in
the area of culturally
responsive education.
Lastly I'm a native American
from the public image publicly
attacked I grew up in northern
New Mexico in the small town
ability on the Equifax
reservation attendance for work
in Espanola New Mexico I tend in
New Mexico State University in
Los crucis and lived there for
six years I currently live in
right rear axle my broad
understanding of the
multicultural nature of New
Mexico and the diversity
Representative provide more
crucial land from which to
understand consolidate the way
to the needs of Bella New
Mexicans that are in the deaf
and hard of hearing community I
appreciate the opportunity to
serve on this board and I think
to elevate and promote the
voices of our deaf and hard of
hearing individuals in the state
of New Mexico.
Thank you thank you so much Mr
hill I'm not going to move on to
Mister John Hooper.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the Senate committee
up I am hard of hearing all my
life and I have and if you do
miss that and I was appointed to
the commission what happened
honey hearing on July seventh
twenty twenty by undercover and
I'm currently the president of
the.
Your lost social America.
Up to percent cap for for about
ten years now and I help people
educate about feeling losses
Advocate down working the case
access part is sign language
captioning are any type of.
Mr inviting yes all S. source
on.
We have a lot of people out
there who became alright here in
later life and they have a
difficult time and hearing me
out in the public or the doctors
officers or anything like that
we educate them how to educate
themselves yes most to keep part
of us as a hearty hearing or
deaf individuals we have to
advocate well self for
communication access and I
appreciate your time
Thank you very much thank you Mr
Hooper now also joining us this
morning is Deborah Romero so if
you want to make any comments in
regards to the commission please
do so.
I would just like to thank
commissioners B. Hall and Cooper
for serving on our board and
supporting the agency's mission.
Thank you.
Thank you so much miss Romero
I'm not gonna go to questions
from senators and I want to
start off with senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Mr the bill and Mr Hooper John
it's good to see you
very much appreciate you all
stepping up to serve in this
important role so thank you for
doing that I also I John your I
wanted to just say I know you're
your sponsor Senator Rodriguez
is it here this morning it's
only because we're kind of in
the subcommittee format I know
she's got a lot of things going
on with Senate finance committee
but I also just wanted to give a
shout out to her for all of her
advocacy for this community over
the years so again these are
It's very important to have
voices
that are able to articulate the
issues that that you all face
and again for you both being
willing to do this we
appreciated a bunch so as the
chair said
We'll probably have the the
actual confirmation vote on the
floor once we get to the
committee to second week of the
session are you won't need to be
on the zoom for that but you're
certainly welcome to and again
there will be questions to you
it'll just be to see and watch
the process and your sponsor I
know Senator Shendo were you Mr
hill and Senator Rodriguez will
present your your confirmations
and that last answer the
questions but you are welcome to
be on the zoom also with family
members if you also want to have
other folks watch that it's
perfectly appropriate we really
encourage you to do that so
again thank you very much for
stepping up to serve.
Thank you senator Wirth any
other questions Senator Stewart.
Thank you Mr chairman I want to
add my thanks to both of you for
being willing to serve.
I've been working with the
school for the deaf and hard of
hearing for a number of years
along with senator Nancy
Rodriguez you have a you have a
brand new superintendent who
actually attended the school so
I'm very impressed Mr Hooper
that you graduated from the
school that you are now going to
be on the commission of fat this
to me is just really wonderful
you know inside out what needs
to happen there and what's going
on and
and Mr Vigil I am so impressed
with your education work for the
for the tribes in the nation you
just have an amazing background
of with your experience and so
grateful that you wanna also
serve on a commission at the
time you're doing all your other
work so thank thank you both I'm
sure will confirm you in a few
weeks.
Thank you senator thank you I'm
not going to move on to Senator
Lopez.
thank you very much Mr chairman
and thank you gentlemen for your
willingness to serve I mean it's
good to see both of you miss
Romero I just had a quick
question to ask what is the
purview of the commission
another words what what worked
as the commission do.
The commission advocates for
gas.
Hard of hearing deaf blind
citizens of New Mexico we
private provide
telecommunication equipment
we educate
Was about the commission or
about
services that we provide
Effective leadership
and we really try to reduce the
barriers of social economic and
education in the culture of
hard of hearing and deaf blind
citizens of New Mexico.
Okay now and I appreciate that
thank you that's for those who
may be watching us this morning
just to kind of get a of a
clearer picture of what the
commission does and I guess so
Mister B. hill you mentioned
with regards to whatever call
cultural sensitivity
in regards to the work of the
commission does
in your
Time of of being with the
commission do you see that there
needs to be much more outreach
we talk about cultural
sensitivity for families and
actually I think those who of us
who are what I say not blessed
with the last hearing
because I know that that that
sometimes when you are not able
to use one of your senses you
become much more in tune with
the rest of our abilities that
we do have so it's not a deficit
that I look at sometimes as a
gift with that Mr B. hello you
know what what kind of
Ultra sensitivity do you see
that maybe needs to continue to
be emphasized within the
commission and the work of the
commission does.
Well I think one of the things I
think that Mr Hooper looted too
although in your and comments
was that there's such a wide
spectrum and we talk about deaf
and hard of hearing and that
that that lives along the to
profoundly deaf there's also the
aging there's also people that
have that we're not born deaf
that have become deaf or hard of
hearing there's a large spectrum
and there's a lot of different
needs and so it's not a monolith
there's a lot of different needs
and and and and have various
ways that we can support an
advocate for individual of the
deaf and hard of hearing
community that first the second
one is the diversity like I
mentioned the multicultural
nature of New Mexico and the
different needs that are faced
in various places so all rural
nature versus the urban nature
of the the the cultural one
norms and values that we see
that are present across that we
want to make sure that we're
insuring in this commission we
have we've had these
conversations about how we're
reaching and how we're providing
for each specific community and
how reaching those needs that
are maybe a rural community out
in southeast New Mexico verses
what that might look like in
northwest New Mexico and the
Navajo Nation for example and
how can we provide services to
provide those understanding to
advocate and support all of our
deaf and hard of hearing
members and people that are that
have these disabilities across
that spectrum and recognizing
that there is that spectrum that
existed we want to understand
what those individual needs are
so part of that culturally
responsive relevant component of
that is understanding those and
really bring those to the
forefront as again that it's not
a monolith that everybody in the
deaf and hard of community arts
and hard of hearing community is
not all the same and that
there's different needs and
wants so recognizing those and
making sure that we elevate
those what.
No and I appreciate that thank
you very much
and I know that there are
differences you know for for
purchasing outreach for services
that are provided to the lack of
them and when you look at the
Vale Rio Grande corridor there
sometimes much more
abilities you know fifty access
services and such and when you
look at rural New Mexico it's a
whole different picture which is
been around for many many years
and I think that's still
something we have to work on I
do have a question and
and just maybe go to Mr metal
free and I didn't see it in our
pocket but for your board
members are you fully staffed in
other words are is your
commission complete with these
two appointments.
I'm I believe we have one
vacancy.
Okay and and in addition to that
Mr chair
miss Romero and for those who
are members is there a cross
section of New Mexico that's
Representative.
you know I see with regards to
you know for Mr Vigil and Mr who
fifty we have representation
from other parts of the state
also I do than just sent right
direction.
We do have a representative in
Los crucis and one of our vacant
positions is also in Los crucis
so our our board chair needs in
Los crucis and Representative
that area and then we have
another vacant position that is
in that same area.
Okay I appreciate that Mr chair
just make sure that we're still
getting cross section of board
members commission members from
across our state to so I
appreciate it and thank you.
Thank you senator and so I don't
have a question but I also want
to thank you for your work at
the time and energy you put into
the commission one of the major
things that I'm appreciative of
the is the transition.
Aspects that need help with from
school to college or school to
work that's a major piece of
what you help with that I want
to thank you for all that you do
so with no other questions
Senators we are done with this
morning session we will
reconvene at one thirty where
we'll hear from the mining
commission called surface mining
commission the unemployment
compensation board The New
Mexico finance authority and the
state racing commission so we
will reconvene at one thirty and
with that this morning session
